1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Leave to Appeal to the Supreme Court against Judgment dated 19/07/2013 delivered by the High Court of the Western Province (exercising civil appellate jurisdiction at Colombo) in appeal WP/HCCA/COL/39/2005(F) D.C. Colombo Case No. 22148/MR. SC. Appeal No. 27/2014

SC. HC. CA. LA. No. 353/2013 IN THE DISTRICT COURT WP/HCCA/COL/39/2005(F) D.C. Colombo Case No. 22148/MR Loku Yaddehige Ruwan Kulunuguna,

Of No. 244/1, Jaya Mawatha, Makola. Plaintiff

Vs. Scanwell Customs Brokers (Pvt.) Ltd., Of No. 3/2, No. 15, Galle Face Terrace, Colombo 03. Defendant

2

IN THE HIGH COURT Scanwell Customs Brokers (Pvt.) Ltd., Of No. 3/2, No. 15, Galle Face Terrace, Colombo 03. Defendant-Appellant

Vs. Loku Yaddehige Ruwan Kulunuguna, Of No. 244/1, Jaya Mawatha, Makola. Plaintiff-Respondent AND NOW BETWEEN IN THE SUPREME COURT Loku Yaddehige Ruwan Kulunuguna, Of No. 244/1, Jaya Mawatha, Makola. Plaintiff-Respondent-Petitioner

Vs.

Scanwell Customs Brokers (Pvt.) Ltd., Of No. 3/2, No. 15, Galle Face Terrace, Colombo 03.

3

But presently at: Scanwell Customs Brokers Pvt. Ltd., No. 67/1, Hudson Road, Colombo 03. Defendant-Appellant-Respondent ---- Loku Yaddehige Ruwan Kulunuguna, Of No. 244/1, Jaya Mawatha, Makola. Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant

Vs. Scanwell Customs Brokers (Pvt.) Ltd., Of No. 3/2, No. 15, Galle Face Terrace, Colombo 03. Defendant-Appellant-Respondent Before : Sisira J. De Abrew, J.

Anil Gooneratne, J. & K. T. Chitrasiri, J. Counsel : Sudarshani Cooray for the Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant

Kamran Aziz with Maduka Perera for the Defendant- Appellant-Respondent.

4

Written Submission tendered on: 23.5.2016 by the Plaintiff-respondent-Appellant 18.5.2016 by the Defendant-Appellant-Respondent Argued on : 05.10.2016 Decided on : 25.1.2017

Sisira J De Abrew

This is an appeal by the Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant (hereinafter

referred to as the Plaintiff-Appellant) against the judgment of the Civil Appellate

High Court (hereinafter referred to as the High Court) dated 19.7.2013 wherein

the Judges of the said High Court set aside the judgment of the District Judge

dated 2.2.2005. The learned District Judge delivered the judgment in favour of the

Plaintiff-Appellant. This court by its order dated 24.2.2014, granted leave to

appeal on the questions of law set out in paragraphs 13(a),(g),(h),(i) and (j) of the

Petition dated 29.8.2013 which are set out below.

1. Has the High Court without consideration of the evidence led, come to

findings of fact contrary to the findings of fact arrived at by the learned

trial Judge, particularly in regard to whether it was the defendant who

hired the lorry through its wharf clerk, or it was Dong A Lanka (Pvt) Ltd,

who hired the lorry from the Plaintiff through their agent or broker who is

the Defendant?

2. Has the High Court erred in failing to appreciate that the contract entered

into by the Defendant required making payment to the Plaintiff at an

hourly rate, and it was not for the Plaintiff but for the Defendant to have

taken steps to demount the container and terminate the hire and stop the

5

running up of hire charges at the hourly rate?

3. Has the High Court failed to appreciate that when the alteration in the

hourly rate from Rs.60 to Rs.85 was communicated by letter dated

24.9.1998, produced marked P3 (PPg65-66), the Defendant did not, either

by its reply letter dated29.9.1998, produced marked P4 (p67), or otherwise

object to the increase in the hourly rate but acquiesced in the increase?

4. Has the High Court erred in holding that the contract of hiring become

impossible of performance by the Defendant and therefore became

frustrated when the container which had been mounted on to the Plaintiff’s

lorry, but not the lorry itself, was detained by the Sri Lanka Customs and

the Foreshore Police?

5. Did the High Court err in holding that monies had been paid to the

Plaintiff by Dong. A. Lanka (Pvt) Ltd when there was no evidence to

prove it?

Facts of this case may be briefly summarized as follows. Padmashantha who is

the wharf clerk of the Defendant-Appellant-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as

the Defendant-Respondent) on 7.5.1998 requested Niroshan who is the driver of

lorry No27-1339 belongs to the Plaintiff-Appellant to transport a container which

was at the Colombo Port to the premises of a company called Dong. A. Lanka

(Pvt) Ltd at Waliweriya. Niroshan on behalf of the Plaintiff-Appellant agreed to

the request at the rate of Rs.60 per hour. As per the said agreement Niroshan took

the lorry to Colombo Port and on steps taken by the Defendant-Respondent the

container was loaded on to the lorry. Thereafter said Niroshan drove the lorry

from the place where the container was mounted to the lorry to the customs

clearance point. The custom officers and the officers attached to the Port did not

permit the container to be taken away as the custom duties and port charges had

6

not been paid with regard to the said container. This incident took place on

7.5.1998. As the Defendant-Respondent did not pay the said charges Niroshan

had to park the lorry with the container at the Port of Colombo. Niroshan

ultimately, on 30.6.2008, complained to the Foreshore Police Station against the

Defendant-Respondent stating the above facts and seeking a direction on the

Defendant-Respondent to pay his charges. Padmashantha who was apparently

summoned by the police made a statement on 3.7.1998 to the police. The

Defendant-Respondent or any other witness did not give evidence at the trial. The

learned District Judge after trial entered judgment in favour of the Plaintiff-

Appellant. Being aggrieved by the said judgment, the Defendant-Respondent

appealed to the High Court and the High Court set aside the judgment of the

learned District Judge. Being aggrieved by the said judgment of the High Court,

the Plaintiff-Appellant has appealed to this court. Learned counsel for the

Defendant-Respondent tried to contend that there was no contract between the

Plaintiff-Appellant and the Defendant-Respondent; that if there was any contract

that was between the Plaintiff-Appellant and Dong. A. Lanka (Pvt) Ltd which is

the owner of the container; and that the Defendant-Respondent was only acting as

an agent of Dong. A. Lanka (Pvt) Ltd. I now advert to this contention. The

Plaintiff-Appellant by letter dated 24.9.1998 marked P3, demanded Rs.159,540/-

from the Manager of the Defendant-Respondent regarding the said contract. The

Plaintiff-Appellant, in the said letter, whilst giving the details of charges due from

the Defendant-Respondent, stated that the Defendant-Respondent, in settlement

of the charges, had made two payments. One such payment was an advance of

Rs.16,500/- paid until 6.7.1998 and the other payment was an advance of

Rs.90,000/- paid on 6.7.1988. The Defendant-Respondent, in his letter dated

29.9.1998 marked P4, did not deny the said payments. The said evidence clearly

7

demonstrates that there was a contract between the Plaintiff-Appellant and the

Defendant-Respondent. Learned counsel for the Defendant-Respondent drawing

our attention to page 103 of the brief, tried to contend that the payment of

Rs.90,000/- had been made by Dong. A. Lanka (Pvt) Ltd and not by the

Defendant-Respondent. But when suggestion was made to Niroshan during the

cross-examination the said amount of Rs.90,000/- was paid by Dong. A. Lanka

(Pvt) Ltd, he clearly denied it. Therefore I cannot accept the said contention and

reject it. When I consider all the above matters, I reject the contention that there

was no contract between the Plaintiff-Appellant and the Defendant-Respondent.

Learned counsel for the Defendant-Respondent next tried to contend that

the Defendant-Respondent was not liable to pay custom and Port dues as the

container does not belong to the Defendant-Respondent. I now advert to this

contention. The request of the Defendant-Respondent to Niroshan was to

transport the container from Colombo Port to Waliweriya. When Padmashantha

on behalf of the Defendant-Respondent made the above request to Noroshan, it is

implied that he had cleared all the encumbrances regarding the container and

would pay any charges that are due to be paid. Therefore I reject the said

contention. Further it is interesting to note the following statement in the letter of

the Defendant-Respondent marked P4 dated 19.9.1998. “Our company made all

the arrangements with customs and a forklift was brought to commence

demounting.” What does it indicate? If the Defendant-Respondent did not have

any interest in the container, why did it make the above arrangements? This

shows that the Defendant-Respondent had undertaken to get the container

released from the Port and the Customs Department. As I pointed out earlier when

Padmashantha made the request to Niroshan, it is implied that he had cleared all

the encumbrances regarding the container and that Niroshan could transport the

8

container in his lorry without any problem. Thus the Defendant-Respondent

cannot take up the position that he is not responsible for the breach of contract

since the custom and port dues had not been paid by Dong. A. Lanka (Pvt) Ltd.

The Plaintiff-Appellant cannot be expected to bear damages due to nonpayment

of custom and port charges. If the said charges were paid by the Defendant-

Respondent, Niroshan the driver of the lorry could have, without any problem,

taken the container to Waliweriya. Under these circumstances, it is not possible

for learned counsel for the Defendant-Respondent to argue that the Plaintiff-

Appellant could have unloaded the container and gone. It has to be noted here that

the Defendant-Respondent in his letter marked P4 admitted that a forklift was

brought to commence demounting. This shows that the driver on his own could

not have demounted the container and a forklift was necessary for this purpose.

Further one should not forget that the contract was to transport the container from

Colombo Port to Waliweriya and that when the Custom and Port Authority

officers, at the custom clearance point, did not permit the lorry with the container

to go out, the journey to go to Waliweriya had already begun. The lorry was

stopped at the Customs Clearance Point as the custom and port charges had not

been paid. When I consider all the above matters, I reject the above contention of

learned counsel for the Defendant-Respondent and I further hold that the

container could not be taken out from the premises of Colombo Port due to the

fault of the Defendant-Respondent.

Learned counsel next contended that the contract could not be performed

as it was frustrated. To support his contention he relied on the judgment in the

case of Taylor Vs Caldwell? The decision in the Taylor Vs Caldwell is found in

the book titled ‘The Law of Contracts by CG Weeramanthry’ Vol. 11 page 789’

which reads as follows:

9

“In Taylor Vs Caldwell the defendants had agreed to give the plaintiff the

use of a music hall for the purpose of a concert. Before the day of

performance the music hall was destroyed by fire and Taylor sued

Caldwell for damages for breach of the contract which Caldwell, through

no fault of his own, was no longer able to perform. It was held that the

contract was not held to be construed as an absolute contract but subject

to an implied condition that impossibility of performance resulting from

destruction of the subject matter terminated the obligation to perform,

where the destruction did not proceed from any fault on the part of the

contractor.”

In the present case the container or the lorry was not destroyed. When I

consider the facts of this case, I hold that the contract was not frustrated and that

the judicial decision in the above case has no application to the present case.

Learned counsel for the Defendant-Respondent relied on the following

passage of the book titled ‘The Law of Contracts by CG Weeramanthry’ Vol. 11

page 787 “…the civil law reads into a contract an implied condition that

performance will be expected only if it is possible..” In the present case, was the

performance of the contract impossible? This question will have to be answered

in the negative because if the custom and port charges were paid by the

Defendant-Respondent, the Plaintiff-Appellant would have transported the

container from Colombo Port to Waliweriya. I therefore hold that the above legal

principle does not apply to the present case. In my view, learned High Court

Judges have fallen into grave error when they decided that the contract had been

frustrated.

Learned counsel for the Defendant-Respondent however contended that if

at all the contract between the Defendant-Respondent and the Plaintiff-Appellant

10

was to pay 60 per hour. But the Plaintiff-Appellant has charged Rs.85/- per hour

with effect from 12.6.1988. Therefore the Defendant-Respondent is not liable to

pay Rs.85/- per hour. I now advert to this contention. It has to be noted here that

the contract between the parties was to transport to the container from Colombo

Port to Waliweriya on 7.5.1998. If the Defendant-Respondent had paid necessary

custom and port charges, the contract would have been performed on the same

day. As I have pointed out earlier, the contract could not be performed due to the

fault of the Defendant-Respondent. When the Plaintiff-Appellant quoted charges,

the said charges were the charges prevailing at that time. No one can expect the

same charges to be quoted one month after 7.5.1988. Therefore it is difficult to

contend that enhancement of charges one month after the original quotation is

unreasonable. In fact the Defendant-Respondent did not give evidence

challenging the above enhancement of charges. When I consider the above

matters, I am unable to agree with the above contention of learned counsel for the

Defendant-Respondent.

Learned counsel for the Defendant-Respondent next contended that the

Plaintiff-Appellant had failed to mitigate the loss that occurred as a result of the

breach of the contract. He contended that the driver of the Plaintiff-Appellant

could have offloaded the container and come from Colombo Port. But it must be

remembered here that what was mounted to the lorry was a container. As I have

pointed out earlier, the Defendant-Respondent had admitted that a forklift was

necessary to demount the container from the lorry. This shows that he had

impliedly admitted that a forklift was necessary to demount the container from

the lorry. The above facts demonstrate that the driver of the lorry just could not

offload the container. If he offloaded the container on his own, the goods in the

container would have got damaged. From the above facts it can be safely

11

concluded that the contract could not be performed due to the fault of the

Defendant-Respondent. When I consider the aforementioned matters, I cannot

agree with the contention of learned counsel for the Defendant-Respondent.

For the above reasons, I hold that the learned High Court Judges have

fallen into grave error when they set aside the judgment of the learned District

Judge. In my view the learned District Judge was correct when he decided the

case in favour of the Plaintiff-Appellant.

The first question of law is as follows.

Has the High Court without consideration of the evidence led, come to

findings of fact contrary to the findings of fact arrived at by the learned

trial Judge, particularly in regard to whether it was the defendant who

hired the lorry through its wharf clerk, or it was Dong A Lanka (Pvt) Ltd,

who hired the lorry from the Plaintiff through their agent or broker who is

the Defendant? I answer this question as follows: It was the defendant

who hired the lorry through its wharf clerk.

The 2nd question of law is as follows.

Has the High Court erred in failing to appreciate that the contract entered

into by the Defendant required making payment to the Plaintiff at an

hourly rate, and it was not for the Plaintiff but for the Defendant to have

taken steps to demount the container and terminate the hire and stop the

running up of hire charges at the hourly rate? I answer this question as

follows: The contract entered into between the parties required making

payment to the Plaintiff at an hourly rate. It was for the Defendant to have

taken steps to demount the container.

The 3rd and 5th questions of law are answered in the affirmative.

I answer the 4th question of law as follows. The contract was not frustrated.

12

For the above reasons, I set aside the judgment of the High Court and affirm

the judgment of the learned District Judge. I allow the appeal. The Plaintiff-

Appellant is entitled to costs of all three courts

Appeal allowed.

Judge of the Supreme Court.

Anil Gooneratne J

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court.