SC. APPEAL. NO. 102/2012

1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

SC.Appeal No.102/12

SC. Spl. LA No.58/2012

D.C.Homagama Case No.764/M

Court of Appeal No.

CA. 1184/02(F)

T.G.Nandadasa

No.128/1 Moragahalanda Road,

Arawwala, Pannipitiya.

Plaintiff-Respondent-Petitioner

Vs.

1. V.S. Kudaligama

Secretary, Ministry of Education,

Isurupaya,

Battaramulla.

2. K.U. Artygalla

Director of the Western Province,

Education Department,

Colombo.

3. Parakrama Randeniya

Asst. Director Education,

Education Office,

Homagama.

4. Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

Defendant-Appellant-Respondents

SC. APPEAL. NO. 102/2012

2

BEFORE : SISIRA J. DE ABREW, J.

UPALY ABEYRATHNE, J. &

ANIL GOONERATNE, J.

COUNSEL : Ranjan Suwandaratne for the Plaintiff-

Respondent-Appellant.

Milinda Goonatillake, DSG, for the Defendant-

Appellant-Respondents.

.

ARGUED &

DECIDED ON : 19/01/2017

SISIRA J. DE ABREW, J.

Heard both Learned Counsel in support of their respective cases. The

Plaintiff in this case filed an action in the District Court challenging his

transfer. In the District Court, the Plaintiff has raised an issue to the

effect whether the Plaintiff from the beginning of his service up to the date

of institution of this action was an assistant teacher.

The Learned District Judge has answered this issue in the affirmative.

The Plaintiff did not file an appeal against the said order of the District

Judge. Therefore, the Plaintiff has admitted that from the date of his

appointment to the date of institution of this action he was an assistant

teacher.

The Plaintiff was, by letter dated 30/01/1989, transferred to

Thalpathpitiya Siddhartha Maha Vidyalaya as an assistant teacher. The

Plaintiff challenged the said transfer in the District Court. The Learned

SC. APPEAL. NO. 102/2012

3

District Judge by judgment dated 20/08/2002 held in favour of the

Plaintiff.

Being aggrieved by the said judgment, the Respondents appealed to the

Court of Appeal. The Court of Appeal by judgment dated 17/02/2012 set

aside the judgment of the District Judge and dismissed the Plaintiff’s

action. Being aggrieved by the said judgment of the Court of Appeal, the

Plaintiff-Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant (hearinafter referred to as the

Plaintiff-Appellant) has filed this appeal. This Court by order dated

07/06/2012 granted Leave to Appeal on questions of Law set out in

paragraph 31(a), (b) and (c) which are set out below,

a Has the Court of Appeal in arriving at the said judgment failed to

consider the detailed evidence given at the trial and thereby finally

arrived at a finding which cannot be supported by the evidence led

at the trial in the District Court.

b. Has the Court of Appeal misdirected with regard to the perse

ultra vires decision taken by the 1st Respondent in transferring the

Petitioner.

c. Has the Court of Appeal failed to consider the fact that when a

decision is perse ultra vires and is made without jurisdiction or a

decision is malicious the provisions of Article 55(5) of the

Constitution cannot be considered as a bar for the institution of

damages action by an affected party in arriving at his final

conclusion.

Learned Counsel appearing for the Plaintiff-Appellant submits that the

person who made the transfer by letter marked “P3” has no authority to

SC. APPEAL. NO. 102/2012

4

do so. Learned Judges of the Court of Appeal have made the following

observations.

“If the Plaintiff is to challenge the document dated

13/01/1998 the Plaintiff should resort to an

administrative action”.

The Plaintiff-Appellant was transferred by letter dated 13/01/1998. The

most important question that must be decided in this case is whether, the

District Court has jurisdiction to make any declaration with regard to the

transfer of the Plaintiff-Appellant. The Plaintiff-Appellant is a Public

Servant.

In answering this question, I would like to consider Article 55 (5) of the

Constitution which was in operation at the time that the learned District

Judge gave the judgment. Article 55 (5) reads as follows:

“Subject to the jurisdiction conferred on the Supreme Court under

paragraph (1) of Article 126 no court or tribunal shall have power

or jurisdiction to inquire into, pronounce upon or in any manner

call in question, any order or decision of the Cabinet of Ministers, a

Minister, the Public Service Commission, a Committee of the

Public Service Commission or of a public officer, in regard to any

matter concerning the appointment, transfer, dismissal or

disciplinary control of a public officer”.

When we consider the above Article we are of the opinion that the District

Court has no jurisdiction to make any declaration with regard to the

transfer of the Plaintiff. This view is supported by the judicial decision in

Chandrasiri Vs. Attorney General, 1989 1SLR page 115 wherein this

court held thus,

SC. APPEAL. NO. 102/2012

5

“ The District Court has no jurisdiction to inquire into, pronounce

or otherwise call in question the dismissal of the Appellant.”

Considering the above legal literature, we hold that the Learned District

Judge did not have jurisdiction to make any declaration with regard to the

transfer of the Plaintiff.

Considering all the aforementioned matters, we answer the 3rd question of

law in the negative. In view of the conclusion reached above, the 1st and

the 2nd questions of law do not arise for consideration.

Considering all the aforementioned matters, we affirm the judgment of

the Court of Appeal dated 17/02/2012 and dismiss the Appeal of the

Plaintiff with costs.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

UPALY ABEYRATHNE, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

ANIL GOONERATNE, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Mks