IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

B.K. Winson De Paul Rodrigo,

No. 73, Thimbirigasyaya,

Hendala, Wattala.

Plaintiff

SC APPEAL NO: SC/APPEAL/32/2021

SC LA NO: SC/HCCA/LA/509/2016

HCCA GAMPAHA NO: WP/HCCA/GPH/03/2009 (F)

DC NEGOMBO NO: 5527/L

Vs.

1. K.D.H Ferdinandez,

2. Annette Fernando,

Both of

No. 3/12,

Weliamuna Road,

Hendala, Wattala.

Defendants

AND BETWEEN

1. K.D.H Ferdinandez,

2. Annette Fernando,

Both of

2

SC/APPEAL/32/2021

No. 3/12,

Weliamuna Road,

Hendala,

Wattala.

Defendant-Appellants

Vs.

B.K. Winson De Paul Rodrigo,

No. 73,

Thimbirigasyaya,

Hendala, Wattala.

Plaintiff-Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

B.K. Winson De Paul Rodrigo,

(Deceased)

No. 73,

Thimbirigasyaya,

Hendala, Wattala.

Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant

Bridget Rodrigo,

No. 73,

Thimbirigasyaya,

Hendala, Wattala.

Substituted Plaintiff-Respondent-

Appellant

Vs.

3

SC/APPEAL/32/2021

1. K.D.H Ferdinandez, (Deceased)

1A. Ernard Treshiya Fernando,

2. Annette Fernando,

All of

No. 3/12,

Weliamuna Road,

Hendala,

Wattala

Defendant-Appellant-

Respondents

Before: P. Padman Surasena, J.

Achala Wengappuli, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Nadvi Bahaudeen with Jayantha Bandaranayake for

the Substituted Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant.

Niranjan De Silva for the Defendant-Appellant-

Respondents.

Argued on : 07.07.2021

Written submissions:

by the Substituted Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant

on 27.07.2021.

by the Defendant-Appellant-Respondents on

30.07.2021.

Decided on: 15.10.2021

4

SC/APPEAL/32/2021

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The plaintiff filed this action against the two defendants seeking

a declaration that he is the owner of the land described in the

2nd schedule to the plaint, ejectment of the defendants from a

portion of this land as described in the 3rd schedule to the

plaint, and damages.

The defendants filed the answer seeking dismissal of the

plaintiff’s action and a declaration that they are the owners of

the land described in the 2nd schedule to the answer. They also

sought a declaration that they are entitled to the use of a road

about 10 feet wide on the land described in the 1st schedule to

the plaint by way of prescription as well as by way of necessity.

In furtherance of the claim to the said right of way, they moved

in the prayer to the answer that a commission be issued to a

surveyor to depict the said right of way.

Let me pause for a while to emphasise that by the said reliefs,

the defendants make no claim to the land described in the 1st

schedule to the plaint except for a right of way over it.

Both parties took out commissions to explain to the court their

respective claims. The plaintiff’s commission plan was marked

P1 by the plaintiff but the defendants’ commission plan found in

the case record was not produced in evidence by the defendants.

By the illustration (f) to section 114 of the Evidence Ordinance,

the court can presume that the defendants did not produce their

own commission plan as evidence because had it been produced

it would have been unfavourable to them.

5

SC/APPEAL/32/2021

The defendants by deed V4 claim title to a land described as “the

half of one forth portion of Godakadurugahawatte” and

“containing in extent twenty perches more or less.” But there was

no survey plan at the time of purchasing this land or at any time

thereafter in order to properly identify the land.

However, the 1st defendant admits in his evidence (at page 170

of the brief) that he saw the surveyor Hopman’s plan marked P4

at the time of purchasing the land by deed V4. In Hopman’s

plan, the land claimed by the plaintiff is clearly depicted and

there is no roadway shown on the plan (save the public road on

the eastern boundary). This means at the time the defendants

purchased the land they claim, they had knowledge of the land

claimed by the plaintiff and the fact that there was no right of

way which could be used by them through the land of the

plaintiff.

The 1st defendant admits in his evidence that the plaintiff gave

Hopman’s plan to the court commissioner, Croos Dabrera, at the

survey. The Croos Dabrera’s commission plan marked P1 shows

the right of way claimed by the defendants as lot 2. However

Croos Dabrera states in his evidence that this was shown on the

plan as lot 2 not because there was a road on the ground but for

the purpose of identifying the defendants’ claim.

According to plan P1, there is a footpath along the western

boundary of the land. The defendants admit that they obtained

electricity and water supply to their land through this footpath.

This goes to prove there was no road on the plaintiff’s land.

The defendants’ claim to a right of way over the land described

in the 1st schedule to the plaint shall fail.

6

SC/APPEAL/32/2021

After trial, the learned District Judge entered judgment for the

plaintiff as prayed for in the prayer to the plaint.

The reliefs sought by the defendants were refused on the basis

that the deeds V2-V4 relied upon by the defendants are not

relevant to the land in suit.

On appeal, the High Court of Civil Appeal set aside the judgment

of the District Court and allowed the appeal granting the reliefs

prayed for by the defendants in the prayer to the answer. Hence

the appeal to this court by the plaintiff.

This court granted leave to appeal against the judgment of the

High Court of Civil Appeal on the following question of law:

Have their Lordships of the High Court of Civil Appeal

misdirected themselves in considering a corpus not put in

issue in the plaint in delivering the judgment?

The defendants raised the following two questions of law:

Have their Lordships of the High Court of Civil Appeal

correctly considered the corpus in relation to the dispute as

presented before the District Court?

Are the defendants entitled to the reliefs as prayed for in

the answer?

On what basis did the High Court of Civil Appeal set aside the

judgment of the District Court? The High Court of Civil Appeal

compared the land claimed by the defendants on their title deed

V4 with the second land described in the plaintiff’s title deed P3

to conclude that the land in suit is an undivided land of which a

½ share is claimed by the plaintiff and a ½ share is claimed by

7

SC/APPEAL/32/2021

the defendants, and therefore the plaintiff should have filed a

partition action, not an action for declaration of title.

This is a misdirection of primary facts on the part of the High

Court of Civil Appeal which vitiates the judgment.

The second land described in the schedule to deed P3 was never

put in issue in this case. That land is not the subject matter of

this action. This is made clear by the averments in the plaint

and the schedules thereto.

The defendants never took up the position in the District Court

that the defendants and the plaintiff are entitled to equal shares

of the land in suit and therefore the plaintiff’s action as

presently constituted is misconceived in law.

Nor did the defendants take up the position before the District

Court that the two lands described in the 1st schedule to the

plaint are situated in two different places. As I said before, the

defendants’ only claim to the lands described in the 1st schedule

to the plaint is a right of way over the two lands. The defendants

cannot take up new positions which are questions of fact for the

first time on appeal.

I answer the questions of law raised by the plaintiff in the

affirmative and those raised by the defendants in the negative.

I set aside the judgment of the High Court of Civil Appeal and

restore the judgment of the District Court and allow the appeal

with costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

8

SC/APPEAL/32/2021

P. Padman Surasena, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Achala Wengappuli, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court