==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 13

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

Appeal under Article 128 of the

Constitution of the Democratic

Republic of Sri Lanka read with

Section 5C of the High Court of the

Provinces (Special Provisions) Act

No. 19 of 1996 as amended, from

the Judgment of the High Court of

the Southern Province (Exercising

its Civil Appellate Jurisdiction)

dated 13th May 2015 in the case

No. SP/HCCA/GA/36/2009(F).

S.C. Appeal No: Nanayakkarawasam Ihalage

09/2016 Francis,

Leenawatta, Naarigama,

S.C. Case No: Hikkaduwa.

SC/HCCA/LA/209/2015 PETITIONER

Vs.

Civil Appellate High Court Galle

Case No: SP/HCCA/GA/36/2009(F)

1. Nanayakkarawasam Ihalage

D.C. Galle Case No: Senerath,

116/Probate Naarigama, Hikkaduwa.

2. Nanayakkarawasam Ihalage

Sirisena Senerath,

Naarigama, Hikkaduwa.

Page 2 of 13

3. Nanayakkarawasam Ihalage

Jayawathie,

Naarigama, Hikkaduwa.

4. Nanayakkarawasam Ihalage

David,

Naarigama, Hikkaduwa.

5. Nanayakkarawasam Ihalage

Diyarin,

Naarigama, Hikkaduwa.

INTERVENIENT RESPONDENTS

AND BETWEEN

Nanayakkarawasam Ihalage

Francis,

Leenawatta, Naarigama,

Hikkaduwa. (Deceased)

PETITIONER-APPELLANT

1A. Karalyne Nandawthie

Hettiarachchi

1B. Nanayakkarawasam Ihalage

Pathmalatha

1C. Nanayakkarawasam Ihalage

Sirisena

1D. Nanayakkarawasam Ihalage

Nalaka Prabath

1E. Nanayakkarawasam Ihalage

Priyanka Pushpakumari

Page 3 of 13

1F. Nanayakkarawasam Ihalage

Niranjan

SUBSTITUTED PETITIONER-

APPELLANTS

Vs.

1. Nanayakkarawasam Ihalage

Senerath,

Naarigama, Hikkaduwa.

2. Nanayakkarawasam Ihalage

Sirisena Senerath,

Naarigama, Hikkaduwa.

3. Nanayakkarawasam Ihalage

Jayawathie, (Deceased)

Naarigama, Hikkaduwa.

3A. H.L.G. Charlis Dias

3B. H.L.G. Kumudunie

3C. H.L.G. Indika

3D. H.L.G. Gunasiri Priyantha

All of Iddamalgodawatta,

Majuwana, Keradewela.

4. Nanayakkarawasam Ihalage

David, (Deceased)

Naarigama, Hikkaduwa.

4A. Nanayakkarawasam Ihalage

Fredie

4B. Nanayakkarawasam Ihalage

Nandasiri

Page 4 of 13

4C. Nanayakkarawasam Ihalage

Chitra Nandani

5. Nanayakkarawasam Ihalage

Diyarin,

Naarigama, Hikkaduwa.

INTERVENIENT RESPONDENT-

RESPONDENTS

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Nanayakkarawasam Ihalage

Senerath,

Naarigama, Hikkaduwa.

2. Nanayakkarawasam Ihalage

Sirisena Senerath,

Naarigama, Hikkaduwa.

3A. H.L.G. Charlis Dias

3B. H.L.G. Kumudunie

3C. H.L.G. Indika

3D. H.L.G. Gunasiri Priyantha

All of Iddamalgodawatta,

Majuwana, Keradewela.

4A. Nanayakkarawasam Ihalage

Fredie

4B. Nanayakkarawasam Ihalage

Nandasiri

4C. Nanayakkarawasam Ihalage

Chitra Nandani

Page 5 of 13

5. Nanayakkarawasam Ihalage

Diyarin,

Naarigama, Hikkaduwa.

INTERVENIENT RESPONDENT-

RESPONDENT-APPELLANTS

Vs.

1A. Karalyne Nandawthie

Hettiarachchi (Deceased)

1AA. Nanayakkarawasam Ihalage

Pathmalatha

1AB. Nanayakkarawasam Ihalage

Sirisena

1AC. Nanayakkarawasam Ihalage

Nalaka Prabath

1AD. Nanayakkarawasam Ihalage

Priyanka Pushpakumari

1AE. Nanayakkarawasam Ihalage

Niranjan

1B. Nanayakkarawasam Ihalage

Pathmalatha

1C. Nanayakkarawasam Ihalage

Sirisena

1D. Nanayakkarawasam Ihalage

Nalaka Prabath

1E. Nanayakkarawasam Ihalage

Priyanka Pushpakumari

Page 6 of 13

1F. Nanayakkarawasam Ihalage

Niranjan

SUBSTITUTED PETITIONER-

APPELLANT-RESPONDENTS

Before : Yasantha Kodagoda, P.C., J.

: Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J.

: Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

Counsel : Vijey Gamage with Ershan Ariaratnam, Jesala

Husain instructed by Upul Wickramanayake for the

Appellants.

: Sumedha Mahavanniarachchi with Amila Vithana

instructed by N. Balasuriya for the Respondents.

Argued on : 18-12-2025

Written Submissions : 17-06-2016 (By the Intervenient Respondent-

Respondent-Appellants)

: 08-01-2026 (By the Substituted Petitioner-

Appellant-Respondents)

Decided on : 13-02-2026

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

This is an appeal preferred by the intervenient respondent-respondent-

appellants (hereinafter referred to as the intervenient-respondents) on being

aggrieved of the judgment pronounced on 13-05-2015 by the Provincial High

Court of the Southern Province holden in Galle while exercising its civil

appellate jurisdiction.

Page 7 of 13

From the impugned judgment, the High Court allowed the appeal before it

with costs, and set aside the judgment pronounced on 30-04-2009 by the

learned Additional District Judge of Galle where the action initiated to prove

the last will deposited in Court by the petitioner of the said District Court

action was dismissed.

The High Court declared that the petitioner-appellant is entitled to take

necessary further steps while determining that the questioned last will was a

last will lawfully executed and proved before the Court.

When this appeal was considered before this Court on 19-06-2015 for the

purpose of granting of leave to appeal, leave was granted on the questions of

law as set out in sub-paragraphs (a), (b), (d) of paragraph 10 of the petition

dated 22-06-2015.

The said questions of law read as follows,

a. Did the High Court of Civil Appeal – Southern Province err in law and

facts by holding that the circumstances of the case the attesting Notary

Public can be considered as an ‘attesting witness’ within the meaning

of sections 68 and 69 of the Evidence Ordinance?

b. Did the High Court of Civil Appeal – Southern Province err in law and

in facts by holding that the disputed last will and testament bearing No.

720 attested by K. M. P. D. W. Dias, Notary Public dated 05-06-1998 is

a lawfully executed last will by the deceased Nanayakkarawasam

Ihalage Wilson?

d. Did the High Court of Civil Appeal – Southern Province misdirected itself

by unduly relying on the evidence of the Notary Public who attested the

last will?

I find that although three questions of law have been formulated, all three

questions revolve around the question whether a Notary Public who attested

a last will or any deed for that matter can be considered as an attesting

witness when the said document is required to be proved in terms of the

relevant sections of the Evidence Ordinance.

Page 8 of 13

At the hearing of this appeal, this Court heard the submissions of the learned

Counsel for the intervenient-respondents, as well as the submissions of the

learned Counsel who represented the substituted petitioner-appellant-

respondents before the District Court (hereinafter referred to as the

substituted petitioners). The parties were also allowed to file additional written

submissions if they so wish.

This is a matter where the original petitioner before the District Court

instituted proceedings in order to prove the last will and testament bearing

No. 720 dated 05-06-1998 attested by K.M.P.D. Weerasiri Dias, Notary Public.

The executant of the last will has been one Nanayakkarawasam Ihalage

Wilson.

The intervenient-respondents have objected to the said application on the

basis that the said last will should stand null and void.

In the judgment, the learned District Court Judge has held that at the time of

executing the last will, the executant was in a proper state of mind and had

the mental capacity to execute the last will. It has been determined that on

the face of the said last will, it can be considered a properly executed

document. It has also been observed that the respondents who challenged the

validity of the last will have never taken up the position that the executant

had no mental capacity to execute the last will at the time of executing the

same.

However, the learned District Judge has determined that the last will has not

been proved due to the failure of the petitioner to call the two attesting

witnesses to the last will as witnesses in the case in order to prove the same.

It has also been held that although the Notary Public who attested the last

will has given evidence, his evidence cannot be concluded as sufficient proof

of the last will in terms of section 68 of the Evidence Ordinance.

When this decision was appealed to the Provincial High Court of the Southern

Province holden in Galle, the learned Judges of the High Court, having

considered the facts and the circumstances and the relevant law, held that

the Notary Public who executed the last will can be considered as an attesting

Page 9 of 13

witness to prove the same, and accordingly, allowed the appeal. It was the

view of the learned Judges of the High Court that the Notary who attested the

last will can be considered as an attesting witness under certain

circumstances. Having considered the facts and the circumstances of the

matter, it has been determined that the Notary is qualified to give evidence as

an attesting witness. It has been held that not calling the two attesting

witnesses to the last will would not be fatal in proving the same as the Notary’s

evidence has proved that the last will was duly executed.

As correctly determined by the learned Judge of the High Court, once a last

will is challenged, it is up to the petitioner who sought to prove the last will to

prove it before the Court.

In the case of Gunawardena Vs. Cabral and Others (1981) 1 SLR 220, the

necessary elements that should be established before a trial Court in order to

prove a last will were considered.

Held:

“1. The onus of proving the will lies on the party propounding the

will.

2. He must satisfy the conscience of the court that the instrument

so propounded is the last will of a free and capable testator in that

he must show the testator knew or approved of the instrument and

intended to be such.

3. The onus imposed on the party propounding the wills is in

general discharged by proof of capacity and the fact of execution,

from which a knowledge of and an assent to the contents of the

instrument are assumed.

4. The circumstances attending the executed of the document may

be such as to show that there is suspicion attaching to the will, in

which case it is the duty of the person propounding the will to

remove that suspicion and this is done by showing that the testator

knew the effect of the document he was signing.

Page 10 of 13

5. The burden of proving that the will was executed under undue

influence rests on the party who alleges it (not considering any

suspicions of undue influence, if any, that may arise on evidence).”

It is quite apparent from the objections filed by the intervenient-respondents

that they have taken up all objections generally possible to claim that the last

will was not an act of its executant, namely, the deceased Nanayakkarawasam

Ihalage Wilson. However, their objections also reveal that their main

contention had been that as children of another brother of the said deceased

person, they are also entitled to the estate of the said deceased.

The evidence adduced before the District Court reveals that the original

petitioner of the action has been the son of yet another brother of the

deceased, with whom the deceased had lived until his demise, and it was he

who cared for him.

As correctly determined by the learned District Judge, the evidence clearly

reveals that the executant of the last will had clear mental capacity and knew

what he was doing at the time of its execution. The learned District Judge has

correctly accepted the evidence of the Notary Public who attested the last will

and also the evidence of the other two witnesses called on behalf of the

petitioner in that regard. Having accepted such evidence, the learned District

Judge relying on section 68 of the Evidence Ordinance has determined that

the last will was not proved since the petitioner failed to call the two attesting

witnesses to the same.

The relevant section 68 of the Evidence Ordinance reads as follows,

68. If a document is required by law to be attested, it shall not be

used as evidence until one attesting witness at least has been

called for the purpose of proving its execution, if there be an

attesting witness alive, and subject to the process of Court and

capable of giving evidence.

The learned District Judge in his judgment has observed that the said

attesting witnesses should have been called as witnesses, and in fact, one of

the attesting witnesses was physically present in Court during the inquiry,

Page 11 of 13

and yet the petitioner failed to call even his evidence in order to prove the last

will in a situation where he had the ability to call at least one attesting

witness.

It clearly appears from the judgment that the said failure has been the sole

reason for the dismissal of the petition.

When this matter was argued in appeal before the Provincial High Court, the

position taken up on behalf of the intervenient-respondents had been the

same, that is to say, that the petitioner failed to prove the last will because he

did not call the attesting witnesses despite his capacity in doing so, and

therefore, the petitioner has failed to prove the last will in terms of section 68

of the Evidence Ordinance.

Having considered the legal provisions in this regard, the learned Judges of

the High Court have drawn their attention to the case of N.U.

Wijegoonetilleke Vs. B. Wijegoonetilleke 60 NLR 560, where it was held by

Basnayake, CJ that;

“A notary who attests a deed is an attesting witness within the meaning

of that expression in section 68 and section 69 of the Evidence

Ordinance.”

The above was a case where the attesting Notary Public gave evidence. In his

attestation, he has stated that he did not know the person who executed the

deed, but in the course of his evidence, he indicated that he knew that the

person who executed the deed was a deaf and dumb person who knew

English, about whom he had heard and whose whole family he knew. It was

in evidence that the Notary had taken all the precautions necessary to make

sure that the donor was no imposter and that he was quite aware of the fact

that he was making a gift of number of his lands.

Having considered a very much similar position under consideration in the

instant appeal that the attesting Notary Public cannot be considered as an

attesting witness in terms of section 68 of the Evidence Ordinance,

Basnayake, C.J. expressed the above quoted view.

Page 12 of 13

He also cited the observation of Burnside, C.J. in the case of Kiribanda Vs.

Ukkuwa (1892) 1 S.C.R. 216 where it was stated;

“It is quite true that the rule of evidence is that if you desire to prove a

written instrument to which the attestation of witnesses is necessary to

give validity, you must first call the witness or witnesses to it or account

satisfactorily for not doing so; but the learned District Judge has erred in

holding that a notary who attests an instrument under our Ordinance

against frauds is not attesting witness so as to bring his evidence within

the above rule of evidence. I do not doubt that he must be considered an

attesting witness.”

E.R.S.R Coomaraswamy in his book, The Law of Evidence, at page 109,

having considered the relevant legal provisions in relation to the capacity of a

Notary Public as an attesting witness to a document attested by him states,

“In this connection, two rules maybe laid down from the case law;

a. A notary who attests a document in terms of Prevention of

Frauds Ordinance is generally competent to testify under

section 68 of the Evidence Ordinance.

b. But he is not so competent if the executant of the document was

not known to him.”

In the case of L. Marian and S. Jesuthasan et al. 59 NLR 348, it was held:

Where a deed executed before a Notary is sought to be proved, the

Notary can be regarded as an attesting witness within the meaning of

section 68 of the Evidence Ordinance provided only that he knew the

executant personally and can testify to the fact that the signature on

the deed is the signature of the executant.

The above judicial pronouncements and the legal analysis show that the

learned Judges of the High Court were correct in considering whether the

Notary who attested the last will in fact knew the executant well, and whether

his oral evidence in that regard can be considered reliable, before deciding

that Notary can be treated as an attesting witness.

Page 13 of 13

It is clear that although the Notary has been silent in his attestation that he

knew the executant of the last will, in fact, he was a distant relative. The

petitioner and the second witness to the last will who was the son of the

petitioner were also his relatives similar to the executant. The learned Judges

of the High Court have well considered the evidence placed before the trial

Court to come to a firm finding that the Notary who attested the last will and

the executant knew each other at the time of the execution of the last will,

and therefore, in line with the considered judicial authority, the said Notary

can be considered as an attesting witness for which I find no basis to disagree.

For the reasons as considered above, I find that the setting aside of the

judgment dated 03-04-2009 of the learned Additional District Judge of Galle

was a correct decision that should not be interfered.

Hence, I answer the questions of law under which leave to appeal was granted

in the negative.

The appeal is dismissed.

The parties shall bear their own costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Yasantha Kodagoda, P.C., J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court