1

IN THE SUPREME COURT

OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

FRIGI Engineering Services (Pvt) Ltd. M/S Dunham Bush Industries Sdn Bhd Joint Venture C/O: FRIGI Engineering Services (Pvt) Ltd. 145, Siri Dhamma Mawatha Colombo 10 Petitioner S.C.[FR] No.337/2015 Vs.

Secretary Ministry of Food Security CWE Secretariat Building No.27, Vauxhall Street Colombo 02 And 45 others Respondents BEFORE : S.E.WANASUNDERA, PC, J.

B.P.ALUWIHARE, PC, J.

K.T.CHITRASIRI, J.

COUNSEL : Dr.Mahinda Ralapanawa with Ms. Nisansala

for the Petitioners Malik Hanan instructed by D.Abeygunawardena for the 3rd Respondent S.Rajaratnam, PC, Senior ASG for the 1st, 2nd & 4th to 46th Respondents

2

ARGUED ON : 24.01.2018

WRITTEN : 09 and14.02.2018 by the Petitioner SUBMISSIONS ON : 08.02.2018 by the 3rdRespondents 05.02.2018 by the1st, 2nd, 4th and 45thResponde

DECIDED ON : 02.03.2018 CHITRASIRI, J.

Petitioner in this case has filed the present application in terms of Article 126 of

the Constitution, seeking the following final reliefs:

a. To declare the fundamental rights of the Petitioner guaranteed under Article

12(1) and/or 12(2) of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka has been violated at the instance of the Respondents; b. To make order to quash and/or invalidate decision of the Respondents to

award the tender in favour of the 3rd Respondent as contained in letter dated 27th July 2015 of the 1st Respondent;

However, on 21.01.2016 this court granted leave to proceed only on alleged

violations under Articles 12(1) of the Constitution. This Article 12(1) stipulates

thus:

12(1) All persons are equal before the law and are entitled to the equal protection of the law.

In the averments found in the amended petition dated 16.11.2015 filed in this

Court, it is stated that the Petitioner is a Joint Venture entity which was formed

representing FRIGI Engineering Services (Pvt) Ltd and M/s Dunhan Bush

Industries Sdn Bhd. In that petition it is also mentioned that FRIGI Engineering

Services (Pvt) Ltd, which is a company incorporated in Sri Lanka has entered

into a Memorandum of Understanding with M/s Dunham Bush industries Sdn

Bhd, which is a company, incorporated in Malaysia for the purpose of engaging

in the business of Air-conditioning in countries world over. This Memorandum

of Understanding is marked as X3 and is filed with the petition of the Petitioner.

3

On 10th February 2014, 2nd Respondent had called for tenders from eligible and

qualified tenderers under the National Competitive Bidding Method, for the

Design, Supply and Installation Testing and Commissioning and Ventilation

System for the National Measurement Laboratory Building of the Department of

Measurement Units, Standards and Services. This document by which the

tenders were called is marked as X4 and it specifies the eligibility of tenderers

who intend placing bids for the same. Following are a few of those eligibility

criteria:

4. Contracting firms eligible to Bid should be:

4.1 Registered with the Institute for Construction Training and Development

(ICTAD) under the National Scheme of Registration of Contractors for Grade

EMI under Medical Ventilation and Air Conditioning in old scheme.

4.2 Joint Ventures subject to the condition that the lead partner of the Joint

Venture is a local contractor satisfying the qualification requirements stated

in 4.1 above.

5. Qualification Requirements to qualify for Contract award include

I Current ICTAD registration Grade EMT under the category Mechanical

Ventilation and Air Conditioning (MVAC) in new scheme or Grade EMI under

Air conditioning in old scheme.

II Annual average turnover of Design, Supply and installation work related to

Air Conditioning performed in the last five years shall not be less than

Rupees Five Hundred Million (Rs.500,000,000,000).

III Bidders should have successfully completed at least 2 Design Supply and

Installation projects related to Air Conditioning, each over Rupees Five

Hundred Million (Rs.500,000,000,000) of this specialized nature, during last

5 years.

4

IV Liquid Assets and/or Credit facilities required shall not be less than Rupees

One Hundred and Twenty Five Million (Rs.125 000 000 00).’

Petitioner has submitted the following experience to support the requirement

referred to in clause 5(III) above which are mentioned in the documents marked

X13 and X13A.

Lead Partner- Frigi Engineering Services (Pvt) Ltd

Construction Experience in last five years

Year Employer Description of Works Amount Responsibility

to Joint

Venture

2012 Sri Lanka

Customs

MVAC System Rs.560million 100%

Lead Partner- Frigi Engineering Services (Pvt) Ltd

Design Experience in last five years

Year Employer Description of Works Amount Responsibility

to Joint

Venture

2010 Bandaranyake

International

Airport -

Katunayake

Design, Supply, installation

MVAC System to Departure

Lounge, New Arrival Lounge

and Extension check in area

Rs.345 million 100%

2012 Sri Lanka Customs

Headquarters

building

Design, Supply, installation

of HVAC system

Rs.526 million 100%

5

Dunham-Bush Industries Sdn Bhd

Construction Experience in last five years

Year Employer Description of

Works

Amount Responsibility

to Joint

Venture

2013 Zuhai United

Laboratories -

China

Design, Supply and

Installation AC System

RMB25.84

million

(Rs.555.6million)

100%

2013 United

Laboratories

(Inner Mongolin)

Co-Ltd

Design, Supply and

Installation AC System

RMB105.6

million

(Rs.2,257.5

million)

100%

Having considered the respective bids received, Cabinet Appointed Government

Procurement Committee [CAPC] has decided to recommend awarding the tender

to the Petitioner. Thereafter, the Minister of Co-operatives and Internal Trade

had submitted the said recommendation to the Cabinet of Ministers for approval.

It is evident by the document marked X15.

However, consequent to an appeal lodged to the Government Procurement

Appeal Board (PAB) by the 3rd Respondent against the decision of the CAPC, it

had summoned the 3rd Respondent and the Petitioner for an inquiry, by the letter

dated 08.07.2014 which was marked as X9. The PAB having held the said

inquiry on 10.07.2014 has submitted its 08 page Report that was marked and

produced as 2R1.

In the aforesaid report marked 2R1, it is observed that the recommended bidder

namely the Petitioner had not obtained the required minimum marks for the

overall compliance of the Bidding document. In arriving at the aforesaid decision,

the PAB has given the following reasons.

6

1. Bid Security being in the name of FRIGI Engineering Services (Private) Limited

which is only a partner in the aid Joint Venture;

2. The person who signed the Bid Form of the Petitioner did not have the required

Power of Attorney to sign it. Furthermore, for the purpose of Clause 26.1 of

Instructions to Bidders, this too is considered as non-compliance.

3. For the purpose of Clause 4.2 of Bidding Data in the Bidding Document, the

documentary evidence submitted by the Malaysian company of the Joint Venture

was not certified by the Sri Lankan Diplomatic Mission of Malaysia.

4. Similarly for the purpose of the abovementioned Clause 4.2, the requirement

that the documentary evidence to confirm the foreign company as an active

company should be certified by the Sri Lankan Diplomatic Mission of the

respective country, was not complied with.

In accordance with the said document 2R1, PAB is of the view that the

recommended bidder had not complied with a number of major, general and

technical requirements as stipulated in the tender documents. Furthermore, it

is observed that the Bid form submitted was not on behalf of the Joint Venture,

but it was only on behalf of one of the partners of the Joint Venture, namely M/s

FRIGI Engineering (Pvt.) Ltd. Also, the Bid Form did not carry any indication to

show that it is from the Joint Ventures of M/s. FRIGI Engineering and Dunham

Bush Joint Venture Industries. Therefore, it is seen that there are ample reasons

for not awarding the tender to the Petitioner joint venture. Moreover, the

Petitioner has failed to demonstrate that PAB, in making the recommendation,

had acted illegally, arbitrarily, capriciously, mala fide and/or unreasonably,

towards the Petitioner to establish any violation of its fundamental rights

guaranteed under Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

In the circumstances, it is clear that with such infirmities, the Petitioner cannot

legitimately expect that it would get the tender referred to in the advertisement

marked X4, awarded in his favour. Therefore, there is no doubt that even if the

7

award made in favour of the 3rd Respondent is annulled, the petitioner is not

entitled to have the tender awarded in its favour. Indeed, the Petitioner has not

sought any relief to have the tender awarded to it, instead has sought only to

quash the decision referred to in the letter dated 27.07.2015 marked X10. By

that letter X10, Secretary to the Ministry of Food Security has informed the

Petitioner of the decision to award the tender to the 3rd Respondent, namely M/S

AIPPL Access International Joint Venture.

At this stage, it is necessary to note that Sujeewa Nishantha Akuranthilaka, in

his capacity as the Director of the Measurement Units, Standards and Services

Department, [2nd Respondent] in his affidavit dated 22nd November 2017, has

stated that this particular tender cannot be awarded to any of the tenderers due

to the reasons set out below.

1. I state, according to the design of the laboratory building, fresh air supply

and air conditioning was to be done by a single system. At present, the laboratory building is functioning with the support of a split type air conditioning machines without the high precision air conditioning and ventilation system. 2. I state that the failure to install the requisite air condition system has

caused severe repercussions. The split type AC is unable to maintain the environmental condition of the laboratory, the air quality tests carried out by the National Building Research Organization (NBRO) and Industrial Technology Institute (IIT) reveal that formaldehyde levels of the internal air exceeds the standard permissible level. Moreover, there is high risk of the laboratory equipment becoming unsuitable as a result of the atmospheric conditions inside the laboratory.

3. I further state, the current specifications and design of air conditioning

system was to be installed parallel to the construction work, however, the high precision air condition could not be installed due to unavoidable circumstances. The said tender was a Design and Build Tender but according to the current situation, it has to be redesigned since the construction of the laboratory has been completed.

8

4. I state that the prepared specification and design of the AC system is not

effective for the present situation, the new design is capable of reducing the formaldehyde content level to levels approved by the Health and Labour Authorities whilst maintaining laboratory environmental conditions in conformity with international standards. [Para. 5,6,7 & 8 of the affidavit dated 22.11.2017 of the Director]

Moreover, in the report of the Procurement Appeal Board [PAB] also, it is

mentioned that the Technical Evaluation Committee (TEC) had found that none

of the tenderers had fulfilled the following three requirements:

1. Specific experience of the Bidder;

2. Preliminary Design Approach; and

3. any other improvements to the Employer’s Requirements

suggested by the Bidder

[Page 3 of the PAB report]

Learned Senior ASG on behalf of the 1st, 2nd, 4th and 45th Respondents

submitted that the Minister of Finance and the Cabinet of Ministers have so far

not sanctioned the request made in the Cabinet Memorandum marked 2R2 by

which approval of the cabinet of Ministers was sought to award the tender to the

3rd Respondent. This is evident by the Cabinet Decision marked 2R3. Instead,

the Cabinet has suggested calling for fresh tenders. The Ministry of Finance in

its observations for the Cabinet Memorandum marked 2R2 has suggested calling

for fresh tenders as none of the bidders have fulfilled the threshold requirement

to award the tender.

Averments in the 2nd Respondent’s Affidavit dated 22nd November 2017 indicate

that it is necessary to change even the specifications and design that is required

for the Laboratory. In such a situation, calling for fresh tenders would give an

9

opportunity for all bidders including the Petitioner, to submit the bids afresh in

accordance with the revised specifications. Accordingly, the decision to call for

fresh tenders to suit the present requirements of the laboratory Building of the

Department of Measurement Units, Standards and Services is amply justified.

In the circumstances, the question of cancellation of the tender awarded to the

3rd Respondent will not arise. It is merely because, with the implementation of

the decision of the Cabinet to call for fresh tenders to suit the present

requirements of the laboratory building of the Department of Measurement

Units, Standards and Services, then the decision to award the tender to the 3rd

Respondent would automatically get annulled.

For the reasons set out hereinbefore, I am of the view that the Petitioner has

failed to establish that its fundamental rights enshrined under Article 12(1) of

the Constitution have been infringed.

The application is dismissed without costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

S.E.WANASUNDERA, PC, J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

B.P.ALUWIHARE, PC, J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT