IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal from an order of the Provincial High Court of the Southern Province holden in Balapitiya in terms of Section 9 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19/1990 read with Article 154P of the Constitution.

S.C. Appeal No. 47/2008 SC/SPL/LA No. 248/2007 H.C. Balapitiya No. 331/2006 M.C. Elpitiya Case No. 40355

Mohamed Buhari Ikram Applicant Vs. Officer-In-Charge, Police Station, Uragasmanhandiya.

Respondent

AND BETWEEN

Mohamed Buhari Ikram Applicant-Appellant

Vs.

1. The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12. 2. Officer-In-Charge

S.C. Appeal No. 47/2008

2

Police Station, Uragasmanhandiya.

Respondents

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12.

1st Respondent- Appellant

Vs. Mohamed Buhari Ikram Applicant-Appellant-Respondent Mohamed Buhari Mohamed Akram

Accused-Respondent

**********

BEFORE : MURDU N.B. FERNANDO, P.C. J. A.H.M.D. NAWAZ, J. ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J. COUNSEL : Ms. Induni Punchihewa S.C. for the 1st - Respondent-Appellant J.P. Gamage for the Applicant-Appellant-Respondent. ARGUED ON : 20th January, 2022 DECIDED ON : 15th December, 2022

S.C. Appeal No. 47/2008

3

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

This matter arises out of an order of the Provincial High Court of

Southern Province holden in Balapitiya, exercising its appellate

jurisdiction over an order of confiscation made by the learned Magistrate

of Elpitiya.

The Accused-Respondent Mohamed Buhari Mohamed Akram was

charged before the Magistrate’s Court of Elpitiya in case No. 40355 for

committing an offence under section 3(c)(1) of the Animals Act (as

amended), by transporting a water buffalo cow without a valid permit

on 04.08.2006. He had transported the said animal in a lorry bearing No.

26-8659. Upon the said charge being read out, the Accused-Respondent

had tendered an unqualified admission of guilt and was accordingly

convicted on the said charge on 07.08.2006 and imposed a fine of Rs.

2500.00.

The Applicant-Appellant-Respondent Mohamed Buhari Ikram

thereafter moved the Magistrate’s Court that the lorry bearing No. 26-

8659 be released to him as he was the registered owner of the said lorry.

After an inquiry held by the Magistrate’s Court, during which only the

Applicant-Appellant-Respondent presented oral evidence, an order of

confiscation was made regarding the said lorry by the learned Magistrate

on 08.11.2006. Being aggrieved by the said order of confiscation, the

Applicant-Appellant-Respondent preferred an appeal to the Provincial

High Court at Balapitiya under Appeal No. 331/2006. After hearing the

parties and in delivering his judgment on the appeal, the learned High

Court Judge had set aside the said order of confiscation and made a

S.C. Appeal No. 47/2008

4

further order that the lorry be released to the said Applicant-Appellant-

Respondent.

On 04.09.2007, the 1st Respondent-Appellant filed an application

bearing number S.C. Spl. LA No. 348/2007 before this Court and sought

special leave to appeal against the said judgment of the Provincial High

Court and had tendered an amended petition on 01.11.2007 setting out

the questions of law on which leave is sought. It transpires from the

available proceedings that this Court had granted leave and the appeal

of the 1st Respondent-Appellant had been allocated the number SC

Appeal No. 47/2008. The Registrar of the High Court of Balapitiya

confirms that the Registry of this Court had conveyed to him that said

application was filed in relation to Appeal No. 331/2006 of that Court

and now pending before this Court as an appeal under SC Appeal No.

47/2008. Thereupon, the original record of the said appeal had

apparently been forwarded to the Registry of this Court by the Registrar

of the High Court of Balapitiya on 19.06.2008. However, it transpires that

the original docket of this Court as well as the said original Court record

were subsequently misplaced and as a consequence of which, no

judgment was pronounced by this Court on the said appeal, as the appeal

could not be taken up for hearing owing to that reason.

At a later stage, the docket was reconstructed with the assistance

of the Hon. Attorney General. Since the original docket was not available

and in the absence of the relevant journal entries beyond 17.05.2017, it

was not possible to ascertain the questions of law on which this Court

had granted leave to appeal to the 1st Respondent-Appellant.

S.C. Appeal No. 47/2008

5

Thereupon, the Applicant-Appellant-Respondent as well as the

Accused-Respondent were noticed to appear before this Court. After

several notices, the Applicant-Appellant-Respondent filed a proxy and

was present in Court on 05.05.2021. He informed Court that he was not

in a position to retain services of a Counsel due to financial constraints.

At this juncture, Mr. J.P. Gamage, Attorney-at-Law, had volunteered to

assist Court by appearing for the said Applicant-Appellant-Respondent

pro-bono and was therefore issued with a copy of the appeal brief. The

matter was thereafter fixed for hearing on 20.01.2022.

When this matter was taken up for hearing on that day, in view of

the submissions made by the parties, this Court had reformulated

following questions of law:

1. Has the learned High Court Judge erred in law regarding

standard of proof?

2. Has the learned High Court Judge erred in law on whom the

burden of proof lies?

The learned State Counsel and the learned Counsel for the

Applicant-Appellant-Respondent made oral submissions and were

permitted to tender written submissions in relation to the said two

questions of law on which this appeal would be decided.

At the hearing before this Court on 20.01.2022, it was submitted by

the learned State Counsel that the learned High Court Judge had misled

himself into forming an erroneous view as to the nature of proceedings

that were before the appellate Court. It was submitted that the learned

High Court Judge considered the appeal of the Applicant-Appellant-

Respondent as if it had emanated from a prosecution of a criminal

offence, in which the guilt of the latter had to be established by the

S.C. Appeal No. 47/2008

6

prosecution beyond reasonable doubt, when in fact the proceedings were

in relation to an appeal, that had been preferred against an order of

confiscation of a vehicle, by the Applicant-Appellant-Respondent.

The learned State Counsel then invited the attention of this Court

to the impugned judgment of the Provincial High Court, where it is

stated that the prosecution had failed to establish beyond reasonable

doubt that the Applicant-Appellant-Respondent, on the day of detection,

handed over the vehicle to his brother, the Accused-Respondent, for the

purpose of illegally transporting a water buffalo cow.

During his submissions in reply, the learned Counsel for the

Applicant-Appellant-Respondent conceded that the applicable law, in

relation to the two questions of law reformulated by this Court, had

already been set out in the judgments of Nizar v Inspector of Police,

Wattegama (1978-79) 2 Sri L.R. 304 and Faris v The Officer in Charge of

Galenbindunuwewa and Another (1992) 1 Sri L.R. 168, and therefore the

learned High Court Judge had erred in imposing a wrong burden of

proof and that too on the prosecution. Nonetheless, the learned Counsel

for the Applicant-Appellant-Respondent had invited this Court to

determine the question of whether the evidence presented before the

Magistrate’s Court during the inquiry by the Applicant-Appellant-

Respondent indicated that he had no knowledge of the commission of an

offence by the Accused-Respondent, who had acted on his own accord

and therefore the part of the judgment of the Provincial High Court, in

which the said Court had considered the evidence and decided to set

aside the order of confiscation was correct to that extent.

Since the Accused-Respondent was convicted for an offence under

the Animals Act as amended, section 3A of the said Act made any vehicle

S.C. Appeal No. 47/2008

7

used in the commission of such an offence be liable to be confiscated. The

proviso to the said section states that “… in any case where the owner of the

vehicle is a third party, no order of confiscation shall be made, if the owner proves

to the satisfaction of the Court that he has taken all precautions to prevent the

use of such vehicle or that the vehicle has been used without his knowledge for

the commission of the offence.” Having referred to the judgment of

Vythialingam J in Nizar v Inspector of Police, Wattegama (supra), SN

Silva J (as he was then) stated in Faris v The Officer in Charge of

Galenbindunuwewa and Another (supra) that “in terms of the proviso to

section 3A of the Animals Act, an order for confiscation cannot be made if the

owner establishes one of two matters. They are, (1) that he has taken all

precautions to prevent the use of the vehicle for the commission of the offence (2)

that the vehicle has been used for the commission of the offence without his

knowledge.” His Lordship then added “in terms of the proviso, if the owner

establishes any one of these matters on a balance of probability, an order of

confiscation should not be made.”

When an owner of a vehicle presents an application under the

proviso to section 3A of the Animals Act, in relation to a vehicle that had

been used in the commission of an offence under that Act be released to

him, the applicable degree of proof in establishing whether he had taken

all precautions to prevent the use of such vehicle or that the vehicle had

been used for the commission of the offence without his knowledge, and

on whom that burden lies, were considered by this Court in the judgment

of The Finance Company PLC v Priyantha Chandana & Five Others

(2010) 2 Sri L.R. 220. Having referred to the applicable law, as stated in

the two judgments referred to above, as well as in several other judicial

precedents, this Court stated (at p. 232) that “the ratio decidendi of all the

aforementioned decisions also show that the owner has to establish the said

S.C. Appeal No. 47/2008

8

matter on a balance of probability.” Thus, the learned Counsel for the

Applicant-Appellant-Respondent had rightly conceded that the

Provincial High Court had fallen into error when it applied the standard

of proof beyond reasonable doubt to determine the validity of the

confiscation and imposed that burden on the prosecution. The Provincial

High Court had thereby disregarded the applicable burden of proof of a

balance of probability that had been consistently applied by Courts, in

determining the issue of confiscation, as did by the Magistrate’s Court of

Elpitiya in this instance. Hence the two questions of law should be

answered in the affirmative.

In the circumstances, what remains to be considered is the question

posed by the learned Counsel, of whether the Applicant-Appellant-

Respondent had established that he had no knowledge that his vehicle

had been used for commission of an offence to the required degree of

proof and, therefore to that extent, the judgment of the Provincial High

Court should not be interfered with.

A perusal of the order of the learned Magistrate indicates that he

had considered the evidence of the Applicant-Appellant-Respondent

extensively, in order to satisfy himself whether the latter had taken all

precautions to prevent the use of such vehicle or whether the vehicle had

been used for the commission of the offence without his knowledge.

After evaluating the Applicant-Appellant-Respondent’s evidence, the

learned Magistrate had concluded that he had failed to establish to the

satisfaction of Court that the vehicle was used without his knowledge.

The Provincial High Court had thought it fit to interfere with the said

order on the basis that it is the Applicant-Appellant-Respondent’s

evidence during his examination-in-chief that should be accepted and

S.C. Appeal No. 47/2008

9

acted upon as credible evidence, rather than rejecting same on answers

given by him during cross-examination by the prosecution.

The basis on which the Provincial High Court had decided to

interfere with the order of confiscation could accordingly be described as

an instance of determining the validity of the conclusion reached by the

lower Court on the testimonial trustworthiness of the Applicant-

Appellant-Respondent coupled with an erroneous view it had

entertained on the applicable degree of the burden of proof, and the party

on whom that burden lies.

This Court, in the judgment of Pilapitiya v Chandrasiri and

Others (1979) 1 Sri L.R. 361, stated that the determination of primary facts

is always a question of fact. The judgment of The Attorney General v

Mary Theresa (2011) 2 Sri L.R. 292 states that the credibility of a witness

is a question of fact and not of law. It is therefore clear that the assessment

of credibility of a witness, and if it finds such a witness as credible, the

determination of relevant questions of fact on that evidence, are best left

for the original Court to decide. This is due to the distinct advantage the

original Court has over observing the demeanour and deportment of the

witnesses. It had been stated by this Court in Bandaranaike v Jagathsena

and Others (1984) 2 Sri L.R. 397, that due to that reason, the original Court

is at a better position of determining the testimonial trustworthiness of a

witness. This is because of the advantage that an original Court has over

an appellate Court, as the latter would have to determine the same on an

inanimate transcript of evidence, has been considered by superior Courts

as a significant one.

Conclusions reached on primary facts sometime form pure

questions of fact. But there could be situations where they could also be

S.C. Appeal No. 47/2008

10

mixed questions of fact and of law. In Bandaranaike v Jagathsena and

Others (supra), following the ratio of the judgments King v Gunaratne et

al 14 Ceylon Law Recorder 174 and Martin Fernando v The Inspector of

Police, Minuwangoda (1945) 46 NLR 210, it was stated (at p. 407) that an

appellate Court must attach the greatest weight to the opinion of the

Judge who saw the witnesses and heard their evidence and consequently

should not disturb a judgment of fact unless it is unsound. The Court

proceeded to quote three tests as formulated by Macdonell CJ in King v

Gunaratne et al (supra), in emphasising its application by an appellate

Court, in determining validity of findings by the original Court on

questions of fact:

1. the verdict of the judge is unreasonably against the weight of

evidence,

2. there is a misdirection on the law or on the evidence,

3. the Court of trial has drawn the wrong inferences from matters

in evidence, the appeal Court must not interfere with a

judgment of fact.

The testimonial trustworthiness of the Applicant-Appellant-

Respondent, being a question of fact, would undoubtedly have a bearing

on the acceptability of his assertion that his vehicle had been used for the

commission of the offence without his knowledge. But it is evident from

the proceedings that diametrically opposite conclusions were reached by

the two lower Courts on this particular question of fact, namely the

credibility of evidence of the Applicant-Appellant-Respondent. In the

circumstances, this Court must then review both these decisions of the

lower Courts and the reasoning adopted in arriving at the same, in order

to satisfy itself as to which of the said two determinations ought to be

S.C. Appeal No. 47/2008

11

accepted. It is therefore important to refer to the evidence of Applicant-

Appellant-Respondent, albeit briefly, in order to assess whether he had

established that claim to the required degree of proof before the

Magistrate’s Court by presenting credible and reliable evidence.

Only the Applicant-Appellant-Respondent had offered evidence

during inquiry proceedings before the Magistrate’s Court. During

examination-in-chief, he said that he had handed over his lorry to his

own brother on that particular day with instructions to transport a load

of firewood to their bakery at Panapitiya. Only in the following morning

he did learn that his lorry had been taken charge of by the Police, whilst

transporting cattle. He said this was the first time he had ever handed

over his vehicle to his brother, the Accused- Respondent, and that too

was after specifically instructing latter not to engage in any form of illegal

activity. The Applicant-Appellant-Respondent had further asserted that

he had no knowledge that his brother would engage in such an illegal

activity.

The stance of the Applicant-Appellant-Respondent is therefore

clear that he was engaged in the bakery trade and therefore had no reason

to get involved with cattle trade. Having specifically instructed the

Accused-Respondent not to engage in any illegal activity, the Applicant-

Appellant-Respondent never expected his own brother to commit an

offence under the Animals Act by transporting cattle without a valid

permit, when he entrusted the lorry only to transport firewood.

Therefore, it is probable that the Applicant-Appellant-Respondent had

no knowledge of the commission of the offence and became aware that

his lorry was used to transport cattle only the following morning.

S.C. Appeal No. 47/2008

12

This claim obviously was advanced before the Magistrate’s Court

by the Applicant-Appellant-Respondent, in order to invite that Court to

arrive at a conclusion that it was the Accused-Respondent who had acted

on his own and decided to transport cattle, by his act of transporting a

water buffalo cow, instead of transporting firewood to their bakery,

contrary to specific instructions by the former to the latter. Thus, the

Applicant-Appellant-Respondent had sought to convince the

Magistrate’s Court that it was more probable that he would have had no

knowledge of his lorry would be used by the Accused-Respondent in

committing an offence under the Animals Act.

The learned Magistrate was clearly not impressed with the

evidence of the Applicant-Appellant-Respondent as he had totally

rejected the segment of evidence in which it was asserted that this was

the first-time that the Applicant-Appellant-Respondent had handed over

the lorry to his brother, the Accused-Respondent. In his order of

confiscation, the learned Magistrate had made references to the several

inconsistencies that caught his attention which, in his view, had rendered

the evidence of Applicant-Appellant-Respondent unreliable.

A perusal of the evidence indicates that, during cross-examination

by the prosecution, the Applicant-Appellant-Respondent had changed

some of his assertions on many important issues, which he made during

examination-in-chief. This factor naturally raises credibility concerns on

those assertions, made in support of his position that he had no

knowledge of his vehicle was used to commit an offence.

This is evident from the Applicant-Appellant-Respondent’s

admission that he had supplied cattle to slaughterhouses on numerous

S.C. Appeal No. 47/2008

13

occasions. Shifting from his position of operating a bakery, the

Applicant-Appellant-Respondent conceded during cross-examination

that he was engaged in the cattle trade whilst occasionally acting as an

agent of a foreign employment agency. He also admitted that there were

instances where he himself had transported cattle in his lorry, thereby

contradicting his own claim that this was the first instance in which his

lorry was used in transporting cattle. The Applicant-Appellant-

Respondent further admitted that there were previous occasions in

which he had applied for permission to transport cattle and added that if

permission was denied by the authorities, he would then take cattle to

the abattoir on foot, taking shortcuts through the village. He was well

aware of the consequences of illegally transporting cattle by motor

vehicles. The Applicant-Appellant-Respondent also admitted that the

Accused-Respondent had several cases for theft of cattle, and he himself

settled them, after paying compensation to the respective owners.

These admissions by the Applicant-Appellant-Respondent

indicate that he was not at all a stranger to cattle trade and had a close

association with the owner of Uragaha abattoir. It was the owner of the

said slaughterhouse, who alerted the Applicant-Appellant-Respondent

that his lorry had been detained by the Police, whilst transporting cattle.

However, it must be noted that the Applicant-Appellant-Respondent’s

dealings in the cattle trade, though indeed are relevant considerations,

do not by themselves justify an inference that he had knowledge of the

commission of offence with which the Accused-Respondent was

charged. But the evidence of the Applicant-Appellant-Respondent also

discloses several other considerations that amply justify an inference of

knowledge on his part, as decided by the learned Magistrate.

S.C. Appeal No. 47/2008

14

The Applicant-Appellant-Respondent had conceded that it was

with the assistance of his brother, the Accused-Respondent, he had

supplied cattle previously to the abattoir at Uragaha. He also conceded

that there were several instances where the Accused-Respondent was

arrested with others for illegally transporting cattle. The Applicant-

Appellant-Respondent also knew that the Accused-Respondent would

not hesitate to transport cattle if a vehicle was available for that purpose.

It is appropriate to reproduce the relevant part of the evidence in order

to note the manner in which the Applicant-Appellant-Respondent had

responded to the question put to him by the prosecutor during cross-

examination. The context in which this evidence was elicited, as the line

of cross-examination seems to suggest, was whether the Applicant-

Appellant-Respondent was aware as to the previous instances of

transporting cattle illegally.

“m%( ;uka okakjd u,a,s yrla mgjdf.k hkjd lshd jdykhla yuqjqkdu@

W( Tõ’

m%( ta oekqu ;sî ;uhs ÿkafka f,drsh@

W( Tõ’”

Thus, there is no ambiguity as to the knowledge of the Applicant-

Appellant-Respondent in relation to the propensity of his brother to

transport cattle illegally, if a vehicle was available for that purpose. This

admission greatly affects the relative probabilities of the claim advanced

by the Applicant-Appellant-Respondent, in denial of any knowledge of

the same. The Applicant-Appellant-Respondent had handed over his

vehicle to the Accused-Respondent in the evening of the day on which

the offence was committed with full knowledge of his brother’s

propensity to commit such offences. Even with his awareness as to the

S.C. Appeal No. 47/2008

15

consequences of such an act, the Applicant-Appellant-Respondent

nevertheless handed over his lorry to the Accused-Respondent on that

evening. Of course, the Applicant-Appellant-Respondent had denied the

suggestion made by the prosecution that he had knowledge of

transporting cattle. This claim of the Applicant-Appellant-Respondent

had been rejected by the learned Magistrate.

In view of the above considerations, the question whether the

Applicant-Appellant-Respondent had established on a balance of

probability that his vehicle had been used for commission of the offence

by the Accused-Respondent without his knowledge, must be answered

in the negative, as rightly done so by the learned Magistrate.

The reasoning adopted by the learned High Court Judge to arrive

at a contrary conclusion to the one reached by the learned Magistrate on

the credibility of evidence of the Applicant-Appellant-Respondent,

indicates that the learned High Court Judge was of the view that the

original Court should have confined its consideration to his examination-

in-chief only. This peculiar approach that had been adopted by the

learned High Court Judge in evaluating testimonial trustworthiness of a

witness is not known to our Courts and is contrary to the universally

accepted and time-tested methods on assessment of evidence for

credibility.

In an adversarial system of litigation, the importance attached to

cross-examination in assessing the credibility of a witness was

emphasised by Coomaraswamy in his treatise on the Law of Evidence (Vol.

II, Book 2, p. 719) in stating that, “Cross-examination is peculiarly a product

of the English procedure and it is vital feature of all modern systems of evidence.

It has been described as the greatest legal engine ever invented for the discovery

of truth.” In the judgment of Rodrigo v Central Engineering Consultancy

S.C. Appeal No. 47/2008

16

Bureau (2009) 1 Sri L.R. 248, Marsoof J observed (at p. 271) that cross-

examination “… after all, is the time-tested tool used in the adversarial system

to get at the truth.” This Court, in the judgment of Padmatilake (Sgt) v

Director General, Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery and

Corruption (2009) 2 Sri L.R. 151, recognised the importance of cross-

examination by stating (at p. 158), “… it is the paramount duty of the Court

to consider entire evidence of a witness brought on record in the examination-

in-chief, cross-examination and re-examination. In other words, Courts must

take an overall view of the evidence of each witness.”

In a recent pronouncement, Aluwihare J (Kulasiriwardena v

Jayasinghe and Others (2016) 1 Sri L.R. 93) emphasised the importance

of cross-examination as a tool in assessing genuineness of a document

that had been tendered under section 154(1) of the Civil Procedure Code.

The test of consistency also is an essential tool employed by Courts

and has proved its value over the years in assessing credibility. The

testimony of a witness is assessed for its truthfulness and reliability by

considering whether there is any inconsistency inter se on a particular fact

in issue as well whether there is any inconsistency with the testimony of

other witnesses who testified on that same fact in issue.

Since the credibility of a witness is a question of fact, the decision

of the learned Magistrate to not act on the evidence of the Applicant-

Appellant-Respondent should be interfered with only if the appellate

Court is satisfied that such a conclusion fails to qualify on one or more of

the three tests as stated in the judgment of Bandaranaike v Jagathsena

and Others (supra). The rationale on which the learned High Court Judge

had decided to interfere with the finding of fact of the learned Magistrate,

as already referred to earlier on in this judgment, does not fall into any

S.C. Appeal No. 47/2008

17

of the said three instances, but only as a result of a serious misdirection

on the applicable law.

The decision not to accept his evidence was made by the learned

Magistrate only after having seen and hearing the Applicant-Appellant-

Respondent in the witness box and therefore the said decision is

accordingly entitled to great weight. Thus, the Provincial High Court had

fallen into grave error, when it interfered with the finding of the learned

Magistrate not to accept the evidence of the Applicant-Appellant-

Respondent after considering the evidence that had been elicited through

him during cross-examination. It is also relevant to note that the evidence

of the Applicant-Appellant-Respondent requires consideration for its

truthfulness and reliability by applying the test of interestedness or

disinterestedness. In the judgment of The Attorney General v Mary

Theresa (supra) this Court identified the said test as one of the key tests

for assessing credibility and quoted Rajaratnam J from an unreported

judgment, Tudor Perera v AG in (S.C. 23/75 D.C. Colombo Bribery 190/B

– Minutes of S.C. dated 01.11.1975), where His Lordship observed that

when considering the evidence of an interested witness who may desire

to conceal the truth, such evidence must be scrutinised with some care

and also quoted Halsbury Laws of England (4th Edition, paragraph 29),

where it was stated that matters of motive, prejudice, partiality, accuracy,

incentive and reliability have all to be weighed. Since the Applicant-

Appellant-Respondent had an obvious interest as to the outcome of the

inquiry, it is justified in such circumstances that the said test too is

employed in assessing his evidence.

The two questions of law on which this appeal proceeded are

therefore answered in the affirmative and in favour of the 1st Respondent-

Appellant. Accordingly, the judgment of the Provincial High Court is set

S.C. Appeal No. 47/2008

18

aside and the order of the Magistrate’s Court of Elpitiya, in confiscating

the vehicle, is restored back.

Lastly, I wish to record my appreciation for the assistance

voluntarily rendered by the learned Counsel for the Applicant-

Appellant-Respondent, as well as to the learned State Counsel, thereby

facilitating the reaching of a finality to the instant appeal, which had

remained in the system far too long.

The Appeal of the 1st Respondent-Appellant is allowed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

MURDU N.B. FERNANDO, PC, J. I agree. JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

A.H.M.D. NAWAZ, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT