==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 11

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal under

and in terms of section 5(2) and 6

of the High Court of the Provinces

(Special Provisions) Act, No. 10 of

1996 (as amended), read together

with sections 754(2) and 757 of the

Civil Procedure Code.

SC Appeal No: NTT Data Business Solutions Pvt

139/2024 Ltd,

(Formerly known as Intelligence

SC/HC/LA No: India Software Solutions Pvt Ltd),

114/2024 Softsol Tower 2, Third Floor,

B-wing, Software Units Layout,

HC/Civil Case No: Infocity, Madhapur,

156/2021/MR Hyderabad-500081,

Telangana, India.

PLAINTIFF

Vs.

Tech Pacific Lanka Pvt Ltd,

No. 04, Castle Lane,

Colombo 04.

DEFENDANT

AND BETWEEN

Page 2 of 11

Tech Pacific Lanka Pvt Ltd,

No. 04, Castle Lane,

Colombo 04.

DEFENDANT-APPELLANT

Vs.

NTT Data Business Solutions Pvt

Ltd,

(Formally known as Intelligence

India Software Solutions Pvt Ltd),

Softsol Tower 2, Third Floor,

B-wing, Software Units Layout,

Infocity, Madhapur,

Hyderabad-500081,

Telangana, India.

PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT

Before : Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J.

: Janak De Silva, J.

: Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

Counsel : Anuruddha Dharmaratne with Oshan Fernando

instructed by Indika Jayaweera for the Defendant-

Appellant.

Page 3 of 11

: Avindra Rodrigo P.C. with Kasuni Jayaweera

instructed by FJ & G de Saram for the Plaintiff-

Respondent.

Argued on : 17-09-2025

Written Submissions : 04-04-2025 (By the Plaintiff-Respondent)

: 02-04-2025 (By the Defendant-Appellant)

Decided on : 06-02-2026

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

This is an appeal preferred by the defendant-appellant (hereinafter referred to

as the defendant) on being aggrieved of the order dated 12-07-2024

pronounced by the learned Judge of the Commercial High Court of Western

Province holden in Colombo.

From the impugned order, the learned Judge of the High Court rejected an

objection taken up by the defendant for calling witness No. 01 listed in the

list of witnesses and documents filed before the High Court by the plaintiff-

respondent (hereinafter referred to as the plaintiff).

The said objection has been raised on the basis that the plaintiff has failed to

file its list of witnesses and documents as required by and in terms of section

121(2) of the Civil Procedure Code, and therefore, the plaintiff is not entitled

to call witnesses to substantiate its case.

From the impugned order, the learned Judge of the High Court, after having

considered the relevant provisions of the law and also plethora of cases

decided by our Superior Courts in that regard, has determined that although

the said list of witnesses had been filed 7 days prior to the date where the

case was fixed for trial for the 1st time, such procedural defect has not caused

any prejudice to the defendant.

Page 4 of 11

When this matter was supported for leave to appeal from the impugned order

before this Court on 11-11-2024, having considered the submissions of the

learned Counsel, this Court allowed leave to appeal on the following question

of law.

Has the learned Judge of the High Court erred in law by permitting

a witness of the plaintiff to be called in contrary to the section 80,

121(2) and 143 of the Civil Procedure Code.

The Court also stayed the proceedings in the Commercial High Court granting

interim relief as sought by the appellant.

When this matter was taken up for argument before this Court on 17-05-

2025, the learned Counsel who represented both the parties agreed that the

question of law upon which leave to appeal was granted is a pure question of

law and the matter can be disposed of by having considered the written

submissions by both the parties in that regard, and invited the Court to

pronounce the judgment based on the written submissions. Accordingly, the

parties were allowed to file reply submissions, if necessary, for the

consideration of the Court.

The facts that led to the impugned order by the learned Judge of the High

Court can be summarized in the following manner.

The plaintiff company has instituted action before the Commercial High Court

of Colombo by its plaint dated 27-04-2021, seeking inter alia a judgment

against the defendants for a sum of USD 337,359.68/- or its equivalent in Sri

Lankan Rupees, together with legal interest and for other incidental reliefs

based on an alleged breach of contract between the parties.

The defendant in its answer has denied the claim of the plaintiff and has set

up a cross claim against the plaintiff for a sum of USD 400,000/- or its

equivalent in Sri Lankan Rupees, together with legal interest among other

reliefs. The defendant has also sought the dismissal of the action.

Page 5 of 11

After the pre-trial conference, the matter has been fixed for the trial to be

taken up on 07-07-2023. The defendant has filed its list of witnesses and

documents on 21-06-2023 in terms of section 121(2) of the Civil Procedure

Code, 15 days prior to the date fixed for the trial. Admittedly, the plaintiff has

filed its list of witnesses and documents on 30-06-2023, which amounts to

filing the said list 7 days before the date set for the commencement of the

trial.

Once the defendant received the list, the registered Attorney-at-Law for the

defendant has filed a motion dated 07-07-2023 before the Court informing

that the plaintiff’s list of witnesses and documents was not in accordance with

the requirements of section 121(2) of the Civil Procedure Code, giving notice

of objection regarding the admissibility of the list of witnesses and documents

on the basis that it has been filed out of time.

Although the trial has been originally fixed for 07-07-2023, for various

reasons, it has not commenced on that day but has finally commenced on 27-

02-2024. In the meantime, the plaintiff has tendered an affidavit by the 1st

witness named in the list of witnesses filed by the plaintiff together with its

annextures with a copy to the defendant, requiring it to be treated as his

evidence in chief.

When the learned Counsel for the plaintiff moved to call the said witness No.

01 listed in the list on the date of the trial, the defendant has objected to the

witness being called on the basis that the plaintiff has failed to submit its list

of witnesses in terms of section 121(2) of the Civil Procedure Code, and

therefore, the plaintiff is not entitled to move for the said witness to be called

under and in terms of section 175 of the Civil Procedure Code.

Since the objection amounts to a purely legal question, the parties have

agreed to file written submissions in that regard allowing the learned Judge

of the High Court to make a determination.

Page 6 of 11

It is the said determination that is now challenged before this Court.

Since this Court has granted leave to appeal on a specific question of law with

reference to 3 sections of the Civil Procedure Code, I find it relevant to

reproduce the said sections in full for the better understanding of this

judgment.

Section 80 as well as section 121 of the Civil Procedure Code have undergone

drastic changes as a result of Civil Procedure Code (Amendment) Act No. 29

of 2023, which was certified by the Speaker of the Parliament and came into

effect on 17-11-2023.

However, since the objection as to the list of witnesses has been raised on 04-

07-2023, the law applicable at that time should be considered in determining

this appeal. I find that the learned Judge of the High Court too has gone on

the same basis though the relevant objection has been considered in detail

and the impugned order has been pronounced after the above-mentioned

amendment came into effect.

The relevant sections as they stood at the relevant time read as follows,

80. On the date fixed for the case to be called to fix the date of trial

of the action in the trial court, the court shall appoint a date for

the trial of the action and shall give notice thereof in writing by

registered post to all parties who have furnished a registered

address and tendered the cost of service of such notice as provided

by subsection (2) of section 55. (As amended by Amendment Act No.

08 of 2017).

121. (2) Every party to an action shall, not less than fifteen days

before the date fixed for the trial of an action, file or cause to be

filed in Court after notice to the opposite party –

(a) a list of witnesses to be called by such party at the trial,

and

Page 7 of 11

(b) a list of the documents relied upon by such party and to

be produced at the trial.

143. (1) The Court may, if sufficient cause be shown at any stage

of the action, grant time to the parties or to any of them, and may

from time to time adjourn the hearing of the action.

Provided however, that no adjournment in excess of Six weeks may

be granted except in exceptional circumstances, and for reasons to

be recorded.

(2) In all such cases the Court shall fix a day for the further hearing

of the action, and may make such order as it thinks fit with respect

to the costs occasioned by the adjournment:

Provided that, when the hearing of evidence has once begun, the

hearing of the action shall be continued from day to day until all

the witnesses in attendance have been examined, unless the Court

finds the adjournment of the hearing to be necessary for reasons

to be recorded and signed by the Judge.

Even though this Court granted leave to appeal based on the above 3 sections,

I find that what is relevant for the purposes of determining this appeal is only

the applicability of section 121(2) as it stood then, and also the provisions of

section 175(1) of the Civil Procedure Code as it stood before the Amendment

Act No. 29 of 2023.

The relevant section 175(1) of the Civil Procedure Code reads as follows-

175. (1) No witness shall be called on behalf of any party unless

such witness shall have been included in the list of witnesses

previously filed in court by such party as provided by section 121:

Provided however, that the court may in its discretion, if special

circumstances appear to it to render such a course available in the

Page 8 of 11

interest of justice, permit a witness to be examined although such

witness may not have been included in such list aforesaid;

Provided also that any party to an action may be called as a witness

without his name having been included in any such list.

It is quite apparent from the order of the learned trial Judge that he was well

possessed of the law that should be considered in determining the objection

raised by the defendant.

Although the word used in section 121(2) is ‘shall’, our Courts have

consistently held that when it comes to interpreting the requirements of

section 121(2), what needs is a liberal interpretation in the interests of justice.

In the instant action, it is not a case of the plaintiff having failed to file the list

of witnesses before the 1st date fixed for the trial, but failing to file the same

not less than 15 days before the date fixed for the trial. However, it is clear

that the defendant was put on notice not less than 7 days from the date 1st

fixed for the trial as to the plaintiff’s witnesses and list of documents that the

plaintiff will rely on at the trial.

As I have stated earlier, though the case was 1st fixed for trial on 07-07-2023,

the trial has finally commenced more than 6 months after the said date. When

the trial commenced, the defendant also had the benefit of knowing the listed

witness PW-01’s evidence-in-chief, as the said witness has filed an affidavit in

that regard.

In my view, it is in that context that the trial Judge was required to look at

the objection raised in order to find out whether any prejudice has been

caused to the defendant or whether there was any element of surprise as a

result of not filing the list of witnesses not less than 15 days before the date

1st fixed for trial. The trial Judge also should consider the interests of justice

in relation to all parties to the litigation as well, given the facts and the

circumstances unique to each case.

Page 9 of 11

The case of Walkers and Sons Co. Ltd Vs. Masood (2004) 3 SLR 195 was a

case where similar objection was raised as to the list of witnesses and

documents not filed within 15 days prior to the date of the trial.

Per Weerasekara, J.,

“We find that this document has been referred in the plaint and that in

any event the document had in fact been listed 13 days before the trial.

Counsel for the appellant conceded that the documents sought to be

produced was referred to in the plaint and that in his answer this

document had been referred to by way of a reply to the plaint.

In those circumstances the defense taken up that the production of the

document took the defendant-appellant by surprise, cannot be sustained.

Counsel for the appellant then urged that though the objection to the non-

listing in terms of section 121(2) was technical yet it was mandatory. We

regret we are unable to agree with Counsel for the appellant.

We are of the view that as Chief Justice Abrahim stated “this is a Court

of justice and not an academy of law” and that the Civil Procedure Code

tested by time breathes live, and practical and rules of law with a view

of speedy justice.

This view is confirmed by section 175 of the Civil Procedure Code by

which the Court is permitted in appropriate circumstances to permit the

production of documents though not listed.” (emphasis added).

In the case of Sri Lanka Savings Bank Ltd Vs. Global Tea Lanka (Pvt) and

Others 2021/2022 BLR 20 at 28, Preethi Padman Surasena, J. (as he was

then) observed the following,

“Section 121(1) is a provision made available to enable the parties to

obtain summonses to persons whose attendance is required either to give

evidence or to produce documents at the hearing. If a list of witnesses or

a list of documents were not filed in Court then no party will be able to

invoke the provision in section 121(1). Hence, it is necessary to specify a

Page 10 of 11

time limit for filing any list of witnesses or any list of documents in Court.

That is what section 121(2) of the Civil Procedure Code has done.

Thus, the sole purpose of this section is to provide for a framework upon

which the Court will be able to commence the trial on the previously fixed

date without any hinderance. Therefore, if the Court is in a position to

proceed with the trial without any hinderance when it takes up the case

for the trial on ‘the date fixed for the trial of the action’ with the list of

witnesses or a list of documents being filed in Court fifteen days before

the said ‘date fixed for the trial of the action’ then the purpose of section

121(2) is achieved.” (emphasis added)

In S.C. Appeal 1/2025 decided on 10-02-2025, Samayawardhena, J.

having considered the relevant law on the question of filing the list of

witnesses and documents, observed the following,

“Let me emphasize a very important point. As repeatedly highlighted by

the Superior Courts, the underlined principle behind the requirement of

filing the list of witnesses and documents 15 days before the trial is to

ensure that each party is fully aware of the witnesses and the documents

the opposing party intends to rely upon in establishing his case at the

trial, thereby preventing any party from being taken by surprise and

eliminating the prejudice caused thereby.”

For the reasons as considered above, I am of the view that the learned Judge

of the High Court has correctly exercised his discretion in deciding to accept

the list of witnesses and documents filed by the plaintiff in the interests of

justice, in a situation where no prejudice whatsoever has been caused to the

defendant.

Accordingly, I answer the question of law considered in the negative.

Page 11 of 11

The appeal is dismissed. The defendant shall pay Rs. 50,000/- as costs of this

appeal to the plaintiff.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Janak De Silva, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court