1

IN THE SUPREME COURT

OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application under and

in terms of Article 126 of the Constitution

of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

W.P.S. Wijerathna

No. 02, Kaluwalgoda,

Markawita.

Petitioner

SC. FR. Application No. 256/17

Vs.

1. Sri Lanka Ports Authority

No. 19, Chaithya Road,

Colombo 1.

2. Chief Human Resources Manager

Sri Lanka Ports Authority,

No. 19, Chaithya Road,

Colombo 1.

3. S.H.S. Padmini

Deputy Chief Human Resources

Manager,

Sri Lanka Ports Authority,

No. 19, Chaithya Road,

Colombo 1.

2

4. A. Hewawitharana

Harbour Master,

Sri Lanka Ports Authority

No. 19, Chaithya Road,

Colombo 1.

5. S.A.R. Jayathilaka

Chief Fire Officer,

Sri Lanka Ports Authority,

No. 19, Chaithya Road,

Colombo 1.

6. Nelum Anawarathna

Acting Chief Human Resources

Manager,

Sri Lanka Ports Authority,

No. 19, Chaithya Road,

Colombo 1.

7. Nirmal De Fonseka

Manager,

Mahapola Training Centre,

Sri Lanka Ports Authority,

No. 19, Chaithya Road,

Colombo 1.

8. B.M. Anulawathie

Deputy Chief Manager of

Administrative and Engineering,

Sri Lanka Ports Authority,

No. 19, Chaithya Road,

Colombo 1.

3

9. R.G. Hettiarachchi

Superintendent of Audit,

Auditor General’s Department,

No. 306/72, Polduwa Road,

Battaramulla.

10. Auditor General

Auditor General’s Department,

No. 306/72, Polduwa Road,

Battaramulla.

11. Honourable Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondents

Before: Hon. Murdu N.B. Fernando, PC, J.

Hon. S. Thurairaja, PC, J.

Hon. Yasantha Kodagoda, PC, J.

Counsel: Niranjan de Silva with Kalhara Gunawardana for the Petitioner.

Sureka Ahmed, State Counsel for the Respondents.

Argued on: 9

th July 2020

Decided on: 11

th December, 2020

4

JUDGMENT

YASANTHA KODAGODA, PC, J.

This Judgment relates to an Application filed in terms of Article 126 of the Constitution

by one W.P.S. Wijerathna (hereinafter referred to as “the Petitioner”) alleging the

infringement of his Fundamental Rights guaranteed by the Constitution, and seeking

inter-alia a declaration that his Fundamental Rights guaranteed by Articles 12(1) and

14(1)(g) of the Constitution have been violated by one or more of the Respondents to

this Application.

Position of the Petitioner

By his Petition to this Court dated 17

th July 2017, the Petitioner stated that, on 5

th January

1987, he joined the Sri Lanka Ports Authority (hereinafter sometimes referred to as “the

1

st Respondent Authority”) as a ‘Fireman’. Consequently, he had been attached to the

‘Fire Brigade’ of the Sri Lanka Ports Authority (1

st Respondent Authority). Following

confirmation in service, he served the 1

st Respondent as a Fireman for a continuous

period of 15 years. In March 1998, the Petitioner has passed the preliminary examination

of the Institution of Fire Engineers, which according to the Petitioner amounts to a

‘Diploma’. On 15

th October 2001, the Petitioner was appointed as a ‘Landing and

Delivery Clerk’ of the 1

st Respondent Authority. Though the Petitioner has not

specifically stated in his affidavit, it became apparent at the argument stage of this

Application, that this appointment was sequel to the Petitioner having applied for that

post, and being selected. In view of that appointment, the Petitioner left the Fire Brigade

and became attached to the Supply & Services Division of the 1

st Respondent Authority.

The Petitioner continues to-date to function as a ‘Landing and Delivery Clerk’ of the 1

st

Respondent Authority.

In 2006, the Chief Human Resources Manager (hereinafter referred to as ‘the 2

nd

Respondent”) of the 1

st Respondent Authority called for applications for the post of

‘Station Officer’ of the Fire Brigade of the 1

st Respondent Authority. Since he had the

requisite minimum qualifications to be eligible for appointment as ‘Station Officer’, he

preferred an application for the post. However, he had not been recruited on the premise

that, the Petitioner had not completed the required period of ‘continuous service’ at the

5

Fire Brigade of the 1

st Respondent Authority. In his Petition to this Court, the Petitioner

has not impugned the decision of the 2

nd Respondent acting on behalf of the 1

st

Respondent Authority in not having appointed him to the post of ‘Station Officer’ of the

Fire Brigade, on that occasion.

By a Notice dated 28

th March 2012, the 2

nd Respondent once again called for applications

to fill the post of ‘Station Officer’ of the Fire Brigade of the 1

st Respondent Authority.

According to the said Notice calling for applications (a copy of which was produced

attached to the Petition marked “P4”), to be eligible for appointment for the post of

‘Station Officer’, an applicant had to possess the following three qualifications (‘minimum

/ threshold qualifications’):

(1) Be a permanent employee of the 1

st Respondent Authority.

(2) Satisfy one out of the three following eligibility criteria referred to in the said

Notice:

(i) Passed three subjects at the GCE (A/L) examination at the same sitting,

possess a level five certificate of National Vocational Qualification

certified by the Institute of Fire Engineers and 3 years experience in the

‘T/NT wage scale’.

(ii) Passed six subjects including Language and Mathematics at the GCE

(O/L) examination in not more than two sittings, possess a level five

certificate of National Vocational Qualification certified by the Institute

of Fire Engineers and 5 years experience in the T/NT wage scale.

(iii) Performed minimum of 20 years service at the 1

st Respondent

Authority, and out of that, eight years in the ‘T/NT wage scale’ and

possess a level four certificate of National Vocational Qualification.

(3) Possess a ‘satisfactory’ level of performance.

The Notice further stated that, applicants would be required to (a) sit and pass written

and practical tests pertaining to professional experience, (b) pass the interview or if

relevant to the post, pass the medical test. Though not of particular significance, it may

be noted that, as per the Notice “P4”, criteria “(b)” that is passing the interview and

passing the medical test were ex-facie alternate requirements, as opposed to two distinct

criteria to be accomplished to be successful. As the Petitioner possessed the eligibility

6

criteria referred to in the Notice, he preferred an application for the post of ‘Station

Officer’.

Subsequently, the Petitioner had got to know that, by letter dated 23

rd April 2013, the 3

rd

Respondent - Deputy Chief Human Resources Manager of the Sri Lanka Ports Authority

(hereinafter sometimes referred to as “the 3

rd Respondent”) had notified the 4

th

Respondent - Harbour Master of the 1

st Respondent Authority (hereinafter sometimes

referred to as “the 4

th Respondent”) that though six applications had been received for

the vacancy of ‘Station Officer’, the Petitioner was the only qualified applicant, and in the

circumstances had sought the ‘consent’ of the 4

th Respondent to hold an interview and a

practical examination as components of the selection process. In response, by letter dated

11

th May 2013, the 4

th Respondent had taken up the position that he was ‘not agreeable’

to the holding of the interview and the practical examination, on the premise that, the

Petitioner had not completed the required period of ‘continuous service’ at the Fire

Brigade of the 1

st Respondent Authority. In the circumstances, notwithstanding the fact

that the Petitioner was the only eligible applicant, he was not called for an interview and

was not required to face a practical examination. Accordingly, the Petitioner was not

appointed to the post of ‘Station Officer’.

The Petitioner claims that, (a) he was the only applicant who had successfully met the

required minimum / threshold qualifications, (b) at the time he preferred the afore-stated

Application, he had served the Fire Brigade of the 1

st Respondent Authority for 15 years

(though at the time he preferred the application he was not attached to the Fire Brigade

and was attached to another Division of the 1

st Respondent Authority), (c) there was no

rule at the Sri Lanka Ports Authority that only persons employed at a particular Division

were entitled to an appointment to a higher position within that same Division, and (d)

65 Firemen of the Fire Brigade of the 1

st Respondent Authority had signed a letter dated

20

th June 2013 which was addressed to the Director of Human Resources of the 1

st

Respondent Authority by the Petitioner, requesting that he be called for an interview for

the position of ‘Station Officer’. A copy of the said letter was submitted attached to the

Petition marked “P6”. This letter according to the Petitioner indicated that, none of those

employed at the Fire Brigade had any objection to the Petitioner being called for an

interview and for a practical examination being held to consider him being appointed to

7

the post of ‘Station Officer’. It appears that, there was no favourable response to the

Petitioner’s letter dated 20

th June 2013.

Being aggrieved by his not being called for an interview, the Petitioner had by letters

dated 21

st and 28

th December 2012 appealed to the Chairman of the 1

st Respondent

Authority to issue a direction to the Human Resources and Development Division to call

him for an interview for the post ‘Station Officer’. Consequently, by letter dated 23

rd

September 2013, the Petitioner was called for an interview and a practical test, to be held

on 26

th September 2013. Though the Petitioner does not specifically disclose so,

according to material placed before this Court and the submissions made by learned

Counsel, it is evident that the Petitioner had presented himself for both the interview and

the practical test. The Petitioner claims that, he was not notified of the outcome of the

interview and the practical test.

In 2014, an audit had been conducted by the Auditor General’s Department regarding

the vacancy of the post ‘Station Officer’ not having been filled. The circumstances under

which this audit was commissioned and held, have not been placed before this Court by

either party. However, a copy of the corresponding Report dated 13

th November 2014

authored by Superintendent of Audit R.G. Hettiarachchi of the Auditor General’s

Department (hereinafter referred to as ‘the 9

th Respondent’) and addressed to the

Chairman of the Sri Lanka Ports Authority was presented to this Court attached to the

Petition marked “P8”. According to “P8”, the 9

th Respondent had formed the opinion

that, notwithstanding the Petitioner having fulfilled the eligibility criteria, the reason as to

why the Petitioner was not called for an interview and for a practical test in response to

his application tendered in 2012, was because the divisional head, namely, the Harbour

Master (4

th Respondent) having refused to give his ‘consent’, and due to the Human

Resources Division of the 1

st Respondent Authority seeking to delay the selection process

until a workman of the Fire Brigade became eligible for the post of ‘Station Officer’. The

9

th Respondent in his Report further observes that, (a) the 1

st Respondent Authority does

not have a policy of making appointments to higher positions, only from among eligible

employees of the same Division, and (b) the relevant ‘scheme of recruitment’ does not

contain a condition which requires the position in issue to be filled from among only

serving employees of the relevant Division, in this instance the ‘Fire Brigade’. As regards

the interview held in 2013, the Report comments adversely regarding (a) the composition

8

of the interview panel which interviewed the Petitioner (in that it comprised of a nominee

of the 4

th Respondent, which was contrary to precedent), and (b) the nature of the sole

question asked from the Petitioner at the interview and the corresponding comment

entered in the mark sheet. Further, regarding the practical test, the Report comments

adversely on (a) the short notice given to the Petitioner to get ready for the practical test

(eighteen hours), and (b) the marks assigned to the Petitioner by the nominee of the 4

th

Respondent, notwithstanding his having asked only a single question regarding a

particular chemical substance. The Report reveals that the Petitioner had scored 30 out

of 45 marks at the interview and 59 out of 100 marks at the practical test. In view of the

foregoing reasons, having concluded that the entire process had resulted in an ‘injustice’

being caused to the Petitioner, the 8

th Respondent has sought observations from the

Chairman of the 1

st Respondent Authority regarding the contents of the Report, and

information on what steps he proposes to take with regard to the filling of the relevant

vacancy.

Following the release of the Audit Report (“P8”), an inquiry had been held at the 1

st

Respondent Authority, and consequently, a decision had been taken to hold a fresh

interview. The Petitioner had protested at the holding of the interview for the second

time without releasing the results of the initial interview. However, a fresh interview had

been held on 11

th March 2016. It is evident that only the Petitioner had been called for

that interview too. On that occasion, the interview panel assigned to the Petitioner 28 out

of 40 marks for his performance at the interview, and 40 marks for the ‘trade test’,

seemingly out of 60 marks. Thus, the Petitioner had scored a total of 68 marks.

According to the Petitioner, the interview panel had ‘recommended’ the appointment of

the Petitioner to the post of ‘Station Officer’. The Petitioner alleges that, notwithstanding

the recommendation of the interview panel, the Acting Chief Human Resources

Manager (presently functioning as the Manager of the Mahapola Training Centre of the

1

st Respondent Authority and cited as the 7

th Respondent) had recommended that the

interview findings be ‘cancelled’ and fresh applications be called for the post of ‘Station

Officer’. Accordingly, a fresh Notice calling for applications had been published. A copy

of the said Notice dated 19

th June 2017 was produced before this Court attached to the

Petition marked “P13”. The Petitioner alleges that, without selecting him based on the

results of the interview held on 11

th March 2016, the process of selection was delayed till

another person became eligible to apply for the post of ‘Station Officer’.

9

In the foregoing circumstances, the Petitioner alleged that, not having appointed him to

the post of ‘Station Officer’ of the Fire Brigade of the Sri Lanka Ports Authority based

on the interview for that post held on 11

th March 2016 and calling for fresh applications

as reflected in Notice dated 19

th June 2017 (produced marked “P13”) was arbitrary,

capricious and unreasonable and was an infringement of his Fundamental Rights

guaranteed by Articles 12(1) and 14(1)(g) of the Constitution.

Leave to proceed and grant of interim relief

Following the issue of Notice of this Application to the Respondents, the Petitioner’s

Application was sought to be Supported on 10

th August 2017. On that occasion, the

Honourable Attorney General (cited as the 11

th Respondent) who was represented by

learned State Counsel, sought time to obtain instructions from the other Respondents.

Learned State Counsel submitted that, the Respondents will not take steps to hold

interviews sequel to the issue of the Notice calling for application (“P13”) until this

Application was Supported. On that occasion, this Court directed the Respondents to

submit to Court the marks sheets of the previous interviews held by the 1

st Respondent

Authority in respect of the post of ‘Station Officer’. The Respondents complied with the

said order of Court, by producing the marks sheets pertaining to the interviews held on

26

th September 2013 (“X3A”), 10

th February 2016 (“X2”) and 11

th March 2016 (“X1”).

On 27

th October 2017, having heard submissions of both the learned counsel for the

Petitioner and the learned State Counsel for the Attorney General, this Court decided to

grant leave to proceed to the Petitioner in respect of the alleged infringement of his

Fundamental Rights guaranteed in terms of Articles 12(1) and 14(1)(g) of the

Constitution. The Court also granted a Stay Order as prayed in paragraph “e” of the

prayer to the Petition, staying further processing of applications received in response to

Notice dated 19

th June 2017 (“P13”) and staying until the final determination of this

Application the holding of interviews, and practical examinations, and making an

appointment to the post of ‘Station Officer’ of the Fire Brigade of the 1

st Respondent

Authority. The Respondents were given time to file Objections to the Application, and

the matter was fixed for Argument. Accordingly, Statement of Objections of the 1

st

Respondent Authority was filed on 1

st June 2018 and Counter Affidavit of the Petitioner

was filed on 25

th November 2019.

10

On 28

th November 2019, learned State Counsel made an application to this Court on

behalf of the 1

st Respondent Authority. She submitted that, in addition to the vacancy of

the post ‘Station Officer’ to which the Petitioner had applied, due to the retirement of an

employee, another vacancy of the same post had arisen. In the circumstances, she sought

permission of this Court to call for applications to fill such second vacancy. Having heard

Counsel, this Court allowed the said application, since the 1

st Respondent Authority

undertook to retain the previous vacancy to be filled by the Petitioner, in the event this

Court holding in favour of the Petitioner.

Position of the Respondents

The position of the Respondents is reflected in the affidavit filed on behalf of the 1

st

Respondent Authority by its Managing Director H.D.A. Sarath Kumara Premachandra.

In his affidavit, referring to the first occasion when applications for the post of ‘Station

Officer’ were called in 2006, he has submitted that, there were two vacancies for the post

of ‘Station Officer’, and seven candidates including the Petitioner had applied. Interviews

had been held on 10

th April 2007. Following the adoption of the selection procedure,

based on merit, three of the applicants had been selected. Of them, the interview panel

had recommended the appointment of the first two applicants. The third had been

placed on a waiting list. The Petitioner had received 52½ marks and had been placed 5

th.

Accordingly, the Petitioner had not been selected. As noted above, the Petitioner is not

impugning his non-selection for the post of ‘Station Officer’ on that occasion.

Referring to the applications that were received in 2012 in response to Notice dated 28

th

March 2013 (“P4”), the Managing Director admits that the Petitioner preferred an

application for the post of ‘Station Officer’. He asserts that, after the Petitioner submitted

his application, there was an exchange of letters between the Chief Human Resources

Manager and the Harbour Master, but does not venture to explain the purpose for which

such an exchange of letters took place. Nor does he reveal the contents thereof. He has

also refrained from stating the outcome of the exchange of these letters. He has further

submitted in his affidavit that, pursuant to the Notice calling for applications dated 28

th

March 2013, interviews were held on 26

th September 2013. The Petitioner was the sole

candidate. Two out of the three interviewers had not recommended the appointment of

the Petitioner. The relevant mark sheets were produced marked “R2(a)”, “R2(b)” and

11

“R2(c)”. In the circumstances, the Petitioner had not been selected. Along with the mark

sheets, a letter dated 27

th September 2013 marked “R2(d)” was produced, addressed to

the Chief Human Resources Manager by the Senior Harbour Safety Officer W.A.M.J

Perera, who served as a member of the interview panel. The Managing Director of the

1

st Respondent Authority offers no explanation as to why this particular member of the

interview panel wrote that letter to the Chief Human Resources Manager and what the

latter’s response was.

The Managing Director of the 1

st Respondent Authority has not contested the fact that

an Audit was conducted by the 9

th Respondent, and that “P8” is a copy of the Audit

Report. He has not commented on or disagreed with the findings contained therein.

According to the Managing Director, after the audit query raised by the 9

th Respondent,

a domestic inquiry had been conducted into this matter, and it was decided to hold fresh

interviews. Hence, by letter dated 8

th February 2016, the Petitioner was called to face

another interview to be held on 10

th February 2016. The Petitioner did not present

himself for that interview. However, another interview was held on 11

th March 2016, and

the Petitioner participated at that interview. He scored 68 marks, and members of the

interview panel had recommended that the Petitioner be appointed to the post ‘Station

Officer’. However, according to the Managing Director, the selection process had ‘not

been concluded’. Thereafter, the Acting Chief Human Resources Manager had

recommended the ‘cancellation’ of the interview held on 11

th March 2016. The Managing

Director has not given any reason for the said recommendation to cancel the interview

held on 11

th March 2016. Though not specifically stated, the Managing Director seems

to imply that someone in authority had agreed with the said recommendation of the

Acting Chief Human Resources Manager that the interview held on 11

th March 2016 be

cancelled, since he has in his affidavit acknowledged that once again a Notice dated 19

th

June 2017 was published calling for applications all over again. Finally, the Managing

Director of the 1

st Respondent Authority has stated that, “the Petitioner does not possess

requisite ‘experience’ to fulfill the duties of the post of Station Officer”. However, he has

not ventured to explain reasons for his view on the matter.

Rebuttal of the Petitioner

By his affidavit dated 25

th November 2019, the Petitioner has stated that, the mark sheets

tendered on behalf of the Respondents marked “R2(a)”, “R2(b)” and “R2(c)” which

12

reflect the marks assigned by three members of the interview panel who conducted the

interview on 26

th September 2016, do not support the position taken up by the 1

st

Respondent Authority that two out of the three interviewers had not recommended the

appointment of the Petitioner. The Petitioner asserts that the letter dated 27

th September

2013 written by interview panel member W.A.M.J. Perera was a malicious act with the

intention of preventing the Petitioner being appointed to the post of ‘Station Officer’.

The Petitioner has asserted that, since the members of the interview panel that

interviewed him on 11

th May 2016 had recommended that he be appointed to the post

of ‘Station Officer’, he became entitled to be appointed to that post.

Denying the position of the 1

st Respondent Authority that the Petitioner does not have

the requisite experience, the Petitioner has submitted that having served the Fire Brigade

of the Sri Lanka Ports Authority for 15 years, he has acquired sufficient experience to

fulfill the duties of the post of ‘Station Officer’ of that Fire Brigade.

Submissions made on behalf of the Petitioner

Learned Counsel for the Petitioner having explained to Court the factual narrative

referred to in the initial and counter Affidavits of the Petitioner and associated

documents, submitted that, it is of particular importance to note that based on the

performance of the Petitioner at the interview held on 11

th May 2016, the panel of

interviewers had recommended the appointment of the Petitioner to the post of ‘Station

Officer’. In the circumstances, learned Counsel submitted that there was no reason

whatsoever for the Petitioner to have been denied the appointment. He lay special

emphasis on the findings contained in the Audit Report (“P8”) prepared on behalf of the

Auditor General by the 9

th Respondent, and drew the attention of the Court to the finding

that an ‘injustice had been caused to the Petitioner’ by not appointing him to the post of

‘Station Officer’. Learned Counsel further submitted that, the refusal on the part of the

Respondents to appoint the Petitioner to the post of ‘Station Officer’ was arbitrary,

capricious, unreasonable and was an infringement of the Fundamental Rights of the

Petitioner guaranteed under Articles 12(1) and 14(1)(g) of the Constitution. Learned

Counsel for the Petitioner drew the attention of Court to his Written Submission, which

the Court found to be useful.

13

Submissions made on behalf of the Respondents

Learned State Counsel who appeared on behalf of the Respondents defended the

decision of the Respondents in not appointing the Petitioner to the post of ‘Station

Officer’. Her submission was that, as the Petitioner did not continuously serve at the Fire

Brigade of the 1

st Respondent, and as at the time he applied for the post he was working

as a ‘Landing and Delivery Clerk’ in a different Division of the 1

st Respondent Authority,

he did not possess the required experience to function as a ‘Station Officer’. She also

drew the attention of the Court to letter dated 27

th September 2013 sent to the Chief

Human Resources Manager of the 1

st Respondent Authority by member of the interview

panel W.A.M.J. Perera, stating that at the interview held on 26

th September 2013, the

Petitioner failed to answer most of the questions which had been posed by him relating

to ‘general safety’ and ‘dangerous cargo’, and hence the Petitioner was not up to the

required standard. Learned State Counsel submitted that member of the interview panel

W.A.M.J. Perera had not recommended the Petitioner to be appointed as ‘Station

Officer’.

Learned State Counsel also drew the attention of the Court to an endorsement made

seemingly by the same interviewer on the ‘marks sheet’, which states that the Petitioner

had ‘nil knowledge’ regarding ‘dangerous cargo’, ‘chemicals’ and ‘port safety’. She further

submitted that, under such circumstances, the Respondents were justified in not

appointing the Petitioner to the post ‘Station Officer’ of the Fire Brigade of the Sri Lanka

Ports Authority. In the circumstances, learned State Counsel submitted that the treatment

of the Petitioner by the administration of the Sri Lanka Ports Authority did not amount

to discrimination and hence the Fundamental Rights of the Petitioner guaranteed in

terms of Articles 12(1) and 14(1)(g) of the Constitution had not been infringed by the

Respondents. Accordingly, learned State Counsel pleaded that the Application of the

Petitioner be dismissed.

Though it is a requirement under the Rules of the Supreme Court, no Written

Submissions were tendered on behalf of the Respondents, before the date fixed for

argument. It is unfortunate that, even after this Court having drawn the attention of

learned State Counsel to the fact that Written Submissions had not been filed on behalf

of the Respondents, no attempt was made to seek and obtain the permission of the Court

to file Written Submissions even after the conclusion of argument.

14

Time and again this Court has emphasized the need and usefulness of Written

Submissions being filed, in addition of course to the mandatory duty cast by the Rules of

the Supreme Court on all Counsel cum instructing attorneys to file Written Submissions.

Particularly, at the argument stage, most counsel generally crystalize their submissions

and press only certain matters, while not strenuously arguing some other matters.

Particularly due to brevity of time that can be allocated for a matter, they support their

key arguments, leaving out certain other matters. Particularly in such circumstances, it is

extremely helpful to Court if ‘post argument written submissions’ are tendered with the

leave of Court.

Analysis by Court and findings

In this matter, the core issues to be determined by this Court is (i) whether the non-

appointment of the Petitioner to the post of ‘Station Officer’ of the Fire Brigade of the

Sri Lanka Ports Authority following the interview for that post held on 11

th March 2016,

and / or (ii) in the backdrop of all the circumstances of this matter including the outcome

of the interview held on 11

th March 2016, whether the publication of a Notice dated 19

th

June 2017 (“P13”) calling for applications for the post of ‘Station Officer’ by one or more

of the Respondents to this Application, amount to an infringement of the Petitioner’s

Fundamental Rights guaranteed in terms of Articles 12(1) and 14(1)(g) of the

Constitution.

Article 12(1) of the Constitution

I will initially deal with the first declaration sought by the Petitioner, namely that the

Fundamental Right guaranteed by Article 12(1) of the Constitution has been infringed by

one or more of the Respondents.

Article 12(1) of the Constitution provides as follows:

“All persons are equal before the law and are entitled to the equal protection of

the law.”

It is well settled law that, at the core of Article 12 of the Constitution is a key concept,

namely the concept of ‘equality’. The concept of equality is founded upon the premise

that, all human beings are born as equals and are free. Equality confers equal value, equal

15

treatment, equal protection and equitable opportunities to all persons, independent of or

notwithstanding various demographic, geographic, social, linguistic, religious and political

classifications based on human groupings prevalent in contemporary society, some of

which are immutable or born to and others acquired. The concept of ‘equality’ was

originally aimed at preventing discrimination based on or due to such immutable and

acquired characteristics, which do not on their own make human being unequal. It is now

well accepted that, the ‘right to equality’ covers a much wider area, aimed at preventing

other ‘injustices’ too, that are recognized by law. Equality is now a right as opposed to a

mere privilege or an entitlement, and in the context of Sri Lanka a ‘Fundamental Right’,

conferred on the people by the Constitution, for the purpose of curing not only injustices

taking the manifestation of discrimination, but a host of other maladies recognized by

law. While all Fundamental Rights are of equal importance and value, the ‘right to

equality’ reigns supreme, as it can be said that, all the other Fundamental Rights stem

from the ‘right to equality’. The ability of human beings to live in contemporary society

(as opposed to merely existing), and develop and reap the fruits of social, scientific,

economic and political developments, is based on their ability to exercise fully the ‘right

to equality’. Similarly, for human civilizations may they be national or international, to

reap the full benefits of knowledge, skills, experience, talents and wisdom that people

possess, people of such societies must enjoy the ‘right to equality’.

A pre-condition for the maintenance of peaceful co-existence of any plural society,

sustainable peace, cohesiveness between different communities, and achieving

prosperity, is the conferment of the right to equality to all persons of such society. The

right to equality is a fundamental feature of the Rule of Law, which is a cornerstone of

the Constitution of Sri Lanka, and hence the bounded duty of the judiciary to uphold. In

fact, representative democracy, which the Constitution of Sri Lanka recognizes to be the

form of governance of the country, is also founded upon equality.

It is necessary to highlight that, as the Preamble to the Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka provides, the Constitution has been adopted with the

objectives of inter-alia assuring to all Peoples of Sri Lanka freedom, equality, justice,

fundamental human rights and the independence of the judiciary, as the intangible

heritage that guarantees the dignity and well-being of succeeding generations of the

People of Sri Lanka and of all the People of the World, who come to share with those

16

generations the effort of working for the creation and preservation of a just and free

society.

During the very early stages of the evolution of the legal concept of equality in Sri Lanka,

Chief Justice Sharvananda in Elmore Perera v. Major Montague Jayawickrema, Minister

of Public Administration and Plantation Industries and Others

1 explaining the nature of

Article 12, held that it forbids the State from denying to any person equality before the

law and equal protection of the law. It means that all persons are equally subject to the

law and have a right to equal protection of the law, in similar circumstances, both as

regards privileges and liabilities imposed by the law. It ensures that, laws have to be

applied equally to all persons, and that there must be no discrimination between one

person and another, when their position is substantially the same. The principle which

underlines Article 12 is that, equals must be treated equally, operate equally on all

persons, under like circumstances. Article 12 guarantees equality among equals. It is

violated both by unequal treatment of equals and equal treatment of the unequal. Indeed,

the concept of equality does not involve the idea of absolute equality among human

beings. Thus, equality before the law does not mean that persons who are different shall

be treated as if they were the same. Article 12 does not absolutely preclude the State from

differentiating between persons and things. The State has the power of what is known as

‘classification’ on a basis of rational distinction relevant to the particular subject dealt with.

So long as all persons falling into the same class are treated alike, there is no question of

discrimination and there is no question of violating the equality clause. The

discrimination that is prohibited, is treatment in a manner prejudicial as compared to

another person in similar circumstances. So long as classification is based on a reasonable

and a justifiable basis, there is no violation of the constitutional right to equality. What is

forbidden is invidious (unfair / offensive / undesirable) discrimination. The guarantee of

equal protection is aimed at preventing undue favour to individuals or class privilege, on

the one hand, and at hostile discrimination or the oppression of equality on the other.

Since the essence of the right guaranteed by Article 12 and the evils which it seeks to

guard against are the avoidance of designed and intentional hostile treatment, or

discrimination on the part of those entrusted with the administering of the same, a person

setting up grievances of denial of equal treatment must establish that between persons

1 [1985] 1 Sri L.R. 285

17

similarly circumstanced, some were treated to their prejudice and the differential

treatment had no reasonable relevance to the object sought to be achieved. He must show

that, the other person was similarly situated or equally circumstanced. He must make out

that not only had he been treated differently from others, but had been so treated from

persons similarly placed without any reasonable basis, and such differential treatment is

unjustifiable. Chief Justice Sharvananda continued to explain that, the expression

‘discrimination’ indicates an unjust, unfair or unreasonable bias in favour of one person

or a class, as well as bias against any person or class. Discrimination can exist only where

two persons or two subjects are treated in different ways. It arises only from two dissimilar

treatments and from similar treatment. There is no discrimination when two equals are

treated alike. Discrimination can exist only where two persons or two subjects are treated

in different ways. Chief Justice Sharvananda finally held that, what Article 12 strikes at is

not unjust treatment or wrongful treatment, but unequal treatment or unjust

discrimination.

It would thus be seen that, former Chief Justice S. Sharvananda’s views of the concept of

equality is akin to the ‘reasonable classification doctrine’ which is consonant with the

conventional description of discrimination founded upon the concept of ‘equality

between similarly placed persons’. Of course, since the pronouncement of the majority

judgment in Elmore Perera v. Major Montague Jayawickrema, Minister of Public

Administration and Plantation Industries and Others, the Supreme Court of Sri Lanka

has somewhat distanced itself from the interpretations provided by Chief Justice S.

Sharvananda to the concepts of ‘equality’ and ‘discrimination’, and provided an expansive

and more progressive definition of the concept of equality, founded upon the concept of

‘substantive equality’, aimed at protecting persons from arbitrary, unreasonable,

malicious and capricious executive and administrative action. After careful examination

and consideration of the law and the need for such law, respectfully, I am also inclined

to distance myself from the conservative interpretation given by Chief Justice

Sharvananda to the concept of equality, while expressing my agreement with the

subsequent views expressed by their Lordships enumerated in the judgments referred to

below, which encompass the broad concept of ‘substantive equality’. It is necessary to

place on record that the ‘reasonable classification doctrine’ continues to play an

important role in certain factual situations, in determining whether the right to equality

has been infringed.

18

However, prior to doing so, I need to refer to a monumental exploration of the concept

of equality contained in Indian jurisprudence. Former Chief Justice of India, Justice

Bhagwati has somewhat poetically held in E.P. Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu

2 the

following:

“Now, what is the content and reach of this great equalizing principle? It is a

founding faith, to use the words of Bose J, ‘a way of life’, and it must not to be

subjected to a narrow pedantic or lexicographic approach. We cannot

countenance any attempt to truncate its all-embracing scope and meaning, for to

do so would be to violate its activist magnitude. Equality is a dynamic concept

with many aspects and dimensions and it cannot be cribbed, cabined and

confined within traditional doctrinal limits. From a positivistic point of view,

equality is antithetic to arbitrariness. In fact equality and arbitrariness are sworn

enemies, one belongs to the rule of law in a republic, while the other, to the whim

and caprice of an absolute monarch. Where an act is arbitrary, it is implicit in it

that it is unequal both according to political logic and Constitutional law and is

therefore violative of Article 14.”

Article 14 of the Constitution of India is significantly similar to Article 12 of the

Constitution of Sri Lanka. However, ex-facie it is apparent that, Article 12 of the

Constitution of Sri Lanka is wider in scope than Article 14 of the Constitution of India.

On the other hand, the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of India relating to petitions

and appeals alleging violation of rights is wider than the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court

of Sri Lanka conferred by Article 126 of the Constitution. However, those differences in

nature and scope, in my view, should not debar Sri Lankan justices from where

appropriate, taking persuasive cognizance of Indian jurisprudence relating to the

interpretation of the substantive legal concepts embodied in the ‘right to equality’.

It would thus be seen that, both ‘equality between similarly placed persons’ and

‘substantive equality’ come within the scope of Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

2 AIR 1974 SC 555

19

As former Chief Justice Parinda Ranasinghe has pointed out in Ramuppillai v. Festus

Perera, Minister of Public Administration, Provincial Councils and Home Affairs and

Others

3, Article 12 requires that, (i) among equals, the law should be equal and it should

be equally administered, (ii) like should be treated alike, (iii) all persons are equal before

the law and are entitled to the equal protection of the law, (iv) no citizen shall be

discriminated against on grounds of race, religion, language, caste, sex, political opinion,

place of birth or any such grounds, (v) equality of opportunity is an instance of the

application of the general rule underlying Article 12, (vi) whilst Article 12 does not confer

a right to obtain State employment, it guarantees a right to equality of opportunity for

being considered for such employment, (vii) what is postulated is equality of treatment to

all persons in utter disregard of every conceivable circumstance of difference as may be

found amongst people in general, (viii) it prohibits class legislation, but that reasonable

classification is not forbidden, and (ix) in instances where a classification exists, it must

appear that not only that a classification has been made, but also that the classification is

one based on some reasonable ground or some difference which bears a just and proper

relation to the purpose of the classification.

Justice Dr. Shirani Bandaranayake (as she then was) has pointed out in Kanapathipilli v.

Sri Lanka Broadcasting Corporation and Others

4, that the concept of equality, is a

“dynamic concept”. It is based on the principle that the status and dignity of all persons

should be protected whilst preventing inequalities, unfairness and arbitrariness.

It is also necessary to point out that in Wickremasinghe v. Ceylon Petroleum Corporation

and others

5 Chief Justice Sarath Silva has pointed out that, although the objective of the

right to equality is to ensure that all persons, similarly circumstanced are treated alike, it

is seen that the essence of this basic standard is to ensure ‘reasonableness’ being a positive

connotation, as opposed to ‘arbitrariness’ being the related negative connotation. If

legislation or the executive or administrative action in question is ‘reasonable’ and ‘not

arbitrary’, it necessarily follows that all persons similarly circumstanced will be treated

alike, being the end result of applying the guarantee of equality.

3 [1991] 1 Sr. L.R. 11 4 [2009] 1 SLR 406 5 [2001] 2 Sri L.R. 409

20

In Weligodapola v. Secretary, Ministry of Women’s Affairs

6, Justice Dr. A.R.B.

Amerasinghe has held that, though Article 12 of the Constitution does not especially

mention the right to equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to

employment under the State, it is ‘a necessary incident of application of the concept of

equality’ enshrined in Article 12.

It is possible that, Justice Dr. A.R.B. Amerasinghe made specific reference to this fact,

since unlike Article 16 of the Constitution of India which makes specific reference to

public officers’ right to equal opportunity, the 1978 Constitution of Sri Lanka contains

no specific Fundamental Right to that effect. It is noteworthy to mention that, the 1972

Constitution (referred to as the ‘first republican Constitution of Sri Lanka’) contained

such a Fundamental Right in Article 18(1)(h).

As Justice Mark Fernando has pointed out in Ramuppillai v. Festus Perera, Minister of

Public Administration, Provincial Councils and Home Affairs and Others, the term ‘the

law’ contained in Article 12(1) relates not only to the ‘law’ as it is conventionally

understood and interpreted, it would include both subordinate legislation and executive

action. Thus, for the purpose of Article 12, schemes of recruitment, promotion and

appointment would come within the scope of the term ‘the law’. Thus, both the very

nature of schemes of recruitment, promotion and appointment of public institutions such

as the 1

st Respondent Authority, and, should there be an infringement of the application

of such a scheme, such infringement too would come within the scope of Article 126 of

the Constitution, and thereby the Supreme Court would have jurisdiction to inquire into

such complaint alleging an infringement of Article 12(1). This enables employees of

public institutions to secure justice from the Supreme Court pertaining to their grievances

relating to executive and administrative action in their employment setting. Furthermore,

not only in instances where an employer – employee relationship exists or is sought to

be entered into, in instances where a contractual relationship existed, exists or is sought

to be entered into, the right to equality may be invoked as regards executive or

administrative treatment of such contracting party or potential contracting party which is

6 1989 (2) SLR 63 at 85

21

a public institution. This is evident upon a consideration of the judgment of Justice Mark

Fernando in Gunaratne v. Ceylon Petroleum Corporation

7.

With the afore-stated judicial pronouncements in mind, the primary focus of this

judgment is to consider the application of the fundamental ‘right to equality’ in relation

to the non-appointment of the Petitioner to the post of ‘Station Officer’ at a public

statutory authority, namely the Sri Lanka Ports Authority.

The 1

st Respondent – Sri Lanka Ports Authority has been established in terms of the Sri

Lanka Ports Authority Act, No. 51 of 1979, as amended from time to time. Section

7(1)(b) empowers the Sri Lanka Ports Authority to employ such officers and servants as

may be necessary for carrying out the work of the Authority. Section 7(1)(e) of the Act

empowers the Authority to make rules in relation to the officers and servants of the

Authority, including their appointment, promotion, remuneration, discipline, conduct,

leave, working times, holidays and the grant of loans and advances of salary to them.

Therefore, it is apparent that the 1

st Respondent Authority has the power to make in the

form of rules and enforce inter-alia schemes for the selection and appointment of persons

to various positions at the Sri Lanka Ports Authority, which would include the Ports of

Colombo, which is a specified port in terms of the Act. In any event, the promulgation

of such schemes is part of the inherent administrative power of any organization,

including statutory authorities such as the Sri Lanka Ports Authority. Such schemes for

the selection, appointment and promotion of persons particularly for positions in the

public sector, should (a) be founded upon the recognition and compliance with the

concept of equality, (b) contain a rational basis, (c) be capable of objective application,

(d) be compatible with the organization’s objectives, and (e) be aimed at ensuring that the

most suitable are selected for the relevant positions. Particularly in the public sector, it

would be necessary to develop, have in place, and enforce schemes of appointment and

promotion which are compatible with the concepts of equality, for the purpose of (a)

providing an environment in which the objectives of the organization are given effect in

an efficient manner, (b) ensuring meritocracy, (c) preventing arbitrary and unreasonable

decision making and nepotism, (d) preserving effective administration, (e) preventing

abuse, (f) preventing corruption, (g) ensuring transparency, (h) maintaining the morale of

7 [1996] 1 Sri L.R. 315

22

the workforce, and (i) ensuring that the public has confidence in such public institutions.

Once such schemes are promulgated, it is equally important and necessary to ensure that,

they are enforced correctly, comprehensively, uniformly, consistently and objectively.

Recruitment and appointment of persons to positions in the public sector cannot be left

to be decided according to the whims and fancies of persons in authority. As pointed out

by learned counsel for the Petitioner, it has been held by Justice Mark Fernando in

Jayawardena v. Dharani Wijayatilake, Secretary, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional

Affairs and Others

8, that, powers of appointment and dismissal are conferred on various

authorities in the public interest, and not for private benefit, that they are held in trust for

the public and that the exercise of these powers must be governed by reason and not

caprice.

It would thus be seen that arbitrariness and unreasonableness in decision-making in

selections, appointments and promotions particularly in public sector institutions is

inconsistent with the concept of equality. In fact, as pointed out repeatedly by numerous

erudite judges, ‘arbitrariness is the anathema of equality’. In India’s former Chief Justice

Bhagwati’s words, ‘equality and arbitrariness are sworn enemies’.

In my view, principally, schemes for the selection, appointment and promotion of

persons for employment positions should contain mechanisms enabling the selection of

the most suitable person for the relevant position, whilst embodying the principle of

equality. The objective sought to be achieved by doing so, is the imposition of compulsion

on persons in authority who are empowered to take decisions relating to selections,

appointments, recruitment and promotions, to arrive at objective and reasonable

decisions, and thereby securing protection against arbitrary decision-making. While

conferring discretionary authority on elected and appointed higher officials is necessary,

it is equally necessary to ensure that, such discretion is exercised for the purpose for

which discretionary authority has been conferred, and not for the purpose of giving effect

to personal objectives which are inconsistent with equality and influenced by irrational

and subjective criteria. In all probability, the conferment of unregulated discretionary

power would result in violations of the rule of law, and arbitrary, unreasonable and

capricious decision-making, and should therefore be avoided at all cost. Particularly in

8 [2001] 1 Sri L.R. 132

23

and with regard to governance of nation States and management and administration of

public institutions, it is of critical importance that, discretionary authority is exercised by

Executive and by administrative authorities in public trust, only for the purpose of

securing the purpose for which such power had been conferred, for the best interests of

the organization concerned, for the best interests of the State, and in overall public

interest. Not adhering to these vital norms, can certainly result in an infringement of

Article 12 of the Constitution, in injustice, and in the long-term, in calamity.

Whether the 1

st to the 8

th Respondents have acted in conformity with these legal

principles, or contrary to the right to equality conferred on the Petitioner by the

Constitution, is the purpose of the following analysis of the evidence.

It would be seen that, in this matter, it was of fundamental importance that the

Respondents placed the relevant ‘scheme of selection and appointment’ pertaining to the

post of ‘Station Officer’ of the Fire Brigade of the Sri Lanka Ports Authority (1

st

Respondent) before this Court. In its absence, this Court can only proceed on the footing

that the ‘Notice’ calling for applications (“P4” and “P13”) reflect the relevant scheme of

appointment.

Now, I wish to consider whether (i) the non-appointment of the Petitioner to the post of

‘Station Officer’ of the Fire Brigade of the Sri Lanka Ports Authority following the

interview for that post held on 11

th March 2016, and / or (ii) in the backdrop of all the

circumstances of this matter including the outcome of the interview held on 11

th March

2016, the publication of a Notice dated 19

th June 2017 (“P13”) calling for applications for

the post of ‘Station Officer’ breached the principles of equality and non-discrimination.

During the argument stage of this Application, this Court specifically inquired from the

learned State Counsel as to whether the appointment of a person as a ‘Station Officer’ of

the Fire Brigade of the Sri Lanka Ports Authority was governed by a formal ‘Scheme of

Recruitment / Appointment’. She specifically answered that enquiry in the affirmative.

Though unsupported by an affidavit, I am ready to accept that answer, since it was made

by a Counsel from the Bar table in response to a question posed by Court. Court

thereafter inquired from learned State Counsel as to why she did not plead the relevant

scheme as an attachment to the affidavit of the Managing Director of the Sri Lanka Ports

24

Authority, which was the only evidence placed before this Court on behalf of all the

Respondents. Learned State Counsel did not respond to that enquiry and remained

silent. She offered no explanation either for her persistent silence.

In this regard, it is necessary to point out that, the primary duty of Attorneys-at-Law is to

assist Court in the due administration of justice. Their duties and obligations towards

their respective clients are subordinate to the duty they have towards Court. This is more

so with regard to officers of the Attorney General’s Department, who are quite rightly

deemed to be ministers of justice, due to some of the quasi-judicial functions conferred

on the office of the Attorney-General by law. Therefore, officers of the Attorney

General’s Department are required to actively aid Court in the discovery of the truth and

administer justice according to law. It is of critical importance to bear in mind that,

officers of the Attorney General’s Department are duty bound to act in the best interests

of the State, as doing so would be in public interest. Thus, the overall objective of legal

professionals serving the State, should be the protection and fostering of public interest.

Protecting and acting in the best interests of the State and public officials, is circumscribed

by the overarching professional duty legal officers of the State have towards Courts to

assist in the administration of justice. Legal Officers of the State are certainly not required

and should not protect or defend public officials who have committed any illegality or

otherwise acted contrary to law.

I wish to reproduce a passage from Justice Dr. A.R.B. Amerasinghe’s treatise on

“Professional Ethics and Responsibilities of Lawyers”, which provides as follows:

“An attorney has a duty to act in the best interests, of his client. However, in

undertaking the conduct of a case in court he takes on himself an office in the

performance of which he has other duties. Justice will be done, and then to the

imperfect level which human nature allows, if the courts and those assisting them

act with integrity and fairness. An attorney’s duty to court, to the standards of his

profession and to the public which may, and often does, lead to a conflict with

his client’s wishes or with what the client thinks are his personal interests.

Where there is any doubt, an attorney must put the public interest before the

apparent interests of his client. Otherwise, there would not be that implicit trust

25

between the Bench and the Bar which does so much to promote the smooth and

speedy conduct of the administration of justice.”

I must emphasize that, for a moment I have not in this instance inferred that the learned

State Counsel refrained from responding to the question posed by Court, occasioned by

any improper motive. She may have erroneously though or sincerely assumed that, she

owed a duty towards her clients to remain silent not answering the question put to her by

Court.

Therefore, when questions are posed by Court, State Counsel as well as members of the

unofficial Bar must, necessarily answer, and answer truthfully. Remaining silent is no

answer at all. If providing an answer is not possible, Counsel must seek the indulgence of

Court to remain silent, by explaining why it is not possible to provide an answer.

Be that as it may, in the circumstances, this Court is compelled to recognize the ‘Notice’

dated 28

th March 2012 (which was produced by the Petitioner marked “P4”) calling for

applications to fill the vacancy of ‘Station Officer’ and which led the Petitioner to submit

an application and subsequently being interviewed initially on 23

rd September 2013 and

subsequently on 11

th March 2016, as substantially reflecting the relevant ‘scheme of

recruitment / appointment’. I have to also infer that the formal ‘scheme of recruitment /

appointment’ was not presented to this Court by the Respondents, as the production of

that document would have either supported the case of the Petitioner, or run contrary to

the position taken up by the 1

st Respondent Authority, or have contributed towards both.

I propose to commence the analysis of the factual matrix relating to this application by a

consideration of the eligibility criteria or as learned Counsel for the Petitioner put it ‘the

threshold requirement’ contained in the Notice dated 28

th March 2012 (“P4”) calling for

applications for the post ‘Station Officer’. It contains three alternate eligibility criteria or

certain ‘minimum qualifications’, which have been referred to above under the narrative

of the Petitioner’s position. The position of the Petitioner is that, at the time he preferred

the application for the post of ‘Station Officer’ he possessed both the first and second

eligibility criterion, though he was required to fulfill only one. In addition to such

minimum qualifications, the Notice also states that, applicants should possess a

‘satisfactory performance’ level. The Petitioner’s position is that he possessed that level

26

of performance too. The 1

st Respondent Authority has not challenged either of these

factual positions taken up by the Petitioner. In the circumstances, I conclude that the

Petitioner had satisfied the eligibility criteria contained in “P4”.

Under ‘Notes’, “P4” states that, (i) all applicants should pass a written / practical

examination aimed at assessing the professional experience applicable for the applied

post, and (ii) the applicant should pass the ‘interview’ or if applicable to the post, pass the

‘medical test’. In recognition of its normal usage, I infer that the symbol “/” in Note “(i)”

above, denotes alternatives. Thus, what was contemplated was to conduct either a written

or a practical examination. It seems that the term ‘or’ in Note “(ii)” above is a

typographical error or a mistake in the ‘Notice’ calling for applications. Thus, I conclude

that what is actually meant is that applicants will be interviewed, and where relevant to the

post applied for, be required to subject themselves to a medical examination. The

Managing Director of the 1

st Respondent Authority has not stated in his affidavit that the

post of ‘Station Officer’ required applicants to pass a ‘medical examination’. Nor does

the Petitioner state that he was required to subject himself to a medical examination.

Therefore, it must be concluded that, according to the ‘scheme of recruitment /

appointment’, applicants who possess the minimum or threshold qualifications referred

to above, would be required to face an interview and sit for a written or a practical test.

Marks would be given based on their performance, and if only one vacancy existed, the

applicant who earned the highest marks would be selected and appointed to the post.

There appears to be no other requirement to be satisfied for the purpose of being

selected. It is pertinent to bear in mind that, according to this scheme, following the

conduct of the interview, if the applicant is recommended for appointment by the panel

of interviewers, there is no further step to be taken, than to offer the appointment to the

selected candidate.

In this backdrop, I will now examine what actually happened. Sequel to the publication

of “P4” the Petitioner and five others have presented applications. Only the Petitioner

possessed the minimum qualifications / eligibility criteria. Thus, according to the scheme

referred to above, the 2

nd and 3

rd Respondents, namely the Chief Human Resources

Manager and the Deputy Chief Human Resources Manager, respectively, were required

to constitute an interview panel, set or cause the setting of a written or practical

examination for the purpose of assessing whether the Petitioner had the necessary

27

practical experience for the post ‘Station Officer’, and thereafter call the Petitioner to face

the interview and sit for the examination. Instead of doing so, the 3

rd Respondent had

written a letter dated 23

rd April 2013 to the 4

th Respondent seeking his consent to hold

the interview and the examination. This step which the 3

rd Respondent has taken is not a

procedural requirement contained in the ‘scheme of appointment’. The flaw in the

procedure followed, commences at that stage.

The Managing Director of the 1

st Respondent Authority in his affidavit offers no

explanation as to why it was necessary to seek the consent of the 4

th Respondent. By letter

dated 11

th May 2013, the 4

th Respondent declined to give his consent. The Petitioner

claims that the reason for the 4

th Respondent refusing to give his ‘consent’ was because

the Petitioner had not completed the required period of ‘continuous service’ at the Fire

Brigade of the Sri Lanka Ports Authority. The Petitioner’s position in this regard seems

to be founded upon the contents of the Audit Report marked “P8”. The Managing

Director of the 1

st Respondent has neither admitted nor denied this position. In the

circumstances, it is necessary to examine whether the relevant ‘scheme of recruitment /

appointment’ contains such a requirement that applicants should possess ‘continuous’

service at the Fire Brigade. This is pertinent, as admittedly, the Petitioner had not been

attached to the Fire Brigade continuously. Furthermore, learned State Counsel too in her

submissions relied on the fact that the Petitioner had applied for and obtained another

appointment at a different division, and hence at the time he presented the application

was not attached to the Fire Brigade. She submitted that, this was a factor that justified

the Petitioner not being selected for the post ‘Station Officer’. An examination of the

“P4” reveals that there exists no requirement that applicants should have continuously

been attached to the Fire Brigade or that only serving employees of the Fire Brigade were

entitled to apply for the post ‘Station Officer’. Further, the Respondents have not taken

up the position that, there exists an overarching policy at the 1

st Respondent Authority,

that a person may apply and thereby be selected for a post at a particular Division of the

1

st Respondent Authority, only if he had previously continuously served in the same

division. In the circumstances, I conclude that, consequent to the Petitioner having

applied for the post, the 3

rd Respondent need not have sought the ‘consent’ of the 4

th

Respondent, and the 4

th Respondent having refused to give his ‘consent’ was not founded

upon a provision in the applicable ‘scheme of recruitment / appointment’ or a policy of

the 1

st Respondent Authority. Furthermore, the material placed before this Court by the

28

Respondents, does not justify the position that, only a serving officer of the Fire Brigade

was competent to be appointed and serve as a ‘Station Officer’. In the circumstances, I

conclude that, this ground urged on behalf of the Respondents seeking to justify the

Petitioner not being called for an interview sequel to the original publication of “P4” is

both unreasonable and arbitrary.

As the 2

nd and 3

rd Respondents failed to conduct the interview and the examination, the

Petitioner had to appeal to the Chairman of the 1

st Respondent Authority. This resulted

in the Petitioner being called for an interview, which had been held on 26

th September

2013. The Petitioner was the only applicant who was called for the interview, seemingly

because he was the only eligible applicant. It seems from the relevant ‘marks sheet’

(produced by the Respondents marked “X3A”) the interview and the written / practical

examination had been combined by holding a composite ‘interview’. This by itself is a

violation of the ‘scheme of recruitment / appointment’. According to the affidavit of the

Managing Director, two out of the three interviewers of the interview panel had not

recommended the selection of the Petitioner for the post ‘Station Officer’. Thus,

according to the Managing Director, it was decided not to appoint the Petitioner. In

support of that position, the Managing Director produced marked “R2(a)”, “R2(b)” and

“R2(c)” being the ‘marks sheets’ perfected by the interviewers. It was on this occasion

that the nominee of the 4

th Respondent who served on the interview panel, namely,

W.A.M.J. Perera, wrote a letter marked “R2(d)” to the 2

nd Respondent, stating his reasons

for not recommending the Petitioner for appointment.

With regard to the ‘marks sheets’, I wish to make the following observations. The ‘marks

sheets’ indicate by designation and name, the composition of the four-member interview

panel. However, the affidavit of the Managing Director reveals that only a three-member

interview panel conducted the interview. Further, only three ‘marks sheets’ were

presented to court. No explanation has been given as to why only three officials

conducted the interview, instead of the designated four interviewers who were supposed

to interview the Petitioner. Further, the three ‘mark sheets’ submitted do not reveal which

of the interview panel member perfected which ‘mark sheet’. Further, they have not been

signed and dated by the respective members of the interview panel, except for an illegible

initial possibly placed by of one possible member. Thus, the integrity of those ‘mark

sheets’ is in serious doubt. As stated above, the affidavit of the Managing Director does

29

not reveal any reason as to whether in fact a written / practical examination was

conducted. The Petitioner claims that he presented himself to ‘an interview and a

practical test’. However, the Respondents have not presented to this Court the

examination paper that was administered or a document indicating the performance of

the Petitioner at the ‘practical test’. Marks sheets “R2(a)”, “R2(b)” and “R2(c)” do not

contain columns in which marks can be assigned for performance at such a ‘practical

test’. However, “R2(a)” contains an unsigned endorsement that states “Dangerous Cargo

(chemical knowledge) – Nil”. “R2(b)” also contains an unsigned endorsement that states

“Dangerous Cargo, Chemical knowledge, Port safety – Nil knowledge”. Further, “R2(c)”

contains an endorsement stating that the Petitioner’s answers to questions on ‘fire

extinguishing’ were ‘good’. Thus, it seems that, without conducting an examination as

contained in the ‘scheme of recruitment / appointment’, the three interviewers have

asked a few questions and assessed the Petitioner. In all the circumstances referred to

above, it is difficult to place any reliance on the outcome of this interview cum selection

process.

It must be observed that, the afore-stated selection process lacked transparency and

compliance with the ‘scheme of recruitment / appointment’. In the circumstances, it is

quite understandable that the Audit Superintendent (8

th Respondent) who conducted the

Audit of which the Report was produced marked “P8” had multiple criticisms regarding

the selection process and the outcome of it, and concluded that ‘injustice’ had been

caused to the Petitioner. Therefore, it is quite understandable as to why the Managing

Director of the 1

st Respondent did not venture to critique the said Audit Report. From

the mere fact that upon the release of the Audit Report (“P8”) the management having

decided to conduct an ‘inquiry’ into the matter and having subsequently decided to

conduct a fresh interview, reveals clearly that the interview held on 22

nd September 2013

and its outcome were flawed in many respects.

On 11

th March 2016, the Petitioner was required to present himself for a fresh interview.

At that interview, instead of strict compliance with the ‘scheme of appointment’, a

composite interview had been conducted, which seems to have included testing the

knowledge and experience of the Petitioner as well. He was interviewed by four

interviewers and he received a total of 68 marks. The interviewers ‘recommended’ his

appointment as ‘Station Officer’. The relevant marks sheet was produced marked “R4”.

30

Unlike the previous marks sheets produced marked “R2(a)”, “R2(b)” and “R2(c)”, the

authenticities of which are in serious doubt, this marks sheet was signed by the relevant

interviewers. Ex-facie, there is no doubt regarding the authenticity of this marks sheet

relating to the interview held on 11

th March 2016.

Notwithstanding the recommendation by the interview panel, the Managing Director in

paragraph 21 of his affidavit states that, “the process such as Interview Panel Report

signed by the interview panel members seeking approval of the Chairman for the

respective appointment has not been concluded consequent to the interview held on

11.03.2016”. This sentence does not enable the Court to understand which step in the

selection process was not fulfilled. Once, the interview panel had ‘recommended’ the

appointment of the Petitioner to the post ‘Station Officer’, what was the remaining step

in the ‘scheme of selection and recruitment / appointment’ to be taken? In the absence

of such a step that is evident, I am compelled to conclude that, the Managing Director

had included that sentence in his affidavit, merely for the purpose of attempting to justify

what the Acting Human Resources Manager of the time, who has been cited as the 7

th

Respondent, had done. Namely, make a recommendation to ‘cancel’ the interview held

on 11

th March 2016, and hold a fresh interview. Affidavits of the 2

nd, 3

rd and 7

th

Respondents have not been filed. Thus, there is no explanation whatsoever, as to the

possible justification for the 7

th Respondent to have taken this step, which in the absence

of an explanation can be labeled only as an unreasonable and arbitrary act. It is apparent

that, it was that arbitrary decision which resulted in a further decision being taken to

publish a fresh Notice dated 19

th June 2017 (“P13”) calling for applications for the post

of ‘Station Officer’ all over again.

It is therefore my conclusion that, the entire process of calling for applications by Notices

dated 28

th March 2012 (“P4”) and 19

th June 2017 (“P14”), processing of the

corresponding applications, conduct of the selection processes, and the non-selection

and non-appointment of the Petitioner for the post of ‘Station Officer’ of the Fire Brigade

of the Sri Lanka Ports Authority were seriously flawed, and contrary to the relevant

‘scheme of recruitment / appointment’. In the circumstances enumerated above and the

reasoning contained in this judgment, I hold that the non-appointment of the Petitioner

for the post of ‘Station Officer’ of the Fire Brigade of the Sri Lanka Ports Authority

following the holding of an interview on 11

th March 2016 and the ensuing calling for fresh

31

applications by Notice dated 19

th June 2017 was neither reasonable nor justifiable, and

was arbitrary, unreasonable and capricious.

There is every reason to believe that, one or more of the 2

nd, 3

rd, 4

th, 6

th and 7

th Respondents

had acted maliciously and connived with each other to prevent the Petitioner from

receiving the appointment of ‘Station Officer’ of the Fire Brigade of the Sri Lanka Ports

Authority, which he was legitimately entitled to receive in response to his application

submitted in 2012. Had the relevant authorities applied the relevant ‘scheme of

recruitment / appointment’ pertaining to that post in good faith and with due diligence,

while the Petitioner would have become entitled to hold the post ‘Station Officer’ in 2012

itself, the Sri Lanka Ports Authority would have had the services of a ‘Station Officer’ to

its Fire Brigade. Particularly for an establishment such as the Colombo Port, I have to

take judicial notice of the fact that, the services of a ‘Station Officer’ of its Fire Brigade

would be extremely important.

Article 14(1)(g) of the Constitution

I shall now deal with the second declaration sought by the Petitioner, namely a

declaration that the Fundamental Right guaranteed by Article 14(1)(g) of the Constitution

has been infringed by one or more of the Respondents.

Article 14(1)(g) of the Constitution states as follows:

“Every citizen is entitled to – the freedom to engage by himself or in association

with others in any lawful occupation, profession, trade, business or enterprise.”

It would thus be seen that, Article 14(1)(g) of the Constitution confers on citizens of Sri

Lanka the Fundamental Right to be entitled to the freedom to engage by himself or in

association with others, in any lawful occupation, profession, trade, business or

enterprise.

Article 15(5) of the Constitution, which provides possible restrictions to the Fundamental

Right guaranteed by Article 14(1)(g), states as follows:

“The exercise and operation of the fundamental right declared and recognized

by Article 14(1)(g) shall be subject to such restrictions as may be prescribed by

law in the interests of national economy or in relation to -

32

(a) the professional, technical, academic, financial and other

qualifications necessary for practicing any profession or carrying on

any occupation, trade, business or enterprise and the licensing and

disciplinary control of the person entitled to such fundamental right;

and

(b) the carrying on by the State, a State agency or a public corporation of

any trade, business, industry, service or enterprise whether to the

exclusion, complete or partial, of citizens or otherwise.”

Further restrictions that may be imposed are found in Article 15(7) of the Constitution.

They relate to restrictions that may be prescribed by law in the interests of national

security, public order and the protection of public health or morality, or for the purpose

of securing due recognition and respect for the rights and freedoms of others, or for

meeting the just requirements of the general welfare of a democratic society.

Article 15(5)(a) recognizes the fact that, the Fundamental Right contained in Article

14(1)(g) does not confer an absolute right or a right that cannot be restricted or

conditioned to engage in any lawful occupation, profession, trade, business or enterprise.

In order to effectively engage in certain occupations, professions, trades, businesses and

certain enterprises, it would be necessary for the State to ensure that, persons who wish

to engage in such activities possess certain educational, academic, professional, technical

qualifications, training, experience, and skills. It would also be in the interests of the

public to ensure that, persons who wish to be engaged in certain occupations, professions,

trades, businesses and other enterprises possess legal authority granted by competent

authorities such as licenses and permits to engage in such activities. Furthermore, it would

be necessary to ensure that, certain occupations, professions, trades, businesses and

enterprises are conducted in terms of an appropriate legal and regulatory framework, and

where required, subject persons engaged in such activities to regulatory and disciplinary

control. Thus, Article 15(5)(a) enables the legislature to enact laws that prescribe or

provide for such measures in the form of restrictions to be imposed.

It must be noted that, certain occupations, professions and trades are employment

related. Only those holding particular employment positions are entitled to engage in the

related occupation, profession or trade. Thus, a prerequisite to engage in the relevant

33

occupation, profession or trade, is the requirement to hold the relevant employment

position. It should be appreciated that, what Article 14(1)(g) confers is a general right to

engage in an occupation, profession, trade, business or enterprise of one’s choice. It does

not guarantee a Fundamental Right to hold a particular employment related position.

It was held by Chief Justice Sharvananda in Elmore Perera v. Major Montague

Jayawickrema, Minister of Public Administration and Plantation Industries that, Article

14(1)(g) only recognizes a general right conferred on every citizen to do work of a

particular kind and of his choice. It does not confer the right to hold a particular job or

to occupy a particular post of one’s choice. A similar view was expressed by Justice A.R.B.

Amerasinghe in W.M.K. De Silva v. Chairman, Ceylon Fertilizer Corporation

9, wherein

he held that, Article 14(1)(g) ensures that freedom to engage in any lawful occupation of

one’s choice, but that does not extend to a right to be employed by a particular master or

in a particular place of work.

In this matter, while the Petitioner has been successful in establishing that he has been

unreasonably and arbitrarily denied being appointed ‘Station Officer’ of the Fire Brigade

of the 1

st Respondent Authority, at a time when he on his own calling was not even

employed at the Fire Brigade and was performing job functions unrelated to fire-fighting,

he has not established that, non-appointment to the post of ‘Station Officer’ of the Fire

Brigade amounted to an infringement of his Fundamental Right to engage in a lawful

occupation or profession of his choice. It appears from the circumstances of this case

that, the Petitioner’s desire was to be appointed as ‘Station Officer’ of the Fire Brigade,

and not to engage in any particular occupation or profession of his choice.

Correspondingly, his grievance was that he was not appointed to the post of ‘Station

Officer’ and not that, he was deprived of his right to engage in a profession or occupation

of his choice. In the circumstances, I am of the view that, the Respondents have not

infringed the Petitioner’s Fundamental Right guaranteed in terms of Article 14(1)(g) of

the Constitution.

9 [1989] 2 Sri L.R. 393

34

Grant of relief and directives of Court

In view of the foregoing circumstances and reasons, I hold that, the 1

st, 2

nd, 3

rd, 4

th, 6

th, and

7

th Respondents have by the afore-stated impugned decisions and conduct, jointly

infringed the Fundamental Rights of the Petitioner guaranteed by Article 12(1) of the

Constitution, by depriving him of the right to equality.

Therefore, I hereby issue a Declaration that the Petitioner’s Fundamental Rights

guaranteed by Article 12(1) of the Constitution have been infringed by the 1

st, 2

nd, 3

rd, 4

th,

6

th, and 7

th Respondents.

I further direct that, based on the findings of the panel of interviewers who conducted

the interview on 11

th March 2016, the Petitioner be forthwith appointed to the post of

‘Station Officer’ of the Fire Brigade of the Sri Lanka Ports Authority. However, taking

into consideration the fact that, had the 2

nd, 3

rd, 4

th, 6

th and 7

th Respondents correctly and

in good-faith applied the ‘scheme of recruitment / appointment’ of the post ‘Station

Officer’ of the Fire Brigade of the Sri Lanka Ports Authority, the Petitioner would have

received the appointment in 2012, I direct that the said appointment be backdated to 1

st

July 2012.

The Petitioner will not be entitled to receive any back wages.

In the circumstances enumerated above, I make order quashing the Notice dated 19

th

June 2017 (“P13”) calling for fresh applications for the post ‘Station Officer’ of the Fire

Brigade of the Sri Lanka Ports Authority, as prayed for in paragraph (g) of the prayer of

the Petition.

On a consideration of the totality of the circumstances of this case, I direct the 1

st

Respondent – Sri Lanka Ports Authority to pay the Petitioner compensation to the value

of Rs. 300,000/=, and the 2

nd, 3

rd, 4

th, 6

th and the 7

th Respondents to jointly pay the Petitioner

further compensation to the value of Rs. 100,000/=.

35

In the afore-stated circumstances, I allow this Application.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

MURDU N.B. FERNANDO, PC, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT