1

IN THE SUPEME COURT OF

THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Jayanthi Chandrika Perera No.132/2, Kolonnawa Road, Dematagoda, Colombo Presently at No.161, Hospital Road, Kalubowila, Dehiwala Defendant-Petitioner-Appellant S.C.Appeal No.83/2014 SC/HCCA/LA No. 210/13 WP/HCCA/MT/No. 48/2011/F D.C.Mt. Lavinia No. 1788/03/L Vs. D. Don Chandrakumara No. 161, Hospital Road, Kalubowila, Dehiwela Presently at No.167/6 Hospital Road, Kalubowila, Dehiwala Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent BEFORE : B.P. ALUVIHARE, PC, J. PRIYANTHA JAYAWARDENA, PC, J. K.T.CHITRASIRI, J. COUNSEL : W. Dayaratne, PC with R.Jayawardane for the Defendant-Petitioner-Appellant M.U.M.Ali Sabry, PC with Nuwan Bopage and Samhan Munzir for the Plaintiff-Respondent-Respodnent ARGUED ON : 17.11.2016

2

WRITTEN 19.11.2016 by the Defendant-Petitioner- SUBMISSION ON : Appellant. 15.12.2016 by the Plaintiff-Respondent- Respondent DECIDEDON : 24.03.2017 CHITRASIRI, J. This is an action filed in the District Court of Mt. Lavinia by the

plaintiff-respondent-respondent (hereinafter referred to as the plaintiff)

seeking inter alia for a declaration that the plaintiff is the owner of the

premises described in the schedule to the plaint dated 17th September

2003. He has also sought for a declaration that the defendant-petitioner-

appellant (hereinafter referred as the defendant) is holding the said

property as a trust in his favour. He has further prayed for an order to

have the aforesaid property, transferred in his name upon payment of a

sum of Rs.2,100,000/= (Two million one hundred thousand) to the

defendant and also to recover Rs.100,000/= per month as damages.

The defendant filed her answer denying most of the averments in

the plaint and has pleaded that she is the absolute owner of the premises

in suit in view of the deed bearing No. 9222 attested by

D.W.Pathinayake, Notary Public that was marked as P9 in evidence.

Accordingly, she has prayed that the action of the plaintiff be dismissed.

The case proceeded to trial on 25 issues and the learned District Judge

3

by his judgment dated 08th March 2011 held with the plaintiff having

determined that the defendant is holding the property subject to a

constructive trust in favour of the plaintiff.

The defendant filed an appeal in the Civil Appellate High Court,

challenging the aforesaid judgment of the learned District Judge and in

that appeal he sought to have the judgment in the District Court set

aside. Learned Judges in the Civil Appellate High Court dismissed the

appeal and affirmed the judgment of the learned District Judge. Being

aggrieved by the aforesaid decision, defendant filed this appeal in the

Supreme Court. This Court, granted leave to proceed with the appeal, on

the questions of law referred to in paragraph 14 of the petition of appeal

dated 04th June 2013.

Basically the question of law that is to be answered in this appeal

revolves round the issue i e; whether the defendant is holding the

property referred to in the schedule to the plaint as a constructive trust

in favour of the plaintiff. Therefore, it is clear that the plaintiff is relying

upon Section 83 of the Trust Ordinance to have his reliefs obtained in his

favour. Section 83 of the Trust Ordinance reads thus:

“Where the owner of a property transfers or bequeaths it, and

it cannot reasonably be inferred consistently with the

attendant circumstances that he intended to dispose of the

4

beneficial interests therein, the transferee or legatee must

hold such property for the benefit of the owner or his legal

representative.”

I shall now turn to consider the merits of this appeal. It is the

burden of the plaintiff to establish that he did not intend disposing the

beneficial interest when he parted with his rights in the property in

question. A heap of authorities is found to determine the manner in

which Section 83 of the Trust Ordinance had been applied when a claim

is made relying upon the same. Before referring to those decisions, I will

briefly refer to the facts of this case.

Admittedly, the plaintiff became the owner of the premises in suit

by executing the deed of gift bearing No.163 dated 5th January 1992

which was marked P1, in evidence. Thereafter, he has transferred this

property to Vajira Samarawickrama by the deed bearing No.3303 dated

12th January 2000, marked P2. The plaintiff in his evidence has stated

that the aforesaid deed 3303 was executed in order to obtain a loan from

“The Finance Company” for the benefit of the plaintiff and purpose of

which was to construct a building on the land in question. Aforesaid

Samarawickrama gave evidence in this case and he has clearly stated

that he only helped the plaintiff to raise a loan and the money obtained

from the Finance Company was given to the plaintiff to construct a

5

building on the land. He also has stated that the loan was serviced by

the plaintiff having paid the due installments by the plaintiff himself.

Evidence of Samarawickrama in this regard is as follows:

m%’ oeka o mskEkaia tflka Khla .;a;o@

W’ uf.a {d;s ifydaorhd jk meusKs,slreg kqf.af.dv o mskEkaia

wdh;kfhka Kh .;a;d’ Kh .ekSu i|yd Tlafldu lghq;= lf,a

meusKs,slre’

Kh ,dnd ÿkafk uf.a kug’ kuq;a fpla tl .;af; meïKs,slre’

thd Kh .kak fmr whshdf.a foam,la ug mjrd ;snqkd’ tu

f,aLKh me’2 f,i ,l=Kq lrkjd’ ,CI 20 l uqo,la .;af;a’

tu uqo, .kakfldg o mskEkaia wdh;khg hï foam,la iqrlaIs;hla

f,i ;nkak lsõjd’ tA ioZyd l,qfndajs, ta ksji ;sínd’ ta bvu Kh

uqo, i|yd W.ig ;sfhkfldg whs;sfj,d ;snqfka meusKs,sldr whshg

whs;sj ;snqfka’ uf.a kug ta bvu W.ia l,d’

m%’ o mskEkaia iud.u whshf.a ku ;snqk bvu ndr .kak leu;s jqkdo@

ñ,shk folla fokak@

W’ Tõ’

m%’ ta fj,dfõ Wlia ;nkak n,dfmdfrd;a;=jk foamf,a whs;sh ;snqfka

{d;s ifydaorhd jk meñKs,sldr pkao%l=udrghs lshd lsõjd@

W’ Tõ’

6

m%’ o mskEkaia iud.u leu;s jqkdo pkao%l=udr kñka th ,dndf.k

Kh fokak@

W’ keye’ uf.a kug fokak leu;sjqfka’

Bg miqj uf.a kug jsl=kqïlrhla yeÿjd’ tal ;uhs me’2 f,i

,l=Kq lf,a’ fï kvqjg wod, foam, meñKs,sldr pkao%l=udr jsiska

uf.a kug yefrõfõ tA me 2 Tmamqfjka’ fuu foam, iïnkaOfhka

we;a; jYfhkau jslsKSul wdldrfhka lsisu .kqfokqjla isÿjqfka

keye’ ta i|yd uu pkao%l=udrf.ka i; mylaj;a wrka keye’

meñKs,slref.a Wmfoia msg uu fïl lf,a’

m%’ oeka me’2 Tmamqj m%ldrj meñKs,slre lsõj wdldrhg fï foam,

;ukaf.a kug mejrejdfka’ Bg miafia tu foam, kej; j;djla o

mskEkaia wdh;khg Wlia l<do@

W’ Tõ’

Wlia ;nd ,CI 20 la .;a;d’

m%’ ,CI 20 la ,nd .ekSu i|yd ilia lrk ,o Wlia Tmamqj ;uhs fï

me’ 3 f,i ,l=Kqlr ;sfnkafka@

W’ Tõ’

(vide at page 244 in the appeal brief)

Accordingly, it is clear that the transfer effected in favour of Vajira

Samarawickrama was merely to obtain a loan for the benefit of the

plaintiff. Hence, it is seen that the plaintiff had no intention to transfer

7

the beneficial interest of the property to Vajira Samarawickrama when

the deed 3303 marked P2 was executed. Samarawickrama has also

stated that he never paid any loan installment to the Finance Company

to settle the loan. Admittedly, all the loan installments had been paid by

the plaintiff.

Thereafter, aforesaid Vajira Samarawickrama has transferred the

property by deed No.9222 marked P9 which was attested by

D.W.Pathinayake, Notary Public on 09th April 2003 in the name of the

defendant namely, Jayanthi Chandrika Perera. It is this deed that is

being challenged by the plaintiff stating that it is not an outright transfer

but it was executed with the intention of him retaining the beneficial

interest of the property.

Following are some of the decisions that show the manner in which

the issues similar to the question in hand are to be considered, having

regard to Section 83 of the Trust Ordinance. In the case of Piyasena Vs.

Don Vansue [1997 2SLR at page 311], it was held thus:-

“Even though a transfer is in the form of an outright sale it is

possible to lead parole evidence to show that facts exist from

which it could be inferred that the real transaction was either.

(i) money lending, where the land is transferred as a

security as in this case or,

8

(ii) a transfer in trust-in such cases section 83 would apply;

(iii) A trust is inferred from attendant circumstances.

The trust is an obligation imposed by law on those

who try to camouflage the actual nature of a

transaction. When the attendant circumstances

point to a loan transaction and not a genuine sale

transaction the provisions of section 83 of the

Trust Ordinance apply”

(emphasis added)

In the case of Carthelis Vs. Ranasinghe, [2002 (2) SLR 359] importance

of looking at the intention of the parties when parting with the beneficial

interest of a particular property had been considered as a material fact

when looking at the attendant circumstances. In Perera Vs. Fernando

and Another [2011 (2) SLR 192 / 2011 BLR at 263] Suresh Chandra J

held as follows:

“…It would be necessary to conclude that both transfers did not

convey absolute title to the transferees and that they held the

property in trust for the transferor as the transferor in both instances

had not intended to convey the beneficial interest in respect of he

property. This is in line with the principle laid down in Section 83 of

the Trust Ordinance.”

9

In the circumstances, it is now necessary to consider the attendant

circumstances in relation to the execution of the deed P9 in order to

determine the intention of the plaintiff on the issue of transferring the

beneficial interest of the property in question. In fact, it is the

requirement that is to be considered under Section 83 of the Trust

ordinance.

Transferor of the deed marked P9 namely, Vajira Samarawickrama

has clearly stated that he held the property not for his benefit but it was

held by him for and on behalf of the plaintiff. It is also in evidence that

the plaintiff at one stage has failed to service the loan obtained from the

Finance Company. Under those circumstances, the plaintiff has

requested his brother-in-law Gamini Vithanage to help him servicing the

loan. Plaintiff’s evidence is that he requested said Gamini Vighanage to

help him by giving him a loan amounting to Rs.2100,000/= in order to

pay the Finance Company. The evidence to that effect adduced by

plaintiff is found at page 166 in the appeal brief and it reads as follows:

“fï ld,h ;=, uu o mskEkaia iud.ug nÿ uqo,a f.õfõ wudrefjka’ o

mskEkaia iud.fuka wdjd’ ug f.jkak mqtZjkalula ;snqfka keye’

js;a;sldr chka;s pkao%sld fmf¾rd uf.a fkdakdf.a whshdf.a Nd¾hdj’

fuu kvqfõ js;a;slre uf.a fkdakdf.a whshdf.a Nd¾hdj’ ug nÿuqo,a

f.jkak wmyiq jqkdu whshd wfma f.or tk ksid” Tyq lsõjd Woõjla

10

f,i uqo,a f.jkakï” leu;s ojil f.jkak lsh,d’ js;a;sldrshf.a

iajdñmqreIhdf.a ku .dñsKs js;dkf.a’ ta uy;aud uf.a Nd¾hdjf.a tl

l=i Wmka ifydaorhd’ uf.a Nd¾hdjg fï m%YaKh ms<sn|j uu lsõjd’

wms w;r tl.Z;ajhla we;sjqkd’ Tyq lsõjd leu;s oskhl f.jkak

lsh,d’ thd Woõjla f,i f.jkakï” kx.sf.a kug ,shkak lsh,d

iqrl=ula f,i’ ,laI 21la o mskEkaia iud.ug f.jkak ;snqk uqo,’ ta

uqo, f.õjd’”

(vide at page 166 in the appeal brief)

Admittedly, the plaintiff’s wife and the defendant’s husband are

siblings. The plaintiff in his evidence has stated that his brother-in-law

agreed to give Rs.2,100,000/= provided the plaintiff keeping the property

in dispute as a security for the said loan. The position of the defendant is

that the deed P9 was executed as a full pledged transfer and there was

no intention to have the property kept as a security. This is the very

question that is to be determined in this case.

The authorities referred to above show that the circumstances of

each case has to be considered independently to ascertain the intention

of the parties and then only the Court could decide whether such

circumstances fall within the ambit of Section 83 of the Trust

Ordinance. Admittedly, Vajira Samarawickrama being a close relative of

the plaintiff has helped his cousin brother to raise a loan in order to

11

construct a building on the premises in suit. Accordingly, the property

was transferred in the name of Smarawickrama and the loan had been

raised on behalf of the plaintiff through Samarawickrama. Loan

installments were paid by the plaintiff himself. It is not in dispute, that

the plaintiff had failed to settle the loan obtained from the Finance

Company.

Under such circumstances, the plaintiff has requested his brother-

in-law to give money as a loan to settle the moneys due to the Finance

Company. Evidence is forthcoming to establish that the loan obtained

from the Finance Company had been settled after receiving the said sum

of money by the plaintiff. It is the background for the transfer of the

property by executing the deed P9, in the name of the defendant.

It is also necessary to ascertain whether the plaintiff did receive

the exact value of the property when the deed P9 was executed. The

person who valued the property has given evidence. There is no dispute

as to the qualifications of the valuer who issued the valuation certificate

in respect of the property in question. He has valued the property in a

sum Rs. 09 million which was the market value of the property at the

time the deed P9 was executed and the said valuation has not been

disputed.

12

The Notary who executed the deed P9 also has given evidence. In

his evidence he has stated that Rs.5.1 million was given by the defendant

to the plaintiff at the time the deed was executed. This evidence had been

rejected by the trial judge who heard the witnesses and saw them giving

evidence. He also has given enough reasons for not believing the Notary.

Surprisingly, the Notary Pathinayake, in his attestation clause

which is found in the deed P9, has mentioned that the amount

transacted in his presence when he executed the deed P9 was only

Rupees three million. Such a contradiction is sufficient to conclude that

the Notary is not coming out with the truth as to the amount that was

paid by the defendant when executing the deed marked P9. On the other

hand, the plaintiff in his evidence has categorically stated that he

received only Rs.2,100,000/= and it was to settle the loan that Vajira

Samarawickrama had obtained on his behalf from the Finance Company.

Even if the aforesaid evidence as to the alleged payment of Rs.5.1 million

is accepted as correct, obviously it is not the full value of the property the

defendant should have paid to the plaintiff when executing the deed P9.

Therefore, it can safely be concluded that the correct value of the

property had not been received by the plaintiff when executing the deed

marked P9.

13

Having considered all those materials, the learned District Judge

as well as the learned Judges in the Civil Appellate High Court had

inclined to accept the evidence of the plaintiff. The Original Court

Judges being the best Judges of facts, I am not inclined to interfere with

those findings of the learned District Judge on issues of facts.

[Frad Vs.Brown & Co. Ltd (20 NLR 282)

Sumanawathie Vs. Bandiya and Others 2003 (3) SLR 278]

Defendant in support of her position has also argued that she

came into possession of this premises soon after the execution of the

deed P9. Therefore, she has claimed that such possession should be

looked at when the attendant circumstances are being considered.

However, the manner in which the defendant came into possession had

been explained by the plaintiff in his evidence. He has stated that the

defendant came into possession forcibly, soon after the lessee who was in

occupation left the premises. In support of this position, the plaintiff has

submitted two complaints that he had made to the police and those were

marked as P10 and P12. The plaintiff by making those complaints to the

police has explained that the defendant entered the premises in dispute

forcibly soon after P9 was executed. Those matters also had been

carefully considered by the learned trial Judge. To my mind, facts in

relation to receiving the correct value by the plaintiff as the consideration

14

for the transfer of the property should prevail over the evidence in

relation to its possession when considering the attendant circumstances

referred to in Section 83 of the Trust Ordinance.

Accordingly, the attendant circumstances of this case show that

the plaintiff did not intend transferring the beneficial interests in the

property in question when the deed P9 was executed. Therefore, the

plaintiff is entitled to have the benefit of Section 83 of the Trust

Ordinance

For the aforesaid reasons, this appeal is dismissed with costs.

Decisions of the Civil Appellate High Court and the District Court shall

remain intact.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

B.P.ALUVIHARE, PC,J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

PRIYANTHA JAYAWARDENA, PC, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT