SC Appeal 12/2018

1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA In the matter of an appeal

1. Jagath Priyantha Epa 2. Deepika Lakmali Kalansooriya

No.S.G. 12B Gemunupura, Ampara Petitioners SC Appeal12/2018 SC (Leave to Appeal) Application No: SC/HCCA/232/17/LA HCCA(Civil Appeal) Ampara:EP/HCCA/AMP/300/2016 DC Ampara: 374/SPL Vs

1. Ahingsa Sathsarani Epa No.3A/1 Samudra,Paragahakele Ampara. 2. Janaka Pushpakumara Kalansooriya 3. Wijesinghe Arachchige Wasana Malkanthi No.3A/1 Samudra,Paragahakele Ampara.

4. Probation Officer Probation Office, Ampara. Respondents AND BETWEEN

1. Jagath Priyantha Epa 2. Deepika Lakmali Kalansooriya

No.S.G. 12B Gemunupura, Ampara Petitioner-Appellants

SC Appeal 12/2018

2

Vs

1. Ahingsa Sathsarani Epa

No.3A/1 Samudra,Paragahakele Ampara. 2. Janaka Pushpakumara Kalansooriya 3. Wijesinghe Arachchige Wasana Malkanthi

No.3A/1 Samudra,Paragahakele Ampara. 4. Probation Officer

Probation Office, Ampara. Respondent-Respondents AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Janaka Pushpakumara Kalansooriya 2. Wijesinghe Arachchige Wasana Malkanthi

No.3A/1 Samudra,Paragahakele Ampara. 2nd and 3rd Respondent-Respondent- Petitioner-Appellants

Vs 1. Jagath Priyantha Epa 2. Deepika Lakmali Kalansooriya

No.S.G. 12B Gemunupura, Ampara Petitioner-Appellant- Respondent-Respondents

Ahingsa Sathsarani Epa No.3A/1 Samudra,Paragahakele Ampara. 1st Respondent-Respondent- Respondent-Respondent. Probation Officer

SC Appeal 12/2018

3

Probation Office, Ampara. 4th Respondent-Respondent- Respondent-Respondent Before : Sisira J de Abrew J Vijith Malalgoda PC J P.Padman Surasena J Counsel : M.U.M. Ali Sabry PC with Shamith Fernando and Shehani Alwis for the 2nd and 3rd Respondent-Respondent- Petitioner-Appellants Anura Gunaratne for the Petitioner-Appellant- Respondent-Respondents Argued on : 6.3.2019 Written Submission Tendered on :27.9.2018 by the Petitioner-Appellant- Respondent-Respondents 4.9.2018 by the2nd and 3rd Respondent-Respondent- Petitioner-Appellants Decided on : 3.4.2019 Sisira J de Abrew J

The Petitioner-Appellant-Respondent-Respondents whose names are Jagath

Priyantha Epa and Deepika Lakmali Kalansooriya (hereinafter referred to as the

Petitioner-Respondents) filed action in the District Court of Ampara (case

No.374/Spl) against the 2nd and 3rd Respondent-Respondent-Petitioner-Appellants

whose names are Janaka Pushpa Kumara Kalansooriya and Wijesinghr Arachchige

Wasana Malkanthi (hereinafter referred to as the 2nd and 3rd Respondent-Appellants)

SC Appeal 12/2018

4

praying, inter alia, for a declaration that the Petitioner-Respondents are entitled to

the legal and physical custody of their daughter the 1st Respondent-Respondent-

Respondent-Respondent in this case (hereinafter referred to as the 1st Respondent-

Respondent) whose name is Ahingsha Sathsarani Epa; to give them the legal and

physical custody of their daughter, the 1st Respondent- Respondent; and to return the

1st Respondent-Respondent to the Petitioner-Respondents.

The learned District Judge, by his order dated 15.12.2015 dismissing the case of the

Petitioner-Respondents, gave the legal and physical custody of the 1st Respondent-

Respondent to the 2nd and 3rd Respondent-Appellants. He made further order

directing the Registrar General to amend the birth certificate of the 1st Respondent-

Respondent by entering the names of the 2nd and 3rd Respondent-Appellants as

parents‟ names. I have to note here that there was no application before the learned

District Judge to change names of the parents in the birth certificate. Being

aggrieved by the said order of the learned District Judge, the Petitioner-Respondents

appealed to the Civil Appellate High Court and the said court by its order dated

6.4.2017, set aside the order of the learned District Judge and allowed the appeal of

the Petitioner-Respondents. Being aggrieved by the said order of the Civil Appellate

High Court, the 2nd and 3rd Respondent-Appellants have appealed to this court. This

court by its order dated 7.2.2018 granted leave to appeal on questions of law stated

in paragraphs 24(i) to 24(vi) of the petition of appeal dated 28.4.2017 which are set

out below.

1. The said Judgment is contrary to the law and evidence placed before court.

2. Their Lordships of the High Court have failed to understand the nature of the

case, and the true scope of the action presented to the District Court.

SC Appeal 12/2018

5

3. Their Lordships of the High Court have erred in law in failing to understand

that the court should decide a case on the basis of „child‟s welfare is

paramount‟ when the custody of a minor child is involved.

4. Their Lordships of the High Court have completely disregarded the principle

that the best interests the child was paramount.

5. Their Lordships of the High Court have failed to appreciate the analytical

order of the learned Additional District Judge in relation to the custody of the

1st respondent minor child.

6. Their Lordships of the High Court have failed to appreciate that the right of

the parent may be superseded by consideration of the welfare of the child

though the child had not been adopted under the provisions of the Adoption of

Children Ordinance by the Petitioners.

Learned President‟s Counsel for the 2nd and 3rd Respondent-Appellants contended

that the learned Judgers of the Civil Appellate High Court in their judgment have

failed to consider the welfare of the child (the 1st Respondent- Respondent) which is

the most important factor in this case. He therefore submitted that the judgment of

the Civil Appellate High Court be set aside. Therefore the most important question

that must be considered in this case is whether welfare of the child (the 1st

Respondent- Respondent) would be affected if the custody of the child is given to

the Petitioner-Respondents who are the natural parents of the child. Deepika

Lakmali Kalansooriya (the 2nd Petitioner-Respondent) who is the natural mother of

the child is the sister of the 2nd Respondent-Appellant (Janaka Pushpakumara

Kalansooriya). The natural mother of the child gave the child to the 2nd and 3rd

Respondent-Appellants when the child was about 51/2 months old as she had

SC Appeal 12/2018

6

problems with her husband. Later when the child was about two years and one

month old, the Petitioner-Respondents who are the natural parents of the child filed

the present case in the District Court of Ampara seeking the custody of the child.

However before this case was filed in the District Court of Ampara, the 2nd and 3rd

Respondent-Appellants filed an adoption case in the District Court of Ampara

seeking an order to adopt the child when the child was about one year and five

months old. But they withdrew the adoption case when the natural parents objected

to it.

As I pointed out earlier, the most important question that must be considered in this

case is whether welfare of the child (the 1st Respondent- Respondent) would be

affected if the custody of the child is given to the Petitioner-Respondents who are

the natural parents of the child. Where is the evidence to support this contention? I

now advert to this question. When I consider this question it is important to consider

the Probation Officer‟s report. The Probation Officer in his report made observation

to the following effect.

“Although the child has not got used to the atmosphere of the natural parents, the

natural parents have the capacity and want to look after the child. This observation

has been made after conducting a field investigation. The Probation Officer has

recommended giving the child to the natural parents. In order for the child to get

used to the atmosphere of the natural parents, he has recommended to keep the child

at the Child Protection Home Ampara for two weeks; allow the natural parents to be

with the child and not to allow the 2nd and 3rd Respondent-Appellants to visit the

child.” This was the recommendation of the Probation Officer. When the above

recommendation of the Probation Officer is considered how can one argue that

welfare of the child would be affected if the child is given to the natural parents.

SC Appeal 12/2018

7

The 2nd Respondent-Appellant admitted in his evidence that he has a maintenance

case in the Magistrate Court of Ampara for not paying maintenance to a child. The

case has been filed by the mother of the child as he was not maintaining the child.

As a result of relationship that he (the 2nd Respondent-Appellant) had with a woman,

a child was born and it is this woman who filed the maintenance case in the

Magistrate Court of Ampara. The 2nd Respondent-Appellant denied the paternity of

the child but the DNA test proved that he is the father of the child. This was the

evidence of the 2nd Respondent-Appellant in this case. Thus it is seen that the 2nd

Respondent-Appellant failed to maintain his own child and the mother of the child

had to invoke jurisdiction of court to get money to maintain the child. If the 2nd

Respondent-Appellant did not maintain his own child, would he maintain a child of

another woman who is the1st Respondent-Respondent in this case? I doubt. Is it safe

to give custody of a female child to the 2nd and 3rd Respondent-Appellants when the

2nd Respondent-Appellant enjoys this type of reputation? In this connection it is

relevant to consider the judicial decision in the case of M.Jeyaraman Vs

T.Jeyaraman [1999] 1 SLR 113 wherin Thilakawardena J at page 116 (judgment of

the Court of Appeal) observed as follows.

“In 1968, in the decision of Fernando (70 NLR 534) the Supreme Court held

that both the modern Roman Dutch law and English law were agreed on the

principle that the interests of the child were paramount. The court declared

that the modern Roman Dutch law had moved away from rules directed at

penalising the guilty spouse, towards the recognition of the predominant

interest of the child.

SC Appeal 12/2018

8

Applying the principle that the interests of the child are paramount

consideration, the court ruled that the custody of very young children would

ordinarily be given to the mother.”

In Precla W Fernnado Vs Dudley W Fernnado 70 NLR 534 Weramanthry J held as

follows.

In all questions of custody of children the interests of the children stand

paramount. Questions of matrimonial guilt or innocence of a parent would

not therefore be the sole determining factors in questions of custody, though

they are not factors which will be ignored. The interests of the children being

paramount, the rule that the custody of very young children ought ordinarily

to be given to their mother ought not to be lightly departed from.

According to the principles laid down in the above judicial decisions, custody of

very young children ought to be given to their mother. If that is so, how can this

court give custody of the child (the 1st Respondent-Respondent) to a couple who are

not the natural parents of the child?

In Fernando Vs Fernando 58 NLR 262 at page 263 this court observed as follows.

“I need hardly state any reasons for forming the opinion that it would be

detrimental to the life and health and even of the morals of such a young child

if that child is forcefully separated from her mother and compelled to live, not

even in her father's custody, but under the care of an elderly relative to whom

she is not bound by any natural ties. So long as the mother is shown to be fit

to care for the child, it is a natural right of the child that she should enjoy the

advantage of her mother's care and not be deprived of that advantage

capriciously.”

SC Appeal 12/2018

9

Mother‟s love to her child is something that can be explained by words even by the

mother. Thus no court would lightly deprive the mother of such love. In the present

case, the 2nd Petitioner-Respondent is the mother of four children. Her 4th child is the

1st Respondent- Respondent. According to her evidence, she looks after her three

children well. One child has sat for the scholarship examination and the other child

will be sitting for the scholarship examination in the coming year. Thus it shows that

the natural mother of the child is a fit person to look after her children. In the present

case both the natural mother and the natural father request the custody of the child.

Learned President‟s Counsel for the 2nd and 3rd Respondent-Appellants highly relied

on the judicial decision in the case of G. Premawathi Vs A. Kudalugoda 75 NLR

398 Wherein Weeramanthry J observed as follows.

Where the law governing the right to the custody of an illegitimate child is

the Roman-Dutch law, the mother of the child is the natural guardian and is

entitled as such to the custody of the child as against a stranger. If, however,

the interests of the child would be gravely affected by an interference with its

present custody, the claim of the stranger to custody would be preferred to the

claim by the mother.

It has to be noted here that the child in the above case was an illegitimate child. In

the present case the child is a legitimate child and that both natural parents are

asking the custody of the child. In my view, the facts of the above case are different

from the facts of the present case. Therefore I hold that the judicial decision in G.

Premawathi Vs A. Kudalugoda (supra) has no application to the present case.

In Ran Menika Vs Paynter 34 NLR 127 Drieberg J held as follows.

SC Appeal 12/2018

10

The Supreme Court will not deprive a parent of the custody of a child for the

reason only that it would be brought up better and have a better chance in life

if given to another. The Court must be satisfied that it is essential to its safety

or welfare that the rights of the parent should be superseded or interfered

with.

In the case of D Endoris Vs D Kiripetta 73 NLR 20 de Kretser J held as follows.

“Acourt will not deprive a parent of the custody of a child for the reason only

that it would be brought up better and have a better chance in life if given

over to another. It is for the person seeking to displace the natural right of the

father to the custody of his child, to make out his case that consideration for

the welfare of the child demands it.”

de Kretser J at page 21 further held as follows.

The mere delivery of a child by its natural parent to a third party does not

invest the transaction with legal consequences. If the parent has the right to

hand over custody of a child then that parent would also have the undoubted

right to resume the custody himself, as the authority of the parent must

prevail in the latter instance as much as in the former.

In the case of D. Endoris Vs D. Kiripetta (supra), the mother of the child died when

the child was one month old. Father of the child gave the child to his sister and her

husband to look after the infant child as he had no one else. When the child was

eight years old, the father made an application to court for return of the custody of

the child. The Magistrate refused the application of the father. In appeal de Kretser J

setting aside the order of the Magistrate gave custody of the child to the father. de

Kretser at page 22 observed as follows.

SC Appeal 12/2018

11

“It is true that the child would be deprived of the love and care of the first and second

respondents but I do not think that at the age of 8 years the emotional upset of being away

from them is something that he cannot get over. It may be that if left with the respondents

the child would be brought up with more loving care but that is no reason to deprive the

father of his rights to this child.”

From the evidence of the present case, it cannot be concluded that the child‟s (the 1st

Respondent-Respondent) welfare would be affected if the custody of the child is

given to her natural parents. There is also no evidence to suggest that the child

would be brought up better and would have a better chance in life if she is given to

the 2nd and 3rd Respondent-Respondent. Assuming without conceding that the child

would be brought up better if the custody of the child is given to the 2nd and 3rd

Respondent-Appellants, court cannot, applying the principles laid down in above

legal literature, deprive natural parents of the custody of the child. At this juncture I

am mindful of the fact that I would be giving the custody of the 1st Respondent-

Respondent who is a girl to the 2nd and 3rd Respondent-Respondent if I affirm the

order of the learned District Judge.

When I consider all the above matters, I hold that the welfare of the child would not

be affected if the custody of the child is given to the natural parents and that the

child would be brought up better if the custody of the child is given to the 2nd and 3rd

Respondent-Appellants.

The Petitioner-Respondents are the natural parents of the child. Thus they have the

legal right to keep the child in their custody. No argument can be brought forward to

deprive the said legal right of the natural parents. The 2nd and 3rd Respondent-

Appellants do not have any adoption order issued by a court. The adoption case filed

by them was withdrawn when the natural parents objected to the said adoption case.

SC Appeal 12/2018

12

Thus their (the 2nd and 3rd Respondent-Appellants) custody of the child is not legal.

They cannot take up the position that since the natural mother handed over the child

to them, they have the lawful custody of the child. The principle that is to say that

„mere delivery of a child by its natural parent to a third party does not invest the

transaction with legal consequences and that if the parent has the right to hand over

custody of a child then that parent would also have the undoubted right to resume

the custody himself, as the authority of the parent must prevail in the latter instance

as much as in the former‟ enunciated by de Kretser J in the case of D Endoris Vs D

Kiripetta (supra) operates against such contention.

For all the aforementioned reasons, I hold that learned Judges of the Civil Appellate

High Court were right when they set aside the order of the learned District Judge

and allowed the appeal of the Petitioner-Respondents. For the above reasons I

answer the above questions of law in the negative.

For all the aforementioned reasons, I affirm the judgment of the Civil Appellate

High Court dated 6.4.2017 and dismiss this appeal with costs.

Appeal dismissed.

Judge of the Supreme Court.

V.K. Malalgoda PC J

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court.

P. Padman Surasena

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court.

SC Appeal 12/2018

13