IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

1. Balachandra Arachchige Don Nuwan

Chathuranga Padmasiri,

Sub Inspector

Criminal Investigation Department

P.O. Box 534, Colombo 01

2. Koskola Waththage Harsha Lakmal

Kumara,

Sub Inspector,

Criminal Investigation Department,

P.O. Box 534, Colombo 01.

3. Munasingha Arachchige Sajitha

Chathusanka Bandara Karunathilaka,

Sub Inspector,

Police Station, Peliyagoda.

Petitioners

SC/FR/46/2021

Vs.

1. C. D. Wickramaratne

Inspector General of Police,

Police Headquarters,

Colombo 01.

2. Jagath Balapatabendi,

Chairman

3. Indrani Sugathadasa,

Member

2

4. V. Shivagnanasothy,

Member

5. T. R. C. Ruberu,

Member

6. Ahamod Lebbe Mohamed Saleem,

Member

7. Leelasena Liyanagama,

Member

8. Dian Gomes,

Member

9. Dilith Jayaweera,

Member

10. W. H. Piyadasa,

Member

All of the members of the Public Service

Commission of Sri Lanka, No. 1200/9,

Rajamalwatta Road, Battaramulla.

11. K. R. Saranga Perera,

Head of Division

(Recruitment and Promotion Scheme

Preparation Division)

Police Headquarters

Colombo 01

12. Wajira Gunawardena

Director (Civil Administration)

Sri Lanka Administration Division

Police Headquarters

Colombo 01

13. The Attorney-General,

Attorney-General’s Department.

Respondents

3

Before: E. A. G. R. Amarasekara, J.

Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Manohara de Silva, P.C., with Nadeeshani Lankatilleka for

the Petitioners.

Rajiv Goonetilleke, D.S.G., with Sureka Ahmed, S.C., for

the Respondents.

Argued on: 15.12.2021

Written submissions:

by the Petitioners on 25.10.2021 and 24.01.2022

by the Respondents on 16.11.2021 and 21.01.2022

Decided on: 23.11.2022

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Introduction

Two fundamental rights applications were filed by 164 Sub Inspectors of

Police, making the Inspector General of Police (IGP) and the members of

the Public Service Commission (PSC) respondents, alleging violation of

fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 12(1) and 14(1)(g) of the

Constitution by the adoption of the Scheme of Recruitment (SOR) marked

P7 for promotion from the rank of Sub Inspector (SI) to the rank of

Inspector of Police (IP). Upon completion of the pleadings, the two

applications were consolidated and heard together and the parties have

agreed to abide by a single judgment. Hence this judgment will be binding

on the parties in the connected case – SC/FR/55/2021.

Promotions in the police force is a complex and complicated issue. There

is no policy in place on promotions and various schemes have been

4

adopted on an ad hoc basis from time to time to address the grievances

of police officers as they arise. Unless and until a sound promotion policy

is formulated taking into account the views of all stakeholders, this will

be a recurring issue. The intensity of the issue is understood by looking

at the schemes of promotion adopted in the recent past, as set out by the

petitioners in the petition. A number of fundamental rights applications

are pending before this Court on police promotions.

In the year 2010, as seen from P4, all Sub Inspectors who had completed

eight years of service as at 08.02.2010 in the rank of SI were promoted

to the rank of IP across the board, subject only to them having an

unblemished record during the five years immediately preceding the date

of promotion. This scheme was adopted to redress the frustration of

senior officers due to stagnation in service; it only took into account

seniority and there was no interview.

Thereafter, in the year 2016, as seen from P5, a different scheme was

adopted for promotion from the post of SI to IP of officers who had

completed 10 years of service in the rank of SI as at 31.05.2016; seniority

and merit were both considered and there was a structured interview.

Subsequent to this, in the year 2020, once again in order to redress the

frustration of senior officers due to stagnation in service, all Sub

Inspectors who had completed eight years of service as at 31.12.2018

(provided salary increments had been earned), were promoted to the rank

of IP despite not having the requisite qualifications set out in P5. This

time, the number of years of service was reduced from 10 to eight and

the structured interview was also dispensed with.

Then comes the scheme of recruitment in question adopted in 2020

marked P7, which provides for 4 categories of promotion:

5

CATEGORY PERCENTAGE Seniority 50% Limited Competitive Examination 25% Merit 25% Special promotion ½ of the merit category (equal to12.5% of the total number of promotions)

As crystalised in the post-argument written submissions, the petitioners

have three main grievances vis-à-vis P7:

(a) seniority has not been given due recognition

(b) awarding marks on good entries at the interview is discriminatory

(c) the category of special promotion is arbitrary

Before I consider these in detail, let me address the preliminary objection

raised by learned Deputy Solicitor General (DSG) for the respondents

regarding the maintainability of this application on time bar.

Time bar objection

The case record bears out that the Court has granted leave to proceed

after hearing both learned President’s Counsel for the petitioners and

learned DSG for the respondents. It is in the objections filed by way of an

affidavit of the 1st respondent IGP that the time bar objection is taken.

The time bar objection shall be taken at the earliest possible opportunity;

otherwise it is deemed to have been waived. In terms of Article 134(1) of

the Constitution read with Rule 44(6) of the Supreme Court Rules 1990,

the Attorney General has the right of audience at the time of supporting

the application for leave to proceed. Nevertheless, the fact remains that

at that stage the Attorney General is ill-equipped to present the

respondents’ case completely, due to want of time and paucity of

instructions. The Attorney General gets the first opportunity to present

his case fully in the objections filed by way of an affidavit in terms of Rule

6

45(6) of the Supreme Court Rules 1990 after the granting of leave to

proceed. Therefore taking up the time bar objection for the first time in

the affidavit is permissible but that objection cannot be taken for the first

time at the argument or in the written submissions. (Ranaweera v. Sub

Inspector Wilson Siriwardena [2008] 1 Sri LR 260 at 272)

The impugned SOR marked P7 was approved by the PSC on 22.10.2020

and signed by the secretary to the PSC on 04.12.2020 (1R5A). According

to the petitioners, P7 was not conveyed to them through their superiors

as was usually done in the past. This is undisputed. The petitioners state

that on or about 05.02.2021, they became aware of P7 by word of mouth

and thereafter found P7 on the Police Department website. This

application was filed by the petitioners on 25.02.2021. The IGP in his

affidavit states that P7 was published on the official website of the Police

Department on 12.01.2021 and since the petitioners have not invoked

the fundamental rights jurisdiction of this Court within one month from

the date of publication of P7 (i.e. within one month of the infringement

complained of), the application is liable to be dismissed in limine in terms

of Article 126(2) of the Constitution. The petitioners do not accept that

publication on the website was done on 12.01.2021. There is no other

item of evidence to corroborate the date of publication apart from the ipse

dixit of the IGP. I will accept both positions: the IGP’s position that the

website publication was done on 12.01.2021 and the petitioners’ position

that they visited the website on or around 05.02.2021. Then have the

petitioners filed this application within time?

Article 126(2) of the Constitution states that “Where any person alleges

that any such fundamental right or language right relating to such

person has been infringed or is about to be infringed by executive or

administrative action, he may himself or by an attorney-at-law on his

behalf, within one month thereof, in accordance with such rules of

7

court as may be in force, apply to the Supreme Court by way of petition

in writing addressed to such Court praying for relief or redress in

respect of such infringement.” The strict literal interpretation of this

Article is that the time limit of one month set out in Article 126(2) is not

open to interpretation and non-compliance warrants automatic dismissal

of the application in limine without going into the merits of the complaint.

In exercising the extraordinary and exclusive jurisdiction conferred upon

this Court to protect the fundamental rights of the people, this Court,

whilst emphatically emphasising that the time limit of one month is

mandatory and shall be complied with, has nevertheless relaxed the

rigidity of the time tag in appropriate cases by adopting a liberal as

opposed to a literal interpretation of Article 126(2). This is predominantly

done by the adoption of the maxim lex non cogit ad impossibilia: the law

does not expect a man to do the impossible. Hence, it is accepted that the

period of one month begins to run not from the date of violation of the

right but from the date of becoming aware of the violation of the right or

from the time of being in a position to take effective steps to come before

the Supreme Court. The test to be applied is objective, not subjective.

By way of analogy, in terms of section 10 of the Prescription Ordinance,

an action for a declaration that a notarially executed deed is null and void

is prescribed within three years of the date of execution of the deed

(Ranasinghe v. De Silva (1976) 78 NLR 500). Nonetheless, if the plaintiff

seeks cancellation of a notarially executed deed upon concealed fraud,

the three-year period begins to run not from the date of the execution of

the deed but from the time of the discovery of the fraud, or from the time

the party defrauded might by due diligence have come to know of it

(Kirthisinghe v. Perera (1922) 23 NLR 279).

In Edirisuriya v. Navaratnam [1985] 1 Sri LR 100 at 105-106, Ranasinghe

J. (later C.J.) with the agreement of Sharvananda C.J. citing Vadivel

8

Mahenthiran v. AG (SC/68/1980, SC Minutes of 05.08.1980) and

Hewakuruppu v. G.A. de Silva, Tea Commissioner (SC/118/84, SC

Minutes of 10.11.1984) held that although the time limit of one month

set out in Article 126(2) is mandatory, yet, in a fit case, the Court would

entertain an application made outside the limit of one month, provided

an adequate excuse for the delay could be adduced; and if the petitioner

had been held incommunicado, the principle lex non cogit ad impossibilia

would be applicable. This dictum was cited with approval in several later

decisions including Ranaweera v. Sub Inspector Wilson Siriwardena

[2008] 1 Sri LR 260 at 271.

In Siriwardena v. Brigadier Rodrigo [1986] 1 Sri LR 384 at 387, this Court

held:

The period of one month specified in Sub-Article (2) of Article 126 of

the Constitution would ordinarily begin to run from the very date the

executive or administrative act, which is said to constitute the

infringement, or the imminent infringement as the case may be, of

the Fundamental Right relied on, was in fact committed. Where,

however, a petitioner establishes that he became aware of such

infringement, or the imminent infringement, not on the very day the

act complained of was so committed, but only subsequently on a

later date, then, in such a case, the said period of one month will be

computed only from the date on which such petitioner did in fact

become aware of such infringement and was in a position to take

effective steps to come before this Court.

In Dayaratne and others v. National Savings Bank and others [2002] 3 Sri

LR 116, the time bar objection (on the basis that interviews for

promotions had been held and decisions taken more than one month

before the application was filed) was rejected and the Court held that time

began to run against the petitioners only when the names of the

9

promotees were announced. This indicates that the awareness of the

petitioners is crucial when computing the one-month time bar.

In Gamaethige v. Siriwardena [1988] 1 Sri LR 384 at 401, M.D.H.

Fernando J. acknowledged that this Court not only has discretion but

also a duty to entertain a fundamental rights application filed out of time,

depending on the unique facts and circumstances of the case.

The time limit of one month prescribed by Article 126(2) has thus

been consistently treated as mandatory; where however by the very

act complained of as being an infringement of a petitioner’s

fundamental right, or by an independent act of the respondents

concerned, he is denied such facilities and freedom (including access

to legal advice) as would be necessary to involve the jurisdiction of

this court, this Court has discretion, possibly even a duty, to

entertain an application made within one months after the petitioner

ceased to be subject to such restraint. The question whether there is

a similar discretion where the petitioner’s failure to apply in time is

on account of the act of a third party, or some natural or man-made

disaster, would have to be considered in an appropriate case when

it arises.

At page 402, M.D.H. Fernando J. recapitulated the law as follows:

Three principles are thus discernible in regard to the operation of the

time limit prescribed by Article 126(2). Time begins to run when the

infringement takes place; if knowledge on the part of the petitioner

is required (e.g. of other instances by comparison with which the

treatment meted out to him becomes discriminatory), time begins to

run only when both infringement and knowledge exist (Siriwardena

v. Rodrigo [1986] 1 Sri LR 384, 387). The pursuit of other remedies,

judicial or administrative, does not prevent or interrupt the operation

10

of the time limit. While the time limit is mandatory, in exceptional

cases, on the application of the principle lex non cogit ad

impossibilia, if there is no lapse, fault or delay on the part of the

petitioner, this Court has a discretion to entertain an application

made out of time.

In Sriyani De Soyza and others v. Chairman of the Public Service

Commission (SC/FR/206/2008, SC Minutes of 09.12.2016), Prasanna

Jayawardena J. stated:

However, this Court has consistently recognized the fact that, the

duty entrusted to this Court by the Constitution to give relief to and

protect a person whose Fundamental Rights have been infringed by

executive or administrative action, requires Article 126(2) of the

Constitution to be interpreted and applied in a manner which takes

into account the reality of the facts and circumstances which found

the application. This Court has recognized that it would fail to fulfill

its guardianship if the time limit of one month is applied by rote and

the Court remains blind to facts and circumstances which have

denied a Petitioner of an opportunity to invoke the jurisdiction of

Court earlier.

Sharvananda C.J. in Mutuweeran v. The State (5 Sri Skantha’s Law

Reports 126 at 130) stated, “Because the remedy under Article 126 is thus

guaranteed by the Constitution, a duty is imposed upon the Supreme Court

to protect fundamental rights and ensure their vindication. Hence Article

126(2) should be given a generous and purposive construction. The one

month prescribed by Article 126(2) for making an application for relief by a

person for infraction of his fundamental right applies to the case of the

applicant having free access to his lawyer and to the Supreme Court.” In

that case, the petitioner had been in detention from the date of his arrest

on 28.07.1986 up to the time of filing the petition on 03.10.1986.

11

Sharvananda C.J. at page 129 adopted the following criteria in deciding

the time limit: “In my view, Article 126(2) postulates a person whose

freedom of movement is not fettered by being kept in custody or detention,

who has free access to the Supreme Court to apply for relief under Article

126 of the Constitution.”

In Azath Salley v. Colombo Municipal Council and others [2009] 1 Sri LR

365 at 384, Bandaranayake J. (later C.J.) remarked:

Considering the provisions contained in the Constitution dealing

with the fundamental rights jurisdiction and the applicability of

Article 126(2) read with Article 3,4(d) and 17, it is apparent that

Article 126(2) should be interpreted broadly and expansively. Where

a person therefore complains that there is transgressing the law or

it is about to transgress, which would offend the petitioner and

several others, such a petitioner should be allowed to bring the

matter to the attention of this Court to vindicate the rule of law and

to take measures to stop the said unlawful conduct. Such action

would be for the betterment of the general public and the very reason

for the institution of such action may be in the interest of the general

public.

On the facts and circumstances of this case, I take the view that the

application of the petitioners in the instant case is not barred by time in

view of the position taken up by the petitioners (which I have no reason

to refuse) that they became aware of the violation on 05.02.2021.

Infringement of Article 12

The main complaint of the petitioners is that they have been denied the

equal protection of the law guaranteed by Article 12(1) under which “All

persons are equal before the law and are entitled to the equal protection of

the law”.

12

Seniority category

The petitioners contend that when they joined as Sub Inspectors in 2013,

the 2010 scheme had been in place and therefore they had a legitimate

expectation of being promoted to the rank of IP upon completion of eight

years of service. This argument is unacceptable as that scheme was

adopted on a provisional basis to address the frustration of senior officers

due to stagnation in service. Such a temporary solution as against an

established practice cannot found the basis for legitimate expectation.

Promotion is an important part of any institution. No institution can run

effectively and efficiently if seniority is the sole criterion for promotion,

disregarding merit. This is not undervaluing seniority. Seniority should

be given due recognition but it should not be the only criterion because

seniority and competency do not always go hand in hand. If the principles

of meritocracy are given due place, there will be a sense of

accomplishment and fulfilment. It will encourage innovations and

increase productivity, which will in turn positively affect the steady

growth of the institution. But favouritism should not play a role in

promotion. There shall be a promotion policy. The weightage given to

seniority vis-à-vis merit may vary. A right balance should be struck when

considering merit and seniority.

In P7, under the merit category, it is mandatory that officers should have

five years’ experience as Sub Inspectors. Under the seniority category it

is eight years. This goes to show that under the merit category, seniority

has not been disregarded.

M.D.H. Fernando J. in Perera v. Cyril Ranatunga, Secretary Defence and

others [1993] 1 Sri LR 39 at 43 observes:

The plain meaning of “merit” is the quality of deserving well,

excellence, or worth; it is derived from the Latin “mereri”, meaning to

13

earn, or to deserve. In my opinion, “merit” must be considered in

relation to the individual officer, as well as the requirements of the

post to which he seeks promotion. In relation to the individual officer,

there is a negative and a positive aspect: whether there is demerit,

e.g. incompetence and poor performance in his present post, and

whether there is “positive” merit, such as a high degree of

competence and excellent performance. It would also be legitimate

to consider the suitability of the officer for the post, having regard to

the aptitudes and skills required for the efficient discharge of the

functions of that post, and the service to be rendered. By way of

example, an officer who has performed well at a “desk” job, involving

little contact with the public, may lack the qualities required for a

post in the “field”, or involving constant contact with the public,

whereas a junior officer whose performance was only average at the

“desk” job, may have all the aptitudes and skills required for duties

in the field, or involving the public. To ignore the requirements of the

post and the needs of the public would be to permit the unrestricted

application of the “Peter principle” — that in a hierarchy a person

will continue to be promoted until he reaches a level at which he is

quite incompetent. “Merit” thus has many facets, and the relative

importance or weight to be attached to each of these facets, and to

merit in relation to seniority, would vary with the post and its

functions, duties and responsibilities.

The petitioners cited Perera v. Cyril Ranatunga to advance their argument

on the importance of seniority and that due weightage not being placed

on seniority constitutes a violation of the right to equality. It should be

noted that in the said case, only 15% of weightage was placed on seniority

in a seniority and merit based promotion scheme applicable to the second

lowest rung of service. The Court found that due weightage had not been

given to seniority because it was in relation to a rank at the bottom of the

14

hierarchy. In the case of Dharmaratne and another v. Sri Lanka Export

Development Board and 13 others [1995] 2 Sri LR 324 at 337, M.D.H.

Fernando J. observed “The weightage for seniority must depend on the

nature of the post: the greater its responsibilities, the more the justification

for giving greater weightage for factors relevant to merit and ability, and

performance.”

In State of Mysore and another v. Syed Mahmood and others (1968 AIR

1113 at 1115), the Supreme Court of India observed:

Where the promotion is based on seniority-cum-merit, the officer

cannot claim promotion as a matter of right by virtue of his seniority

alone. If he is found unfit to discharge the duties of the higher post,

he may be passed over and an officer junior to him may be promoted.

When considering the hierarchy in the police field, the post of IP is a

senior position with greater responsibility as opposed to the post of

sergeant. Police posts (as opposed to police stations) are manned mostly

by Sub Inspectors. The weightage apportioned to seniority has changed

from time to time and, if I may recap, in 2010 it was 100% and eight

years of service, in 2016 it was 70% and 10 years of service, and since P7

in 2020 it is 50% and eight years of service. The petitioners did not mount

a challenge when the quota for seniority was reduced in 2016 from 100%

to 70% and the years of service was increased from eight to 10, but

complain when it was reduced from 70% to 50% and the years of service

from 10 to eight. There is no justification for this. At the time the

petitioners filed these two applications, none of them had completed eight

years of service and therefore they could not have applied for promotion

on the basis of seniority. In any event, the petitioners themselves admit

that there are only about 700 cadre vacancies in the rank of IP and

therefore it is unlikely that they will fall within the 50% soon after

completion of eight years as there are other officers senior to them.

15

At the argument, learned President’s Counsel for the petitioners

submitted that although the petitioners completed their eight years of

service on 15.03.2021 and thereby qualified to apply for promotion on

seniority basis on 15.03.2021, in X2 dated 05.04.2021, the IGP has

arbitrarily fixed the date of completing eight years of service as

31.12.2020 and not from the date of calling for applications (which

according to learned President’s Counsel is 05.04.2021), in violation of

clause 10.2.4.3 at page 24 of P7. I am unable to accept this argument.

RTM-121 marked X2 has been signed by the IGP on 05.04.2021 and that

date cannot be construed as the date of calling for applications for

promotion on seniority basis. X2 also states that completed applications

should be handed over to the Senior Deputy Inspector General of Police

before 4.00 pm on 01.05.2021. Is it then possible to argue that the last

date of calling for applications is 01.05.2021? What X2 states is that eight

years of service must be completed by 31.12.2020 and therefore

31.12.2020 should be considered as the point of calculation of the eight

years. This is neither arbitrary nor a deviation from the established

practice to deliberately prevent the petitioners from being promoted

under the seniority category as submitted by the petitioners in their

counter affidavit; for instance, P6 is dated 19.02.2020 but the completion

of 10 years of service is fixed at 31.12.2018.

There is no disregard of or injustice to the seniority category under the

impugned SOR.

Limited Competitive Examination category and Merit category

In order to apply under the limited competitive examination category or

the merit category, a SI must have threshold qualifications as set out in

paragraphs 10.1.3 and 10.1.4 found at pages 19-21 of P7, which include

five years of active service as a SI. There is also a competitive exam for

those who apply for the limited competitive examination category. There

16

is a structured interview for both categories where marks are allocated

as follows:

Additional educational qualifications 10 marks Excellent performances

Special appreciations Good entries

25 marks (total) 10 marks 15 marks

Sports 10 marks Courses (education) 15 marks Professional competency 20 marks Medals 10 marks Interview evaluation 10 marks

Of the sub-categories that fall under the structured interview, the

petitioners’ only complaint is in respect of the 15 marks allocated for

“good entries”.

There are two divisions in the Sri Lanka Police, namely the functional

division and the territorial division. Broadly speaking, officers in the

functional division do administrative work and those in the territorial

division do field work. The petitioners in their counter affidavit list out

the following as falling under the functional division.

DIG/PHQ = DIG/Police Headquarters

DIG/PMSD = DIG/Prime Minister Security

Division

DIG/SPR = DIG/Special Protection

Range

D/Civil Admin = Director/Civil Administration

CA/SLP = Chief Accountant/Sri Lanka

Police

DIG/LOG = DIG/Logistics Range

17

DIG/T & C = DIG/Transport &

Communication Range

DIG/R & T = DIG/Recruitment and

Training Range

DIG/Welfare = DIG/Welfare and Medical

Service Range

ED/NPA = Executive Director/National

Police Academy

DIG/Crimes = DIG/Crimes Range

DIG/PNB = DIG/Police Narcotics Bureau

DIG/ CP & EP = DIG/Community Police &

Environment Protection

Range

DIG/Marine &

Tourists

= DIG/Marine & Tourists Police

Range

DIG/TR & RS = DIG/Traffic Management and

Road Safety Range

DIG/FFHQ = DIG/Field Force

Headquarters

DIG/R & Tech = DIG/Research & Technology

Range

DIG/Staff = Staff DIG to IG Police

DIG/Spe.Branch = DIG/Special Branch Range

DIG/Legal = DIG/Legal Range

DIG/CID = DIG/Criminal Investigation

Department

DIG/HRM = DIG/Human Resources

Management Range

DIG/Media = DIG/Police Media Range

18

COMM/STF = Commandant/Special Task

Force

The petitioners in their counter affidavit say:

We state that officers serving under the functional division cannot

earn marks nor are they given an opportunity to earn marks

allocated for good entries. We state that if 15 marks are given for an

officer for a successful investigation carried out while serving in a

police station, similarly, marks must be given to those officers

serving in the functional division for the work that they do which

mostly involves administrative work. A scheme of recruitment should

allocate marks in such a way that it gives an opportunity to all those

falling under the scheme to earn the said marks.

Learned DSG in the post-argument written submissions states that the

3rd petitioner in this application and the 70th to 162nd petitioners in

SC/FR/55/2021 are serving in the territorial division and therefore this

is not an issue common to all the petitioners.

There are 162 petitioners in SC/FR/55/2021. Learned President’s

Counsel for the petitioners in his post-argument written submissions

states that there are 38 petitioners who cannot earn marks for “good

entries” because of the nature of their duties. This to my mind means

that except for those 38, the others are able to obtain the said marks

because they are serving in the territorial division. There are 3 petitioners

in this application (SC/FR/46/2021). Of them, the 3rd petitioner is

serving in the territorial division. It is clear that the alleged issue is not

common to all the petitioners nor to all the prospective applicants, as

there are about 700 cadre vacancies in the rank of Inspector of Police.

19

The petitioners argue that the officers serving in the functional division

can neither earn nor are they given an opportunity to earn the marks

allocated for good entries. I cannot agree.

It is true that the marks awarded under 2.2.1 to 2.2.4 in P7 for entries

pertaining to crime, vice, traffic and open warrants can be earned by an

officer serving in a police station (under the territorial division). This does

not mean that the officers serving in the territorial division automatically

get these good entries. They need to earn the marks; they have to make

raids, detect crimes, execute warrants etc. There are inherent risks

involved in these activities. If the work that they do is more onerous, they

should rightly be in a position to obtain more marks for such tasks.

A scheme could have a criterion under which only a particular division

could score marks. However, there should be a mechanism by which

others in the same group could also score marks under a particular

category so that the scheme of recruitment though seemingly unequal in

criteria is just and reasonable in application and effect. The petitioners

claim that a total of 15 marks awarded for good entries are denied to

them because of the nature of the job of the functional division. The

question is whether there is a comparable criterion whereby the aggrieved

petitioners could also score 15 marks. When I consider the list of

positions that fall under the functional division, as stated by the

petitioners in their counter affidavit and quoted by me above, it seems to

me that the officers in the functional division are in a better position than

those in the territorial division to earn marks for good entries allocated

under 2.2.5 and 2.2.6. Take for instance “2.2.5 – Special activities

conducted during the course of duties including community police, traffic

or narcotic prevention activities”. According to the petitioners themselves,

the Police Narcotics Bureau, Community Police and Environment

Protection Range, Traffic Management and Road Safety Range come

20

under the functional division. Then who is in a better position to engage

in special activities such as conducting awareness programmes to earn

marks? Marks under 2.2.6 can be earned by any officer irrespective of

the division. It may be noted that even under the earlier scheme P5 where

70 marks were allocated for seniority, out of 30 marks, five marks were

allocated for good entries. This is not an altogether new feature designed

to discriminate against officers in the functional division in favour of

those in the territorial division.

The petitioners have also alleged that they had no knowledge at the time

of appointment that those involved in crime detection and investigation

would be offered more marks. It is true that ideally the scheme of

recruitment should be announced beforehand so that officers are aware

of what is expected of them in the future. However, it should also be

admitted that the schemes of recruitment or promotion have constantly

changed in line with emerging needs. It cannot be predicted. Placing a

burden on the respondents to announce the exact scheme that would be

in place in 10 years or so maybe unreasonable.

In Wasantha Disanayake and others v. Secretary, Ministry of Public

Administration and Home Affairs and others [2015] 1 Sri LR 362 at 367

Sripavan C.J. stated:

A scheme of recruitment once formulated is not good forever; it is

perfectly within the competence of the appropriate authority to

change it, rechange it, adjust it and re-adjust it according to the

compulsions of changing circumstances. The Court cannot give

directions as to how the Public Service Commission should function

except to state the obligation not to act arbitrarily and to treat

employees who are similarly situated equally. Once the Public

Service Commission lays down a scheme, it has to follow it

uniformly. Having laid down a definite scheme of promotion, the

21

Public Service Commission cannot follow the irrational method of

pick and choose.

It may also be relevant to note that under 2.2.2 and 2.2.3, one must have

25 entries to earn one mark whereas under 2.2.5 one can earn three

marks and under 2.2.6 one can earn one mark for each two entries.

More importantly, officers in the functional division are in a more

favourable position to earn marks for education, as their duties are

largely confined to office hours with time off during the evenings,

weekends and holidays to pursue higher studies, whereas officers in the

territorial division (e.g. an officer in the crime or traffic branch) have to

work practically round the clock in rotation all seven days of the week

and can hardly find the time to do so. In practical terms, officers who are

in the territorial division and wish to pursue higher studies shift to the

functional division. That is common to any department or discipline. The

IGP in his affidavit states that officers are entitled to get transfers to the

functional division or territorial division according to their preference

upon completion of three years in the police force.

To start with, in practical terms, the duties of officers in the functional

division allow them more of an opportunity to apply under the limited

competitive examination category for which 25% of vacancies has been

set apart.

Under the structural interview in P7, if I may highlight some features:

under paragraph 1, 10 marks have been allocated for additional

academic qualifications such as degrees and diplomas; under paragraph

4, 15 marks for courses; under paragraph 5.4, seven marks for computer

literacy. For these items alone, an officer in the functional division,

having had more time due to the nature of his employment to dedicate to

higher studies, could earn 32 marks as against the 15 marks an officer

22

in the territorial division could earn on good entries. Moreover, good

entries die a natural death upon promotion whereas academic

qualifications do not. It seems that the new scheme is more advantageous

to the officers in the functional division than in the territorial division.

I reject the submission made on behalf of the petitioners in the post-

argument written submissions that “the petitioners have no way of being

promoted to the rank of IP under the seniority category, based on the

competitive examination or based on merit” and that the petitioners have

been treated unfairly and unreasonably in violation of Article 12 of the

Constitution.

In Samarasinghe v. The Bank of Ceylon [1978-79-80] 1 Sri LR 221 it was

held:

Although employees may be integrated into one class, ie. Sub-

Managers, the employees can in the matter of promotion be

classified again into two different classes on the basis of any

intelligible differentia, as for example educational qualifications,

which has a nexus with the object of classification, namely,

efficiency in the post to which promotion is to be made. Accordingly,

the differential made by the Bank in promotion from the grade of

Sub-Manager to Assistant Manager was not unconstitutional.

There can be a classification for the purpose of promotion, and this will

not amount to discrimination. Though officers in both the territorial

division and the functional division are all Sub Inspectors, the nature of

their work differs and accordingly the manner in which they may obtain

marks to attain a promotion also differ. What is required is that the

scheme of recruitment should not have a discriminatory effect on any

group of officers without reasonable justification. I find no such

discrimination in P7.

23

Special promotion

Special promotions come under the merit category. Of the 25% of

vacancies set apart for the merit category, ½ is allocated to special

promotions. In other words, 12.5% of the total cadre vacancies is

dedicated to special promotions. Paragraph 10.1.5 at pages 22-23 of P7

provides for this. As this allocation is subject to heavy controversy and

for better understanding of this provision, let me reproduce this

paragraph in full.

10.1.5 විශ ේෂ උසසේ කිරීම

10.1.5.1 සපුරාලිය යුතු සුදුසුකම්:

i. උප ශපාලිසේ පරීක්‍ෂක තනතුශේ පත්වීම සේිර කර තිබීම

ii. විශ ේෂ උසසේීම කමිටුම මගින් විශ ේෂ උසසේීම සඳහා සුදුසු බවට

නිර්දේශ කර තිබීම

ද ෝ

iii. දපොලිස්පතිදේ මතය අනුව යම් විශ ේෂ අවසේථාවක දී තම විශ්වොසය

අනුව විශ ේෂ උසසේීම් සඳහා සුදුසු යැයි තීරණය කර තිබීම

සටහන: ඉහත පරිදි විශ ේෂ උසසේීමක් නිලධාරයාශේ ආධුනික කාලය තුල ලබාදුන්

අවසේථාවකදී නිලධරයා තනතුශේ පිහිටුවිය යුත්වශත්ව ඔහුශේ ශසේවය සේිර කල

දින සිටය.

10.1.5.2. විශ ේෂ උසසේ කිරීශම් කමිටුව: පහත සංයුතිශයන් යුක්ත විශ ේෂ උසසේීම

කමිටුවක් විය යුතුය.

i. පරිපාලන කටයුතු භාර, ශයෙෂේඨ නිශයෝයෙ ශපාලිසේපතිවරයා

ii. මානව සම්පත්ව කළමනාකාර විෂය භාර ශයෙෂේඨතම නිලධරයා

iii. නීති කටයුතු භාර ශයෙෂේඨතම නිලධරයා

සටහන: පරිපාලන කටයුතු භාර, ශයෙෂේඨ නිශයෝයෙ ශපාලිසේපතිවරයා යටශත්ව ඉහත

අංක (ii) හා (iii) විෂයන් තිබුණද, එම විෂයන් භාර ශයෙෂේඨතම නිලධරයා

ශමම කමිටුවට ඇතුළත්ව විය යුතුය.

10.1.5.2.1. විශ ේෂ උසසේ කිරීශම් කමිටුව පත්ව කරන බලධාරියා: යාතික ශපාලිසේ

24

ශකාමිෂන් සභාව විසින් බලය පවරන ලද ශපාලිසේපති

10.1.5.3. උසසේ කිරීශම් ක්‍රමය:

i. සේථානභාර නිලධාරීන්, දිසේික් භාර නිලධාරීන්, ශකාට්ඨාස භාර

නිලධාරීන්, දිසා භාර නිලධාරීන් ශහෝ පළාත්ව භාර ශයෙෂේඨ නිශයෝයෙ

ශපාලිසේපතිවරුන් විසින් ශපාලිසේ ශසේවාශේ උන්නතිය ශවනුශවන් ශහෝ

පුරවැසියන්ශේ ආරක්‍ෂාව සැලසීම නීතිය හා සාමය පවත්වවාශෙන යාම

ශවනුශවන් අති විශිෂේඨ වූ දක්‍ෂතා දක්වන ලද නිලධරයකුට විශ ේෂ

උසසේීම් ලබාදීම සුදුසුයැයි ශේඛිය විධානයන්ට යටත්වව ශපාලිසේපති

ශවත නිේශේ කළ හැකිය.

ii. ශපාලිසේපති විසින් උසසේ කිරීම් ක්‍රමශේදයන් ක්‍රියාත්වමක කරනු ලබන

අවසේථාවන් හීදි විශ ේෂ උසසේීම් ලබාදීම සඳහා ඉහත පරිදි විශ ේෂ

උසසේීම් කමිටුව පත්ව කිරීම සඳහා කටයුතු කර, ලැබී ඇති නිේශේ

කමිටුව ශවත ශයාමු කළ යුතුය.

iii. ඒ සඳහා පත්ව කරනු ලැබූ කමිටුවක් මඟින් විශ ේෂ උසසේීම් නිේශේ

කරනු ලබන අතර, කුසලතා පදනම යටශත්ව ඇති පුරප්පාඩු වලින්

උපරිම 50% ක ප්‍රමාණයක් දපොලිස්පතිදේ අභිමතය පරිදි ලබාදිය

හැකිය.

iv. විශ ේෂ උසසේ ීශම් කමිටුව විසින් උසසේ කිරීම සඳහා සුදුසු යැයි

තීරණය කරනු ලබන නිලධරයන් පිළිබඳ නිර්දේශ ශපාලිසේපති ශවත

ඉදිරිපත්ව කිරීශමන් පසු ශපාලිසේපති විසින් විශ ේෂ උසසේීම් ලබාශදනු

ඇත.

v. එශසේ වුව ද, දපොලිස්පතිදේ මතය අනුව යම් විශ ේෂ අවසේථාවක දී තම

විශ්වොසය අනුව සුදුසු යැයි තීරණය කරනු ලබන නිලධරයකුට විශ ේෂ

උසසේීම ලබාදිය හැකිය.

සටහන: විශ ේෂ උසසේීම ලබාදීශම් දී එශසේ ලබාදීමට තීරණය කරනු ලබන ශහේතු යම්

අධිකරණයක දී ශහෝ ශවනත්ව අධිකාරියක් විසින් ප්‍ර ේන කරනු ලැබුවශහාත්ව

ඉදිරිපත්ව කිරීම සඳහා එම නිලධරයාශේ පුේෙලික ශොනුවට ලිඛිතව ඇතුලත්ව

කළ යුතුය.

Learned President’s Counsel for the petitioners strenuously submits that

the unqualified discretion given to the IGP under this category is arbitrary

25

and discriminatory and therefore clearly violates Article 12(1) of the

Constitution.

Learned DSG, drawing attention to Rule 44(1) and also to Rule 30 of the

Supreme Court Rules 1990, submits that the petitioners did not refer to

the power of the IGP to grant special promotions in the petition or even

in their written submissions filed prior to the argument as a cause for

complaint and thereby denied the IGP an opportunity to meet this

argument in his objections filed by way of an affidavit.

Whilst strongly relying on the judgment of S.N. Silva C.J. in Jayasinghe

v. The National Institute of Fisheries and Nautical Engineering (NIFNE) and

others [2004] 1 Sri LR 230, learned DSG submits that this Court should

not entertain such a new position taken up for the first time at the

argument stage. Jayasinghe’s judgment has no direct bearing to solve

the issue at hand. It was an extreme case where a petitioner in a

fundamental rights application filed a petition which was unmistakably

not only lengthy, verbose and prolix but also slanderous, abusive of the

character of the respondents, false and baseless. Although the petition

contained as many as 113 paragraphs, the petition did not contain an

averment as to the manner in which the petitioner’s complaint

(interdiction) infringed his fundamental right guaranteed by Article 12(1)

of the Constitution. It is in that context that the Supreme Court referred

to Rule 44(1)(a) and sections 40(d) and 46(2)(a) and (b) of the Civil

Procedure Code. It is not an authority to say that in a fundamental rights

application, a petitioner cannot raise at the argument a new matter that

has not been expressly pleaded in the petition. There is no complaint in

the instant case that the petition is lengthy and prolix or contains

averments which are scandalous or false.

It is also significant to note that the new matter raised arises out of the

same impugned document P7, not out of a new document introduced for

26

the first time at the argument. The two cases are, therefore,

incomparable.

It is undisputed that the fundamental rights declared and recognised in

our Constitution are based on the Universal Declaration of Human

Rights. If there is a prima facie case of a violation of fundamental rights,

can the Supreme Court turn a blind eye to it on the basis that it has not

been expressly pleaded in the original application? I think not.

A fair reading of Part IV of the Supreme Court Rules 1991 in the proper

context does not lend support to such a restrictive view. Rule 44(7)

enables any person in indigent circumstances to invoke this jurisdiction

without formalities. If the Supreme Court decides to entertain such an

informal complaint, such person is afforded legal aid for the effective

presentation of his case – vide Sumanadasa and 205 others v. Attorney

General [2006] 3 Sri LR 202 at 205.

It is significant to note that Article 17 found in the fundamental rights

chapter of the Constitution recognises as a fundamental right the

entitlement of every person to apply to the Supreme Court under Article

126 when there is an infringement or imminent infringement by executive

or administrative action of a fundamental right to which such person is

entitled.

In terms of Article 126(1) of the Constitution, the Supreme Court shall

have sole and exclusive jurisdiction to hear and determine any question

relating to the infringement or imminent infringement by executive or

administrative action of any fundamental right declared and recognised

by Chapter III of the Constitution. It is the constitutional duty of the

Supreme Court not to frustrate or diminish fundamental rights

jurisdiction by self-imposed fetters but rather to cherish, respect, secure

and advance fundamental rights.

27

The SVASTI of the Constitution whilst recognising the Constitution as the

“SUPREME LAW” of the Republic inter alia assures “to all Peoples…

FUNDAMENTAL HUMAN RIGHTS…as the intangible heritage that

guarantees the dignity and well-being of succeeding generations of the

People of SRI LANKA”.

Article 3 of the Constitution states that “In the Republic of Sri Lanka

sovereignty is in the People and is inalienable. Sovereignty includes the

powers of government, fundamental rights and the franchise.” Article 3

ties sovereignty to inter alia fundamental rights and makes sovereignty

inalienable. This is a unique feature in our Constitution.

The traditional meaning of sovereignty is the power or supreme authority

of the State. But under our Constitution sovereignty is not the power or

supreme authority of the State but the power or supreme authority of the

People, as sovereignty is in the People. How the legislative power,

executive power and judicial power of the People shall be exercised is set

out in Article 4(a), (b) and (c) of the Constitution.

Article 4(d) states “the fundamental rights which are by the Constitution

declared and recognized shall be respected, secured and advanced by all

the organs of government and shall not be abridged, restricted or denied,

save in the manner and to the extent hereinafter provided”. The

restrictions are contained in Articles 14A(2) and 15. According to Article

83, Articles 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 30(2) and 62(2) are entrenched

Articles that cannot be restricted (except by two-thirds majority in

Parliament and the approval of the People at a Referendum).

What is meant by “all the organs of government” referred to in Article 4(d)?

The three organs of government are the Legislature, Executive and

Judiciary. Therefore it is the constitutional duty of all Courts including

the Supreme Court to respect, secure and advance fundamental rights

28

and not to abridge, restrict or deny them except to the extent such rights

have been abridged, restricted or denied by the Constitution itself. This

is further reinforced under chapter XVI of the Constitution dealing with

“The Supreme Court” where it states in Article 118(b) that “The Supreme

Court of the Republic of Sri Lanka shall be the highest and final superior

Court of record in the Republic and shall subject to the provisions of the

Constitution exercise jurisdiction for the protection of fundamental rights”,

not merely for the enforcement of fundamental rights.

In Edirisuriya v. Navaratnam and others [1985] 1 Sri LR 100 at 106,

Ranasinghe J. (later C.J.) declared:

Article 126 (1) of the Constitution has conferred upon this Court sole

and exclusive jurisdiction to hear and determine any question

relating to the infringement or imminent infringement by executive or

administrative action of any fundamental right declared and

recognized by Chapter 3 of the Constitution. The right to invoke such

jurisdiction by an aggrieved person is set out in Article 17, which has

been given the status of a fundamental right itself. Article 4(d) of the

Constitution has ordained that the fundamental rights which are

declared and recognized by the Constitution should be respected,

secured and advanced by all the organs of government and should

not be abridged, restricted or denied save in the manner and to the

extent provided by the Constitution itself. A solemn and sacred duty

has been imposed by the Constitution upon this Court, as the highest

Court of the Republic, to safeguard the fundamental rights which

have been assured by the Constitution to the citizens of the Republic

as part of their intangible heritage. It, therefore, behoves this Court

to see that the full and free exercise of such rights is not impeded by

any flimsy and unrealistic considerations.

29

In Sumanadasa and 205 others v. Attorney General (supra), complaints

(not formal fundamental rights applications) were addressed to the

Supreme Court by 206 persons held in remand custody upon orders

made by Magistrates in respect of offences punishable in terms of section

45 of the Immigration and Emigration Act, alleging infringement of their

fundamental rights guaranteed by Article 13(2) of the Constitution

resulting from continuous detention without any recourse to a remedy

until the conclusion of their trials. S.N. Silva C.J. whilst holding that

Article 13(2) had been violated, at page 212 observed:

The Court has to consider the ambit of the fundamental right

guaranteed by Article 13(2) and the relief, if any, to be granted to the

Petitioners in the absence of a procedure established by law to

adjudicate on their continued detention.

In this context we note that in terms of Article 118(b) of the

Constitution this Court is vested with jurisdiction” for the protection

of fundamental rights”. The word “Protection” is wider than the word

“enforcement”. It is incumbent on this Court to make such orders as

are necessary to ensure that the fundamental rights guaranteed by

the Constitution are adequately protected and safeguarded.

Fundamental rights forms part of the sovereignty of the People and

Article 4(d) of the Constitution being a basic provision on which the

structure of our Constitution is founded, requires that fundamental

rights be “respected, secured and advanced by all organs of

government and shall not be abridged, restricted or denied save in

the manner and to the extent hereinafter provided.”

Hence the rights guaranteed to the Petitioners in terms of Article

13(2) should be secured and advanced by this Court and not be

abridged, restricted or denied. Any such abridgment, restriction or

30

denial has to be based only on specific provisions of the Constitution

itself.

Ganeshanantham v. Vivienne Goonewardene and three others [1984] 1 Sri

LR 319 at 330-331, Samarakoon C.J. emphasised the importance of

giving purposive interpretation to Article 126(2). There is no necessity to

name in the petition exactly the state officer by whom the petitioner’s

fundamental right or rights were violated. The unlawful act gives the

Court jurisdiction to entertain the petition and to make a suitable

declaration. The inquiry is not limited to the person named in the

petition.

The jurisdiction granted to this Court by Article 126 of the

Constitution concerns fundamental rights and language rights

declared by Chapters III and IV of the Constitution. In exercising this

jurisdiction the Court has to make a dual finding, viz.,

(1) Whether there is an infringement or threatened infringement

of a fundamental right, and

(2) Whether such infringement or threat is by executive or

administrative action.

If the answer to the first is in the negative the second does not arise

for consideration. If the answer to the first is in the affirmative then

the question arises as to whether the act complained of constitutes

executive or administrative action. It may not always be possible for

the petitioner to allege in his petition that the act was that of a

particular officer of State. His name may not be known to

the petitioner, and he may only be able to identify him by other

means. For example in the course of the inquiry he may be able to

establish that it was a police officer of a named Police Station. This

Court would then have jurisdiction to act in terms of Article 126. On

31

the other hand it may be that in the course of the inquiry it transpires

(as happened in the instant case), and it is established to the

satisfaction of the Court, that the infringement was by a State Officer

other than the one named in the petition. This Court would still have

the power to act in terms of Article 126. The jurisdiction of this Court

does not depend on the fact that a particular officer is mentioned by

name nor is it confined to the person named. The unlawful act gives

the Court jurisdiction to entertain the petition and to make a

declaration accordingly. The fact that it was committed by an Officer

of State empowers the Court to grant a remedy. The provisions of

Article 126(2) do not limit the inquiry to the person named in the

petition. Such a limitation is apparent in the provisions of Article

126(3) where the inquiry is confined to the party named in the

application for a writ in respect of whom the Court of Appeal makes

the reference. Article 4(d) of the Constitution enjoins all organs of

Government to respect, secure and advance the fundamental rights

declared and recognized by the Constitution. This Court being a

component part of the judiciary, which is one of the organs of

Government, must necessarily obey such command. It will be a

travesty of justice if, having found as a fact that a fundamental right

has been infringed or is threatened to be infringed, it yet dismisses

the petition because it is established that the act was not that of the

Officer of State named in the petition but that of another State Officer,

such as a subordinate of his. The provisions of Article 126(2) cannot

be confined in that way. This Court has been given power to grant

relief as it may deem just and equitable – a power stated in the

widest possible terms. It will be neither just nor equitable to deny

relief in such a case. Counsel for the Petitioner referred to the

provisions of Rule 65 and called in aid its terms to buttress his

argument. Rule 65 merely states that the Petitioner shall name the

person who he alleges has committed the unlawful act. This by no

32

means exhausts the avenues available to a petitioner. As I have

stated earlier it does not provide for a situation where the petitioner

is unable to name the Officer of State who commits the act.

Furthermore Rule 65 concerns procedure and like most rules cannot

detract from the powers of Article 126. I therefore reject the

contention raised in issues A1 and 2 by Counsel for the petitioner.

In Centre for Environmental Justice (Guarantee Limited) and others v. Hon.

Mahinda Rajapaksha and others (SC/FR/109/2021, SC Minutes of

01.12.2021), it was observed that the procedural defects of fundamental

rights applications should not shackle the constitutional duty of the

Court to examine the allegations of the petitioner stated therein. In this

case, on behalf of the respondents, the Attorney General objected the

original petition being amended on three grounds: non-joinder of parties,

time-bar and the amended petition being filed to cure the defects in the

original petition which were brought to the notice of Court on behalf of

the respondents. Rejecting these objections, Janak de Silva J. observed:

The heart of the Petitioners’ complaint is that the 1st and 2nd

Respondents and the Cabinet of Ministers are interfering with the

statutory powers of the Attorney General.

This is a serious allegation, which if true, has far reaching

ramifications. According to Article 4(d) of the Constitution, it is the

bounden duty of this Court to secure and advance the fundamental

rights guaranteed by the Constitution. These are proceedings

brought on behalf of the public at large. I hold that this Court must

not allow procedural defects of the nature alleged in this matter to

shackle its constitutional duty to examine the allegation of the

Petitioners at the leave to proceed stage.

33

This constitutional duty resting on the Supreme Court has been

reiterated in a spate of Supreme Court judgments including Sriyani Silva

v. Iddamalgoda, OIC, Police Station, Paiyagala [2003] 2 Sri LR 63,

Piyasena v. Attorney General and others [2007] 2 Sri LR 117, Azath Salley

v. Colombo Municipal Council (supra).

The Supreme Court has been conferred with wide powers to grant relief

in a fundamental rights application. Article 126(4) empowers the

Supreme Court “to grant such relief or make such directions as it may

deem just and equitable” depending on the facts and circumstances of

each individual case. The three components may be highlighted for

emphasis: (a) grant relief or (b) make declarations (c) as the Court may

deem just and equitable. The Supreme Court exercises equitable

jurisdiction in fundamental rights applications. Hence this Court in

appropriate cases can overlook high-flown technical objections, such as

the one raised here, in the interest of justice.

Although the petitioners have not challenged the special promotion

scheme in the petition, this matter was raised at the argument and the

learned DSG was given an opportunity to reply in the post-argument

written submissions. Let me quote the stand of the IGP on this issue of

special promotions as reflected in the written submissions:

54. Without Prejudice to the above, it is submitted on behalf of the

Respondents that in terms of the Scheme of Recruitment marked

P7 officers are promoted to the rank of Inspector of Police under

three categories. The said categories are 50% on seniority, 25% on

merit and the balance 25% through a competitive examination.

55. Of the 25% that is allocated for the merit category; half of the said

25%, that is a total of 12.5% of the total number of promotions, are

allocated for special promotions. Special promotions are granted

34

on the recommendations of the Committee. The said Committee is

appointed by the IGP with the approval of appointing authority.

56. It is respectfully stated that the Scheme of Recruitment does not

provide for a blanket 12.5% to be given special promotions, instead

it stipulates that a maximum of 12.5% can be granted special

promotions.

57. Furthermore, it is pertinent to note that although clause 10.1.5.1

provides that the IGP may grant special promotions when he is of

the belief that an officer is eligible to be thus promoted, the Note at

page 18 of the Scheme of Recruitment specifically provides that in

a particular year only a maximum of 10 special promotions can be

given under this category.

58. Thus it is evident that the role of the Committee is not redundant

as contended by the Petitioners as appointments have to be

recommended by the Committee.

According to paragraph 10.1.5.1, the eligibility criteria for special

promotion is confirmation in the post of SI, recommendation by the

Special Promotion Committee for promotion (විශ ේෂ උසසේීම කමිටුම මගින් විශ ේෂ

උසසේීම සඳහා සුදුසු බවට නිේශේ කර තිබීම) or (ශහෝ) the decision of the IGP for

promotion which is based on the IGP’s opinion of/trust in that officer

(ශපාලිසේපතිශේ මතය අනුව යම් විශ ේෂ අවසේථාවක දී තම වි ේවාසය අනුව විශ ේෂ උසසේීම් සඳහා සුදුසු

යැයි තීරණය කර තිබීම). The coordinating conjunction “or” here is significant:

the IGP can act upon the recommendations of the Special Promotions

Committee or he can wholly give effect to his unilateral decision based on

his personal opinion/trust regarding certain officers. It may also be

relevant to note that apart from the IGP having the authority to fill all the

vacancies under the special promotion category on his own, he is also

not duty bound to accept the recommendations of the Special Promotions

35

Committee. The Special Promotions Committee only makes

recommendations to the IGP but the final decision is taken by the IGP

himself and not the Committee. In explaining the parameters of the

powers of the IGP in the special promotion scheme, in addition to giving

due recognition to his “opinion” (ශපාලිසේපතිශේ මතය) and “trust” (තම වි ේවාසය

අනුව), the word “discretion” (ශපාලිසේපතිශේ අභිමතය) has also been used in

paragraph 10.1.5.3.iii. These are all subjective. The use of the words

“opinion”, “trust” and “discretion” interchangeably makes it clear that the

intention of the framers of this SOR is to give unfettered discretion to the

IGP to decide on this special promotion category. Learned President’s

Counsel for the petitioners submits that such a provision has been

incorporated in P7 to accommodate the directions and requests of the

powers that be. Where there is a Special Promotion Committee

established to recommend persons for promotion under the special

promotion category, it is questionable as to why the IGP has also been

vested with such discretion to give special promotion. There are no

principles, rules or guidelines stipulated under which he should exercise

his discretion.

Such unfettered discretion given to the IGP cannot be justified by adding

a “Note” after paragraph 10.1.2 of P7 (at page 18 of P7) to say that the

reasons for such decisions shall be included in the personal file of the

particular officer to be submitted to Court or to any other authority in

the event such decisions are challenged.

In United States v. Wunderlich (342 U.S. 98 (1951)) at page 156 Justice

Douglas stated:

Law has reached its finest moments when it has freed man from the

unlimited discretion of some ruler, some civil or military official, some

bureaucrat. Where discretion is absolute, man has always suffered.

At times it has been his property that has been invaded; at times,

36

his privacy; at times, his liberty of movement; at times, his freedom

of thought; at times, his life. Absolute discretion is a ruthless master.

It is more destructive of freedom than any of man’s other inventions.

I accept that as the head of the police force, the IGP should possess

powers to take decisions for the greater benefit of the police force, but he

cannot have unabridged discretion. He can be the Chairman of the

Special Promotions Committee and his independent opinion in relation

to special promotions can be discussed at the Committee and collective

decisions can be taken. If there is no unanimity, the majority decision

should prevail. This is the common practice adopted by every responsible

institution, including in the promotion of judicial officers.

In Munasinghe v. Vandergert [2008] 2 Sri LR 223 at 232, Bandaranayake

J. (later C.J.) observed:

Considering the present day administrative functions, there is no

doubt that it is necessary to confer authority on administrative

officers to be used at their discretion. Nevertheless, such

discretionary authority cannot be absolute or unfettered as such

would be arbitrary and discriminatory, which would negate the

equal protection guaranteed in terms of Article 12(1) of the

Constitution.

Article 12(1) of the Constitution ensures protection from arbitrariness

and discrimination by executive or administrative action. The objective of

Article 12(1) of the Constitution therefore is to ensure equal treatment.

In Ariyawansa and others v. The People’s Bank and others [2006] 2 Sri

LR 145 at 152 Bandaranayake J. stated:

The concepts of negation of arbitrariness and unreasonableness are

embodied in the right to equality as it has been decided that any

action or law which is arbitrary or unreasonable violates equality.

37

In the determination of this Court in The Special Goods and Services Tax

Bill (SC/SD/1-9/2022, page 36), it was held:

absolute and unfettered discretion being vested in an officer of the

Executive is a recipe for (i) unreasonable and arbitrary decision-

making, (ii) abuse of power, (iii) corruption, and (iv) the roadway to

depredation of the Rule of Law. On all such accounts, it results in an

infringement of Article 12(1) of the Constitution which guarantees

equal protection of the law.

In Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu and another (1974 AIR 555 at 583)

Bhagwati J. observed:

Equality is a dynamic concept with many aspects and dimensions

and it cannot be “cribbed cabined and confined” within traditional

and doctrinaire limits. From a positivistic point of view, equality is

antithetic to arbitrariness. In fact equality and arbitrariness are

sworn enemies; one belongs to the rule of law in a republic while the

other, to the whim and caprice of an absolute monarch. Where an

act is arbitrary, it is implicit in it that it is unequal both according to

political logic and constitutional law and is therefore violative of Art.

14, and if it affects any matter relating to public employment, it is

also violative of Art. 16. Arts. 14 and 16 strike at arbitrariness in

State action and ensure fairness and equality of treatment.

In Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. The International Airport Authority of India

and others (1979 AIR 1628 at 1638) Bhagwati J. stated:

The power or discretion of the Government in the matter of grant of

largess including award of jobs, contracts, quotas, licences etc.,

must be confined and structured by rational, relevant and non-

discriminatory standard or norm and if the government departs from

such standard or norm in any particular case or cases, the action of

38

the Government would be liable to be struck down, unless it can be

shown by the Government that the departure was not arbitrary, but

was based on some valid principle which in itself was not irrational,

unreasonable or discriminatory.

In Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib (1981 AIR 487 at 499), after considering the

concept of reasonableness and its applicability, Bhagwati J. stated, “the

concept of reasonableness and non-arbitrariness pervades the entire

constitutional scheme and is a golden thread which runs through the whole

of the fabric of the Constitution.”

In Jaisinghani v. Union of India and others (1967 AIR 1427 at 1434)

Ramaswami J. observed:

[T]he absence of arbitrary power is the first essential of the rule of

law upon which our whole constitutional system is based. In a

system governed by rule of law, discretion, when conferred upon

executive authorities, must be confined within clearly defined limits.

The rule of law from this point of view means that decisions should

be made by the application of known principles and rules and, in

general, such decisions should be predictable and the citizen should

know where he is. If a decision is taken without any principle or

without any rule it is unpredictable and such a decision is the

antithesis of a decision taken in accordance with the rule of law. (See

Dicey - “Law of the Constitution” - Tenth Edn., Introduction cx). “Law

has reached its finest moments”, stated Douglas, J. United States v.

Wunderlich, (1951) 342 US 98 “when it has freed man from the

unlimited discretion of some ruler... Where discretion is absolute,

man has always suffered”. It is in this sense that the rule of law

may be said to be the sworn enemy of caprice. Discretion, as Lord

Mansfield stated it in classic terms in the case of John Wilkes, (1770)

4 Burr 2528 at p. 2539 “means sound discretion guided by law. It

39

must be governed by rule, not by humour: it must not be arbitrary,

vague and fanciful.”

As observed by Amerasinghe J. in Perera and nine others v. Monetary

Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka and twenty-two others [1994] 1 Sri

LR 152 at 166:

Transparency in recruitment proceedings would go a long way in

achieving public expectations of equal treatment. The selection of a

person must be viewed as a serious matter requiring a

thoroughgoing consideration of the need for the services of an officer,

and a clear formulation of both the basic qualities and qualifications

necessary to perform the services, and the way in which such

qualities and qualifications are to be established.

In Wijerathna v. Sri Lanka Ports Authority and others (SC/FR/256/2017,

SC Minutes of 11.12.2020), Kodagoda J., whilst holding that the

petitioner’s fundamental right under Article 12(1) had been violated by

the failure to appoint him to a particular post, observed:

In my view, principally, schemes for the selection, appointment and

promotion of persons for employment positions should contain

mechanisms enabling the selection of the most suitable person for

the relevant position, whilst embodying the principle of equality. The

objective sought to be achieved by doing so, is the imposition of

compulsion on persons in authority who are empowered to take

decisions relating to selections, appointments, recruitment and

promotions, to arrive at objective and reasonable decisions, and

thereby securing protection against arbitrary decision-making. While

conferring discretionary authority on elected and appointed higher

officials is necessary, it is equally necessary to ensure that, such

discretion is exercised for the purpose for which discretionary

40

authority has been conferred, and not for the purpose of giving effect

to personal objectives which are inconsistent with equality and

influenced by irrational and subjective criteria. In all probability, the

conferment of unregulated discretionary power would result in

violations of the rule of law, and arbitrary, unreasonable and

capricious decision-making, and should therefore be avoided at all

cost.

I take the view that the special promotion provision contained in

paragraph 10.1.5 of P7 (at pages 22-23 of P7) insofar as the powers of the

IGP are concerned is absolute, unfettered and arbitrary. Arbitrariness in

the decision-making process violates Article 12(1), which guarantees

equal protection of the law. Hence I hold that the fundamental right of

the petitioners guaranteed by Article 12(1) of the Constitution is violated

to that extent by P7 and I further declare that the special promotion

provision in P7 is a nullity. I direct that the 1st to 10th respondents (the

IGP and the members of the Public Service Commission) revisit that

section of P7 and revise it in order to protect the fundamental rights of

the petitioners.

Infringement of Article 14(1)(g)

The petitioners complain of the violation of Article 14(1)(g) of the

Constitution, which states: “Every citizen is entitled to the freedom to

engage by himself or in association with others in any lawful occupation,

profession, trade, business or enterprise”. This is not an entrenched

provision. It is subject to Article 15(5), 15(7) and 15(8):

15(5) The exercise and operation of the fundamental right declared

and recognized by Article 14(1)(g) shall be subject to such restrictions

as may be prescribed by law in the interests of national economy or

in relation to –

41

(a) the professional, technical, academic, financial and other

qualifications necessary for practising any profession or carrying on

any occupation, trade, business or enterprise and the licensing and

disciplinary control of the person entitled to such fundamental right;

and

(b) the carrying on by the State, a State agency or a public

corporation of any trade, business, industry, service or enterprise

whether to the exclusion, complete or partial, of citizens or otherwise.

15(7) The exercise and operation of all the fundamental rights

declared and recognized by Articles 12, 13(1), 13(2) and 14 shall be

subject to such restrictions as may be prescribed by law in the

interests of national security, public order and the protection of

public health or morality, or for the purpose of securing due

recognition and respect for the rights and freedoms of others, or of

meeting the just requirements of the general welfare of a democratic

society. For the purposes of this paragraph “law” includes

regulations made under the law for the time being relating to public

security.

15(8) The exercise and operation of the fundamental rights declared

and recognized by Articles 12(1), 13 and 14 shall, in their application

to the members of the Armed Forces, Police Force and other

Forces charged with the maintenance of public order, be subject to

such restrictions as may be prescribed by law in the interests of the

proper discharge of their duties and the maintenance of discipline

among them.

The right to a profession/occupation of one’s choice goes hand in hand

with the corresponding duty of every person in Sri Lanka to work

42

conscientiously in his chosen occupation, as articulated in Article 28 of

the Constitution.

In Vasudewa Nanayakkara v. Choksy, Minister of Finance and others

(SC/FR/209/2007, SC Minutes of 13.10.2009) Bandaranayake J. (later

C.J.), quoting the pronouncement of Lord Denning in Nagle v. Feilden

and others ([1966] 1 All E.R. 689 at page 694) that “…a man’s right to

work at his trade or profession is just as important to him as, perhaps more

important than, his rights of property. Just as the courts will intervene to

protect his rights of property, so they will also intervene to protect his right

to work”, proceeded to hold:

It is therefore the paramount duty of Courts to ensure that a citizen’s

right to work is protected. The right to employment being a

fundamental right guaranteed by the Constitution, it would be the

duty of the Court to exercise their authority in the interest of the

individual citizen and of the general public to safeguard that right.

Where the state is the employer, the violation of Article 14(1)(g) has been

found in instances such as the arbitrary discontinuation of employment

(Nimal Bandara v. National Gem and Jewellery Authority

(SC/FR/118/2013, SC Minutes of 13.12.2017) and the arbitrary

suspension of an appointment (Sisira Senanayake v. Land Reform

Commission SC/FR/190/2016, SC Minutes of 15.02.2017).

The equivalent to Article 14(1)(g) of our Constitution is Article 19(1)(g) of

the Indian Constitution, which states: “All citizens shall have the right to

practise any profession, or to carry on any occupation, trade or business.”

The Supreme Court of India has held that where an administrative,

executive or non-legislative body has been vested with uncontrolled

discretion that would negatively impact the fundamental right to practice

43

any profession, occupation, trade or business, a finding of the violation

of such right can be made.

In Municipal Corporation of the City of Ahmedabad and others v. Jan

Mohammed Usmanbhai and another (1986 AIR 1205) at page 1210 R.B.

Misra, J. observed:

Where the law providing for grant of a licence or permit confers a

discretion upon an administrative authority regulated by rules or

principles, express or implied, and exerciseable in consonance with

the rules of natural justice, it will be presumed to impose a

reasonable restriction. Where, however, power is entrusted to an

administrative agency to grant or withhold a permit or licence in its

uncontrolled discretion the law ex facie infringes the fundamental

right under Art. 19(1)(g).

In Liberty Cinema v. The Commissioner, Corporation of Calcutta and

another (1959 AIR Cal 45) D.N. Sinha, J. at page 53 stated:

In my opinion, it is now firmly established that an uncontrolled and

arbitrary power without any restriction whatsoever cannot be

granted to the executive or a non-legislative body, if it is possible by

the exercise of such power to affect the rights guaranteed to a citizen

to carry on trade or business.

In Elmore Perera v. Major Montague Jayawickrema, Minister of Public

Administration and Plantation Industries [1985] 1 Sri LR 285, the

contention of the petitioner was that his compulsory retirement from

government service amounted to a violation of his fundamental rights

guaranteed under Article 12 and 14(1)(g) of the Constitution to engage in

his profession as a surveyor. By majority decision, the Supreme Court

held that a violation of Article 12(1) had not been established. Thereafter

Sharvananda C.J. stating that “Counsel for the petitioner correctly did not

44

press the ground that the action of the respondents had infringed the

petitioner’s fundamental right of freedom to engage in any lawful

occupation, as provided by Article 14(1)(g)” expressed the following opinion

obiter at pages 323-324:

The right of the petitioner to carry on the occupation of surveyor is

not, in any manner, affected by his compulsory retirement from

government service. The right to pursue a profession or to carry on

an occupation is not the same thing as the right to work in a

particular post under a contract of employment. If the services of a

worker are terminated wrongfully, it will be open to him to pursue

his rights and remedies in proper proceedings in a competent court

or tribunal. But the discontinuance of his job or employment in which

he is for the time being engaged does not by itself infringe his

fundamental right to carry on an occupation or profession which is

guaranteed by Article 14(1)(g) of the Constitution. It is not possible to

say that the right of the petitioner to carry on an occupation has, in

this case been violated. It would be open to him, though undoubtedly

it will not be easy, to find other avenues of employment as a

Surveyor. Article 14(1)(g) recognises a general right in every citizen

to do work of a particular kind and of his choice. It does not confer

the right to hold a particular job or to occupy a particular post of one’s

choice. The compulsory retirement complained of, may at the highest

affect his particular employment, but it does not affect his right to

work as a Surveyor. The case would have been different if he had

been struck off the roll of his profession or occupation and thus

disabled from practising that profession.

In Syed Khalid Rizvi and ors. v. Union of India and ors. (1992 Supp (3)

SCR 180 at 214), Ramaswamy J. stated:

45

No employee has a right to promotion but he has only right to be

considered for promotion according to rules. Chances of promotion

are not conditions of service and are defeasible. Take an illustration

that the Promotion Regulations envisage maintaining integrity and

good record by Dy. S.P. of State Police Service as eligibility condition

for inclusion in the select list for recruitment by promotion to Indian

Police Service. Inclusion and approval of the name in the select list

by the U.P.S.C, after considering the objections if any by the Central

Govt. is also a condition precedent. Suppose if ‘B’, is far junior to ‘A’

in State Services and ‘B’ was found more meritorious and suitable

and was put in a select list of 1980 and accordingly ‘B’ was

appointed to the Indian Police Service after following the procedure.

‘A’ was thereby superseded by ‘B’. Two years later ‘A’ was found fit

and suitable in 1984 and was accordingly appointed according to

rules. Can ‘A’ thereafter say that ‘B’ being far junior to him in State

Service, ‘A’ should become senior to ‘B’ in the Indian Police Service.

The answer is obviously no because ‘B’ had stolen a march over ‘A’

and became senior to ‘A’. Here maintaining integrity and good record

are conditions of recruitment and seniority is an incidence of service.

The right to engage in a lawful profession is infringed if that right is

“unlawfully obstructed”. Vide Mrs. W.M.K. De Silva v. Chairman, Ceylon

Fertilizer Corporation [1989] 2 Sri LR 393 at 407-408.

In Siriwardena and another v. Inspector, Police Station, Ambalangoda

(SC/FR/242/2010, SC Minutes of 30.04.2021), the petitioners who are

Attorneys-at-Law went to the Ambalangoda police station as part of their

professional duties to assist a client of the 1st petitioner in a matter

involving the custody of a child. The petitioners contended that the 1st

respondent, an Inspector of Police, and the 2nd respondent, a Sub-

Inspector of Police, verbally abused, threatened, humiliated and

46

intimidated the petitioners, even after having been informed that they

were Attorneys-at-Law, and the 2nd respondent degraded the petitioners

in front of members of the public by inter alia casting aspersions on the

legal profession, causing severe embarrassment and humiliation to the

petitioners. The petitioners filed an application before the Supreme Court

alleging violation of their fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles

11, 12(1) and 14(1)(g) of the Constitution. The Supreme Court held that

the respondents violated the fundamental rights of the petitioners

guaranteed by the said Articles. Article 14(1)(g) was held to have been

violated by the interference with their freedom to engage in their lawful

occupation. Thurairaja J. declared:

It is my view that the treatment meted out to the Petitioners by the

1st and 2nd Respondents is a violation of their rights under Article 11

of the Constitution. Further it is a violation of the Petitioners’ rights

under Article 12 and 14(1)(g) of the constitution as it is an

interference with their freedom to engage in their occupation,

particularly given that this incident was an occurrence during their

exercise of duties as are demands of their occupation, in the best

interest of the 1st Petitioner’s client.

If we are to respect, secure, advance and protect the fundamental right

of citizens to engage in a lawful profession, we need to give a purposive

interpretation to Article 14(1)(g) and not a restrictive interpretation that

would directly or indirectly abridge, restrict or deny such right. The right

to engage in a lawful profession should be understood as the right to

effectively engage in a lawful profession. Although a promotion is not a

right per se of an employee, the unjustifiable denial of consideration for

promotion (by virtue of the conferment of unabridged discretion on the

IGP) adversely affects the petitioners’ right to effectively engage in their

lawful employment, in violation of Article 14(1)(g).

47

I hold that the special promotion provision contained in paragraph 10.1.5

of P7 (at pages 22-23 of P7) insofar as the powers or discretion of the IGP

are concerned also violates the fundamental right of the petitioners

guaranteed by Article 14(1)(g) of the Constitution.

Doctrine of Severability

The next question is whether, when an impugned administrative decision

challenged in a fundamental rights application contains provisions that

are violative of fundamental rights and those that are not, the Court can

separate the good from the bad and declare only the bad part invalid

leaving the good part intact. This is permissible.

I concur with the view of De Silva J. expressed in Ranatunga v.

Commissioner General of Agrarian Development (CA/WRIT/180/2017, CA

Minutes of 17.07.2019):

In Thames Water Authority v. Elmbridge Borough Council [1983] 1

Q.B. 570 it was held that where a local authority had acted in

excess of their powers, the court is entitled to look not only at the

document but at the factual situation and, where the excess of

the power was easily identifiable from the valid exercise of power,

to give effect to the document in so far as the exercise of the power

had been intra vires. In Regina v. Secretary of State for Transport

ex parte Greater London Council [1985] 3 WLR 574 it was held

that in an appropriate case, certiorari will go to quash an unlawful

part of an administrative decision having effect in public law

while leaving the remainder valid.

However, such severance of the ultra vires part from the intra

vires part is subject to qualifications. If the bad can be cleanly

severed from the good, the court will quash the bad part only and

leave the good standing (Agricultural, Horticultural and Forestry

48

Industry Training Board v. Ayelsbury Mushrooms Ltd. (1972) WLR

190). In R. v. North Hertfordshire District Council ex parte Cobbold

[1985] 3 All ER 486] it was held that where a specific part of a

licence could be identified as being offensive and therefore

unlawful, it could only be severed from the licence so far as to

leave the remainder untainted if the severance would not alter the

essential character or substance of that which remained. It

follows that severance would not be permitted where the words

which is sought to sever were fundamental to the purpose of the

whole licence.

In the case of Siva Sithamparam v. National Paper Corporation and

others [2003] 3 Sri LR 164, Jayasinghe J. held “Unless the invalid part

is inextricably interconnected with the valid the court is entitled to set

aside or disregard the invalid part having the rest intact, it is

appropriate to sever what is invalid if the character of what remains is

unaffected.”

Similarly in Pure Beverages Company Executive Officers Association v.

Commissioner of Labour [2001] 2 Sri LR 258 at 271 Yapa J. stated:

Further Wade and Forsyth Administrative Law Seventh Edition Page

329 states as follows. “An administrative Act may be partially good

and partially bad. It often happens that a tribunal or authority

makes a proper order but adds some direction or condition which is

beyond its powers. If the bad can be cleanly severed from the good,

the Court will quash the bad part only and leave the good standing.”

Vide also Agricultural, Horticultural and Forestry Industry Training

Board Vs. Aylesbury Mushrooms Ltd. Therefore in relation to the

decision of the Commissioner dated 24.09.1997 it is clearly possible

to sever the good from the bad. Hence the decision of the

Commissioner which had been wrongly made, so as to apply to the

49

four affected members of the Petitioner Association could be quashed

allowing the decision made by the Commissioner in respect of the

other employees belonging to the other two trade unions intact.

Conclusion

For the aforesaid reasons, I hold that the seniority category, limited

examination category and merit category stipulated in P7 are not violative

of Article 12(1) and Article 14(1)(g) of the Constitution; but, under the

special promotion category comprising 12.5% of the total vacancies, the

discretionary power granted to the 1st respondent IGP is violative of the

fundamental rights of the petitioners guaranteed by Article 12(1) and

Article 14(1)(g) of the Constitution. The application is partly allowed. Let

the parties bear their own costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

E.A.G.R. Amarasekara, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Kumuduni Wickremasinghe, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court