IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of Article 128 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Hon. Attorney General, Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12. Complainant S.C. Appeal No.14/2019

SC/SPL/LA No. 125/2014 Court of Appeal Case No. C.A.95/2011 A.B.C. H.C. Avissawella No. 58/2006 Vs. 1. Singappuli Arachchilage Rumesh Sameera Dissanayake alias Gaminige Kolla

2. Baduwala Wahampurage Podinona,

3. Kalanchidewage Suresh Nandana

Accused

And

1. Singappuli Arachchilage Rumesh Sameera Dissanayake alias Gaminige Kolla

2. Baduwala Wahampurage Podinona,

3. Kalanchidewage Suresh Nandana

1st, 2nd, and 3rd Accused- Appellants

Vs.

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

2

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

ComplainantRespondent

AND NOW

Kalanchidewage Suresh Nandana

Presently at

Remond Prison Welikada,

Boralla, Colombo 08.

3rd Accused-Appellant-Appellant

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

ComplainantRespondent-Respondent

BEFORE : P. PADMAN SURASENA, J. ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J. MAHINDA SAMAYAWARDHENA, J. COUNSEL : Anil Silva P. C. with Amaan Bandara for the 3rd Accused-Appellant- Petitioner-Appellant Rohantha Abeysuriya P.C. A.S.G. for the Hon. Attorney General ARGUED ON : 21st January, 2022 DECIDED ON : 09th February,2024

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

3

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

The 3rd Accused-Appellant-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as

the Appellant) was indicted along with 1st and 2nd Accused-

Appellants-Petitioners (Petitioners of SC Spl. LA No. 126/2014 and

hereinafter referred to as the 1st and 2nd accused) before the High Court

of Avissawella for committing attempted murder on Thotapitiya

Arachchilage Kusumawathie and, in the course of same transaction,

committing murders of Hetti Arachchige Susantha and Hetti Arachchige

Swarna on or about 26.10.2003. All three accused elected a trial without

a Jury. After the ensuing trial, during which the Appellant as well as the

1st and 2nd accused made statements from the dock denying any

involvement with the offences to which they were accused of, the High

Court found three of them guilty on all counts contained in the

indictment.

In relation to the 1st count of attempted murder the High Court

imposed a term of 20-year Rigorous Imprisonment along with a fine of

Rs 50,000.00 on each of the accused, coupled with a default term of

imprisonment, whereas the Court imposed death sentence on them in

respect of the 2nd and 3rd counts.

All three accused have individually preferred appeals against the

Judgment of the High Court in appeal No. CA 95/2011 (A, B and C) and

the Court of Appeal by its consolidated Judgment dated 19.06.2014,

affirmed the convictions entered against them and along with the

sentences imposed by the High Court, before proceeding to dismiss

their appeals.

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

4

Thereupon, the Appellant had sought Special Leave to Appeal

from this Court against the said Judgment of the Court of Appeal.

When the said application for Special Leave bearing No. SC SPL. LA

No. 125/2014 was supported on 09.01.2019, this Court thought it fit to

grant Special Leave to Appeal on the questions of law, as set out in sub

paragraphs 12(b), 12(c) and 12(d) of his Petition dated 25.07.2014. The

joint application of the 1st and 2nd accused seeking Special Leave to

Appeal under application No. SC SPL LA No. 126/2014, against the

dismissal of their appeals by the Court of appeal too was taken up for

support on the same day but, they were unable to persuade this Court

to grant leave.

The three questions of law, on which special leave to appeal was

granted in relation to the impugned Judgment of the Court of Appeal,

are as follows;

(b) Did the Learned Judges of the Court of Appeal fail to

appreciate that the entirety of the evidence led at the trial in

the High Court do not justify the conviction of the

Appellant of the offences set out in 1st, 2nd, and 3rd charges

of the Indictment?

(c) Did the Learned Judges of the Court of Appeal fail to

appreciate the items of evidence in favour of the Appellant

which tends to negative his participation in the incidents

which culminated in causing hurt to Thotapitiya

Arachchilage Kusumawathie and causing the deaths of

Hettiarachchige Susantha and Hettiarachchige Swarna?

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

5

(d) Did the Learned Judges of the Court of Appeal misdirect

themselves in holding that the Appellants convictions in

respect of the murders of Hettiarachchige Susantha and

Hettiarachchige Swarna is correct inasmuch as there is no

direct or circumstantial evidence connecting the Appellant

with the said murders?

At the hearing of the appeal, the learned Presidents Counsel for

the Appellant, submitted that even if the testimony of the injured

Thotapitiya Arachchilage Kusumawathie is accepted as a whole and the

prosecution case is placed at its best, still there was insufficiency of

evidence, either in the form of direct or circumstantial evidence, in

order to justify drawing an irresistible and necessary inference as to his

guilt to the count of attempted murder. He further contended that the

prosecution had failed to establish that the Appellants participatory

presence to the attempted murder of Kusumawathie to the required

degree of proof. Similarly, the learned Presidents Counsel stressed on

the point that there was no evidence at all to establish that the

Appellant was even merely present when the two murders were

committed, and that factor had effectively negated justification of any

inference drawn by the Court on his complicity to the said murders.

Therefore, the learned Presidents Counsel contended that the appellate

Court had fallen into grave error in affirming the Appellants

convictions to the count of attempted murder as well as to the two

counts of murder.

Learned Additional Solicitor General resisted the appeal of the

Appellant and contended that the High Court as well as the Court of

Appeal were satisfied with the available evidence in direct and

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

6

circumstantial forms and thereby sought to justify the affirmation of the

conviction entered against the latter.

In view of the very nature of the legal principles that are

associated with the contention advanced by the learned Presidents

Counsel, which should be considered along with the issue of sufficiency

of evidence, it would be helpful if reference is made to the case that had

been presented before the trial Court by the prosecution. This would

facilitate the task of consideration of the contention advanced by the

Appellant, against the backdrop of the three questions of law in which

leave was granted.

The injured Kusumawathi is a married woman of 45 years at the

time of the incident who lived with her husband and their two children

Susantha and Swarna. She had another daughter who had settled

elsewhere after marriage. The 2nd accused is Kusumawathis husbands

half-sister. The 1st accused is the only son of the 2nd accused, who also

had a daughter. The 3rd Appellant was to marry the 2nd accuseds

daughter and was in the habit of regularly visiting the 2nd accuseds

house. Both these families lived on a commonly owned rectangular

piece of land in an extent of about an acre and had their houses built

on it. The two houses were only about ten feet apart and were facing a

pathway which commenced from the main road and leading up to a

stream called Gomala Oya. This pathway provided the only access to the

main road to both families. Kusumawathi did depend on Gomala Oya for

supply of water and, as such, had to regularly walk pass the 2nd

accuseds house.

Describing the incident, during which Kusumawathie had

sustained serious injuries to her head and her son and daughter were

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

7

killed, she testified that it happened on the evening of 26.10.2003. It was

a Sunday. She had returned home at about 4.15 in the afternoon from

Ratnapura Hospital after visiting her husband, who was receiving in-

house treatment for the past two weeks. Her 24-year-old son Susantha,

who was employed as a field officer in a Government Institution, had

left home in the morning to attend some official work and not returned

home by then. Daughter Swarna, a 22-year-old unmarried girl at the

time of her death, was reading for a diploma conducted by Kelaniya

University. She too had left in the morning and not returned home.

Kusumawathie, after returning from the hospital and after having

attended to some household chores, had gone to the stream and washed

her laundry and had left them there drying. At about 6.00 in the

evening she returned to the stream in a hurry, going past the accuseds

house, in order to bring back her clothes as a huge storm was brewing

this time.

On her way back she saw the 1st accused, who was now standing

in front of his house, approaching her with a sword in his hand. Upon

seeing him and sensing an impending danger, she had frozen where she

was. Kusumawathie had her laundry in one hand and, in the other, a

cake of soap. The 1st accused was not alone but was flanked by the 2nd

accused and the Appellant, who too had emerged from the doorway

following the 1st accused. The 2nd accused and the Appellant had clubs

in their hands.

The 1st accused, without making any utterance, had struck her

with the sword on her hand. She fell down when he struck her with his

sword for the second time. The 2nd accused had thereafter hit her with a

club. The Appellant too had attacked her with a club. It was a sustained

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

8

attack by all three of them and their attack concentrated on her head

and legs. After the attack, all the accused had dragged her up to the

stream and left her there. She did not see who it was as she was

dragged face down.

After about five minutes since the three attackers of Kusumawathie

left leaving her near the stream, she heard her daughter Swarna

repeatedly calling out wf. This was about 6.15 p.m. Due to multiple

injuries Kusumawathie already had suffered, she could not move or call

out for her daughter for help. At that point of time, the rain started. It

was a heavy downpour and she fainted where she was. When she

regained consciousness after some time, which she estimates to be

about one and half hours, she made an attempt to stand up. She could

not hold her head up due to injuries and started dragging herself along

the pathway towards her house, with the hope her son would have

returned home by then. Having reached in front of her house, she saw

the bookcase and the water bottle of her daughter lying in the front

garden of their house. After seeing some blood on their main door and

realising that her daughter too had been attacked, Kusumawathie had

then inched towards the main road and came across the body of her son

Susantha. It was lying on the pathway leading to their house. He had

fallen on his umbrella. She had eventually managed to reach the main

road and called out for help from one of her neighbours, Jayasinghe,

who lived in a house bordering main road.

According to Jayasinghe, after the heavy rain had eased off, he

heard a womans call of distress and, on enquiry, saw Kusumawathi

lying on the ground in front of his house with bleeding injuries on her

head. When questioned as to what happened, she had said .dKsf.

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

9

fld,a, .eyqj referring to the 1st accused. Jayasinghe had then asked one

Jayaratne to take the injured to hospital, however, the latter had fainted

after seeing the nature of injuries on Kusumawathies head. She was then

rushed to Eheliyagoda Hospital by one Premalal, where she was treated

initially, before being transferred to Colombo National Hospital for

specialised medical care.

The first information over the incident was received by

Eheliyagoda Police Station on the same day at 7.40 p.m. and SI Medawatta

who visited the crime scene observed a body of a male lying on a

pathway about a distance of five feet away from the main road and

about 20 meters away from the house of Kusumawathie. The deceased

was dressed in a shirt, a pair of trousers and shoes. There was an

umbrella underneath his body. Several deep cut injuries were noted by

the officer on the head of the deceased. This was the body of Susantha.

The body of his sister, Swarna, was discovered about nine meters away

towards their house and lying on an embankment of about 6 feet above

from the pathway. She was dressed in a blouse and a skirt. Her books

were strewn in the front garden and one of her shoes was found near

the house. She too had suffered several cut injuries to her head and face.

The Officer also noted several blood-like patches in the back garden of

the house. The 1st and 2nd accused were at their home. They were

arrested on the following day by the Police along with the Appellant.

The Police thereupon recovered a sword, upon being pointed out the

place by the 1st accused, where it was lying concealed in a shrub.

Post-mortem examination of Susanthas body revealed that he had

suffered multiple cut injuries to his head, inflicted by a heavy sharp

weapon like a sword. His death was due to an injury which had severed

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

10

several major blood vessels of the neck along with neck muscles and

caused damage to cervical vertebrae. That particular injury was

classified as a necessarily fatal injury by the expert witness. The

deceased also had defensive wounds on his arms. The death of Swarna

was also due to multiple necessarily fatal cut injuries to her head,

inflicted by a sharp heavy weapon, similar to a sword. She also had

several injuries which the medical officer, who testified on his autopsy

findings, had described as defensive injuries, in addition to several

abrasions which may have caused due to a fall.

The medical evidence presented by the prosecution also revealed

that Kusumawathie had lost her middle and ring fingers due to an attack

using a heavy sharp cutting weapon. She also had suffered a fracture of

her ulna, upon being hit by a blunt weapon, similar to a club. She also

had suffered multiple cut injuries to her head, which the Consultant

JMO, who examined her in the hospital after she was treated for those

injuries, expressed his opinion that they could have endangered her life.

Thus, it is not a surprise that the learned Presidents Counsel

opted to place reliance on the contention that there was no direct or

circumstantial evidence to conclude that the Appellant had participated

in the attack on Kusumwathie along with his other contention that the

available evidence only points to him being merely present during the

attack on Kusumawathie, although being armed with a club at the time of

causing injuries to the elderly woman by the other two. It is also clear

that the learned Presidents Counsel had heavily relied on the total

absence of any direct or circumstantial evidence, according to him

which even fail to suggest the Appellants mere presence, during the

attack on the two deceased.

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

11

In this context, it is also relevant to note that the prosecution

relied on Section 32 of the Penal Code, in order to impute criminal

liability vicariously on the 2nd accused and the Appellant, in view of the

fact that the main striker was the 1st accused, who used a sword to

repeatedly inflict serious cut injuries on all of his victims, in the course

of same transaction, resulting in causing life threatening injury to

Kusumawathie and necessarily fatal injuries to her two children.

Before I turn to consider the validity of the conviction of the

Appellant entered against him by the High Court and affirmed by the

Court of Appeal in relation to the second and third counts of murder, it

is convenient to consider the legality of his conviction to the count of

attempted murder, in this part of the judgment, particularly in view of

the fact that the prosecution presented an eyewitness account, in

support of that count.

Admittedly, the only source of direct evidence available to the

prosecution to establish the count of attempted murder was

Kusumawathie herself, who provided an eye-witness account to the

sequence of events that resulted in causing a life-threatening injury to

her. The trial Court as well as the appellate Court relied on her evidence

to sustain the convictions entered against the three accused. Hence, a

brief reference should be made on the issue of the testimonial

trustworthiness of that eyewitness before I proceed any further.

During her cross-examination, learned Counsel who represented

all three accused before the High Court, was unable to mark a single

contradiction or an omission against the testimony of Kusumawathie.

Learned Counsel only suggested to the injured that she was the

aggressor who harassed the 1st and 2nd accused and, at times, threatened

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

12

them with violence, over the dispute regarding the land. Continuing

with this line of questioning, the witness was also suggested by the

learned Counsel that prior to this incident she had chased after the 1st

accused, while being armed with a sword. Kusumawathie totally denied

occurrence of such an incident and consistently maintained her

position, that it was the 1st and 2nd accused who wanted her family out

of the land, on which they lived for a long period of time. However, the

issue was not probed beyond that particular suggestion.

Importantly there was no suggestion made to the witness to the

effect either that she had falsely implicated the 1st, 2nd accused, upon

being motivated by the animosity she had entertained against them.

Also, there was no suggestion made on behalf of the Appellant either

on the basis that she had falsely accused him because he was merely

associated with the household of the 1st and 2nd accused or at least that

he was never involved in the attack.

The trial Court considered these aspects in detail and, having

found that Kusumawathies evidence was corroborated by medical

evidence, decided to accept her evidence as a credible and truthful

account of the incident. In affirming the conviction of the two accused

and the Appellant to the count of attempted murder, the Court of

Appeal too was satisfied with the said conclusion reached by the trial

Court, as it found it safe to act on her evidence. I am in agreement with

the said decision of the Court of Appeal to treat Kusumawathies

evidence as truthful account. Understandably, learned Presidents

Counsel for the Appellant did not challenge that finding of fact. Hence,

his contention that even if one were to take her evidence its best, it

would only reveal that the Appellant was merely present at the scene

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

13

and nothing more, and thereby falling short of establishing he had a

participatory presence in the commission of attempted murder.

In these circumstances, her narration of the sequence of events

had to be taken as an uncontested account of an eyewitness, in relation

to the count of attempted murder and also provided several important

items of circumstantial evidence, in relation to the two counts of

murder.

Returning to the contention advanced before this Court by the

Appellant, it must be noted that the three counts contained in the

indictment had been presented to the High Court on the premise that

the three accused committed the several offences in the course of same

transaction, citing Section 32 of the Penal Code. With that citation, the

prosecution sought to impute vicarious criminal liability on each of the

three accused for criminal acts committed by any one of them, and

therefore each one of them was made liable for the attempted murder

and murders in the same manner as if it were done by each one of them

individually. As such, it was the burden of the prosecution to establish

beyond reasonable doubt that the three accused have acted in

furtherance of their common murderous intention, in the commission of

the offences they were charged with.

The collective wisdom, as found in multiple judicial precedents

that had been pronounced over the years by the superior Courts, in

which the applicable principles of law on Section 32 of the Penal Code

in the imputation of criminal liability on several accused, was

encapsulated by this Court in the Judgement of Indrawansa Kumarasiri

and Others v Kumarihamy, Chief Registrar Colombo and the Attorney

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

14

General (SC TAB Appeal No. 2 of 2012 decided on 02.04.2014), in the

following manner;

a. The case of each Accused must be considered separately;

b. The Accused must have been actuated by a common

intention with the doer of the act at the time the offence

was committed;

c. Common intention must not be confused with same or

similar intention entertained independently each other;

d. There must be evidence either direct or circumstantial, of

prearrangement or some other evidence of common

intention;

e. It must be noted that common intention can be formed on

the spur of the moment;

f. The mere fact of the presence of the accused at the time of

the offence is not necessarily evidence of common

intention;

g. The question whether a particular set of circumstances

establish that an accused person acted in furtherance of

common intention is always a question of fact;

h. The Prosecution case will not fail if the Prosecution fails to

establish the identity of the person who struck the fatal

blow provided common murderous intention can be

inferred.

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

15

i. The inference of common intention should not be reached

unless it is a necessary inference deducible from the

circumstances of the case.

The underlying principle of law contained in Section 32 of the

Penal Code, in imputing criminal liability on a person for the criminal

act of another, is evident from the words; accused must have been

actuated by a common intention with the doer of the act at the time the offence

was committed. Dr. Gour in his book Penal Law of India (11th Edition),

(at p. 314), states that in order to impute criminal liability under Section

34 of the Penal Code of India (which is the counterpart provision to our

Section 32) the essence of Section 34 is that the person must be physically

present at the actual commission of crime. This must be coupled with actual

participation. With the imposition of the requirement of the person, on

whom the liability under Section 32 is sought to be imputed, must be

present at the actual commission of crime, the principle of law quoted

above in (f) becomes relevant in view of the contention advanced by the

learned Presidents Counsel in relation to the count of attempted

murder. The said principle of law states mere fact of the presence of the

accused at the time of the offence is not necessarily evidence of common

intention.

Thus, the core contention of the Appellant, in impugning his

conviction for the offence of attempted murder, is that his mere

presence at the place of the incident, without any other evidence

indicating that he did take any active part in the attack on the injured

Kusumawathie, clearly insufficient for the trial Court to impute him with

any criminal liability under Section 32 of the Penal Code. Clearly this

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

16

contention is based on the pronouncement made by Basnayake CJ in the

case of The Queen v Vincent Fernando and two others (1963) 65 NLR

265, (at p. 272) that a person who merely shares the criminal intention or

takes a fiendish delight in what is happening but does no criminal act in

furtherance of the common intention of all is not liable for the acts of the

others.

In view of this pronouncement, if the Appellant were to be

afforded an exemption from criminal liability under Section 32, on

account of his mere presence at the crime scene, the evidence must

indicate that he did not do any criminal act in furtherance of the common

intention of all. If the words of Basnayake CJ, as appear in the quoted

segment of the judgment of the Court of Criminal Appeal, taken in

isolation ignoring the rest of his Lordships reasoning, then it could lead

to a mistaken notion that the act or acts that are attributed to the

accused, on whom criminal liability sought to be imposed under Section

32, should be done along with or at the same time, with the act or acts of

the other accused that had resulted in the commission of that particular

offence. If this notion is accepted as a correct principle of law in relation

to imposition of criminal liability under Section 32, then the timing of

the act or acts attributed to the accused becomes material as it is the

contention of the Appellant that he was merely present, when the

others attacked and caused injuries to Kusumawathie. This contention

seems to indicate that he placed reliance on the factual position that

during the time period within which the said attack was carried out by

the others, there was no evidence at all to indicate that he did anything

to injure the woman.

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

17

In the same Judgment, Basnayake CJ effectively negates validity of

such a notion. His Lordship stated (at p. 272) By virtue of the definition of

act in Section 31 of the Penal Code the application of the Section also extends

to a series of criminal acts done by several persons in furtherance of

the common intention of all. There are more cases which fall within the

extended application than within the un-extended. Thereupon, his

Lordships further stated thus; where a series of criminal acts is done by

several persons, each act would be done either jointly or severally. But whether

the criminal acts in the series of criminal acts are done jointly or severally if

each criminal act is done in furtherance of the common intention of all each of

the persons sharing the common intention and doing any act in the series of

criminal acts is not only liable for his own act but is also liable for the acts of

the others in the same manner as if it were done by him alone.

More importantly, having referred to the often-quoted words of

Lord Sumner in the Privy council judgment of Barendra Kumar Gosh v.

Emperor (1925) A. I. R. Privy Council (at p. 1), that they also serve who

only stand and wait, Basnayake CJ offered an important clarification to

that statement by stressing the point that the words of Lord Sumner has

to be regarded as applying not to a bystander who merely shares

mentally the criminal intention of the others but to a person whose act of

standing and waiting is itself a criminal act in a series of criminal acts done in

furtherance of the common intention of all.

The Appellant, however, does not claim that he was present there

as a mere bystander and simply watched the proceedings. Neither did

he claim that he merely shares the criminal intention and did nothing in

furtherance of the common intention of all nor derived a fiendishly delight

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

18

from the criminal act of the others. In his statement from the dock, the

Appellant only pleaded that he had no knowledge of the incident.

While the judgement of The Queen v Vincent Fernando and two

others (supra) speaks of an accused, who, by way of an act or a series of

criminal acts done in furtherance of the common intention of all

persons, each sharing a common intention with the others and doing

any act in that series of criminal acts is not only made liable for his own

individual act but also made liable for the acts of the others in the same

manner as if it were done by him alone, the Privy Council judgment of

Mahbub Shah v Emperor AIR (32) 1945 Privy Council 118, Nair J

stated that common intention within the meaning of the Section implies a

pre-arranged plan, and to convict the accused of an offence applying the

Section it should be proved that the criminal act was done in concert pursuant

to a pre-arranged plan.

This principle of law was referred to in the case of The King v

Asappu et al (1948) 50 NLR 324, (at p.329) by Dias J and restated the

underlying principle as follows;

in order to justify the inference that a particular prisoner was

actuated by a common intention with the doer of the act, there must be

evidence, direct or circumstantial, either of pre-arrangement, or a pre-

arranged plan, or a declaration showing common intention, or some

other significant fact at the time of the commission of the offence, to

enable them to say that a co-accused had a common intention with the

doer of the act, and not merely a same or similar intention entertained

independently of each other.

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

19

Thus, the requirement considered by the Privy Council, for the

purpose of imposition of criminal liability on an accused under Section

32 in relation to the said appeal, was the presence of a pre-arranged

plan. The requirement of evidence as to a pre-arranged plan, as

considered in the judgment of Mahbub Shah v Emperor (supra), was

further expanded by the judgment of The King v Asappu et al (supra),

with the pronouncement that a Court could infer existence of common

intention on evidence as to pre-arrangement, or a pre-arranged plan, or

a declaration showing common intention. The Court also highlighted yet

another factor in the said judgment, when it stated that in order to

establish criminal liability under Section 32 a Court could also infer

existence of common intention in an accused based on some other

significant fact at the time of the commission of offence.

In this context, I think it is important to highlight another

important aspect in this regard. The prefix pre is generally taken to

connote an event that had occurred prior to, in relation to another event

that had followed the first event. Similarly, when that prefix appears in

the phrase pre-arranged plan, it also gives an impression to a general

reader what that particular phrase might mean is that the arrangement

to commit the offence was agreed upon by the accused must have taken

place well in advance to the time of actual commission of the offence.

However, Basnayake CJ, in the judgment of The Queen v Mahatun and

another (1959) 61 NLR 540, clarified that ambiguity by making the

authoritative pronouncement (at p. 546) that to establish the existence of a

common intention it is not essential to prove that the criminal act was done in

concert pursuant to a pre- arranged plan. A common intention can come into

existence without pre-arrangement. It can be formed on the spur of the

moment. To hold that common intention within the meaning of the Section 32

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

20

necessarily implies a pre-arranged plan would unduly restrict the scope of the

Section and introduce an element which it has not.

Thus, in a given time scale, which has its starting point placed at

the occurrence of the meeting of the accused in their physical form and

its terminal point set at the time of the actual commission of the offence,

the event of common meeting of minds in the form of a pre-arranged

plan or pre-arrangement could occur at any point of time between the

said two points within that time scale, either spontaneously and

alongside with the commission of the offence, or prior to the actual

commission of the crime, and thereby making it indeed a pre-arranged

plan.

It is noted earlier on, in relation to the count of attempted

murder, that the prosecution presented an eyewitness, who in turn had

provided direct evidence regarding details of the violent attack that had

been unleashed upon her, by the three accused. In Wasalamuni Richard

v The State (1973) 76 NLR 534 at p. 549, HNG Fernando CJ made the

following observation after considering a long line of judicial

precedents; In Ceylon the principle in Mahbub Shah's case has been applied

in cases of direct evidence. Invariably in such cases the material question is

whether or not there was evidence of a pre-arranged plan among the assailants,

where the facts disclose that the assailants set upon their victim and assaulted

him in pursuance of which he was injured or received fatal injuries.

Since the count of attempted murder is based on direct evidence,

it is necessary to test the validity of reasoning adopted by the High

Court in order to convict him to that count, as well as the reasoning of

the appellate Court, adopted in the affirmation of that conviction,

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

21

against the backdrop of the legal principles that are referred to in the

preceding paragraphs.

The trial Court, in its consideration of the evidence had observed

that the injured Kusumawathie could not recall exactly what the

Appellant did to her during the attack. The Court also noted that,

despite her inability to recall a specific act of the Appellant during the

attack, she had, however, implicated all three of the accused for

mounting an attack on her. She was not challenged by the Appellant for

the role attributed for him in the attack. The question as to what

particularly the Appellant did during the attack was answered by the

injured by stating that I cannot recall, all three came and attacked ( u;l

keye, ;=ka fokdu wdjd, .eyqjd). She distinctly remembered that the Appellant

had a club in his hand and also asserted that she was struck with clubs

multiple times. The trial Court was satisfied that the Appellant had

attacked the injured woman along with the other two and had

thereafter got involved with them in carrying Kusumawathie up to the

stream. Therefore, the Court concluded that the Appellant shared a

common intention with the other accused, in relation to the attack on

Kusumawathie, during which the injured woman sustained an injury

may have been caused her death in the ordinary course of nature. This

conclusion was reached by the trial Court after satisfying itself that it is

the necessary inference that could be drawn after consideration of the

material placed before it. The Court of Appeal too, in affirming the said

conviction after undertaking a detailed analysis of the evidence, also

was of the view that the material placed before the trial Court is totally

consistent with the guilt of the accused and proves and establish circumstances

which guilt safely confirm of all three accused.

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

22

If there was material to reasonably conclude that the three

accused, including the Appellant, had acted in furtherance of a common

intention of all, in launching the attack on Kusumawathie, not merely to

hurt her, but to cause her death or such bodily injuries as were likely to

cause her death, and that they did so by carrying out a pre-arranged

plan, then there is no question as to the validity of imposition of

vicarious criminal liability on the Appellant, for the commission of the

offence of attempted murder, despite the fact the injury that had

endangered her was inflicted by the 1st accused and the Appellant was

merely there, with a club in his hand.

It is significant to note when Kusumawathie made a general

accusation against the Appellant, that he, along with the others, had

attacked her and there was no challenge made by him on that specific

accusation. Thus, her claim that the Appellant too had attacked her,

despite the fact that it remains bereft of any specific details of the

manner in which that attack was carried out, supported the prosecution

case, and thereby enabling the trial Court to answer the question;

whether the material presented before it is indicative of a pre-arranged

plan in the affirmative, which in turn established the common intention

entertained by each of the accused.

The trial Court had made a reference to this aspect of a pre-

arranged plan as it related the evidence indicating a strong motive

entertained by the 1st and 2nd accused in order to secure the land only to

themselves. It had therefore inferred that the only obstacle that

prevented them achieving that objective was the continued occupation

of the land by Kusumawathies family and the accused made an attempt

to remove that obstacle by mounting the said attack on her family. In

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

23

the circumstances, it is helpful if the gist of her evidence touching on

this particular aspect is referred here in more detail, although I have

already devoted some space earlier on this Judgment in reproducing

her evidence.

The injured was attacked by the three accused, when she was

returning from the stream in a hurry after collecting her laundry. She

had already gone past the house of the 2nd accused to do her laundry

and returned home. This was the second time she had gone past that

house in that afternoon to the stream. On her hurried return, before the

onset of the heavy downpour, she came to pass the entrance to the 2nd

accuseds house. Then only the 1st accused emerged out from the house

with a sword in his hand and was flanked by the 2nd accused and the

Appellant, each carrying clubs. The 1st accused struck Kusumawathie

with his sword once on her right hand, severing her middle and ring

fingers and when he struck for the second time, she fell down. The 2nd

accused then struck her with a club and the attack by the accused, using

the sword and clubs, continued for some time. Thereafter she was

dragged down to the stream and dumped there. None of the accused

ever uttered a single word in the entirety of the whole sequence of

events.

The above narration does not speak of any recent act by which

the pre-existing animosity between the two families over the possessory

rights of the land was rekindled. The suggestion that Kusumawathie had

made an attempt to attack the 1st accused with a sword was merely for

the purpose of negating her assertion that the aggressor was the 1st

accused. The Learned Counsel did not connect that suggestion to the

incident during which Kusumawathie sustained serious injuries. The

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

24

denial of the witness of this suggestion was not probed any further and

there was no evidence elicited by the Appellant to substantiate that

suggestion. In the circumstances, what transpires from the available

evidence is that there was no recent incident that triggered the violent

attack on Kusumawathie and her children.

In fact, there could not have been any spare time for

Kusumawathie during her short stay at home on that day to allowing her

to challenge the 1st and 2nd accused as her husband was receiving

inhouse treatment at a hospital for the past two weeks and she was

busy with the tasks of managing the house, preparing and taking meals

to her sick husband whilst attending to the needs of her children. There

was no indication of an imminent threat of violence that would be

unleashed anytime soon on any member of her family, as the mother

and the two siblings have attended to their regular activities, as if there

was absolute peace that exists between the 1st or 2nd accused, despite the

continuing resentment over the land.

Even on the day of the incident, the evidence is that Kusumawathie

had returned from hospital only in the mid-afternoon and was

thereafter busy with her daily household chores since then. There was

no indication to Kusumawathie of any acts of animosity directed towards

her by any of the accused on that particular day. Her actions clearly

indicate that she did not anticipate any of the events that had taken

place in that very evening. She had once gone past the accuseds house

to do her laundry without an incident. She then returned home to

prepare dinner for her children who are expected to return anytime that

evening itself. Then for the third time too, she had gone past the

accused house, that time in a hurry, in order to pick her laundry up

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

25

before the onset of rain. None of the accused were seen in the open at

that point of time. Only on her return journey for the third time, the first

sign of trouble emerged as she was prevented proceeding any further

by the three accused, who had come out of their house, and formed a

human barricade blocking the pathway. Upon seeing that the 1st

accused was armed with a sword while the 2nd accused and the

Appellant had clubs, Kusumawathie immediately realised that she was in

mortal danger. After her fall due to the sustained attack, the accused,

probably due to her appearance with the bleeding injuries to her head

and showing no signs of life, had taken her to be dead and thereafter

brought her down to the stream to be left there.

This sequence clearly indicative of the fact that the three attackers

were waiting patiently until Kusumawathie returned from the stream for

the second time to mount their surprise attack on her. The fact that the

1st accused suddenly emerged out of his door armed with a sword,

being flanked by the 2nd accused and the Appellant with clubs, is

indicative that they have timed well to launch their attack and were

determined to carry out a decisive attack on the unsuspecting woman.

As already noted, this attack was not due to any provocative act done

on the part of the injured, by which she had re-ignited the animosity

that had subsided for some time. It is also not an instance where the

victim was attacked by the attackers during an incident that erupted

spontaneously and acting under the heat of passion using whatever

they could lay their hand on or had picked up from their surroundings

to be used in the attack. The three attackers were already armed with a

sword and clubs, when they emerged from the front door of their

house.

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

26

One striking feature that could be observed from these

circumstances is that no one of the trio had issued any directions or

commands on the other two members as the attack proceeded on and,

each of them, by their conduct indicated that they knew exactly what

each of them were supposed to do individually. After the attack and

while the injured woman lay motionless, the accused knew the next

step is that she should be carried away to the exact place, where she

was eventually taken. The task of carrying Kusumawathie down to the

stream, obviously an unusual course of action by any standard, was

carried out by them without any instructions issued by the 1st accused,

who spearheaded the attack.

The only probable reason for the accused to adopt such a strange

move would have been to erase any indication of violent attack on

Kusumawathie, from the pathway as her children were due to return

home at any moment in that evening. It was essential for the attackers

not to leave any room for suspicion, so that they could have an edge

over the unsuspecting victims Swarna and Susantha, by mounting

similar surprise attacks on them, when they were least prepared. What

is important to note here is, not particularly the reason why they took

her there, but the fact that the decision to carry Kusumawathie down to

the stream was not taken at the place and time where she was attacked.

The act of carrying her down to the stream had been a result of an act of

prior understanding reached between the three attackers. It obviously

would have been reached even before the actual attack was launched,

and its timing shifts to a point even prior to their emergence from the

doorway, as Kusumawathie walked back from the stream. In this regard,

the fact that the washed clothing and the cake of soap which

Kusumawathie had in her hands at the time of her attack, that should be

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

27

lying at the place of attack, had disappeared from the scene is a very

relevant and significant factor indicative of the degree of preparedness.

The attack on the injured was carried out by all three accused,

whilst maintaining a stoical silence in its entire duration, and therefore

the intentions entertained by each of them at that point of time had to

be inferred from the available items of evidence and also of any

inferences that could reasonably be drawn from those items of

evidence.

It was observed by the Privy Council in Mahbub Shah v Emperor

(supra - at p. 120) in fulfilling its task of consideration of the evidence,

the Court must bear in mind that it is difficult if not impossible to

procure direct evidence to prove the intention of an individual; in most cases, it

has to be inferred from his act or conduct or other relevant circumstances of the

case. In the Judgment of Sirisena and six others v The Queen (1969) 72

NLR 389, the Court of Criminal Appeal quoted the Judgment of the

Supreme Court of India in Afrahim Sheik v. The State of West Bengal 3

A. I. R. 1964 S.C. 1263 at 1268, which stated; A person does not do an act

except with a certain intention ; and the common intention which is requisite

for the application of S. 34 is the common intention of perpetrating a particular

act. Previous concert which is insisted upon is the meeting of the minds

regarding the achievement of the criminal act and Section 34 then makes the

responsibility several if there was a knowledge possessed by each of them that

death was caused as a result of the beating.

The Court of Criminal Appeal observed in Regina v Somapala et

al (1956) 57 NLR 350 (at p. 353), the that the word act, as found in

Section 32 of the Penal Code, have been authoritatively explained

quoting Lord Sumner in Barendra Kumar Ghosh v Emperor (supra)

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

28

the whole action covered by the unity of criminal behaviour which results in

something for which an individual would be punished if it were all done by him

alone ", and liability is imputed to each individual socius criminis not merely

for his own acts but for the totality of the acts committed by his confederates in

furtherance of their common intention. Vicarious or collective responsibility

attaches in such a situation for the result (e.g., death) of their united action.

But S. 32 certainly does not, in addition, constructively impute to one socius

criminis the guilty knowledge of another. In order to decide whether an accused

person, to whom liability is imputed for another person's criminal acts has

committed an offence involving guilty knowledge, the test is whether such

guilty knowledge has been established against him individually by the

evidence.

The factors referred to in the previous paragraph makes it very

clear that there was indeed a pre-arranged plan, that had agreed upon

between the three accused for the purpose of causing death of

Kusumawathie or to cause her an injury that would be sufficient to cause

death in the ordinary course of nature, with which the three accused

had agreed upon before launching their attack on her.

In relation to the manner of the attack on Kusumawathie, the fact

that all three emerged from their door already armed with a sword and

clubs and that too when only the injured had reached their house, are

all indications of prior planning. Neither the Appellant nor the 2nd

accused had to think on their feet to align their individual actions to

coincide with that of the 1st accused, who acted as the main striker

during the entire episode. The three accused knew exactly what each

one of them was supposed to do with passing of each phase of the

attack. This factor becomes explicit when one takes the sequence of

events that took place after Kusumawathie, being repeatedly struck on

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

29

her head by the 1st accused with a sword coupled with repeated club

blows aimed at her by the other two, had collapsed in the same spot

and was lying motionless. The accused took that as an indicator that she

had died. It was the 1st accused who inflicted the injury that could be

termed as a fatal in the ordinary course of nature.

However, none of the remaining partners to the attack neither

expressed their dismay or remorse for the fate of the victim, indicating

the actions of the 1st accused had far exceeded what they had

anticipated for. It is a factor that gives rise to an inference what they

saw was what exactly they wanted to see. They executed the said pre-

arranged plan to a total completion by mounting a violent surprise

attack on Kusumawathie, resulting in an injury that would be sufficient

to cause her death in the ordinary course of nature, and finally

disposing of their victim, under the mistaken belief that she was dead.

There is no material which might point to any other innocent

hypothesis in favour of the Appellant either from the prosecution

evidence or from his own evidence, which confined to a pleading

ignorance of the attack, taken up at the last minute, and was rightly

rejected by the trial Court. Thus, all these factors point to the irresistible

conclusion that when the Appellant did emerge through that doorway,

being armed with a club and alongside the 1st accused and 2nd accused,

to obstruct Kusumawathie who was merely returning home with

laundry, he had entertained a common murderous intention shared

with them to cause her death or to cause such bodily injuries as were

sufficient to cause her death.

The Court of Criminal Appeal, in its judgment of The King v

Piyadasa et al (1947) 48 NLR 295 (at p.297), followed the reasoning of

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

30

Howard CJ in the judgment of King v. Herashamy (1946) 47 N. L. R. 83,

in which it was held that (at p.89), to convict all of the accused of the

offence of attempted murder each one of them at the time of the assault was

actuated by a common intention not only to beat but also to cause his death or

such bodily injuries as were sufficient to cause his death. In the instant

appeal, the High Court was convinced that the evidence presented by

the prosecution satisfied these requirements and the offence of

attempted murder was complete and the Court of Appeal concurred

with that conclusion. These two conclusions reached by the Courts

below, which I find to be correct in both law and in fact as they were

reached after taking into consideration of the circumstances referred to

above in its totality. Hence, even if this Court were to accept the

contention of the learned Presidents Counsel that, in the absence of any

specific act attributed to him during the attack, other than being merely

present with a club in his hand, as opposed to confirming his

participatory presence, that fact alone does not suffice to absolve him of

the criminal liability for the attempted murder of Kusumawathie

vicariously, because the evidence clearly point to a necessary inference

that there was indeed a pre-arranged plan to which he too was a party

and therefore his presence at the commission of that offence could be

taken a participatory presence.

A similar approach was taken by the Court of Criminal Appeal in

The King v Marthino et al (1941) 43 NLR 521, where several employees

of one bus Company had mounted an attack on the employees of a rival

Company, over transporting passengers between Matale and

Anuradhapura. The appellants are the employees of one company, who

had caused the bus of the rival company to stop in front of their garage

by obstructing the road with several of their own buses and then

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

31

launching an attack on the driver and conductor of the other Company

and another person, who was travelling in that bus and injuring them.

During the appeal, in challenging the conviction by the Jury,

particularly on the 9th accused, it was contended that the evidence

indicated that he had not taken part in the attack on the employees of

the rival company but was waiting lawfully at a halting place and

therefore he did not entertain common intention with the other

attackers. De Krester J rejected that contention after considering the

propriety of him being there at the bus halt. His Lordship stated;

That may be so if he is taken apart in that way. But once all the

other circumstances point to a plan of attack it is difficult to believe that

he alone of the Mant Bus Co. was ignorant of the plan or disapproved of

it. The conductor of his bus and the runner were both accused. He gave

no evidence explaining how he happened to be there or that he was

unaware of any plan and in the circumstances of this case, he should

have given evidence if he had anything to say for himself.

Having dealt with the sustainability of the conviction that had

been entered against the Appellant on the count of attempted murder

by the High Court and its affirmation by the Court of Appeal in the

preceding paragraphs, I shall now turn to consider the validity of the

conviction entered by the trial Court in respect of the remaining two

counts, i.e., the murders of Swarna and Susantha.

The available evidence against the Appellant in relation to these

two counts, as correctly pointed out by the learned Presidents Counsel,

are necessarily of circumstantial in nature. Therefore, I agree with the

learned Presidents Counsel on the point, that the question whether the

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

32

Appellant had a participatory presence with shared common intention

to commit the two murders with the others at the time of its

commission, will have to be decided upon consideration of the totality

of the available items of circumstantial evidence, although, in relation to

the count of attempted murder the prosecution presented an eyewitness

account.

The primary contention of the learned Presidents Counsel in

respect of the convictions for murders is, by affirmation of the

conviction of the Appellant on them, the Court of Appeal had fallen

into grave error as it failed to hold that the items of circumstantial

evidence presented by the prosecution in respect of the said two counts

are wholly inadequate even to infer his mere presence at the crime

scene and therefore incapable of offering any justification to the

drawing of an inference of guilt, which should be the necessary and

inescapable inference under the circumstances.

In view of the said contention advanced by the Appellant in

challenging the validity of his conviction to the two counts of murder, it

is incumbent upon this Court to assess that contention both in its legal

and factual aspects, in relation to the questions of law that had been

formulated and accepted by this Court. Therefore, as the first step, I

intend to examine the basis on which the trial Court found the

Appellant guilty to the two counts of murder, which would be followed

by an examination of the approach adopted by the Court of Appeal, in

affirming the said conclusion reached by the original Court.

The trial Court, in its 50-page Judgment summarised its process

of reasoning and the conclusion reached on the evidence presented

before it in the following manner (at page 45 of the Judgment);

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

33

fuu bvu ;=, mosxj isk wksla tlu mdYjh pQos; mdYjhhs' kd

5 la jk fl ld,hloS oshKshg myroSula is lsrSug pQos;hka yer

fjk;a mqoa.,fhla tu ia:dkhg meKshdhs is;Su W.ygh' ukaoh;a

meKs,slrejka bvfuka bj;a lsrSf f;kdj ;snqfKao pQos;hka ygh'

fuu wmrdO ia:dkh inkaOfhka i<ld ne,Sfos fuh mqoa.,sl bvula

jk w;r" ;=jd,ldrshg pQos;hka myr kafkao orejka fofokdf.a uD;

YrSrhka fidhd.kq ,enqfo wdikak ld,hla ;=, tlu bvul msys

wdikak ia:dk j,oSh' ta wkqj uq,a wmrdOh tk ;=jd,ldrshg myroSfuka

miq ;=jd,ldrshf.a oshKsh iy mq;df.a urKhka fol;a is we;af;a

tlu ia:dkfha h' tk" ;=jd,ldrsh iy 1" 2 pqos;hka mosx bvu ;=,h'

Bg wu;rj urKlrejka fofokdf.a foayhka ;snqfKao tlu ia:dkfha jk

neka" tlu mqoa.,hka iska fuu wmrdO ;=ku is l, njg idOdrK

wkq;shlg t,f yelshdj we;'

It is clear from the above quoted paragraph, that the trial Court

was of the considered view that it could reasonably draw an inference

that the three offences were committed by the same set of persons, who

attacked Kusumaswathie and they committed the two murders, in the

course of same transaction, as the prosecution alleged in the indictment.

In page 46, The trial Court re-iterated its conclusion already reached by

stating (at p.46) Bg wu;rj ;=jd,ldrshf.a iy urKlrejka f.a ;=jd, msysgd

we;af;a ysfia iy fow;aj,h' bka udrdka;sl ;=jd, is lr we;af;a ish fokdf.au ysi

m%foaYfha uo iqfYaIs lreKls' ta wkqj tlu f;kdjlska iy tlu wdldrfha

wdhqOhlska" tlu wdldrfha wmrdO ls%hdjka is lsrSug tlu mqoa.,hka u.ska me' id' 1

;=jd,ldrsh iy urKlrejka fofokd ygu ;=jd, is we;s nj meyeos,sju fmkS hhs'

Then the trial Court referred to an inference it had drawn in

stating (at p. 46) that f wkqj ishu idlaIs tlaj i,ldn,k l, tk iudk

wdldrfha ;=jd, tlu ia:dkhlg ^ysig& tlu wdldrfha wdhqOhlska ;=jd, is lsrSu fuu

pQos;hka i fjk;a lsisjl= u.ska is h fkdyels njg idOdrK wkq;shlg t,f

yelshdj we;s nj ks.ukh lr and excluded the probability of a third party

committing the two murders, as it states (at p. 48) by; i|yka ishu

lreKq iy idlaIs i<ld ne,SfoS fuu wfp`okd m;%fha 1" 2" 3 fp`okdjkaf.ka oelafjk

wmrdOhka is lr we;af;a fuu pQos;hka ;sfokd i fjk;a wfhl= iska fkdjk njg jk

wkq;sh i fjk;a wkq;shlg t<ug yelshdjla fkdue;s nj ;SrKh lr

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

34

It is evident from the nature of injuries suffered by both the

deceased, that their deaths were due to the seriousness of multiple cut

injuries that had been inflicted on them. These injuries were inflicted

with repeated attacks on their heads using a heavy sharp cutting

weapon similar to a sword. Each of the deceased suffered at least one

necessarily fatal injury to their heads which resulted in instantaneous

death. The evidence indicates it was the 1st accused, who used a sword

in the initial attack on Kusumawathie, while the 2nd accused as well as

the Appellant had clubs in their hands.

The trial Court had thereafter taken note of the time interval of

mere five minutes between the attack on Kusumawathie and the attack

on Swarna along with the fact that the three offences were committed

within the confines of the same compound and in close proximity to

each other. The Court was satisfied that the possibility of a third-party

involvement in the two murders was highly unlikely, owing to these

factors. The Court also considered the uncontradicted evidence of

Kusumawathi, that the 1st and 2nd accused had entertained a strong

motive against her family, and there was no material even to suggest

that there were others, who similarly entertained such motives, strong

enough to launch such an attack against the three victims. The trial

Court was of the view this is the factor that reduced the likelihood of a

third-party intervention in the commission of the three offences to a

mere possibility.

In addition, the segments that are reproduced from the Judgment

of the trial Court in the preceding Section of this Judgment also indicate

that, in arriving at the final conclusion as to the guilt of the Appellant

and his co-accused on the two counts of murder, the trial Court

concluded that they did commit the said two offences in the course of

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

35

same transaction that commenced with the commission of the offence of

attempted murder on Kusumawathie.

The approach that had been adopted by the trial Court could be

attributable to the reason that there was no direct evidence available to

arrive at a finding that the Appellant had participated in the

commission of two murders with a shared common intention with the

others. The prosecution sought to fill this factual gap in its case by

placing reliance on the several items of circumstantial evidence and

inviting the trial Court to draw an inference of guilt against the

Appellant.

The trial Court, being mindful of the requirement to satisfy itself

as to the necessity of drawing an inference of guilt, if it is the

inescapable and necessary inference under the given set of

circumstances. The trial Court, in order to exclude any reasonable

hypothesis as to his innocence and to reach the conclusion that the

items of evidence before Court are sufficient to impute criminal liability

under Section 32 on the Appellant for the two counts of murder, had

acted on the unchallenged evidence of Kusumawathie as well as the

evidence of other witnesses along with the opinions of experts.

The conclusion reached by the trial Court, that the two murders

were committed by the same three accused and those offences were

committed within the course of same transaction, which commenced

with the commission of attempted murder, is in turn based on several

inferences drawn on the combined effect of its consideration of direct

evidence, the several items of circumstantial evidence, the

presumptions of fact and the inferences the Court had drawn on them.

The Court of Appeal too, in its part, concurred with the approach of the

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

36

trial Court in drawing such presumptions of fact and inferences, when

it affirmed the finding of guilt entered against the Appellant by the

original Court.

In determining the appeal preferred by the Appellant, where he

advanced the identical contention that had been placed before this

Court, the Court of Appeal held that the material placed before the trial

Court is totally consistent with the guilt of the accused and proves and

establish circumstances which guilt safely confirm all three accused. Then the

Court added that the circumstantial evidence which surface from the

testimony of the main witness, taken its entirety and collectively establish the

guilt of all the Accused on the murder charge as well and, highlighted its

approval of the conclusion referred to in page 48 of the Judgment of the

High Court, by making a direct reference to same. In addition, the

appellate Court also observed that the items of direct evidence taken

collectively fortify circumstantial evidence to establish the two counts of

murder.

Thus, the concurrence of the Court of Appeal with the conclusion

reached by the trial Court by approving the manner in which the

original Court considered the circumstantial evidence, the facts in issue

it had presumed and the inferences drawn on them. When the trial

Court concluded that it was the same three accused who committed

attempted murder were also responsible for the two murders as well, it

had obviously excluded the proposition that the Appellant had simply

walked away from the scene after committing attempted murder, as the

learned Presidents Counsel surmised during his submissions before

this Court, and instead concluded that he was present with the other

two accused, when Swarna and Susantha were killed. In other words, in

order to conclude that the two murders were committed by the same

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

37

three accused who committed the attempted murder, the trial Court

had acted on the presumption of fact that after the attack on

Kusumawathie, same three accused were present when Swarna was

attacked and continued to be present when Susantha was attacked as

well. In effect, the appellate Court had approved the several inferences

drawn by the trial Court, which in turn acted on presumptions of fact

that the persons who were present at the time of committing attempted

murder were present at the time of committing the two murders as

well.

I intend to revisit this finding of the trial Court, that the two

murders were committed during the course of same transaction that

began with committing attempted murder, further down in this

Judgment, where the consideration of the said finding in yet another

perspective. But at this point of time, I shall confine myself only to one

particular factor, namely the trial Courts decision to act on the

presumptions of fact it had drawn upon evidence and drawing

inferences on them.

In these circumstances, it is necessary to devote some space in

this Judgment considering the legal validity of such presumptions of

fact and, in the same process, must also examine whether the trial Court

had acted within the its legally permissible limits, in presuming

existence of certain facts in issue, for this aspect will undoubtedly have

a direct bearing on the legality of the guilt of the Appellant to the two

counts of murder.

In relation to the two counts of murder, the prosecution

presented a case based on circumstantial evidence. Coomaraswamy,

(supra) states (p. 17 of Vol. I) in contrast with direct evidence,

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

38

circumstantial evidence is where any fact from which a fact in dispute

may be inferred. He then adds ( ibid) , [I]n criminal law, it would mean

evidence as to the existence of all collateral facts and circumstances from which

the commission of an offence by the accused can reasonably be inferred. The

judgment of Chakuna Orang v. State of Assam (1981) Cri. L. J. 166, by

Lahiri J, also compared a case based on direct evidence with a one based

on circumstantial evidence, whilst specifically highlighting the

underlying principle on which the Courts have acted on such situations.

His Lordship states that circumstantial evidence ordinarily

means a fact from which some other fact is inferred, whereas, direct evidence

means testimony given by a person as to what he has himself perceived by his

own senses and therefore the evidence which proves or tends to prove

the factum probandum indirectly, by means of certain inferences or deduction

to be drawn from its existence and its connection with other 'facta probantia'

. This Judgment of the Indian Supreme Court was cited by this

Court in Rajapakse and Others v AG (2010) 2 Sri L.R. 113.

In this context, as already noted above, the contention advanced

by the learned Presidents Counsel that the items of circumstantial

evidence, as adduced by the prosecution, are insufficient to draw an

inference that the Appellant was even present at the places where the

two murders were committed. He therefore seeks to challenge the

validity of the determination of the trial Court as to his participatory

presence, which essentially is a question of fact, based on the inferences

drawn from several items of circumstantial evidence. In effect, this

contention is based on highlighting a significant gap found in the

narration of events presented by the prosecution as to what the

Appellant did after Kusumawathie was dumped by the stream. Whether

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

39

the Appellant did continue with others to the place where the murders

were committed, in order to participate in the attacks or whether he had

simply withdrawn from the company of the other two accused after the

attack on Kusumawathie by allowing them to proceed to the next phase

of the attack by simply walking away from them, as the learned

Presidents Counsel contended.

There was no direct evidence presented by the prosecution

pointing to either of these possibilities. There was no explanation

forthcoming from the Appellant either, despite the strong prima facie

case against him in relation to the count of attempted murder nor did

he even suggest that position to the injured. In my view, considering the

totality of the evidence presented by the prosecution in this particular

instance, the said factual gap that exists in the prosecution case in

relation to the presence of the Appellant where the two murders were

committed, as pointed out by the learned Presidents Counsel, need not

necessarily be filled out by means of direct evidence. The prosecution,

as alleged in the indictment, sought to fill this gap in its case by

presenting evidence seeking to establish that the three offences were

committed by the same three accused, and they did so during the

course of same transaction.

This situation, that resulted in due to a factual gap in a narrative,

was aptly described by the then Chairman, Law Commission of India,

Justice Mathew, in his report on proposed law reforms dealing with

Dowry Deaths, dated 10.08.1983. This report was referred to by the

Supreme Court of India, in its judgment of State of West Bengal v Mir

Mohammad Omar & Others (2000) 8 SCC 382 and reproduced a certain

part therein. Relevant part of Justice Mathews statement (at paragraph

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

40

1.4 of the said report) in relation to the situation under discussion is as

follows;

Speaking of the law of evidence, it may be mentioned that one of

the devices by which the law usually tries to bridge the gulf

between one fact and another, where the gulf is so wide that it

cannot be crossed with the help of the normal rules of evidence, is

the device of inserting presumptions.

In the circumstances, this Court must examine whether the

presumptions of fact as to the Appellants presence at the time of

committing the two murders, as drawn by the trial Court, so as to

bridge the gulf, could legally and factually be justified, upon the

available items of evidence both direct and circumstantial before it, as

did by the Court of Appeal in determining his appeal.

Courts, in determining cases presented before them, do come

across similar situations on a regular basis. In such situations, the

Courts could turn to a provision where the Evidence Ordinance itself

had provided to cater to such situations. I have ventured to adopt this

course of action, in view of the pronouncement made by Lord Reid in

the case of Benmax v. Austin Motor Co.(1958) 1 A. E. R. 320, to the effect

where the point in dispute is the proper inference to be drawn from proved

facts, an Appeal Court is generally in as good a position to evaluate

the evidence as the Trial Judge, and ought not to shrink from that task." This

statement was referred to and acted upon by HNG Fernando J, (as he

then was) in The Attorney General v Gnana-Piragasam and another

(1965) 68 NLR 49 (at p. 58), where the matter before their Lordships

was to determine the validity of the finding of fact as decided by the

trial Court, whether the gold bars were made in this country to the

order placed by the first Plaintiff, who sought a declaration from Court

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

41

that he is entitled to eight bars of gold which were seized by the

Collector of Customs, Northern Province, and forfeited in pursuance of

Sections 45 and 106 of the Customs Ordinance, read with certain

provisions of the Exchange Control Act No. 24 of 1953.

The original Court accepted the plaintiffs position that he

purchased items of old jewelry by utilising profits made from a

smuggling business and were subsequently converted into gold slabs.

The Attorney General, who preferred an appeal against the said finding

of fact, contended before their Lordships that the said determination of

fact reached by Court was made neither on a perception of the oral

evidence nor was it reached based upon credibility or demeanour of

witness, but was referable solely to inferences and assumptions. It is in

these circumstances the appellate Court had made the pronouncement

reproduced above.

Before I proceed to consider the question of justifiability of

reaching such a presumption drawn on the given set of circumstances

presented by the prosecution in the form of direct and circumstantial

evidence before the trial Court, it is important to examine as to the

nature of the discretion conferred on Courts by Section 114 of the

Evidence Ordinance, within which a Court could legally draw

presumptions of fact.

Section 114 states that it confers a discretion on Courts, to

presume the existence of any fact which the Court thinks likely to have

happened, having regard to the common course of natural events,

human conduct and public and private business, in their relations to the

facts of the particular case. The Section also indicates it is a discretion

conferred on the Courts, which it may or may not exercise.

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

42

Coomaraswamy, in his treatise on Evidence Ordinance, states (p. 340 of

Vol II Book 1) that wherever the ordinary course of human events and the

general tendency of human character render it probable under the

circumstances of the case that a thing is true, the Court is at liberty to presume

its truth and, in addition allows a Court to exempt the party

asserting it from the necessity of proof in the first instance . The Court

could also impose the burden of rebutting that such a presumption, as

to the existence of any fact is not true, upon the party who denies it.

Learned author then adds that whether, in a particular case, it is safe to do

so, is a question which the Judge must decide for himself according to his

judgment. Thus, indeed a wide discretion had been conferred on

Courts by Section 114, which it may or may not decide to exercise,

depending on the facts of each case. The inclusion of this particular

Section in the Evidence Ordinance is a mere codification of a principle

of law in England.

In the case of R v Burdett (1814-1823) AER Rep. at p.84, decided

in 1820, Best J stated [W]hen one or more things are proved from which our

experience enables us to ascertain that another, not proved, must have

happened, we presume that it did happen as well in criminal as in civil cases.

Holroyd J concurred with this pronouncement by stating [C]rimes of the

highest nature, more especially cases of murder, are established, and

convictions and executions thereupon frequently take place for guilt most

convincingly proved by presumptive evidence only, and the wellbeing and

security of society much depend on the receiving and giving due effect to such

proofs.

The purpose of recognising a legally sanctioned presumption of

fact was described by Monir in his Principles and Digest of the Law of

Evidence, 6th Ed, Vol 2 (at p. 1188), where the learned author states that;

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

43

The term presumption of fact is used to designate an

inference, affirmative or dis-affirmative of the existence of some

fact, drawn by a judicial tribunal, by a process of probable

reasoning from some matter of fact, either judicially noticed, or

admitted, or established by legal evidence to the satisfaction of the

tribunal.

He then adds the modality in drawing such presumptions of fact

by stating (ibid);

when inferring the existence of a fact from others, Courts of

justice do nothing more than apply, under the sanction of law, a

process of reasoning which the mind of any intelligent being

would, under similar circumstances, have applied itself; and the

force of which rests altogether in the experience and observation

of the course of nature, the constitution of the human mind, the

springs of human action, and the usage habits if society. The

sources of presumption of fact are, (i) the common course of

natural events, (ii) the common course of human conduct, and

(iii) the common course of public and private business.

Illustration (a) to Section114 of the Evidence Ordinance indicates

(obviously to illustrate the point) that the said Section confers a

discretion on Court to presume, a man in whose possession stolen

goods were found soon after the theft, is either the thief or has received

the goods knowing them to be stolen. In the words of Howard CJ in The

King v William Perera (1944) 45 NLR 433 (at p.438), the law is, that if,

recently after the commission of the crime, a person is found in possession of

the stolen goods, that person is called up to account for the possession, that is,

to give an explanation of it which is not unreasonable or improbable. The

strength of the presumption, which arises from such possession, is in

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

44

proportion to the shortness of the interval which has elapsed. If the interval has

been only an hour or two, not half a day, the presumption is so strong, that it

almost amounts to proof; because the reasonable inference is, that the person

must have stolen the property. In the ordinary affairs of life, it is not probable

that the person could have got possession of the property in any other way. And

juries can only judge of matters, with reference to their knowledge and

experience of the ordinary affaire of life.

The scope of Section 114, particularly in its practical aspect, was

considered by the superior Courts on numerous occasions. But the

majority of those instances, the Courts have dealt primarily with the

aspect of recent possession of stolen goods, as per illustration (a) to that

Section, in order to decide over the question whether, in the

circumstances presented in those instances, the presumption could be

extended to hold that the accused, who possessed stolen goods recently,

had committed the offence of theft as well.

However, it is important to note that the scope of presumptions

of fact that could be drawn under Section 114 were not confined only to

the cases of theft or of retention of stolen property. This statement is in

accord with the view expressed by the author of the Indian Evidence

Act as well as the Ceylon Evidence Ordinance No. 12 of 1864, Sir James

Fitz-James Stephen. In his book titled An introduction to the Indian Evidence

Act, (2nd Impression), after dealing with the topic of conclusive

presumptions, learned author then makes the following statement in

relation to Section 114, (at p. 181), that the Court may in all cases

whatever draw from the facts before it whatever inferences it thinks just

(emphasis added).

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

45

On a similar note, Wijewardene J (as he then was), in Cassim v

Udaya Manaar (1943) 45 NLR 519, quoted Tayler on Evidence 12th Ed,

para 142, where it is noted that the presumption is not confined to cases

of theft but applies to all crimes even the most penal. Thus, on an indictment

for arson proof that property which was in the house at the time it was burnt,

was soon afterwards found in the possession of the prisoner has been held to

raise a probable presumption that he was present and concerned in the offence.

A like inference has been raised in the case of murder accompanied by robbery,

in the case of burglary and in the case of the possession of a quantity of

counterfeit money. His Lordship then added a caution in drawing such

presumptions of fact by laying emphasis on the aspect that (at p. 520),

the Court has to consider carefully whether the maxim applies to the facts

of the case before it because a presumption under Section 114 is not a

presumption of law but only a presumption of fact.

Having undertaken an exhaustive analysis of the judicial

precedents both local and foreign and considered the authoritative texts

on the nature of the discretion conferred on Courts to presume facts

under Section 114, Amaratunge J, in the Judgment of Ariyasinghe and

Others v Attorney General (2004) 2 Sri L.R. 357, stated (at p.399) that the

categories of offences in respect of which a presumption under Section 114

may be drawn are not restricted or closed. The Courts are left with an

unfettered discretion in all cases to presume, if so advised, the existence of any

fact which it thinks likely to have happened, regard being had to the common

course of natural events, human conduct and public and private business in

their relation to the facts of the particular case. I am in respectful

agreement with said statement made by Amaratunge J on Section 114, in

view of the material I have reproduced in the preceding paragraphs.

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

46

In comparatively a recent judgment, the Supreme Court of India

expressed its view on this issue, where Thomas J, in the judgment of

State of West Bengal v Mir Mohammad Omar & Others (supra), stated

thus;

In this case, when prosecution succeeded in establishing the

afore narrated circumstances, the Court has to presume the

existence of certain facts. Presumption is a course recognised by

the law for the Court to rely on in conditions such as this.

Presumption of fact is an inference as to the existence of one fact

from the existence of some other facts, unless the truth of such

inference is disproved. Presumption of fact is a rule in law of

evidence that a fact otherwise doubtful may be inferred from

certain other proved facts. When inferring the existence of a fact

from other set of proved facts, the Court exercises a process of

reasoning and reach a logical conclusion as the most probable

position. The above principle has gained legislative recognition in

India when Section 114 is incorporated in the Evidence Act. It

empowers the Court to presume the existence of any fact which it

thinks likely to have happened. In that process Court shall have

regard to the common course of natural events, human conduct

etc., in relation to the facts of the case.

Therefore, the presumption of fact under Section 114 of the

Evidence Ordinance is a legally sanctioned method, which permits a

Court of law to use its discretion conferred by the said Section, to infer

the existence of a fact from either a proved fact or set of proved facts,

which were established by credible evidence. Despite the presumption

of fact of a mental state of the accused is presumed in direct evidence

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

47

cases, generally, the necessity to draw presumptions of fact makes out

an important function in the judicial reasoning in cases that are based

on circumstantial evidence. According to Lahiri J, in Chakuna Orang v.

State of Assam (supra), circumstantial evidence, being evidence

which proves or tends to prove the factum probandum indirectly, by means of

certain inferences or deduction to be drawn from its existence and its

connection with other 'facta probantia', it is called. The force of the evidence

does not depend merely on the credit attached to the 'factum probandum' but

to the result which by a process of reasoning it indirectly establishes in the

mind of the Judge. It is sometimes styled as collateral evidence or presumptive

evidence. When we infer or presume things from the collateral circumstance the

nature of the evidence is styled as collateral evidence.

In the circumstances, it is helpful to consider the manner in which

the Section 114 had been put to use by the superior Courts and utilised

same to draw certain presumptions of fact. In that respect, I wish to

refer to the case of Perera, Inspector of Police v Mohideen (1970) 73

NLR 393, first. This is an instance where the accused was charged under

Section 3(3)(b) of the Betting on Horse-racing Ordinance for unlawfully

accepting a bet on a horse named St. Mungo, expected to run at a race

meet in England. The prosecution presented the chit by which the bet

was placed on by a decoy and accepted by the accused, in addition to

presenting a news sheet titled Grand sporting News, containing the

name of a horse St Mungo among the names of horses set down to run

at a race in England. It was necessary for the prosecution to establish the

fact that the horse St Mungo did run in the race held in England. This

news sheet was tendered to Court along with two issues of London

Times, published prior to the bet and on the day of the bet, indicating

that the horse named St Mungo did run at Thirsk Race on both these

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

48

days. These were produced by the prosecution in order to substantiate

the contents of the chit, which only had St Mungo scribbled on it, in

addition to few digits indicating the value of the bet.

The trial Court held that the reports published in London Times

cannot be taken as lawful proof of the fact that the horse St Mungo was

a runner in the race referred to in the charge, in relation to the disputed

fact in issue, as it disqualifies as hearsay. In consideration of the

material available before the trial Court, HNG Fernando CJ held that, in

the absence of any evidence or inference to the contrary, Section 114

made the trial Court entitled to presume that a horse named St Mungo

did run in a race on the date of the offence. This conclusion was reached

by his Lordship on the reasoning that;

In the language of s. 114 of the Evidence Ordinance, when

regard is had to the common course of human conduct and

private business in relation to the practice of betting on horse-

races, it is surely likely to have happened that St. Mungo did

run in the particular race. To think otherwise would be to think

quite unreasonably that the London Times perpetrates on its

readers either stupid pranks or fraudulent deceptions.

In view of the above, it is quite clear that the conclusion reached

by the trial Court, over the question of fact that whether the Appellant

was present at the place where two murders were committed as they

were committed in the course of same transaction which began with the

commission of attempted murder, is a legally sanctioned presumption

of fact, if it could be drawn in relation to the facts of the case that had

been presented before it, as per the only qualification imposed by

Section 114. The Court of Appeal was therefore correct in accepting the

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

49

legality of the said conclusion in this particular respect. However, in the

circumstances, it is now incumbent upon this Court to consider whether

such a conclusion, as to the presence of the Appellant at the place where

murders were committed, is justified and reasonable in relation to the

facts of the case placed before the trial Court.

Clearly the trial Court had, having considered the evidence in

totality, had acted on certain inferences it had drawn upon established

facts. These include the inferences that the Appellant had shared

common murderous intention with the other two accused and has had

participatory presence at the time of committing the two murders, in

order to find the Appellant guilty to the two counts. The necessity to

draw such inferences to determine these facts in issue before the trial

Court arose as Kusumawathies evidence indicate that none of the

accused, including the Appellant, did ever utter a word during the

entire duration of the attack or at least when they carried her up to the

stream, betraying their minds.

In addition to the acts attributed to the attackers by Kusumawathie

in her evidence, the trial Court must then satisfy itself as to the

intentions entertained by each of them in doing those acts and that too

to the required degree of proof, in order to determine whether those

acts were done whilst sharing common murderous intention or an

intention to cause a life threatening injury to the injured. In respect of

the two murders, the Court had to arrive at a similar finding that the

attackers shared a common intention to commit murder and the

Appellant was present with the others during the attack. In the absence

of any utterances attributed to the three accused by Kusumawawathie

that were made during the attack, indicating what they had in mind or

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

50

what they intended to achieve by carrying out the attack, it was

necessary for the trial Court to draw inferences from the established

facts as to the existence of the requisite mental element on each of the

accused, in addition to their participation in the acts.

Hence, before I embark upon the task of assessing the

justifiability and reasonableness of the inference of the Appellants

presence at the time of committing the murders in the given set of

circumstances, it is helpful, if I pause for a moment to investigate the

difference between the terms presumptions and inferences that could be

drawn over facts, as the first step, in the context of a judicial inquiry. At

this juncture, it is of interest to refer to basic classification introduced by

Stephen himself on the methodology and the nature of inferences

employed in judicial investigations vis a vis scientific investigation,

which he described as follows (supra - at p.53);

1. Inferences from an assertion, whether oral or

documentary, to the truth of the matter asserted,

2. Inferences from fact which, upon the strength of such

assertions, are believed to exist, to facts of which the

existence has not been so asserted.

He then clarifies the difference between outcome of the two

inferences in the following manner (at p. 55); ,

Let the question be whether A committed a crime. The facts

which the Judge actually knows are that certain witnesses made

before him a variety of statements which he believes to be true.

The result of these statements is to establish certain facts which

show that either A or B or C must have committed the crime, and

neither B or C did commit it. In this case that facts before the

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

51

Judge would be inconsistent with any other reasonable hypothesis

except that A committed the crime. This would be commonly

called a case of circumstantial evidence; yet it is obvious that the

principle on which the investigation proceeds as in the last case is

identically the same. The only difference is in the number of

inferences, but no new principle is introduced.

The word inference is defined in the Blacks Law Dictionary 9th

Ed, (p.847) as a conclusion reached by considering other facts and deducing a

logical consequence from them. Basnayake CJ echoed this position in the

judgment of The Queen v Ekmon and Others (1962) 67 NLR 49, by

observing that (at p.62), a presumption is not the same as inference. In

presumption the presumed fact is taken to be true or entitled to belief without

examination or proof unless and until it is disproved while inference is the

conclusion drawn from one or more proved facts or a combination of them.

A limitation to the extent to which the existence of a fact could be

presumed by Court, in the exercise of discretion under Section 114 of

the Evidence Ordinance, was expressed by Stephens in his book,

published in the year 1872. The rationale for the recognition of such a

limitation was due to the reason that in such cases most probably an

injustice will be done to the accused if the principal fact has to be

inferred from circumstances pointing to it (supra at p. 67). Learned

author then states [T]his is the foundation of the well-known rule that the

corpus delicti should not in general in criminal cases be inferred from other

facts but be proven independently. This principle was strictly applied in

situations where a person accused of murder, but no dead body was

found enabling the prosecution to establish the death of the deceased

and its cause.

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

52

However, over the years, the Commonwealth jurisdictions have

consciously departed from this view and adopted a more pragmatic

approach by taking the view that insisting on the said rule. This is

because insisting of direct and positive evidence of death, in the absence

of a dead body would result in many crimes would occasionally go

unpunished. This was explicitly stated by Gour, in his work Penal Law of

British India, 5th Ed, (at p.1019); the absence of the body is not fatal to the

trial of the accused for murder, though a material circumstances to be

considered. Any other view would place in the hands of the accused an

incentive to destroy the body after committing the murder and thus secure

immunity for his crime. A rule to the contrary is impossible practically.

Coomaraswamy (supra Vol 1, pgs. 31,32) too states the position

would be the same in Sri Lanka as in India in view of the definition of proved

and accordingly [I]n law, the fact that the corpus delicti has not been found

or traced cannot make any difference, if there is sufficient reliable evidence,

direct or circumstantial, that murder has in fact been committed. It would be

clear from these citations, a Court could even infer a principal fact

regarding a crime, provided there is sufficient and reliable evidence,

direct or circumstantial, that a crime has in fact been committed, despite

the apprehensions of Stephens.

Thus, having considered the legal permissibility of drawing

presumptions of fact, in order to examine the factual validity of the facts

presumed by the trial Court, and to determine whether there was

sufficient material that had been placed before the trial Court to

reasonably presume the facts it did presume, I find the evidence

relating to the timing of the attacks on Swarna and Susantha is a

convenient point to embark upon that task.

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

53

The three counts contained in the indictment against the

Appellant and other two accused were presented on the sequence of

committing attempted murder of Kusumawathie as the first count,

followed by the counts on committing the murder of Susantha and

Swarna as the 2nd and 3rd counts, respectively. It was stated in the

indictment that the 2nd and 3rd counts were committed by the three

accused sharing common intention and in the course of same

transaction that begun with commission of the offence referred to in the

1st count. But the evidence indicated that the attack on Swarna preceded

the attack on Susantha.

In the circumstances and for convenience in dealing with the

factual situation in chronological order, I prefer to follow the sequence

of the three incidents, in which they occurred, as revealed in the

evidence. Therefore, it is proposed to consider the evidence in relation

to Swarnas murder first before I proceed to evidence relating to the

murder of Susantha.

The evidence presented by the prosecution particularly in

relation to the death of Swarna commences with Kusumawathies

evidence which revealed that, after about 5 minutes she was dragged

down to the stream by the accused and dumped there, she had heard

her daughter calling out wf at least twice. The time was about 6.15

in the evening. Then she lost consciousness. She regained her senses

after about 1 hours and she only heard the sound of water gushing

down in the stream. Thereupon, Kusumawathie, having failed to stand

up and walk upright due to her injuries, had dragged herself towards

her house with difficulty. She saw the bookbag of Swarna, lying on the

front garden of her house. She also saw blood patches on the wall near

the kitchen. She did not see her daughters body anywhere near her

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

54

house but instead came across her sons body, lying on an umbrella, as

she continued to drag herself along the pathway towards the main

road.

It is evident that Swarna had reached home that evening having

returned from her class, a few minutes before her brother did. Her

mother was not at home. She then called out for her mother. She would

obviously have thought, as usual, her mother would have gone to the

stream to do some washing. She called out for her mother wf. This

was not a call of distress, as denoted by the common usage of wfuda.

At that particular point of time, she had no threat of any violence and

therefore had no apparent cause to be alarmed.

The fact that Swarnas bag and the books were strewn in the

garden indicate that, after calling out for her mother, she had to flee in a

great hurry, probably after being terrified over some incident which

happened to her at that point of time. The blood patches that were seen

by Kusumawathie and the police officer indicate that the said incident is

a violent one and the degree of its violence extends to causing physical

harm to her. This incident is clearly referable to a surprise attack

mounted on Swarna by an attacker armed with a cutting weapon, due to

which she had sustained one or more bleeding injuries. The blood

patches could not be attributed to the injuries of Swarnas brother, since

he was killed even before reaching anywhere near their house.

Kusumawathie did not go inside the house and she merely had a passing

glance of her house, whilst dragging herself along the pathway with the

intention of seeking help. There was no evidence to indicate that any of

the accused including the Appellant had suffered any bleeding injury to

leave such blood patches. Clearly the blood patches were of Swarna,

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

55

who suffered at least one bleeding injury during the brief period she

was inside the house.

Swarna, with this surprise attack on her, would have realised that

she was faced with an imminent threat to her life. Being injured and

terrified by this unexpected violent attack by her own relative, she then

ran out of her house, as a desperate attempt to save her life. In the

process, she dropped her bag containing books and lost a shoe.

Obviously, she needed to get to safety in a great hurry.

Placed in such a situation, the most natural and probable course

of action for Swarna to take was to run along the pathway to reach the

main road and to call out for help, as her mother did. This is the

pathway she had taken a few minutes before to reach home. But

strangely her body was found on an embankment and it was above 6 to

7 feet from the level of the pathway. She had climbed this embankment,

which is even taller than her own body height, whilst fleeing for safety,

despite her attacker was closing in armed with a sword. In view of the

medical evidence, her death had been an instantaneous one due to the

seriousness of the injuries caused to her head. She died where her body

was eventually recovered. The fact that Swarna had only two abrasions,

which were possibly due to fall, positively indicate she was not dragged

to the place where her body was found, but she had collapsed there

after the attack on her head.

Then a question arises as to what made her to climb up on a ridge

or an embankment (lKah) of about 6 to 7 feet above from the level of

the pathway which caused her to lose valuable time in the process and

thereby giving an advantage to her pursuer armed with a deadly

weapon, who then struck multiple sword attacks on her head, causing

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

56

already referred to necessarily fatal injuries resulting in an

instantaneous death.

The answer to this question could be found, if another scenario,

that could reasonably be deduced from these circumstances, is

considered. Swarnas apparent irrational conduct, could easily be

explained, if one were to infer a situation where that pathway she had

to take, was already been obstructed by someone blocking her escape

route, and thus compelling Swarna to take the most difficult route as the

only available alternative for her safety.

If that is the case, then who did obstruct Swarna from running

along the pathway?

Clearly it was not the 1st accused, as he was chasing after her

from behind. Then it must be others who were present. The Appellant

and the 2nd accused were right there, only several feet away from the

place where Swarnas body was found, barely five minutes ago,

according to Kusumawathie. Then the strong inference could be drawn

that it was the Appellant and the 2nd accused who prevented Swarna

running along the pathway. If it was only the 2nd accused who was

preventing Swarna taking the pathway, she would have had a chance of

escaping her fate by overpowering the elderly woman. But apparently

Swarna had no choice. It appears that she was forced to take the more

difficult escape route as the only available option. In the circumstances,

it is highly probable that the Appellant too was present there, in order

to effectively prevent her escape.

It need not be emphasised that it would have been impossible for

Swarna to overpower the Appellant, a grown-up male, who is in the

prime of his youth. If this was the sequence of events that led to Swarna

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

57

suffering a necessarily fatal cut injuries that resulted in her

instantaneous death, then the 2nd accused, and the Appellant would

most certainly have shared a common murderous intention with the 1st

accused, who carried on the fatal attack and therefore have participated

in the murder by facilitating the 1st accused. There are no other

circumstances that exist to point any other conclusion.

What is more important to note from the set of circumstances that

had been established by the prosecution is that there were sufficient

materials before the trial Court on which it could reasonably presume

the fact that while the initial attack on Swarna was being carried out by

the 1st accused, the Appellant and the 2nd accused were present at the

crime scene and facilitated the 1st accused, to complete their already

agreed plan of attack.

Susanthas body was found just five feet away along the pathway

from the point it connected to the main road. The body was facing up

and was lying on an umbrella. Susantha had his lower left arm bent

from the elbow from the upper arm, which remained raised. His face

was heavily disfigured with several serious cut injuries. The distance

between the bodies of Susantha and his sister was about nine meters.

The expert witness who performed the autopsy on the body of

Susantha observed multiple deep and long cut injuries on his face

totaling to nine. The 10th 11th and 12th injuries, classified as defensive

injuries, were also seen on his left arm, in addition to an abrasion found

on his forehead. The witness was of the opinion that the 1st to 9th

injuries would have been inflicted on the deceased using a sharp cutting

weapon, similar to a sword, and could well have been inflicted by using

the one and the same weapon. The 9th injury was a long one, cutting

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

58

into cervical vertebrae, major bold vessels and nerves of the neck and,

therefore, termed as the necessarily fatal injury.

Thus, the conclusion reached by the trial Court as to the guilt of

the Appellant on the two murders, was obviously based on several

presumptions and inferences drawn from the facts that are already

established through direct evidence and in addition the presumptions

of facts, likely to have happened according to ordinary human conduct.

In view of this particular factor, it is of interest to examine as to how the

superior Courts, in the past, have dealt with similar situations that were

presented for its determination.

In this respect, I shall first refer to the judgment of the Court of

Criminal Appeal in Rex v Wijedasa Perera et al (1950) 52 NLR 29. This

judgment was pronounced on the appeal preferred by the accused who

sentenced to death for the murder of one John Silva. The Section I wish

to highlight refers to the 6th accused, who was charged for conspiracy to

rob cash collection of Ceylon Turf Club, committing robbery,

conspiracy to commit murder of John Silva and abetment to commit

murder of John Silva. He was found guilty by the Jury to the 1st and 2nd

counts.

The facts related to the involvement of the 6th accused are as

follows. The 1st to 8th accused have conspired that the cash collection of

the Turf Club be robbed, whilst in transit. The Turf Club usually

transported its cash collection in a vehicle hired from a particular

establishment in Colombo. The 5th and 6th accused have hired a car from

the same establishment especially for the purpose of committing the

robbery. Usually, the cash collection is transported in the personal

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

59

custody of one of its employees, who had the protection of an escorting

police officer.

John Silva was the unfortunate driver, who was assigned to drive

the car, that was hired by the 6th accused and his partner, who paid for

the hire. The 6th accused, an ex-policeman and the 5th accused, an ex-

Army driver were John Silvas passengers. It had already been agreed

between the conspirators, that the 6th accused was to impersonate as an

Inspector of Police during the hold-up of the vehicle transporting cash

of the Turf Club, scheduled for the next day and the 5th accused were to

drive John Silvas car to the place of planned heist.

Other accused have followed John Silvas car in another smaller

car and after stopping for refreshments at Puttalam, have left in

advance. Near the culvert No. 13/4 along Puttalam-Anuradhapura

Road, a lonely and an isolated place, the 5th accused, feigning a stomach

upset and, as agreed with the others earlier on, halted the car driven by

John Silva, under the pretext of relieving himself. The 7th and 8th

accused, who had already arrived there and hiding in the jungle, were

awaiting for the arrival of the car driven by John Silva. They had a gas

mask and a rope with them. The 6th accused remained in that car while

the others have lured the unsuspecting John Silva to walk with them into

the jungle, under some pretext.

After a lapse of a few days, John Silvas body was recovered in

highly decomposed state. It was tied to a tree in the jungle and had a

gas mask placed over its head. His death was due to suffocation, which

resulted in due to squeezing of the tube that admitted air, which

enabled the wearer to breath in, with the mask on.

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

60

In appeal, it was contended before the Court of Criminal Appeal

on behalf of the 6th accused, that he was not physically present at the

place where the murder of John Silva was committed and did not abet

the latters murder either.

The Court rejected this contention. The reasoning of the Court is

indicative from the following paragraph quoted below;

We are unable to distinguish the case of the 6th accused from

that against the other three appellants. It is true that he was

physically not present at the time the deceased man was

murdered but we are of opinion that having regard to all the facts

and circumstances he was an abettor of this murder, and as such

equally liable with his co-conspirators. His learned Counsel

conceded that the 6th accused was privy to the tying up of the

deceased in the jungle. It is clear that not only was it the

intention of the robbers to tie up the deceased man in the jungle

but it was also the intention to kill him there, and, therefore, the

6th accused is equally guilty with his co-conspirators in

everything they did in order to give effect to their common

plan. We agree with the submissions of the Attorney-General

with regard to the 6th accused. He knew that the deceased had to

die. He gave no evidence at the trial. He is an ex-police officer

and with true police caution he did not like to be seen carrying

the incriminating suitcase in which the uniform which he

was to use the following day was packed. We do not think the fact

that the 6th accused was on the road by the car while the others

murders the deceased makes any difference to his case. Somebody

had to be by the big car. This is a main road and any passer-by

who saw a large car standing unattended on a lonely forest

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

61

road, might be tempted to stop and make inquiries which

would be extremely inconvenient for those who were murdering

the deceased in the jungle. Therefore, the 6th accused, or some

other person had to be by the car. The Attorney General argues

that if his companions told him that they had merely tied the

deceased to a tree, the 6th accused as an ex-police officer would

never have kept quiet for his own safety, because if John Silva

remained alive he would indubitably have given evidence against

the 6th accused whom he saw in circumstances in which he would

have been able to identify him.

However, it must be noted that in the case referred to above, the

charge was abetment of murder following conspiracy. In that respect

this case differs from the instant appeal as it is based on common

intention and not on a charge of conspiracy. But what is relevant to the

appeal before this Court is that in the said Judgment their Lordships

had made several presumptions of fact, based on common course of

natural events and human conduct, in their relation to the fact of the

case presented before the original Court. These presumptions of fact

and the inferences that were drawn by the Court of Criminal Appeal are

relevant to the determination of the appeal before us, indicating the

extent to which a Court could utilise presumptions of facts and

inferences drawn upon them in determining the guilt or innocence of an

accused. The Court of Criminal Appeal had drawn several inferences

from the already established facts presented by direct evidence and also

on the presumed facts, in coming to the conclusion that the 6th accused

was equally guilty to the offence of abetment of murder, in rejecting his

contention that he remained in the car and therefore had no hand in the

commission of murder that had taken place elsewhere. The judgment of

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

62

Rex v Wijedasa Perera et al (supra) is another among many instances

where Courts had relied on presumptions of facts and inferences drawn

from the established facts, in order to determine the validity of the

imposition of criminal liability to capital offences. Similarly, in the

instant appeal, the question to be answered by this Court too is whether

the inference of guilt entertained by the lower Court is a reasonably

drawn inference on the available material or not.

The judgment of Attorney General v Seneviratne (1982) 1 Sri L.R.

302, is another such judgment. The appeal before the Supreme Court

was a situation where the accused was charged for robbery and murder

of two persons. The prosecution case was that the deceased couple, who

lived all by themselves in a house situated in their 22-acre property, had

a large stock of pepper, was murdered by the accused while committing

robbery. Investigators found blood-stained footprints of the accused on

a newspaper bearing the same date as of the date of murder along with

his fingerprints. Witness Arnolis said the accused hired his vehicle to

transport several gunny bags of pepper from a place near Pinwatta

bend. There was a trail of pepper that commenced from the deceaseds

house and ended where pepper bags were loaded into Arnolis vehicle.

Essentially the case against the accused was a one based on several

items of circumstantial evidence.

When the learned Counsel for the accused contended before this

Court as to the unexplained 3 hour gap between the hearing of the

cries of the deceased and loading of gunny bags into the car, the Court

had drawn certain inferences based on presumptions of fact. The Court

stated that there is evidence that there was a trail of pepper from the house of

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

63

the deceased to the bend on the road. This path was not motorable. Therefore,

whoever carried the bags of pepper would have had to do so on foot and it

would have taken him at least ten to fifteen minutes to walk this distance. He

would have had to walk this distance to and for twelve times. The time gap is

therefore easily explained.

The Court then added It is significant that on the evidence of

Arnolis the conclusion that the robbery was well planned is inescapable. On the

first occasion that the accused invited Arnolis to bring his hiring car to

transport the bags of pepper, Arnolis was unable to accede to his request. That

night not only was there no robbery, but there were no murders as well.

However,on the following day when Arnolis brought his hiring car to the

Pinwatte bend the 6 bags of pepper had been removed from the bedroom of the

deceased. It was on this same night that the deceased persons were done to

death. On the evidence there is no doubt that the accused had been involved in

the attack on the couple, for otherwise his footprints could not been stained

with blood. It would have been a strange coincidence that the couple had

already been done to death at the time the accused came to remove the bags of

pepper.

These selected segments of the Judgments that I have reproduced

above in length clearly illustrative the extent to which the Courts

exercised its discretion to presume facts from the established facts and

had drawn inferences upon both these categories of facts, in order to

reach the conclusion as to the guilt or the innocence of accused.

Returning to the conclusion reached by the trial Court on the

inference it had drawn upon the material that the murders of Susantha

and Swarna were committed during the course of same transaction by

the 1st, 2nd accused and the Appellant that commenced with the

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

64

commission of attempted murder, to my mind a question necessarily

arises whether the trial Court, in the same process of reasoning

concluded that the pre-arrangement that existed between the three of

them, in relation to the commission of the offence of attempted murder

on Kusumawathie, could also be extended to include to commit the

deaths of her two children as well. If there was such a pre-arranged

plan and if it did include the murder of the two deceased, then that fact

coupled with the presumed act of the Appellant of being present in the

execution of that part of the said pre arrangement, would undoubtedly

justifies imposition of vicarious criminal liability on him.

This requirement of the existence of a pre-arranged plan to

commit murders, could be satisfied if the evidence presented by the

prosecution supports such a reasonable inference to that effect.

Even on a superficial consideration of the set of circumstances

that were enumerated in the preceding paragraphs, one could

immediately observe many a similarity in the series of violent attacks

that were carried out on Kusumawathie and her family members. The 1st

and 2nd accused, being the immediate neighbours and close relatives of

the victims, had sufficient familiarity with the routine activities and

movements of Kusumawathies family at that point of time. Clearly the

attack was carried out by selecting a day in which only one member of

the victim family was present at each point of time.

Of these three attacks, the most notable feature is the element of

surprise in the attacks carried out on each of the unsuspecting victims.

The injured had no reason even to suspect that she would be attacked

by her own relatives, when she ran out to the stream in a hurry to

collect her laundry prior to the onset of the heavy downpour in that

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

65

evening. She was surprised to see the 1st accused armed with a sword.

Without any utterance, the 1st accused struck her with a sword.

Similarly, when Swarna innocently called out for her mother, the 1st

accused probably made the first move by striking the unsuspecting

woman with his sword. In the case of Susantha too, the way his body

was lying indicate that he had little or no opportunity to suspect, even

faintly, of the impending attack. Each one of the two murder victims

virtually had no opportunity of knowing what happened to the other

family member when they were attacked, as care was taken to prevent

them realising of what happened to the other, thus keeping the element

of surprise intact.

The medical evidence before Court indicated that it is very likely

that the same heavy cutting weapon was used in the three incidents.

The cut injuries sustained by all three victims were primarily

concentrated to their heads. The attack on them were carried out swiftly

and decisively. Except for Kusumawathie, who survived the attack in

spite of her head injury and did not move after collapsing on the

ground, other two victims had sustained necessarily fatal injuries and

died at the place where they were attacked.

Particular care was taken to retain the surprise element on the

subsequent victims by clearing any tell-tale evidence from the scene of

the previous attack. Swarna did not see any of the laundry, carried by

her mother up to the 2nd accuseds house, when she was attacked on the

pathway. This feature also explains the selection of the place of attack

on Susantha, because, if he did reach home and notice his sisters

belongings and blood patches, he would have realised something

sinister had taken place. That would in turn prompt him to take

adequate precautions to defend himself. If he was alerted to the nature

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

66

of imminent danger he would soon be exposed to, it would have made

the execution of the last phase of the planned attack a total failure.

Hence, it was important to mount a surprise attack particularly on

Susantha when he least expected of such an attack. The distance from

the main road to the body indicate that Susantha had just got off bus

and that too in the rain. He had his umbrella with him. The sun had

already set, and the time was few minutes after 6.30 p.m. with the dark

rain clouds still looming in the sky. Limited availability of light also

contributed to the surprise element of the attack. Susantha had no time

to react even to the instinctive response of fight or flight, at least by

making an attempt to run away from the attackers unlike his sister but,

instead was done to death on the spot with repeated attacks, numbering

nine, concentrated to his head, using a sword.

The other reason for the extension of the prearrangement made in

respect of Kusumawathie to include Susantha and Swarna as well, is the

motive. It is uncontested that there was a dispute over the land they all

lived on and the 2nd accused and her son, the 1st accused, wanted

Kusumawathie and her family out of it. The Appellant was to marry the

1st accuseds sister and that would have made him to participate in the

planned attack, because he too could someday be a beneficiary. It is

therefore clear that the motive entertained by the two accused and the

Appellant does not confine to elimination of Kusumawathie but also it

should logically extend to her children as well. Wanting the land in its

entirety, being the compelling reason to mount an attack on

Kusumawathie, there was no logic in sparing her children, who would

assert their rights over the land. If Susantha and Swarna too were not

eliminated, then it would render the already completed act of

elimination of Kusumawathie, absolutely a meaningless exercise. It

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

67

would also pose the additional danger of leaving witnesses to a possible

criminal prosecution against the perpetrators of the attack.

As the Court, in the case of Rex v Wijedasa Perera et al (supra),

inferred that John Silva, the innocent driver of the hiring car, was killed

in order to facilitate the accuseds plan to commit the robbery and also

to wipe out a vital witness for the prosecution, in the instant appeal too,

the three of the accused including the Appellant would have decided

that both Susantha and Swarna should not live on that land anymore and

they too must die. In consideration of the manner in which the attacks

were carried out, the attackers could not have decided the fate of each

of their victims whilst on their feet and being actively engaged in the

attack. Both the murder victims, Susantha and Swarna, were expected to

return home at any moment of time when they mounted the attack on

Kusumawathie. Thus, it is clear that what should become of each of the

three victims were already decided by the trio, even before they stepped

out of their house, in order to confront Kusumawathie.

It was disclosed before the trial Court that the attempted murder

and two murders were committed within a time span of little over one

hour. Kusumawathie was attacked at about six in the evening and the

learned Counsel for the three accused who defended them before the

trial Court clarified from Dr. Wijepala Bandara whether he agrees with

the position that the deaths of the deceased would have occurred

between 6.30 p.m. to 7.30 p.m. of that evening, the expert witness

answered the question in the affirmative. The assertion of

Kusumawathie that she regained her senses after about one and half

hours does not cut across this position and Swarna obviously had died

sometime after 6.15 p.m. upon her return to their house, followed by

her brothers death. The time duration of the three incidents was

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

68

extended to last over an hour not due to a reason within the accuseds

control but owing to the fact that the two of the remaining victims had

returned home at different time intervals.

In the circumstances, it is evident that the course of action that

commenced when the 1st and 2nd accused along with the Appellant

coming out from the entrance of the 2nd accuseds house with a prior

arrangement, in order to confront Kusumawathie who was returning

from the stream after collecting her laundry, had continued thereafter

with the killing of her two children as per the said arrangement

entertained and executed to the full by the three of the accused. Thus,

the said course of transaction had unquestionably been extended to the

attacks on Swarna and Susantha resulting in their deaths.

When viewed against the backdrop of these circumstances, the

finding of the trial Court that the two murders were committed in the

same transaction which commenced with the attempted murder is

indeed a reasonable inference to draw. In this context, it is necessary, at

least by making a superficial consideration of the term same course of

transaction, because it will have a bearing on the validity of the

conviction in relation to the offences of murder.

The phrase same transaction is used in Section 180 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure, enabling the prosecution to charge all persons

concerned in committing an offence together in one and the same

indictment, as in the instant appeal. The operative words used in the

Section are when more persons than one, are accused of jointly committing

the same offence or of different offence committed in the same transaction

may be tried together or separately if the Court thinks fit. It was noted

earlier on that the indictment on which the Appellant was tried on, was

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

69

presented on that basis and no challenge to its validity was made by

any of the three accused before the original Court. A helpful description

of what that term means could be found in the Judgment of the Indian

Supreme Court Mohan Baitha and Others v State of Bihar and Another

(2001) 4 SCC 350, where it is stated that;

The expression same transaction' from its very nature is

incapable of an exact definition. It is not intended to be

interpreted in any artificial or technical sense. Common sense

and the ordinary use of language must decide whether on the

facts of a particular case, it can be held to be in one transaction. It

is not possible to enunciate any comprehensive formula of

universal application for the purpose of determining whether two

or more acts constitute the same transaction. But the

circumstances of a given case indicating proximity of time, unity

or proximity of place, continuity of action and community of

purpose or design are the factors for deciding whether certain acts

form parts of the same transaction or not. Therefore, a series of

acts whether are so connected together as to form the same

transaction is purely a question of fact to be decided on the

aforesaid criteria (emphasis added).

The trial Court, in page 45 of its Judgment, as evident from the

Section reproduced above, used the identical consideration in arriving

at the conclusion that the two murders were committed in the same

transaction that commenced with the attempted murder on

Kusumawathie. The trial Court, although mindful of the requirement to

satisfy itself as to the existence of common intention and participatory

presence of the Appellant to found him guilty to the two offences, did

not specifically referred to them in its conclusion. Instead, it used the

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

70

term that the three accused committed the three offences they were

charged with in the same transaction. But undoubtedly the Court

would have considered them, when it considered the continuity of

action and community of purpose or design in arriving at the said

conclusion.

The relatively later pronouncement made by the Mohan Baitha

and Others. v State of Bihar and Another (supra) perfectly in line with

the test applied by Wijeyewardene J in the case of Jonklaas v Somadasa

et al (1942) 43 NLR 284 (at p. 285), where his Lordship held that the

substantial test for determining whether several offences are committed in the

same transaction is to ascertain whether they are so related to one another in

point of purpose or as cause and effect or as principal and subsidiary acts as to

constitute one continuous action. While the fact that offences are committed at

different times and places need not necessarily show that the offences are not

committed in the same transaction, yet these are matters which cannot be

ignored altogether.

In relation to the evidence presented before the trial Court, I am

of the view that the principle enunciated in the judgment of The King v

Pedrick Singho (1946) 47 NLR 265, by Howard CJ by stating that if the

facts are so interwoven to constitute a series of facts, then such a

situation could be regarded as a one transaction, applies to the instant

Appeal as well and, as such, the finding of the trial Court that the three

offences were committed in the same transaction is well justified.

Even if the evidence clearly supports a reasonable conclusion that

the three attacks were carried out by the same three accused during the

course of same transaction, this Court, however, must satisfy itself as to

legality of the criminal liability imposed at least on the Appellant, if not

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

71

on each of the other accused. This aspect needs further consideration

with citation of a few applicable principles.

Lord Sumner in Barendra Kumar Ghosh v Emperor (supra) stated

liability is imputed to each individual socius criminis not merely for his

own acts but for the totality of the acts committed by his confederates in

furtherance of their common intention. Vicarious or collective responsibility

attaches in such a situation for the result (e.g., death) of their united action. In

Regina v Somapala et al (1956) 57 NLR 350 at p. 353, the Court of

Criminal Appeal observed that Section 32 of the Penal Code does

not, in addition, constructively impute to one socius criminis the guilty

knowledge of another. In order to decide whether an accused person, to whom

liability is imputed for another person's criminal acts has committed an offence

involving guilty knowledge, the test is whether such guilty knowledge has been

established against him individually by the evidence. This requirement

could be satisfied if the evidence presented by the prosecution supports

a reasonable inference of the existence of a pre-arranged plan, as the

Privy Council, in its judgment of Mahabub Shah v Emperor (supra)

stated (at p.120) common intention within the meaning of Section

implies a pre-arranged plan, and to convict the accused of an offence applying

the Section it should be proved that the criminal act was done in concert

pursuant to the pre-arranged plan or as in The King v Asappu et al

(supra), in order to justify the inference that a particular prisoner was

actuated by a common intention with the doer of the act, there must be

evidence, direct or circumstantial, either of pre-arrangement, or a pre-arranged

plan, or a declaration showing common intention, or some other significant fact

at the time of the commission of the offence, to enable them to say that a co-

accused had a common intention with the doer of the act, and not merely a

same or similar intention entertained independently of each other.

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

72

In Sirisena and six others v The Queen (1969) 72 NLR 389, the

Court of Criminal Appeal quoted the Judgment of the Supreme Court

of India in Afrahim Sheik v. The State of West Bengal 3 A. I. R. 1964

S.C. 1263 at 1268, which stated; A person does not do an act except with a

certain intention; and the common intention which is requisite for the

application of S. 34 is the common intention of perpetrating a particular act.

Previous concert which is insisted upon is the meeting of the minds regarding

the achievement of the criminal act.

In determining the course of action it had taken, the trial Court,

particularly in order to decide on the question of fact whether the

Appellant had a participatory presence during the attack on Swarna and

Susantha, had aided itself with the presumption of fact that it had

arrived at after a consideration of the totality of the material, that the

Appellant was present with the other two, when the two murders were

committed upon the pre-arrangement which all three had shared from

the commencement of the series of attacks on their victims. The Court

arrived at this finding on the premise that they were committed within

the course of same transaction that commenced with the commission of

the offence of attempted murder and continued thereafter with that of

committing the two murders. There was no alternative version

available for the Court to consider. The Appellant in his short statement

from the dock denied any knowledge of this incident but did not put

across any suggestions as to what he did and, more importantly what

he did not, thereby left Kusumawathies evidence without a challenge

with an alternative narration.

In my view the phrase in the course of same transaction was used

by the trial Court, in a sense that it had the components of common

intention and participation of each accused, incorporated into it, as

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

73

these factors are continued to be present from the initial criminal act to

the next criminal act, if it could be taken as such. Despite the fact that

the conviction entered against the Appellant by the trial Court without

specifically referring to some of these individual components, when it

decided that it was committed in the course of same transaction as

fulfilment of a prior arrangement, it was obviously mindful of the

existence of these requirement, as evident from several references that

were made to them in the course of its judgment.

When viewed in the light of the above, the Appellants presence

during the attack on Kusumawathie and thereafter on her children could

not be taken as a mere by stander who simply watched what was

happening due to his curiosity. Neither the Appellants conduct could

be accepted as who merely shares the criminal intention nor as a person

who derived fiendishly delight in what is happening as per The Queen v

Vincent Fernando and two others and Mir Mohammad Omar & Others

(supra). In the context of consideration of any other reasonable

hypothesis that might accrue in favour of the Appellant, the trial Court

had considered the probability of a third-party involvement in the

commission of the two murders. None of the accused or the Appellant

had made any suggestion to the prosecution witnesses in that regard.

The prosecution evidence also does not provide any basis for such a

proposition. Nonetheless, the trial Court considered this hypothesis and

then decided to exclude same on the basis such an involvement of

another party is highly unlikely, given the fact that the two murders

were committed by the three accused in the same transaction with the

motive attributed to them.

The process of reasoning adopted by the trial Court to exclude a

third-party involvement in the commission of the two murders runs

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

74

parallel to the process of reasoning adopted by Sir Stephen, when he

stated (supra - at p 55);

Let the question be whether A committed a crime. The facts which the

Judge actually knows are that certain witnesses made before him a

variety of statements which he believes to be true. The result of these

statements is to establish certain facts which show that either A or B or

C must have committed the crime, and neither B nor C did commit it. In

this case that facts before the Judge would be inconsistent with any other

reasonable hypothesis except that A committed the crime.

Learned author, in his attempt to illustrate the manner in which a

Court could prefer to accept one hypothesis among several other by

accepting same and discarding others, adopted a process of logical

reasoning in the selection of that particular hypothesis against the

others. If this example is adopted with certain modifications to suit the

circumstances of the instant appeal then it should read thus; if certain

facts which show that the three accused together or a third party must

have committed the crimes, and the established facts before the Judge

points to the fact that no third party involvement, then the facts before

the Judge would be inconsistent with any other reasonable hypothesis except

that the three accused committed the crime. Then the remaining question

would be the liability of the Appellant, in the commission of the

murders.

The decision of the Court of Appeal, in affirming the conviction

entered by the trial Court upon the said inference, adopted the

reasoning of the judgment of the Court of Criminal Appeal in King v

Gunaratna et al (1946) 47 NLR 145, which dealt with a case of

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

75

circumstantial evidence. Cannon J, referring to the contention by the

appellant before that Court stating that the evidence related to

circumstances that are only of suspicion against him, stated (at p.149)

each fact, taken separately, may be so termed, but the question for

consideration is whether, taken cumulatively, they are sufficient to rebut the

presumption of innocence. The conclusions reached by the trial Court as

well as the appellate Court could not be faulted, in view of the

considerations I have already referred to in this Judgment, taken along

with the pronouncement in the Judgment of Attorney General v

Seneviratne (supra) that The Jury, who are judges of fact, are entitled, as

they did in the present case, to conclude that where murder and robbery form

part of the same transaction, the person who committed the robbery committed

the murder also which I reformulate in relation to the instant appeal to

denote that the trial Court, being the tribunal of fact, is entitled to

conclude that the persons who committed the attempted murder also

committed the two murders where the attempted murder and the two

murders form part of the same transaction,

However, in Don Somapala v Republic of Sri Lanka (1975) 78

NLR 183, Thamotheram J held the view (at p.188); Court may

presume that a man who is in possession of stolen goods, soon after the theft, is

either a thief, or has received goods knowing them to be stolen, unless he can

account for its possession. This is a presumption which a Court may or may

not draw depending on the circumstances of the case. There is no " similar "

presumption that a murder committed in the same transaction was committed

by the person who had such possession. There is no presumptive proof of this.

The burden still remains to prove beyond reasonable doubt that the person who

committed the robbery did also commit the murder. All that the prosecution

has established is that the accused was present at the time of robbery.

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

76

This statement of Thamotheram J was considered by a divisional

bench of five Judges of this Court in Attorney General v Seneviratne

(ibid), and Weeraratne J, with concurrence of Sharvananda J (as he then

was) and Zosa J, held that the ruling in Somapala's case should be

confined to the special facts of that case and has no application to the

facts disclosed in the instant case. The Jury, who are judges of fact, are entitled,

as they did in the present case, to conclude that where murder and robbery

form part of the same transaction, the person who committed the robbery

committed the murder also. The validity of such a conclusion depends on the

facts of the transaction. I respectfully follow the pronouncement made

by Weeraratne J that the ruling in Somapala's case should be confined to

the special facts of that case and hold that it does not lay down a general

principle. I fortify my view on that statement with the wording found in

Section 114 itself to the effect that the Court may presume existence of

any fact which it thinks likely to have happened having regard to

common course of natural events, etc. in their relation to the facts

of the particular case (emphasis is added), as observed by Amaratunge

J in Ariyasinghe and Others v Attorney General (supra).

In this regard, it must be noted that the indictment, upon which

the 1st accused, 2nd accused and the Appellant were tried on, too had

been presented before the trial Court on that very basis. It is not

necessary to highlight the fact that the participatory presence of the

Appellant in the commission of the three offences is built into the said

conclusion reached by the trial Court and affirmed by the Court of

Appeal, and I have no reason to term it as an unreasonable inference

reached on the available material.

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

77

Learned Presidents Counsel placed his contention solely upon

the factor that there was no sufficient evidence to support a conviction

on attempted murder and there was none to support the conviction on

murders. In view of the reasons already stated in the preceding part of

this judgment, it is my considered view that the inference reached by

the trial Court is a reasonable inference that could be drawn upon,

having regard to the totality of the circumstances presented before that

Court and therefore could also be termed as a necessary inference, in

the absence of any material to the contrary. I find the following

statement of De Kretser J in The King v Marthino et al (supra, at p.524) is

apt in relation to the instant appeal, since the evidence presented by the

prosecution clearly forms a substantial compact mass and to

disintegrate the evidence into fragments and to examine each fragment is

hardly to do justice to the evidence as a whole.

The Court of Criminal Appeal, in its judgment of Wasalamuni

Richard and two Others v The State (1973) 76 NLR 534, had held thus

(at p.552);

The question whether a particular set of circumstances establish

that an accused person acted in furtherance of a common

intention is always a question of fact and if the jury's views on

the facts cannot be said to be unreasonable, it is not the function

of this Court to interfere. In Rishideo v. State of Uttar

Pradesh, (1955) A. I. R. 331, (at p.335), the Supreme Court of

India has expressed this principle on following terms;

After all the existence of a common intention said to have

been shared by the accused person is, on an ultimate

analysis, a question of fact. We are not of opinion that the

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

78

inference of fact drawn by the Sessions Judge appearing

from the facts and circumstances appearing on the record

of this case and which was accepted by the High Court was

improper or that these facts and circumstances were

capable of an innocent explanation.

In this instance, the conclusion reached by the trial Court that the

Appellant had shared a common murderous intention with the other

two accused to commit murder, in addition to him sharing a common

intention to commit either the murder of Kusumawathie or to cause life

threatening injury to her could easily be termed as a reasonable

inference that had been reached upon consideration of the set of

circumstances that were presented before Court. Therefore, I concur

with the affirmation of the said conclusion by the Court of Appeal.

Accordingly, I proceed to answer the three questions of law, on

which the instant appeal was heard, in the following manner;

(b) Did the Learned Judges of the Court of Appeal fail to

appreciate that the entirety of the evidence led at the trial in

the High Court do not justify the conviction of the

Appellant of the offences set out in 1st, 2nd, and 3rd charges

of the Indictment? No.

(c) Did the Learned Judges of the Court of Appeal fail to

appreciate the items of evidence in favour of the Appellant

which tends to negative his participation in the incidents

which culminated in causing hurt to Thotapitiya

Arachchilage Kusumawathie and causing the deaths of

Hettiarachchige Susantha and Hettiarachchige Swarna? No.

S.C. Appeal No. 14/2019

79

(d) Did the Learned Judges of the Court of Appeal misdirect

themselves in holding that the Appellants convictions in

respect of the murders of Hettiarachchige Susantha and

Hettiarachchige Swarna is correct inasmuch as there is no

direct or circumstantial evidence connecting the Appellant

with the said murders? No.

In view of the fact that the answers of this Court on all the

questions of law are found to be in the negative, the conviction entered

by the High Court against the Appellant on all three counts in the

indictment and the judgment of the Court of Appeal dismissing the

appeal of the Appellant by affirming the said conviction should not be

disturbed. The judgment of the Court of Appeal and the judgment of

the High Court are accordingly affirmed, along with the sentences

imposed on the Appellant.

The appeal of the Appellant is accordingly dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

P. PADMAN SURASENA, J. I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

MAHINDA SAMAYAWARDHENA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT