IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal under

and in terms of the Provisions of

Section 5C of the High Court of

the Provinces (Special Provisions)

Amendment Act No.54 of 2006,

read inter alia with the provisions

of Article 128(2) of the

Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

from the Judgement of the High

Court of the Western Province

(holden at Colombo, exercising

civil Jurisdiction)

1. Wadutantirage Verjiniya

Shirani Fernando 2. Gihan Jenius Moses 3. Sheyani Verjiniya Moses 4. Enila Jekila Moses (2nd,

3rd and 4th Plaintiffs appearing by their next friend the 1st Plaintiff) All of No. 12A Banglawatta Terrace, Banglawatta Mabola, Wattala

1

Plaintiffs

Vs. 1. Manager,

Shanak International (Pvt) Ltd, No. 38, 2nd Lane, Rawathawatta, Moratuwa 2. L.W.D Udaya Athula

No. 195/2 Gonawala, Kelaniya Defendants AND BETWEEN

L.W.D Udaya Athula

No. 195/2 Gonawala, Kelaniya 2nd Defendant- Appellant Vs. 1. Wadutantirage Verjiniya

Shirani Fernando 2. Gihan Jenius Moses 3. Sheyani Verjiniya Moses 4. Enila Jekila Moses (2nd,

3rd and 4th Plaintiffs appearing by their next friend the 1st Plaintiff)

2

All of No. 12A Banglawatta Terrace, Banglawatta Mabola, Wattala Plaintiffs-Respondents

Manager, Shanak International (Pvt) Ltd, No. 38, 2nd Lane, Rawathawatta,Moratuwa 1st Defendant- Respondent AND NOW BETWEEN L.W.D Udaya Athula No. 195/2 Gonawala, Kelaniya

2nd Defendant-Appellant- Appellant

Vs.

1. Wadutantirage Verjiniya

Shirani Fernando 2. Gihan Jenius Moses 3. Sheyani Verjiniya Moses 4. Enila Jekila Moses (2nd,

3rd and 4th Plaintiffs appearing by their next friend the 1st Plaintiff) All of No. 12A Banglawatta Terrace, Banglawatta Mabola, Wattala

3

Plaintiffs- Respondents-Respondents Manager, Shanak International (Pvt) Ltd, No. 38, 2nd Lane,

Rawathawatta,Moratuwa

1st Defendant-Respondent-Respondent

BEFORE: HON. P. PADMAN SURASENA, J.

HON. E.A.G.R. AMARASEKARA, J.

HON. K.KUMUDINI WICKREMASINGHE, J.

COUNSEL: Erusha Kalidasa with Renuka Kumarasinghe

Instructed by Anusha Wickramasinghe for the

2nd Defendant-Appellant-Appellant.

Dr. Sunil F.A. Cooray with Ms. Sudarshani

Cooray for the Plaintiffs- Respondents-

Respondents

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS: By 2nd Defendant-Appellant-Appellant on

24.05.2019.

By the Plaintiffs-Respondents-Respondents

on 19.09.2019.

ARGUED ON: 13.01.2023

4

DECIDED ON: 25.03.2025

K.KUMUDINI WICKREMASINGHE, J.

The Plaintiffs- Respondents-Respondents (hereinafter referred to as the

Respondents) initiated this action in the District Court of Colombo

seeking to recover a sum of Rupees 20 million as damages on the basis

that the negligence of the 2nd Defendant-Appellant-Appellant

(hereinafter referred to as the Appellant) had caused the death of the

Respondents husband/father. The Appellant in his answer whilst

denying the allegation leveled against him, pleaded that the contributory

negligence of the deceased had caused the accident, a result of which

caused the death of the deceased.

The Learned District Judge of Colombo, considering all the evidence led

in trial, delivered his judgement on 06.02.2014 granting the Respondents

a sum of Rupees 7,680,000/- on damages and/or compensation to be

paid by the Appellant. The Learned District Court Judge, in his

impugned judgement held inter alia, since the Appellant had pleaded

guilty in the Magistrate Court for a charge under section 298 of the Penal

Code, the Appellant is guilty for negligence. Furthermore, the Learned

District Court Judge held that even if there is contributory negligence on

the part of the deceased it cannot be considered, as the negligence on

part of the Appellant has been proved in this case.

Being aggrieved by the Judgement of the District Court of Colombo, the

Appellant preferred an appeal to the High Court of the Western Province

(Exercising Civil Appellate Jurisdiction) holden in Colombo. The Learned

5

High Court Judges following the oral and written submissions of both

parties, delivered their judgement on 11.01.2018 dismissing the

Appellants appeal.

Aggrieved by which the Judgement of the High Court of the Western

Province (Exercising Civil Appellate Jurisdiction) holden in Colombo, the

Appellant appealed to the Supreme Court. On 27.09.2018 the Supreme

Court granted leave to appeal on the following question of law, Did the

High Court err in law by not considering the contributory negligence

of the deceased in calculating the quantum of compensation.

In the written submissions of the Appellant, the Appellant contends by

referring to the document marked 4 at page 233 of the brief, that the

Learned Magistrate in the connected case has recorded that the deceased

had crossed the road where there is a barricade/fence dividing the road

according to the Police, reproduced as follows:

. The

Photographs marked V-1, V-2, V-7, V-8 and V-9 at pages 187-193 of the

brief, clearly demonstrate that the place where the deceased crossed

from was divided by a fence.

The Appellant further stated that, that it is logical that an accident can

occur as a result of the negligence of one party but the other party can

too contribute to the cause of the accident for his negligence. The

Appellant stated that the Learned Judges of the High Court of Colombo

had also appreciated that the deceased had crossed the road where there

was no pedestrian crossing.

6

In the written submissions of the Respondents, the Respondents contend

that contributory negligence is not a defense when the dependents sue

for damages in a fatal accident case. The Respondents relied on R G

McKerron in Law of Delict, 7th Edition at page 149 It follows from a

peculiar nature of the action that any defense which strikes only at the

deceaseds personal right to sue, and not at the existence of the duty,

cannot be set up against the dependants. Thus, the dependants can

recover in full despite the fact that contributory negligence of the deceased

would have been a bar at common law to any claim by the deceased

himself, had he merely been injured and not killed. So an agreement by

the deceased to accept all risk of injury cannot be set up as a defense to

an action by his dependents.

The Respondents submit that the cause of the accident was due to the

negligent driving of the Appellant. The Appellant during cross

examination admitted that he was driving at a speed of 50 to 55

kilometers per hour at the time of the accident.

Now I will proceed to answer the question of law on which leave was

granted, namely that Did the High Court err in law by not considering

the contributory negligence of the deceased in calculating the quantum

of compensation.

Before addressing the aspect of contributory negligence, I will first delve

into the law of negligence in Sri Lanka. The term Culpa or negligence is

the failure, in doing an act, or in omitting to do an act, to take precaution

which a reasonable man diligens paterfamilias would take if he, in the

circumstances, could have foreseen that injury would directly cause to

7

another person or his property if those precaution were not taken S A

Railways V Saunders [1931] AD 271. In order to bring a successful

claim in negligence, four elements must be established: (i) the existence

of a duty of care, (ii) breach of that duty, (iii) legal causation and (iv)

damages.

Lord Atkin in the famous English case of Donoghue v Stevenson [1932]

AC 562 HL held The breach of road rules can constitute negligence. The

question of negligence must be considered on the basis of all evidence. It

must not be made to hinge upon one answer such that there was no fault

on either side given in the context of the questioning on the fact that there

was no police prosecution.

An important principle developed by Lord Atkin in the above case was

when the duty of care might arise known as the neighbour principle.

The principle holds that one must exercise reasonable care to avoid

actions or inactions that could foreseeably harm another person. Lord

Atkin defined a "neighbour" as someone so closely and directly impacted

by the act that they should be considered when contemplating the

potential effects of ones actions or omissions.

The traditional approach to determining wrongfulness originates from

the decision in Minister van Polisie v Ewels [1975] 3 SA 590 (A) at

596597. This case established that conduct is deemed wrongful if the

harm suffered was caused in a legally reprehensible or unreasonable

manner, contra bonos mores (against good morals), considering all

relevant circumstances. In Roman-Dutch law, this principle is known as

the "Boni Mores Test," where boni mores, meaning "good morals," serves

8

as a legal standard to evaluate the wrongfulness of a defendant's conduct

based on society's sense of justice, morality, and reasonableness. This

approach was further discussed in Carmichele v Minister of Safety

and Security [2001] CCT 48/00 ZACC 22.

The English case of Caparo Industries plc v Dickman [1990] AC 605

enunciated the three fold test, a case dealing with pure economic loss

caused by alleged negligent misstatements. In this case, the court held

that the three elements that must be established in respect of a duty of

care are foreseeability of harm; proximity and whether it is fair, just and

reasonable to impose a duty of care.

The second element of the tort of negligence is the defendant's improper

act or omission, commonly referred to as a breach of duty. This element

presupposes the existence of a standard of proper behavior aimed at

avoiding undue risks of harm to others and their property, which ties

back to the duty of care. As articulated by Baron Edward Hall in Blyth v.

Proprietors of the Birmingham Waterworks Co. [1856] 11 Ex Ch

781, the law of negligence evaluates what type and level of care is

reasonable under specific circumstances. It relies on the standard of "a

reasonably prudent person" and considers how such a person would act

in a given situation to pursue their objectives while avoiding harm to

others. This case established the reasonable person test.

The next element is causation. To establish causation, it is not enough

for the plaintiff to demonstrate that the defendant's conduct caused the

harm. The plaintiff must also show a direct link between their damage

and the defendant's negligence, the specific aspect of the conduct that

breached the duty owed to the plaintiff. The fundamental standard for

9

causation is the "but-for" test, which requires that the defendant's

negligence be a sine qua non of the harm, a necessary condition without

which the harm would not have occurred. In other words, the

defendant's negligence is considered a cause of the plaintiff's harm if the

harm would not have happened but for the defendant's negligence, as

established in Cork v. Kirby MacLean Ltd [1952] 2 All ER 402.

The final element is that a damage must be caused to the Plaintiff as a

result of the negligence of the Defendant. As established in the case of

The Wagon Mound no 1 [1961] AC 388 within the principles of

remoteness of damage, damage will only be compensable where that

damage could have been reasonably foreseen by the reasonable man.

Applying the standards of negligence set out above to the facts of this

case. The Appellant was driving his vehicle on Baseline Road when the

vehicle he was driving hit the husband/father of the Respondents, a

result of which caused his death. It is a trite law established by a

plethora of cases that motorists owe a duty of care to all road users,

especially pedestrians and children as discussed in the case of Chan v

Peters [2021] EWHC 2004 QB. As such the Appellant owed a duty of

care to the deceased. In terms of the breach of such duty of care, in

applying the reasonable man test did the conduct of the Appellant fall

short of that exercised by a reasonably prudent man. The Learned

District Court Judge in determining the Appellants negligence held that

as the Appellant had pleaded guilty for the charge under section 298 of

the penal code, the Appellants negligence has been proven. The

Learned High Court Judges held that the place at which the accident

occurred was at a roundabout on Baseline Road Colombo, where people

10

usually go across the road, or at least a reasonable prudent man would

expect that a person would go across the road and not drive at excessive

speed.

Upon perusal of the record of the cross examination of the Appellant in

the District court, when questioned on what speed the Appellant was

traveling at the time of the accident, the Appellant answered he was

traveling at a speed of 40 kilometers per hour (at page 154 of the brief).

However, as per the document marked P12 which is the Police statement

taken from the Appellant, a few hours after the accident, the Appellant

stated that he was traveling at a speed of 50 to 55 kilometers per hour

(at page 155 of the brief). The Appellant during cross examination

concedes to the fact that he could have been traveling at the speed of 50

to 55 kilometers. In P12, the Appellant had further stated that one of the

front tires of the vehicle had burst, owing to which he lost control of the

vehicle, leading to the accident. However, as per the evidence of the

Government Analyst at page 110 of the brief, the tyre had burst after the

accident had occurred and not before. Further, during the cross

examination of the Appellant,the Appellant admitted that the vehicle did

not come to a halt after hitting the deceased but continued on and hit

the pavement, which led to the tyre to burst (at pages 161-162 of the

brief). Therefore, when all these factors are considered in total it is

obvious that the Appellant was in fact traveling at an excessive speed

and a breach of duty of care has occurred.

The next element is causation, which is the but-for test, in considering

the facts above, if not for the negligent driving and excessive speed of the

Appellant, the accident would not have occurred. There is a direct nexus

11

between the act of negligence and the death of the victim. The final

element is to establish negligence is damages which is also satisfied as

the deceased has lost his life.

The court can infer that the Appellant was indeed traveling at an

excessive speed based on the combination of all these factors together. It

was this combination of evidence that led the Learned District Court

Judge and the Learned High Court Judges to conclude that the Appellant

was driving negligently at an excessive speed, not solely because he

entered a guilty plea in the Magistrates Court in the related case.

Therefore, I am of the opinion that the Appellants negligence has been

established in this case due to all these factors.

Now I will consider the aspect of contributory negligence. Contributory

negligence is defined by U.L. Abdul Majeed in A Modern Treatise on

the Law of Delict (Tort) as an act or inaction on the part of an injured

party that combines with the negligence of another in causing the injury,

sometimes as to diminish or bar the recovery of damages for the injury. It

is the contention of the Appellant that the deceased attempted to cross

the road where there is no pedestrian crossing, where there is a fence

separating the line of the road. As such the Appellant contends that the

accident occurred due to the negligence or contributory negligence of the

deceased.

In Union Government (Minister of Railways) v Lee [1927] AD 202, it

was established that a widow or minor children could claim damages for

the wrongful death of a person allegedly caused by the defendant's

negligence, even if the death resulted from the combined negligence of

12

the defendant and the deceased. Under Roman-Dutch law unlike Roman

law, which adheres to the Lex Aquilia principle the widow does not

simply "stand in the shoes" of her husband; rather, she and the children

each possess an independent right of action. Thus, the husbands

negligence does not prevent them from suing the responsible party for

loss of income due to his wrongful death. This principle was upheld in

the case of Jamesons Minors v C.S.A.R. [1908] TS 575 These

principles entailed that there are no grounds on which the negligence of

the husband can be imputed to his widow, thus forfeiting her claim for

damages.

In the English case of Davies v Mann [1842] 152 ER 588 developed the

last opportunity rule. This rule places responsibility on the party who

had the final opportunity to prevent the accident or injury. It frames

contributory negligence in terms of causation. The central issue is

whether a causal connection can be established between the injured

party's behavior and the occurrence of the accident. If the immediate

cause of the accident is attributed to the injured partys actions often

described as the injured partys fault having directly contributed to the

injury then there is no basis for a damages claim. The crucial question,

therefore, is which party had the last and, consequently, the better

chance to prevent the harm; that party should then assume

responsibility for the resulting damage.

In the case of Tuff v. Warman [1858] 5 C.B. (N.S.) 572, Justice

Wightman held that the question to consider when determining a case

concerning contributory negligence should be: whether the damage was

occasioned entirely by the negligence or improper conduct of the

13

defendant, or whether the plaintiff himself so far contributed to the

misfortune,but for his own negligence or want of ordinary and common

care and caution on his part, the misfortune would not have happened. In

the first case, the plaintiff would be entitled to recover, in the latter not; as,

but for his own fault, the misfortune would not have happened. Mere

negligence or want of ordinary care or caution would not, however,

disentitle him to recover, unless it were such, but for that negligence or

want of ordinary care and caution, the misfortune could not have

happened; nor, if the defendant might by the exercise of care on his part

have avoided the consequences of the neglect or carelessness of the

plaintiff.

It is quite clearly established as a principle of Roman Dutch Law that the

family of the deceased can still bring an action regardless of contributory

negligence on the part of the deceased, if the negligence has caused the

death of the deceased. It is an undisputed fact that the deceased had

attempted to cross the road at a point where there is no pedestrian

crossing. However, the place at which the accident occurred is a

roundabout on Baseline Road which is associated with people crossing

the road as correctly decided by the Learned High Court Judges. In order

to be a reasonably prudent driver on Sri Lankan roads, one must

recognise that pedestrians, animals, and various obstacles may suddenly

appear on the roadway. Therefore, one should drive with an awareness of

these possibilities, allowing for a quick response to avoid potential

accidents. The Appellant has admitted that it was a Sunday afternoon on

which the accident occurred without many vehicles on the road and as

such it is likely he did not anticipate any pedestrians to cross the road.

The Appellant has also admitted that it is possible he was driving at a

14

speed of 50 to 55 kilometres per hour when the accident occurred.

However, as unfortunate as it is, one cannot concede the fact that it is

due to the excessive speed at which the Appellant was traveling which

led to the accident and he could not avoid hitting the deceased. As such

his negligence is the operative cause of this accident that led to the death

of the deceased and the contributory negligence of the deceased if at all,

at this juncture is irrelevant.

Addressing the aspect of the quantum of the damages awarded by the

Learned District Court Judge. The Respondents had prayed for a sum of

Rupees 20 million in damages in their plaint of the District Court. The

Learned District Court Judge in his judgement had awarded a sum of

Rupees 7,680,000 with legal interest. The Learned District Court Judge

had awarded this amount on the calculation that the deceased was 44

years at the time of his death with a monthly income of Rupees 40.000

and an annual income of Rupees 480,000. The Learned District Court

Judge held that an average person would work until the retirement age

of 60 years as such Rupees 480,000 x 16 years which amounts to

Rupees 7,680,000 was awarded to the Respondents. It is settled law that,

an Aquilian action under Roman Dutch Law, permits granting only of

damages for pecuniary loss and not for loss of love and affection, this

position was discussed in detail in the case of Prof Priyani Soyza v

Reinzie Arsecularatne [2001] 2 Sri LR 295 where it was held that

Requisites of an action under the Lex Aquilia, have been expressed by

different text writers in different ways; but substantially they are the

same. Wickramanayake, gives the requisites as

15

(i) the plaintiff must show actual pecuniary loss. An exception is the award

of compensation for physical pain suffered by a person injured through the

negligence of another,

(ii) He must show that the loss was due to the unlawful act of the

defendant or that the defendant was acting in excess of his rights,

(iii) He must show dolus or culpa on the part of the defendant (The Law of

Delict in Ceylon 1949).

In the case of Sirisena v Ramachandran And Another [2003] 3 Sri LR

344 it was held that in order to be recover damages in a claim of

negligence, The plaintiff must show that she has suffered patrimonial loss

through being deprived of benefits whether in the form of maintenance of

services, rendered by the deceased under a legal duty to do so .... the

dependents are entitled to compensation only for the actual pecuniary loss

which they have suffered by reason of the death. In the ordinary way,

when the head of a household is killed, his wife and children are

dependent on him to the extent of his earnings or other income, less a

deduction for money spent on the maintenance of the husband and his

other personal needs (at page 346). In Geldenhuys v Transvaal Hindu

Educational Council [1938] W.L.D. 260 it was discussed that in the

event the widow has lost the pecuniary benefits which would have been

hers through her husband if he was alive, having regard to the normal

expectation of life, such widow will be entitled to claim compensation on

account of her being deprived of the support which she was entitled to

receive from her husband.

Based on the above principles of law, applying the same to the facts of

the instant case, the Learned District Court Judge has granted the

16

damages on a calculation based on the deceaseds monthly wages which

is a reasonable basis for the calculation of pecuniary loss. Therefore I see

no reason to interfere with the amount of damages awarded by the

Learned District Court Judge.

Therefore, considering all of the above factors in this appeal of the

Appellant, I am of the view that the Learned District Court Judge and the

Learned High Court Judges had arrived at the correct conclusion when

considering the negligence on part of the Appellant.

Accordingly, I answer the question of law on which leave to appeal has

been granted in the negative. For these reasons, the Judgment of the

High Court of the Western Province (Exercising Civil Appellate

Jurisdiction) holden in Colombo and the Judgement of the District Court

are affirmed.

The appeal of Appellant is hereby dismissed.

I make no order for costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

E.A.G.R. AMARASEKARA J,

I had the privilege of reading the judgement written by Her Ladyship

Justice Kumudini Wickramasinghe in its draft form.

I prefer to express my views as follows;

17

As per the journal entry dated 27.09.2018, it is not clear whether the

question of law allowed is the one in paragraph 20 (c) or 20 (e) of the

Petition dated 20.02.2018. Anyway, the main defence taken up in the

Answer as well as what has been addressed in written submission is

based on contributory negligence and its relevance to the computation of

compensation which indicates that the main contention between the

parties, is the question of law mentioned in paragraph 20(E) of the said

Petition.

However first I prefer to refer to question of law 20(C) in the Petition,

which is mentioned below;

20(C). Did the High Court err by its conclusion that the Petitioner drove

vehicle at an excessive speed?

First of all, it must be noted that the above question of law 20(C) does

not challenge the conclusion reached by the Learned District Judge as

perverse. The Learned District Judge considering the fact that the 2nd

Defendant Appellant pleaded guilty to the charge under Section 298 of

the Penal Code before the Magistrate, where a charge has to be proved

beyond reasonable doubt which needs a higher standard of proof than

before a civil court, and the facts revealed by the Government analyst

report and evidence, came to the conclusion that the 2nd Defendant

Appellant had driven the vehicle at an excessive speed. I do not see that

the said conclusion can be considered as perverse.

In addition to the above facts, the Learned High Court judge has

considered what the 2nd Defendant had stated to the Police at a time

close to the accident, in coming to the conclusion that the 2nd Defendant

was driving at an excessive speed and negligently.

18

In Nadarajah v CTB (1979) 2 NLR 48 it was held that a plea of guilt

tendered by the driver in the Magistrate Court is relevant as an

admission made by him and ought to be taken into consideration by the

trial judge in the civil suit. In Mahipala and Others V Martin Singho

(2006) 2 Sri L R 272, it was held that the Defendants unqualified plea

of guilt is most relevant and admissible as evidence of negligence on his

part and the plea of guilt in a criminal court is admissible in civil

proceedings. Further it was held that when the 1st Defendant pleaded

guilty to the charges of recklessness and negligent driving under Motor

Traffic Act, it has legal proof in the legal sense.

Hence, even if it is the question of law in paragraph 20(C) which was

allowed by this Court, it has to be answered in the negative since there

was facts that supports the conclusions of the courts below which came

to the conclusion that the 2nd Defendant drove in an excessive speed and

was Negligent. As such this court cannot hold that those decisions were

perverse.

Now I prefer to consider the question of law mentioned in paragraph

20(E) which has been considered by my sister Judge in her draft

judgement and answered in the negative. I too agree that the question of

law has to be answered in the negative. The said question of law reads as

follows;

20 E. Did the High Court err in law by not considering the contributory

negligence of the deceased in calculating the quantum of compensation?

First it is necessary to refer to Section 3 of Contributory Negligence and

Joint Wrongdoers Act No. 12 of 1968. Aforesaid section provides for the

apportionment of damages between the parties who are involved in the

19

contributory negligence and the given section does not apply to a

dependent of a party that contributes to the negligence, who file a case

on a cause of action that has caused pecuniary loss to the said

dependent. Thus, when a dependent of a party to contributory negligence

filed a case as a Plaintiff and one has to look at our common law,

Roman-Dutch Law, to see whether compensation has to be apportioned

or reduced in accordance with the contribution for the negligence caused

made by the negligent party to whom the dependent is related.

It must be noted, when the dependents filed an action against a party to

the contributory negligence, they filed it based on a cause of action

accrued to them due to the pecuniary loss caused to them by said

negligence. It must be differentiated from a situation where the

dependents are substituted as plaintiffs to a party deceased who was the

plaintiff originally. On said occasions, they step into the shoes of the

original plaintiff who is a party to the contributory negligence. The case

at hand is not a case where the plaintiffs have been substituted for the

original plaintiffs who was a party to contributory negligence. In contrast,

the present case at hand has been filed by the dependents of a person,

who is deceased due to an accident caused by the negligence of the

Defendant, for the pecuniary loss caused to them. The deceased might

have been a party to the contributory negligence but the dependents are

not making claims for a cause of action accrued to the deceased but

directly to them.

Union Government v Lee (1927) A.D. 202, which is referred to by her

Ladyship Justice Wickremesinghe in her draft judgment which also has

been referred to by R.G. Mckerron in his book titled Law of Delict

Platinum Edition at page 323 and 324, is a case where it was held that

20

the negligence of the deceased, although it would have been an answer to

any claim for damages by him, if he had been injured but not killed, was

not a bar to a claim by his widow;

In the same book at page 66 and 67 with regard to negligence of a third

person, Mckerron states as follows:

As a general rule it is no defence for the defendant to plead that the

negligence of a third party contributed to the damage. To this rule there is

only one real exception, namely, where the negligence of the third person

is imputable to the plaintiff. Where this is the case, the position is the same

as if the plaintiff had been guilty of negligence. The negligence of one

person is imputable to another only in those exceptional cases in which the

law holds one person responsible for the wrongful acts of another. Thus,

since one spouse is not responsible for the delicts of the other unless the

other was acting as his or her agent or servant. The negligence of the

plaintiffs spouse is not ordinarily imputable to the plaintiff. Similarly,

since dependents do not derive their rights through the deceaseds estate,

the negligence of the deceased cannot be imputed to them. Of the

exceptional cases referred to, by far, the most important is the liability of a

master for the wrongs of his servant. The contributory negligence of a

servant acting in the course of his employment can always be set up, both

at common law and under the Apportionment of Damages Act, to a claim

by his employer.

In same book at page 149 it is stated as follows:

It follows from the peculiar nature of the action that any defence which

strikes only at the deceaseds personal right to sue, and not at the

existence of the duty, cannot be set up against the dependents. Thus, the

21

dependents can recover in full despite the fact that the contributory

negligence of the deceased would have been a bar at common law to any

claim by the deceased himself, had he been merely injured and not killed.

So, an agreement by, the deceased to accept all risk of injury cannot be set

up as a defence to an action by his dependents. ...

Then it is clear as per the Roman-Dutch Law, our Common Law,

contributory negligence of the deceased cannot be used to defeat or

reduce a claim made by the dependents of the deceased based on a

cause of action accrued to the dependents, themselves. This may not be

so, if they have been substituted to the claim of a deceased plaintiff, or

they claim their compensation as part of one that should be accrued to

the deceased estate or the dependents are vicariously liable for the

alleged acts of the deceased. The present case at hand is one filed on a

cause of action accrued to the dependents which caused pecuniary loss

to them due to death of the deceased for which the Negligence of the

Defendant contributed.

In Master Divers (Pvt.) Ltd. Vs Anusha Karunaratne and Others

(2010) 1Sri L R 403 at 419, Abdul Salam J held Finally it must be

observed that unlike in English Law, the Roman Dutch Law looks at the

Aquilian Action extended to the dependents of the deceased as an

independent, non-derivative remedy, unfettered by defences vitiating the

deceaseds personal right to sue, including the contributory negligence-

vide Union Government Vs Lee.

As such, as per the Common Law, Contributory Negligence of the

deceased need not have been considered by the Courts below to refuse or

reduce the compensation. Hence, the question of law 20 (E) mentioned

above, has to be answered in the Negative.

22

This court observes that in calculating the compensation, the Learned

District Court Judge had considered Rs. 40,000 /= as the monthly

income of the deceased and there is a loss of Rs. 40,000 /= per month to

the Plaintiffs who are the Dependents. However, the deceased could have

used a considerable amount from that Rs. 40,000 /= for his day-to-day

expenses such as travelling to work, clothes, medical expenses and

meals. In my view, he should have used at least 1/3rd of that amount for

his expenses. However, there is no question of law raised or allowed

regarding that aspect. It is not proper to reduce the compensation on a

point not raised or argued by the parties.

Since I answer the questions of law relied upon by the parties in the

Negative, I dismiss the appeal. No costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

P. PADMAN SURASENA J.

I agree with the judgement of Hon. Justice E.A.G.R. Amarasekara.

Judge of the Supreme Court

23