1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application under Article 126 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

1. P.S.R. Premalal

No.2, First Lane, Vidyala Mawatha, SC (FR) Application No.502/2010 Anuradhapura.

2. W.G. Karunaratne,

Neelavila, Suruwirugama, Sooriyawewa. 3. W.M.A.C. Dissanayake,

‘Jeewana’, Kamburupitiya. 4. R.S.K. Mallawaarachchi,

61d, Feeldvive Terrace, Kandy Road, Wewaldeniya. 5. K.L.Mahinda

No. 34, Mawarala Watta, Mawarala, Matara. 6. S.P. Mallawaarachchi,

No.83, Anuradhapura Road, Kahatagasdiliya. 7. P.K.W.Kalutota,

Palugaswala, Lunama, Ambalantota. 8. R.W.G.D.P. Munasinghe,

No.42, Jana Udana House Scheme, Talawa.

2

9. J.K.D.S.Samadara,

‘Manjula’, Kalahe, Mandawala, Galle. 10. W.D.S.Fernando,

No.32, East Moratumulla, Moratuwa. 11. G.G.G. Rejikumara,

Palugampala Road, Sannasgama, Lellopitiya. 12. V.A.N. Premarathna,

Gurugewatta Road, Wendesiwatta, Ballapana, Galigamuwa. 13. W.G.N. Pathmini,

256/5, Flower Gardens, Weligama, Matara. 14. E.A. Anushka Kumari,

No.20, Andagala Road, Matugama. 15. S.K. Samarasinghe,

H 11, Nila Niwasa, Penideniya, Peradeniya. 16. P.H.Walpita,

‘Dahampaya’, Talagala, Gonapola Junction. 17. H.I.M.Kulathunga,

No.52,’Nawakala’,Kiwldeniya, Kulugammana. 18. K.C. Dasanayake,

Meewewa, Sub Post Office,

3

Narammala. 19. G.P.A.L.Pathirana,

No.193/1, Ibigala Road, Katugastota. 20. I.M.S.K.M.Idisooriya,

No.163/3, M.C. Nilaniwasa, Hatton House Mawatha, Hatton. 21. Y.S.P.P. Gunarathna.

No 401/ A/2, Dagonna, Negambo. 22. H.K.G Niroshana,

No. 671, Perakum Pedesa, Kaduruwela, Polannaruwa. 23. A.M.Anura Thissa,

No.2/2, 3rd Lane, Kanupelella, Badulla. 24. U.P. Dahanayake,

No.206/B/2, Halgala Road, Alapaladeniya. 25. H.J. Piyasena,

‘Jayanthi’, uthuru uduwa, Kuda

Uduwa, Horana. 26. R.A.T.C.Weerasekara,

No.71,Railwayquarters,

Moratuwa. 27. Y.M. Soma Kumuduni,

No.223, Badabedda Watta, Pannala. 28. S.P. Kusumawathie,

4

No.44/16, Sri Bodigaya Road, Gampaha. 29. P.B. Wickremasinghe,

No.156, Dikkanda, Waturugama. 30. P.H.C. Pushpakumara,

No.601/66, Thammennakulama. Anuradhapura. 31. W.M.U.S. Weerakoon,

No128, ‘Banadara’, Puliyankulama, Anuradhapura. 32. D. Deepani Perera.

No.208, Aluthgama, Bogamuwa, Yakkala PETITIONERS Vs. 1. (A) Wasala Mudiyanselage Nimal

Jayantha Pushpakumara Commissioner of Examinations, Pelawatte, Battaramulla. 2. (B) Jawigodage Jayadeva Ratnasiri Secretary, Ministry of Public Administration and Local Government and Democratic Governance, Independence Square, Colombo 7.

3. M.W. Jagath Kumara 4. M.G.I.Mhawatta

5

5. L.U.J.Perera 6. H.K.M.D.K.Kavisekara 7. B.D.Y.S.Wimalarathna. 8. N.P. Samarawickrema. 9. N.Y.Kohowala. 10. H.M.V.S.Jayawardena 11. S.P.Sirimanna 12. J.H.P.Samarasena 13. K.H. Somalatha 14. L.P.M.S.Pathirana 15. W.T.N.Silva 16. D.R. Jaysinghe 17. R.A.Wijayawickrema 18. T.K.J.T.Kumari 19. J.M. Chandralatha 20. P.N.P.K Karunarathna 21. H.I.R.Hathurusinghe 22. N.M.Y.Thushari 23. W.R.R.P.Wije Rupa 24. K.P.Chaminda 25. M. Wanigasekara 26. H.D.Satharasinghe 27. Vaantha Kumari 28. R.P.M.S.Rajapaksha 29. K.H. Pushpa Jennet 30. S.D.S.A. Rupasinghe 31. N.K.U.Kumari 32. H. Thilakawardena. 33. M.M.N.S.Kumara 34. K.D.S.Sanjeewana 35. W.D.N.Sirimanna 36. U.K.B.L. Priyadarshana

The 3rd to 36th Respondents C/O Secretary, Ministry of Public Administration and Home Affairs, Independence Square, Colombo 7.

6

37 (A). Wasantha Deshapriya,

Acting Director, 28/10, Sri Lanka Institute of Development Administration, Malalasekara Mawatha, Colombo 7. 38. Hon.Attorney- General, Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

39. (B)Dharmasena Dissanayake, Chairman 40. (B)A.Salam Abdul Waid, Member. 41. (B).Ms.D.ShiranthiWijethilake,

Member 42. (A) Dr. Prathap Ramanujam, Member 43. (A)Mrs. V. Jegarasasingham, Member 44. (A) Santhi Nihal Seneviratne, Member 45. (A) S. Rannuge,Member 46. (A) D.C.Mendis, Member 47. (A)Sarath Jayathilake, Member.

The 39(B) to the 47th Respondents: of the Public Service Commission, No.177, Nawala Road, Narahenpita.

ADDED RESPONDENTS

Before: Buwaneka Aluwihare PC, J

H.N.J.Perera, J

L.T.B.Dehideniya, J

7

Counsel: J.C.Weliamuna, PC with Pulasthi Hewamanne for the Petitioners.

Nerin Pulle, DSG for the 1A, 2B, 39B, 45A and the AG.

Uditha Egalahewa PC, with Vishwa Vimukthi for the 3rd -36th Respondents.

Argued on: 06-02-2018

Decided on: 05-03-2019

L.T.B.Dehideniya, J.

The Petitioners being the public servants, and the candidates for the vacancies in

Class III of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service invoke the fundamental rights

jurisdiction of this court to challenge the legality and the correctness of the

Limited Competitive Examination- 2007 for the recruitment to class III of the Sri

Lanka Administrative Service, the recruitment process that followed the said

examination, the selection of 3rd to 36th Respondents to class III in the SLAS, the

failure of the 1st and 2nd Respondents or other authorities to conduct a proper and

comprehensive investigation into the alleged fraudulent acts.

The Limited Competitive Examination-2007, which the Petitioners sat, had

consisted of three question papers, namely General Administration, Financial

Regulations and Case Study. The examination was to be conducted on 30-05-

2009 and 31-05-2009. The Petitioners state that, on 28-05-2009, they discovered

with credible evidence that the question paper on ‘case study’ had been leaked

out to many candidates and they believed that the other two question papers were

also leaked out. The contention of the Petitioners is that, the leakage of the

question paper is a serious matter that vitiated the legitimacy and propriety of the

Limited Competitive Examination-2007.The Petitioners state that the said

8

‘malpractice’ was brought to the notice of the 1st Respondent by the General

Secretary of Sri Lanka Government, combined Management Assistants’ Services

Union, by its letter dated 08-06-2009. A fresh examination was conducted on 14-

11-2009, in respect of the question paper on case study. The Petitioners

emphasize that, they had an agitation to have a fresh examination for other two

question papers, and amidst their continuous demands for a fresh examination in

respect of the other two subjects (General Administration and Financial

Regulations), the authorities have taken no steps to redress their grievance.

According to the Petitioners, a list of interviewees was issued by the Department

of Examinations, on or about 22-04-2010. The list contained the names of 77

candidates including the Petitioners, who were eligible to be interviewed. The

Petitioners state, that the specific list contained the names of the several

candidates who have been connected with the fraudulent act of leakage of the

question paper pertaining to the ‘Case Study’. The Petitioners further complain

that the marks obtained by specific candidates have not been included into the

list. The Petitioners state that, they received letters by the 2nd Respondent for an

interview to be held on 05-06-2010, for which they attended. The Petitioners state

that, on or about 05-08-2010, the 2nd Respondent issued a list of candidates who

have been selected for the recruitment to the Class III of SLAS and as per their

contention, the list has failed to disclose either the total marks of each candidate

or the breakdown of their marks for each subject. The Petitioners further

accentuates, the fact that, it has been the practise, when releasing names of

selectees, to give the marks of such selectees in order of merit. The Petitioners

state that, they made a request to the 2nd Respondent, to release the said list with

marks but the 2nd Respondent issued the list dated 11-08-2010, including the

names of the candidates (3rd to 36th Respondents) instead. The Petitioners state

that some candidates had obtained unrealistically higher marks for the question

9

paper on General Administration, and there was a rumour that the 13th

Respondent involved in the type setting of the paper and simultaneously, 3rd ,4th

,5th 6th ,7th ,9th ,11th ,12th ,16th and 20th Respondents had access to the content of

the question papers. The Petitioners further state, that an inquiry relating to the

fraud has been pending against the 3rd and 8th Respondents, who had been selected

and majority of the Respondents have been included in the list through political

affiliations, eliminating the Petitioners.

The Petitioners state that, the decisions, actions and inactions of the 1st and 2nd

Respondents, including other authorities are illegal and amount to an

infringement of the Fundamental Rights of the Petitioners guaranteed under

Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

The 1st Respondent admits the fact that the Petitioners sat for the Limited

Competitive Examination 2007 for SLAS. The 1st Respondent has received a

compliant on 08-06-2009, about the leaking out of a question paper relevant to

the ‘Case Study’, which was scheduled to be held on 31-05-2009 prior to the

examination. The 1st Respondent states that an inquiry was launched upon the

receipt of the compliant by the Department of Examination in terms of Public

Examinations Act No: 25 of 1968 and further a complaint was made to the

Criminal Investigation Department of Sri Lanka Police (CID).

The CID was successful in discovering the premature release of the question

paper relevant to ‘case study’. As the 1st Respondent states, the Examination

pertaining to ‘Case Study’ held on 31-05-2009 was cancelled and the fresh

examination was held on 14-11-2009. Meanwhile, several other similarly

circumstanced candidates filed the writ application no.772/2009 to call for fresh

10

examinations in respect of all three question papers and the Court of Appeal

dismissed the writ application. The 1st Respondent states that, the Department of

Examinations issued a list containing 77 candidates who were eligible to attend

the interview in order of their merit.

Meanwhile, The CID and Department of Examination were both conducting

investigations in relation to the premature release of the question paper. The

Department of Examinations was capable in identifying three candidates involved

in the fraud and according to the 1st Respondent, the candidates who were

involved in the fraud, were disqualified and removed from the selected list of

candidates. Subsequently, the CID initiated criminal proceedings against the

identified perpetrators, at the Kaduwela Magistrate Court.

The 3rd to 36th Respondents reiterate the contention of the 1st and 2nd Respondents.

As the 3rd to 36th Respondents state, they were appointed to class III of the SLAS

by letter dated 06-10-2010 of the 2nd Respondent.

The Respondents’ Contention is that, the Petitioners have not complied with the

Article 126(2) of the Constitution. The Article 126 (2) of the Constitution,

describes the ‘one month rule’, which applies to the Fundamental Rights cases.

What the Respondents’ insist is that, the Petitioners have not complied with the

‘one month rule’ to institute this application.

Article 126 (2) of the Constitution states;

‘Where any person alleges that any such fundamental right or

language right relating to such person has been infringed or is about

to be infringed by executive or administrative action, he may himself

11

or by an attorney-at-law on his behalf, within one month thereof, in

accordance with such rules of court as may be in force, apply to the

Supreme Court by way of Petition in writing addressed to such Court

praying for relief or redress in respect of such infringement. Such

application may be proceeded with only with leave to proceed first

had and obtained from the Supreme Court which leave may be

granted or refused, as the case may be, by not less than two judges.’

What the Respondents argue on this matter is that, the Respondents filed the

Petition after 91 days, since the date their fundamental rights were alleged

to have been violated and the application is time barred. The Respondents

cite Mahendran v. Attorney General (S.C. Application No.68/80) and

highlight the contention of Justice Wanasundera P.C stating,

‘Article 126 requires that the application to the Supreme Court

must be made within month of the date of the alleged

infringement of the fundamental right. The Petition is clearly out

of time.’

It is further argued in the case Gamaethige v. Siriwardena and Other

(1988) 1S.L.R. 384; which states that, ‘the pursuit of other remedies,

judicial or administrative, does not prevent or interrupt the operation of the

time limit.’

Further, the Respondents uphold the contention of Sathya Hettige P.C.J, in

the case Liyanage and Another Vs. Ratnasiri Divisional Secretary,

12

Gampaha and others(2013) 1.S.L.R.06, which in essence holds the view

that, the time limit within which an application for relief for any fundamental

right or language right violation may be filed is mandatory and complied

with.

The case further asserts the fact, that the ‘month rule’ is a constitutional

mandate.

In this case, the original examinations were scheduled to be held on 30-05-

2009 and 31- 05-2009. After being discovered, that the paper on ‘case study’

was leaked out, a fresh examination was held on 14-11-2009. They faced the

interview on 05-06-2010. It is apparent, that the Petitioners were silent until

the interview was over and after getting to know that, they were disqualified

from the interview for the selection, they took steps to file this application.

The law cannot excuse on their delay in applying to the court. It has been

held by Justice Gamini Amaratunga, in Ranaweera and others v. Sub-

Inspector Wilson Siriwardena and Others (2008) 1.S.L.R.260,

‘.............. the court would entertain an application made outside the

time limit of one month provided an adequate excuse for the delay

could be adduced. For instance of a petitioner had been held

incommunicado...........’

It is evident from the statements of the Petitioners that, they were informed

about the alleged leakage of the question paper on the dates which the

examinations were scheduled to be held. They were silent for a period of

13

time and upon the non-selection, they became enthusiastic to file this

application. The Petitioners are unable to provide with an adequate excuse

for the delay in filing the application. It is axiomatic that, when it comes to

the law courts, the litigants must not sleep over their right to invoke the

jurisdiction. The Petitioners have not complied with the ‘one month rule’ in

filing this application.

The Respondents illustrate the mistakes in the Petitioners’ application. What

they insist is the futility of the application and the failure on the part of the

Petitioners to name the necessary parties as Respondents. The futility of the

application is explained by referring to the time which has lapsed, between

the date on which the application was filed and the present. It is clear that, the

Petitioners have not prayed for a relief to quash the appointments of the 3rd to

36th Respondents and the court has not granted interim reliefs to the Petitioners

to restrict the 3rd to 36th Respondents being appointed to Class III of SLAS

where they were appointed to the relevant positions by the 2nd Respondents’

letter dated 06-10-2010, with effect from 08-10-2010. The 3rd to 36th

Respondents have been appointed to the relevant stations on or about 13-01-

2011 after they underwent a training session conducted by Sri Lanka Institute

of Development Administration. It is clear to this court that, the purpose of

the examination and interviews was already fulfilled and the Petitioners

purpose of application to this court is apparently of no avail. The 3rd to 36th

Respondents were rendering their service as government servants, to the

country for last 8 years and their services were not interrupted. The

Respondents quote the contention of Justice Shirani Bandaranayake in Don

Shelton Hettiarachchi v. Sri Lanka Ports Authority and Others

(2007)2S.L.R.307,

14

‘Learned President’s Counsel for the Respondents brought to our

notice at the time of the hearing, which was admitted by the

Petitioner, that both the Petitioner and the 5th Respondent had

retired from the 1st Respondent authority during the pendency of this

application and there it was futile for the Petitioner to proceed with

this application.’

Justice Bandaranayke quoted the contention pronounced by Abrahams C.J,

‘this is a court of justice and not an Academy of Law’.

As far as the current situation is concerned, the futility of the application is

clear, owing to the fact that the 3rd to 36th Respondents have been appointed

to the specific positions of SLAS and it would amount to a futility to

proceed with the application.

The Respondents’ further illustrate the failure of the Petitioners to name the

necessary parties as Respondents. As the Petitioners specify, their

compliant on the infringement of Fundamental Rights, guaranteed by the

Constitution is directed towards the 1st and the 2nd Respondents and other

authorities to investigate and /or cause such investigation to be conducted

into the said incident of leakage of the three question papers. The

Respondents state, the failure of the Petitioners to name Inspector General

of Police / Director of the CID of the police as necessary parties to their

application.

15

The law has focussed on many purposes of naming officials. In

Samanthilake V. Earnest Perera and others (1990) 1 Sri.L.R 318,

Justice Amarasinghe has elaborated on the purposes. His Lordship has

predominantly emphasized on the fact that naming officials has a

supportive function towards the court. Such an act supports the court in the

identification of those who could help the court in the exercise of its

inquisitorial functions in clarifying the disputed facts. Another purpose

which his lordship has stated is that the act of naming officials facilitate

proof as to the question whether the specific act in question is executive or

administrative. His contention was further extended to the extent the giving

a title or a description of a state officer, supports in reducing the burden

which falls on the Petitioners of adducing evidence to establish that the act

in question was executive or administrative action. (Jayampathi

Wickremarathne P.C, Fundamental Rights in Sri Lanka, pg.466).

It is evident, that the Petitioners failure in naming the Inspector General of

Police/ Director of the CID of the Police, up to a certain extent influenced

the inquisitorial functions of this court, especially in regard to the

clarification of certain facts on the investigations conducted as to the

question paper on ‘Case study’.

The Respondents further state that 08 candidates have not been included in

the application as Respondents. The situation of these 08 candidates is, they

sat for the three examinations and have been shortlisted on the marks

obtained for the three question papers. The Petitioners prayed for an interim

relief to cancel the question papers on General Administration and

16

Financial Regulations and if this court granted the interim relief, the

interests of these 08 candidates would have been adversely affected.

‘He who seeks equity must do equity’ is the maxim which specifies that,

when a litigation is involved, the claimant must act fairly towards his

opponent, if he wants to claim relief. In the simplest sense, persons seeking

equitable relief must accord to the other parties concerned all the equitable

rights, in the subject matter to which they are entitled. The Petitioners are

obliged to name the candidates as Respondents to the application, if they

foresaw the fact that the rights of the 08 candidates are at a stake.

The Respondents uphold the contention of Justice Shirani Bandaranayke in

Don Shelton Hettiarachchi v. Sri Lanka Ports Authority and others

(2007) 2S.L.R.307,

‘This need for having necessary parties before court was considered

by this court in Farook v. Siriwardena, Election Officer and Others,

where it was clearly stated that the failure to make a party to an

application of persons, whose rights could be in the proceedings is

fatal to the validity of the application.’

A further doubt has arisen in relation to the honesty and the disclosure by

the Petitioners. The Petitioners in their Petitions and affidavits complained

that the 1st Respondent, has not conducted an investigation as to the leakage

of question papers but prima facie evidence is there in proof of the fact that

the 1st Respondent has conducted an inquiry in terms of Public Examinations

17

Act No.25 of 1968. These are contradictions in the statements of the

Petitioners. Further the Petitioners state a misleading fact in relation to the

B-Report. The Petitioners allege, that the B-Report consists about a leakage

of 03 question papers but when concerning prima facie evidence, it depicts

leaking out of the question paper relevant to ‘Case Study’.

It is in general perception of law, that a party seeking an equitable remedy

must not himself be guilty of unconscionable conduct. In Dering v. Earl of

Winchelsea (1787) 1Cox 318,

‘.......such a representation of Sir Edward’s conduct certainly

places him in a bad point of view; and perhaps it is not a very

decorous proceeding in Sir Edward come into this Court under

these circumstances..... A man must come into a Court of Equity

with clean hands, but when this is said, it does not mean a

general depravity: it must have an immediate and necessary

relation to the equity sued for, it must be a depravity in legal as

well as a moral sense.’

The Respondents quote the contention of Justice Hector Yapa, in

Jayasinghe v. The National Institute of Fisheries (2002)1 S LR 277,

where his lordship held that,

‘The Petitioner’s conduct lacked uberima fides. The application has

to be rejected in limine on this ground as well.’

18

The Petitioners’ contradictions as to the 1st Respondent and the contents of

the B-Report causes a doubt in regard to the uberima fides of the Petitioners’

conduct which disentitles them to obtain relief.

The Petitioners, not complying with the ‘one month rule’ of the Article

126(2), failure in naming the parties, and the falsity in petitions and

affidavits as to the material facts, rendered the application defective.

The court upholds the contention that, no violation of the Fundamental Right

guaranteed to the Petitioners under Article 12 (1) of the constitution has

taken place.

Petition dismissed.

Judge of the Supreme Court

H.N.J Perera, J.

I agree

Chief Justice

Buwaneka Aluwihare PC, J.

I agree

Judge of the Supreme Court

19