IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Juwan Hettige Sriyalatha Silva,

No.19/80, New Neegrodharama

Road, Kalutara North.

Plaintiff

SC APPEAL NO: SC/APPEAL/6/2021

SC LA NO: SC/HCCA/LA/133/2020

HCCA NO: WP/HCCA/KAL/179/2013/F

DC KALUTARA NO: 7890/P

Vs.

Meemanage Duneetha

Chandrakanthi Silva,

No. 19/80, New Neegrodharama

Road, Kalutara North.

Defendant

AND BETWEEN

Juwan Hettige Sriyalatha Silva,

No.19/80, New Neegrodharama

Road, Kalutara North.

Plaintiff-Appellant

2

SC/APPEAL/6/2021

Vs.

Meemanage Duneetha

Chandrakanthi Silva,

No. 19/80, New Neegrodharama

Road, Kalutara North.

Defendant-Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

Meemanage Duneetha

Chandrakanthi Silva,

No. 19/80, New Neegrodharama

Road, Kalutara North.

Defendant-Respondent-Appellant

Vs.

Juwan Hettige Sriyalatha Silva,

No.19/80, New Neegrodharama

Road, Kalutara North.

Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent

Before: L.T.B. Dehideniya, J.

Achala Wengappuli, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

3

SC/APPEAL/6/2021

Counsel: Shyamal A. Collure with Prabath S. Amarasinghe,

A.P. Jayaweera and Raveendra Silva for the

Defendant-Respondent-Appellant.

Dr. Thashira Gunatilake for the Plaintiff-Appellant-

Respondent.

Argued on: 17.11.2021

Written submissions:

by the Defendant-Respondent-Appellant on

04.04.2021.

by the Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent on

26.07.2021.

Decided on: 20.01.2022

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

There is no corpus or pedigree dispute in this partition action.

The plaintiff in the plaint itself concedes that she and the

defendant are entitled to equal shares in the corpus. In the prayer

to the plaint the plaintiff sought the partition of the land and then

stated that, if the court finds the partition inexpedient, an order

can be made for the sale of the land in lots in terms of the Partition

Law, No. 21 of 1977. According to the preliminary plan, the extent

of the land to be partitioned is only 1.86 perches and the

defendant is living in the house standing on the land. The plaintiff

had made no claim to the house at the preliminary survey. There

is no plantation on the land because the whole land is occupied

by the house.

4

SC/APPEAL/6/2021

After trial the District Judge held that the plaintiff and the

defendant are each entitled to a ½ share in the corpus and the

defendant is additionally entitled to the improvements, i.e. the

house. It was further held that due to the trivialness of the extent

of the land, it is inexpedient to allot divided portions as it would

be less than the minimum extent required by law regulating the

subdivision of land for development purposes. Hence, in terms of

section 26(3) of the Partition Law, the District Judge instead of

allotting divided portions of the land to the plaintiff and the

defendant, ordered the sale of the plaintiff’s ½ share to the

defendant, who is in possession of the house, upon a valuation by

the court commissioner.

On appeal, the High Court set aside the part of the judgment

whereby the District Judge ordered that the plaintiff’s undivided

½ share be sold to the defendant on the basis that “the learned

District Judge misdirected herself in ordering a sale of the plaintiff’s

share to the defendant despite that there was evidence to the effect

that the plaintiff is also interested in soil rights as the owner of the

adjacent land. And also, without considering the evidence adduced

on behalf of the plaintiff to show her intention to expand her

roadway with her due share.”

It is from this judgment of the High Court that the plaintiff

preferred the present appeal to this court.

There is no issue that the plaintiff is entitled to a ½ share of the

soil rights of the land. However, the fact that the plaintiff is the

owner of the adjoining land is beside the point in order to

determine the rights of the parties in respect of the land to be

partitioned in this action. As I stated previously, the plaintiff

5

SC/APPEAL/6/2021

herself prayed in the prayer to the plaint that in the event

partition is inexpedient, the court can order the sale of the land.

The orders the District Judge is empowered to make after trial in

a partition action are listed in section 26(2) of the Partition Law.

This section runs as follows:

The interlocutory decree may include one or more of the

following orders, so however that the orders are not

inconsistent with one another:-

(a) order for a partition of the land;

(b) order for a sale of the land in whole or in lots;

(c) order for a sale of a share or portion of the land and

a partition of the remainder;

(d) order that any portion of the land representing the

share of any particular party only shall be

demarcated and separated from the remainder of

the land;

(e) order that any specified portion of the land shall

continue to belong in common to specified parties or

to a group of parties;

(f) order that any specified portion of the land sought

to be partitioned or surveyed be excluded from the

scope of the action;

(g) order that any share remain unallotted.

This list is not exhaustive: the words used in the section are “may

include”, not “shall include”. (Hewavitharana v. Themis Silva

(1961) 63 NLR 68)

It is clear from this section that after trial, the District Judge can

order the sale of the land in whole instead of partitioning the land.

6

SC/APPEAL/6/2021

He can inter alia order the sale of part of the land and partition

the remaining portion. It was held in Ferdinands v. De Alwis

(1957) 59 NLR 253 that “paragraphs (c) and (e) of section 26 of the

new Partition Act read together authorise the court to allot one

portion of a land to a party or a set of parties and to order the sale

of another portion and the division of the proceeds of the sale

among other parties alone or among them and some or all of the

parties to whom the former portion is allotted.” In the Privy Council

case of Ceylon Theatres Ltd v. Cinemas Ltd (1968) 70 NLR 337, the

subject matter of partition was the land almost entirely occupied

by the Tower Hall Theatre in Maradana. The District Court

ordered the sale of the land, as no physical partition of the

property was practicable, but subject to the life interest in favour

of the 2nd defendant in respect of 1/3 share of the soil and

buildings. This was held to be in consonance with the Partition

Law.

Section 26(3), which the District Judge relied upon in the instant

case to order the sale of the plaintiff’s undivided ½ share (i.e. 0.93

perches) to the defendant, reads as follows:

Where by virtue of an order made under subsection (1), a

person is entitled to an undivided extent of land which, by

reason of its trivialness in extent or value or of it being less

than the minimum extent required by any written law

regulating the subdivision of land for development purposes,

the court considers it inexpedient to allot to that person a

divided portion, the court may, in lieu of ordering the

allotment of a divided portion of the land to that person and

on the payment to that person of such compensation as may

be determined by court, allot that extent to any other person

7

SC/APPEAL/6/2021

who is entitled to an undivided extent of the land to which

the action relates.

I might add that even if the District Judge does not order the sale

of the land in the judgment, such a sale can still be ordered after

the scheme inquiry which is held after the judgment but before

the final decree of partition is entered. (Leelawathie v. Abeykoon

[2005] 3 Sri LR 127) Section 36(1)(b) of the Partition Law states

that after the scheme inquiry, the court may “order the sale of any

lot, in accordance with the provisions of this Law, at the appraised

value of such lot given by the surveyor under section 32, where the

commissioner has reported to court under section 32 that the extent

of such lot is less than the minimum extent required by written law

relating to the subdivision of land for development purposes and

shall enter final decree of partition subject to such alterations as

may be rendered necessary by reason of such order of sale.”

It is clear that the District Judge’s order is in accordance with the

Partition Law. The plaintiff does not complain of the procedure

for sale. Her complaint is in respect of the order for sale.

At the argument, learned counsel for the plaintiff defended the

judgment of the High Court stating that the plaintiff is entitled to

one half of the house. This claim has been rejected by the District

Judge in her judgment and the High Court in appeal has not

reversed that finding. There is no appeal by the plaintiff against

the judgment of the High Court. The submission of learned

counsel is in any event unsupported by evidence and is therefore

unsustainable.

This court granted leave to appeal against the judgment of the

High Court on the following two questions of law:

8

SC/APPEAL/6/2021

(a) Does the judgment of the High Court defeat the purpose

of section 26(3) of the Partition Law?

(b) Has the High Court erred in law by failing to appreciate

that the District Judge has answered issue Nos. 9 and

10 correctly?

By the answers to issue Nos. 9 and 10, the District Judge came

to the conclusion that an order for sale of the plaintiff’s share to

the defendant is the most practical way of terminating the co-

ownership of this land.

I answer both questions in the affirmative and set aside the

judgment of the High Court and restore the judgment of the

District Court. The appeal is accordingly allowed but without

costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

L.T.B. Dehideniya, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Achala Wengappuli, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court