==== BLOCKS ==== 

THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal to the Supreme Court from the judgment pronounced on 12. 10. 2016 by the Civil Appellate High Court of the Western Province sitting in Colombo in terms of Section 5C of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 54 of 2006 read with Article 127 of the Constitution.

National Development Bank Limited No.40, Nawam Mawatha, Colombo 2.

Plaintiff S.C. Appeal No.31/2017 SC/HCCA/LA No. 566/2016 Vs. Provincial High Court Appeal Case No. WP/HCCA/COL 84/2011 District Court of Colombo Case No. 17820/MB 1. Kongodage Upul Sampath Ratnaloka Bake House “Ratnaloka” No.01, 2nd Kilo Meter Post, Punagala Road, Bandarawela. 2. Katugaha Bandaranayake Herath Mudiyanselage Conrad Sena Katugaha “Promises”, No. 37/1B, Hospital Road, Melrose Place, Wevatanne, Bandarawela.

Defendants

S.C. Appeal No. 31/2017

2

In the matter of an Appeal

National Development Bank Limited Presently called and known as National Development Bank PLC No.40, Nawam Mawatha, Colombo 2.

Plaintiff-Appellant Vs.

1. Kongodage Upul Sampath Ratnaloka Bake House “Ratnaloka” No.01, 2nd Kilo Meter Post, Punagala Road, Bandarawela.

1st Defendant-Respondent

2. Katugaha Bandaranayake Herath Mudiyanselage Conrad Sena Katugaha “Promises”, No. 37/1B, Hospital Road, Melrose Place, Wevatanne, Bandarawela.

2nd Defendant-Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

National Development Bank Limited Presently called and known as National Development Bank PLC No.40, Nawam Mawatha, Colombo 2.

Plaintiff-Appellant-Petitioner

Vs.

S.C. Appeal No. 31/2017

3

Katugaha Bandaranayake Herath Mudiyanselage Conrad Sena Katugaha “Promises”, No. 37/1B, Hospital Road, Melrose Place, Wevatanne, Bandarawela.

2nd Defendant-Respondent- Respondent

AND NOW IN THE MATTER OF A SUBSTITUTION BY AND BETWEEN

National Development Bank Limited Presently called and known as National Development Bank PLC No.40, Nawam Mawatha, Colombo 2.

Plaintiff-Appellant-Petitioner-Appellant

Vs.

Katugaha Bandaranayake Herath Mudiyanselage Conrad Sena Katugaha “Promises”, No. 37/1B, Hospital Road, Melrose Place, Wevatanne, Bandarawela.

2nd Defendant-Respondent- Respondent

[deceased]

2A. Christine Jennifer Denis No. 37/1B, Hospital Road, Melrose Place, Wevatanne, Bandarawela.

S.C. Appeal No. 31/2017

4

2B. Micheal Sena Vadim Katugaha No. 37/1B, Hospital Road, Melrose Place, Wevatanne, Bandarawela.

2A and 2B Substituted-Defendant- Respondent-Respondent

***********

BEFORE : P. PADMAN SURASENA, CJ. A.H.M.D. NAWAZ , J. ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

COUNSEL : Geethaka Goonewardena P.C. with Rishan Vidanapathirana for the Plaintiff- Appellant-Petitioner- Appellant. Dr. Sunil Cooray with Sudarshani Cooray for the 2A and 2B substituted Defendant-Respondent- Respondents ARGUED ON : 14th July, 2021 DECIDED ON : 07th November, 2025 ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

The Plaintiff-Appellant-Petitioner-Appellant Bank (hereinafter

referred to as the Plaintiff Bank) filed an action before the District Court of

Colombo to recover a sum of Rs. 496,568.50 with interest fixed at 12.58 % per

annum, and also a sum of Rs. 1,215,032.67 per annum and legal interest,

from the 1st Defendant-Respondent and the 2nd Defendant-Respondent-

S.C. Appeal No. 31/2017

5

Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the 1st and 2nd Defendants) on the

basis they are jointly and severally liable to pay.

The 1st Defendant did not appear before the District Court. The

Court proceeded to try the 1st Defendant ex parte. The 2nd Defendant

contested the claim against him. After trial, the trial Court dismissed the

action of the Plaintiff Bank in relation to the 2nd Defendant. Being

aggrieved by the said judgment, the Plaintiff Bank preferred an appeal to

the Provincial High Court. The Provincial High Court of Civil Appeal

proceeded to dismiss the appeal of the Plaintiff Bank after affirming the

judgment of the trial Court.

Thereupon, the Plaintiff Bank sought Leave to Appeal from this

Court against the judgment of the Provincial High Court of Civil Appeal.

After affording a hearing to the parties, this Court, on 15.02.2017, decided

to grant Leave to Proceed to the Plaintiff Bank on the following questions

of law:

a. In civil actions, upon production of a Letter of Demand as

evidence by the Plaintiff;

i. Does the burden of proof shift to the Defendant to

establish and/or lead evidence that it was not

received by him?

ii. Does the burden of proof shift back to the Plaintiff

only if the Defendant elicits evidence that he had not

received such letter?

b. Was there any evidence before Court to determine that the

Letters of Demand had not been sent to the Defendants, when the

S.C. Appeal No. 31/2017

6

2nd Defendant had failed and/or refused to give evidence to the

effect that he had not received such Letters of Demand?

c. Has the Provincial High Court of the Western Province erred in

law in holding that the letter P29 cannot be considered as a reply

to Letters of Demand P25 & P28 [ both dated 06.06.2005], when

there was no evidence to the contrary given by the Defendant to

the effect that P29 was in reply to some other letter?

d. Has the Provincial High Court of the Western Province erred in

law in properly evaluating the evidence led in the case?

The learned President’s Counsel, in his submissions to this Court,

contended on behalf of the Plaintiff Bank that the two causes of action on

which the Defendants were sued, accrued when the Defendants defaulted

payment of loan instalments that are due at the end of each month.

Therefore, in the absence of an “on demand” clause in the mortgage bond,

there was no necessity for the Plaintiff Bank to make a demand to any of

the Defendants, by way of a Letter of Demand addressed and served on

them. In support of the said contention, the learned President’s Counsel

relied on a particular section of text quoted from the treatise on The Law of

Contracts, by Professor C.G. Weeramantry, where it is stated (Vol. 2, Section

874, page 834) “[A] bond for the performance of an agreement becomes prescribed

ten years from the breach of conditions but not otherwise …”.

The learned Counsel for the 2nd Defendant, submitted that his

consistent position before the trial Court was that he did not receive any of

the two Letters of Demand said to have been sent by the Plaintiff Bank

under registered cover, and as such no demand had been made in terms of

the applicable conditions of the loan transaction. During the trial, the 2nd

S.C. Appeal No. 31/2017

7

Defendant disputed the contents of the letters informing him of any dues,

or the Letters of Demand, which were all therefore marked subject to

proof. But the Plaintiff Bank failed to prove any such document by calling

relevant witnesses.

When the two contrasting positions presented to the trial Court by

the Plaintiff Bank as well as the 2nd Defendant are considered after placing

them side by side, it must be observed that the contention presented before

this Court by the former was not the position taken before the trial Court.

The Plaintiff Bank, although now takes up the position that no demand

was necessary for its cause of action to accrue against the 2nd Defendant,

the case presented by it before the trial Court, was in fact made on the

basis that such demands were made, which the 2nd Defendant chose to

ignore.

But before I proceed to consider them, it is necessary to make a brief

reference to the transaction history between the parties that led to the

institution of the instant action.

The 1st Defendant secured two loan facilities from the Plaintiff Bank

in the sums of Rs. 700,000.00 and Rs. 200,000.00, upon accepting the terms

and conditions contained in the Offer Letter dated 09.07.2002 (P2). These

two loans were secured by the property belonging to the 2nd Defendant,

who pledged the same to the Plaintiff Bank as a primary mortgage. On

09.07.2002, the 2nd Defendant entered into an Immovable Bond No. 511, in

respect of the said property with the Plaintiff Bank. On 16.11.2006, the 1st

Defendant obtained another loan facility from the Plaintiff Bank on top of

the one he had already obtained, along with the 2nd Defendant, by

S.C. Appeal No. 31/2017

8

presenting themselves as the “BORROWERS”, in terms of another Letter of

Offer (P10). The 2nd Defendant signed on a secondary mortgage bond No.

291 as an “OBLIGOR” on the same day and thereby pledged the same

property to the Plaintiff Bank to secure the said subsequent facility also.

The 2nd Defendant also executed Deed of Renunciation No. 292, by which

he renounced the benefit of Section 46 of the Mortgage Act as amended,

along with mortgage bond No. 291.

These loans were obtained by the 1st Defendant for the purpose of

upgrading his bakery industry. The 1st Defendant who owned the bakery,

was married to the 2nd Defendant’s daughter. After several instalments

were paid on these facilities, it is alleged that the Defendants have

defaulted. The several attempts made by the Plaintiff Bank to secure

payment of the defaulted loan instalments from either the 1st and/or the

2nd Defendants, even after engaging them in a series of correspondence,

proved unsuccessful. In the continued failure on the part of the Defendants

to fulfil their payment obligations, the Plaintiff Bank thereupon issued

several Letters of Demand on them. But there was no attempt made on the

part of the Defendants to comply with any of these demands.

Eventually, the Plaintiff Bank decided to sue the two Defendants

“jointly and severally” on two causes of action. The Plaintiff Bank filed its

Plaint in the District Court of Colombo on 25.10.2006. In paragraph 10 of the

said Plaint, the Plaintiff Bank averred that “… after giving credit for the part

payments made by the Defendants as at 30.09.2006 there is a sum of Rs.

496,568.50 due owing and payable from the Defendants to the Plaintiff as shown

in the Statement of Accounts filed herewith marked as “P5” which sum or any

part thereof the Defendants have failed and neglected to pay and settle the Plaintiff

S.C. Appeal No. 31/2017

9

though thereto obliged to and though thereto demanded.” In paragraph 19 of the

Plaint the Plaintiff Bank also averred that “… after giving credit for the part

payments made by the Defendants as at 30.09.2006 there is a sum of Rs. 1,215,

032.67 due owing and payable from the Defendants to the Plaintiff as shown in

the Statement of Accounts filed herewith marked as “P8” which sum or any part

thereof the Defendants have failed and neglected to pay and settle to the Plaintiff

though thereto obliged to and though thereto demanded”.

Since the question of law in relation to this aspect is pivoted on the

fact of production of Letters of Demand sent by the Plaintiff Bank to the 2nd

Defendant during the trial, the determination on whom the burden of

proof of service of those Letters of Demand lies, is very relevant at this

stage, in order to inquire into the position taken up by the 2nd Defendant,

in view of the nature of evidence presented before the trial Court. This is a

necessary task that must be undertaken even before this Court proceeds to

analyse the impugned judgment of the Provincial High Court of Civil

Appeal along with the judgment of the trial Court, in the light of the

contentions presented by the Plaintiff Bank.

The 2nd Defendant, in his answer has taken up the position that he

did not receive any of the Letters of Demand said to have been sent under

registered cover by the Plaintiff Bank. In his answer, the 2nd Defendant

averred (at paragraph 13) that “ fuu ú;a;slre ;jÿrg;a lshd isákafka” fuu kvqj

mejrSug m%:u fy`” 1 jk ú;a;slre wod< f.ùï fkdf.jd meyer yers wjia:djloS tlS uqo,a

m%udKhla fuu ú;a;slref.ka fmr b,a,Sula u.ska meñKs,slre b,a,d fkdisàu u; flfiaj;a

meñKs,slreg fuu ú;a;slreg tfrysj meñKs,a, mjrd mj;ajdf.k hd fkdyels nj fuu

ú;a;slre lshd isà”.

S.C. Appeal No. 31/2017

10

In line with the position taken up in his answer by the 2nd

Defendant, issues Nos. 14(1) and 14(2) were raised by him to the effect that

whether, prior to the institution of the action, the Plaintiff Bank demanded

from the 2nd Defendant the payment of relevant sum, defaulted by the 1st

Defendant, and if not, could the Plaintiff Bank have and maintain the

action against the 2nd Defendant.

After trial, in dismissing the action of the Plaintiff Bank against the

2nd Defendant, the trial Court, in its judgment answered issues No. 14(1) as

“not demanded” and issues No. 14(2) as “cannot maintain the action”. The

examination of the process of reasoning, adopted by the trial Court to

provide the said answers, indicated that the Letters of Demand, marked as

P27 and P28 were marked subject to proof but the Plaintiff Bank failed to

present relevant evidence to establish that they were in fact sent to the 2nd

Defendant informing him of the amount demanded from him. The trial

Court also considered the letter dated 11.06.2005 (P29), sent by the 2nd

Defendant to the Plaintiff Bank “without prejudice” and decided that it

could not be accepted as a document that indicated the 2nd Defendant was

duly notified by the Plaintiff Bank of its demand for payment by Letters of

Demand P27 and P28.

The appeal preferred by the Plaintiff Bank against the said judgment

was dismissed by the Provincial High Court of Civil Appeal after

affirming the said line of reasoning and the conclusion reached thereupon

by the trial Court. The Appellate Court also rejected the submission of the

Plaintiff Bank that the contents of the letter P29, although sent with the

qualification “without prejudice”, could be relied upon, provided that it

was not written with a view to settling the dispute. The Court concluded

S.C. Appeal No. 31/2017

11

that in fact P29 was written by the 2nd Defendant to achieve that very

purpose.

I now turn to the question of law that this Court is called on to

answer, in relation to Letters of Demand, which reads as follows;

“In civil actions, upon production of a Letter of Demand as evidence

by the Plaintiff;

i. Does the burden of proof shift to the Defendant to

establish and/or lead evidence that it was not received by

him?

ii. Does the burden of proof shift back to the Plaintiff only if

the Defendant elicits evidence that he had not received

such letter?”

The question of law on this particular aspect of the appeal

commenced with the sentence; “[I]n civil actions, upon production of a Letter

of Demand as evidence by the Plaintiff…”. It appears that the said question of

law was framed rather in an abstract form, as it does not make any

reference to the circumstances presented before this Court in the instant

appeal. The set of circumstances that were considered by the Courts below,

in order to arrive at their respective findings, are now being impugned in

these proceedings. The words “[I]n civil actions, upon production of a Letter of

Demand as evidence by the Plaintiff…” creates the impression in one’s mind,

if an answer is provided by this Court to same, that pronouncement would

meant to be applicable to the whole gamut of civil actions, rather than an

answer provided to an action based on a particular set of facts and

S.C. Appeal No. 31/2017

12

circumstances, on which the lower Courts have applied relevant principles

of law, when arriving at their respective findings.

It is already noted that the learned President’s Counsel contended

that the Plaintiff Bank was not under any obligation to make a demand of

the sums due to it. It was submitted that as and when the monies became

due on a specific date, in terms of the agreement, the failure of the

Defendants to fulfil their part, accrues the requisite cause of action. In the

preceding paragraphs, dealing with the factual situation, it was already

noted that the averments contained in paragraphs 10 and 19 of the Plaint

have indeed described the manner in which the two causes of action were

accrued on the Defendants. The action was founded on the fact that

demands were made but disregarded.

With both these averments, the Plaintiff Bank presented its case on

the footing that it had, in fact made demands of the sums due, as

mentioned in the several Letters of Demand (P25, P26, P27, P28, P32 and

P33) sent to the two Defendants, which they have chosen to ignore. This is

indicative from the words that “…the Defendants have failed and neglected to

pay and settle to the Plaintiff though thereto obliged to and though thereto

demanded.” The reliance placed on the Letters of Demand issued on the

Defendants in order to institute an action against them was not due to an

oversight on the part of the Plaintiff Bank but for a very valid reason.

The Letters of Offer (P2 and P10), by which the two Defendants have

undertaken the terms and conditions under which the loan facilities were

disbursed by the Plaintiff Bank, contained a clause with the title “Breach by

the Borrowers” that read (Clause 7) “ [I]n the event of the Borrowers

S.C. Appeal No. 31/2017

13

committing any breach of the terms and conditions set out therein the Bank shall

be entitled at any time to cancel the facilities and to demand and recover

payments of all its claims on the BORROWERS” (emphasis added). Similarly,

the Immovable Bond No. 511 (P6A) also contained in Clause 8(d) that “…

in the event of the OBLIGOR and/or MORTGAGOR committing any breach of

the terms and conditions set out herein the BANK shall at any time to cancel the

facilities and to demand and recover payments of all its claims on the OBLIGOR”

(emphasis added).

The Immovable Bond No. 511 (P6A), by which the 2nd Defendant

pledged his property as security too contained a similar undertaking by

the Plaintiff Bank. In Clause 8(d) of P6A, it was agreed among parties that

“… in the event of the OBLIGOR and/or the MORTGAGOR committing any

breach of the terms of conditions set out herein the BANK shall be entitled at any

time to cancel the facilities and to demand and recover payment of all of its claims

on the OBLIGOR” (emphasis added).

Thus, in the event of any breach of the terms and conditions

contained in any of these instruments by the Defendants, it was obligatory

on the part of the Plaintiff Bank to make demand of payments from them.

Moreover, this factor is further confirmed upon perusal of the Immovable

Bond No. 511 (P6A) which also contained a Clause, stating that if any

notice or demand were to be made on any of the parties, the manner in

which such notice or demand shall be served. The said Clause 5(i) of P6A,

reads as follows;

“ … that every notice or demand under these presents may be

effectually made by notice in writing and every such notice

S.C. Appeal No. 31/2017

14

summons or any legal process of any kind whatsoever in connection

with any action suit or other proceeding taken under these presents

shall be taken and be deemed to have been duly served on the

OBLIGOR and the MORTGAGOR if the same be sent by post

under registered cover addressed to the OBLIGOR to its registered

office at Sole Proprietor of “Rathnaloka Bake House”, at No.37/1B,

Hospital Road, Melrose Place, Wevathanne, Bandarawela and to the

MORTGAGOR to No. 37/1B, Hospital Road, Melrose Place,

Wevathanne, Bandarawela”.

In its impugned judgment, the Provincial High Court of Civil

Appeal considered this aspect in detail. The appellate Court, having

quoted from Prof Weeramantry’s treatise ( supra) where it was stated “[A]

bond for the performance of an agreement becomes prescribed ten years from the

breach of conditions but not otherwise and prescription will not begin to run until

a demand for performance has been made and refused”, and reminded itself of

the general principle enunciated in the judgment of Seylan Bank Ltd., v

Intertrade Garments (Pvt) Ltd., (2005) 1 Sri L.R. 80 (at p. 87-88), proceeded

to hold that “ … proof of demand as a precursor to filing the action is a sine qua

non for successful prosecution of the same.”

In view of the several factors referred to in the preceding

paragraphs, I am of the considered view that the Provincial High Court of

Civil Appeal was correct in making the said determination. Thus, it was

incumbent upon the Plaintiff Bank to establish the fact that it was more

probable that it had made the demand from the 2nd Defendant by sending

Letters of Demand P27 and P28 under registered cover to the specified

S.C. Appeal No. 31/2017

15

address set out in the Letters of Offer. With that conclusion, I next turn to

the evidence presented by the Plaintiff Bank in discharging that burden.

There was no dispute to the fact that the 2nd Defendant had resided

at all times at the address given in that instrument (P6A), to which all

notices or, more importantly the demands, could have been sent under

registered cover.

During the examination in chief of the witness, called and relied on

by the Plaintiff Bank, who gave evidence on this aspect of the case as to the

compliance of this requirement. According to him, the Defendants have

defaulted the payment of loan instalments and as such “ tfia fkdf.ùu u;

2005’06’06 jk osk 1 jk ú;a;slreg;a” 2jk ú;a;slreg;a” tka;rjdis folla hjd ;sfnkjd

th me25 iy me 26 f,i ,l=Kq lr isákjd’ me25 iy me 26 msgm;a hjd ;sfnkjd 2jk

ú;a;slreg’ ^ me25 iy me 26 Tmamq lsrSfï ndrhg hg;aj ndr.kakd f,i b,a,d isà’& me25 iy

me 26 tka;rjdis hjd ;sfnkafka fï kvqfõ 1jk kvq ksñ;a; iïnkaOfhka whúh hq;= uqo,a

i|yd’ 2jk ksñ;af;a whúh hq;= uqo,a i|yd 1” 2 ú;a;slrejkag cqks iy cQ,s ,sms folla hjd

;sfnkjd’” It is clear from that evidence, that the witness was not personally

involved with either the preparation of the said Letters of Demand or was

involved with the posting of the same under registered cover to the

address of the 2nd Defendant. In the absence of any personal involvement,

the witness obviously had to rely on a record kept by the Plaintiff Bank to

make that statement. However, during cross-examination, when the 2nd

Defendant questioned the witness over the service of Letters of Demand,

he answered that question in the following manner;

“ m%( ;ukag tfia fuu me 32 iy 33 f,aLK ú;a;slrejkag hejqj lshkak

hïlsis idCIshla .re wêlrKhg ,ehsia;=.; lr,d ;sfhkjdo@

W( ta .ek uu fkdokS’

m%( uu ;ukag fh`ckd lr isákafka fï me 32 iy 33 lshk f,aLK

S.C. Appeal No. 31/2017

16

ú;a;slrejka fj; hejqj kï” ta iïnkaOfhka ;ud lsisÿ idCIshla

;udf.a f,aLK ,ehsia;=j i|yd ;ud f.dkq lr kE lsh,@

W( uu fkdfjhs f.dkq lf<a kS;S{ uy;a;hd’ ta .ek uu fkdokS’”

This segment of evidence, reproduced above from the witness’s

testimony for the Plaintiff Bank, is indicative of the position that there

were no records available with the bank for the witness to make that

factual statement, when he sought to affirm the fact of posting Letters of

Demand to the 2nd Defendant’s address. The only reference made to this

issue during re-examination of the witness was to ask him whether the

Defendant had admitted the receipt of the Letters of Demand.

Since the trial Court considered only the Letters of Demand, marked

as P27 and P28, it is prudent to examine the contents of these letters in

relation to the issue at hand. P27 is a Letter of Demand issued on

06.07.2005, whereas P28, the other Letter of Demand, was issued on

06.06.2005. Both these letters, carry the names and addresses of the 1st and

2nd Defendants and, are titled “tka;rjdish”. The letters also contain the

words to denote that they are sent under registered cover. Other than these

two documents and the brief oral account of the witness, there is no other

evidence presented by the Plaintiff Bank for the consideration of Court that

it had fulfilled its part of the obligation by making a formal ‘demand’ from

the 2nd Defendant.

The issue as to whether there was a demand made from the 2nd

Defendant or not had been a disputed fact in issue since the institution of

the action which continued to the trial. In line with the position taken up

by the 2nd Defendant in his answer, issues Nos. 14(1) and 14(2) were raised

S.C. Appeal No. 31/2017

17

by him and the trial Court were to make a determination on those issues.

The Plaintiff Bank was adequately placed on notice by the 2nd Defendant

that he disputes the fact that a demand was made. As already noted

earlier on in this judgment, these two issues were raised by the 2nd

Defendant to the effect; that whether, prior to the institution of the action,

the Plaintiff Bank demanded the relevant sum from the 2nd Defendant, and

if not, could the Plaintiff Bank have and maintain the instant action against

the 2nd Defendant. The Plaintiff Bank had ample notice of the fact that the

2nd Defendant disputes the reception of the Letters of Demand said to have

been sent to his address. But the Plaintiff Bank was complacent with the

sufficiency of evidence it had presented before the trial Court, which are

reproduced above, and apparently expected the trial Court to answer those

two issues against the 2nd Defendant.

These two documents, by their mere appearance, seem to be photo

copies of the original Letters of Demand, which were said to have been

sent to the two Defendants by the Plaintiff Bank. Section 61 of the Evidence

Ordinance states that the contents of documentary evidence may be

proved either by primary evidence or by secondary evidence. Section 63(2)

makes such photo copies made from the original, qualify to be taken as

secondary evidence of the original, as such copies were made from the

original, by a mechanical process, which in itself ensures the accuracy of

the copy. Since the originals of P27 and P28 are expected to be in the

custody of the 2nd Defendant, after being delivered to him under registered

cover to his address, the Plaintiff Bank had the opportunity to make an

application to Court to issue notice on the 2nd Defendant, under Section 66

of that Ordinance. This is because Section 66 restricts the admissibility of

S.C. Appeal No. 31/2017

18

secondary evidence of a document, unless the party proposing to give

such secondary evidence has previously given to the party in whose

possession the document is, notice to produce it. There was no such

evidence placed before the trial Court by the Plaintiff Bank that the photo

copy of the original, in the absence of the original, should be received in

evidence, due to the failure of the 2nd Defendant to produce the same,

even after notice was issued on him to do so.

In addition to these multiple factors tend to indicate that the Letters

of Demand P27 and P28 were not properly admitted as evidence before the

trial Court. More importantly, it must also be noted that the 2nd Defendant

objected to these Letters of Demand being produced and admitted in

evidence, when the witness for the Plaintiff Bank tendered them in trial

Court. They were accordingly tendered to Court by the Plaintiff Bank with

the qualification “subject to proof”. The said objection of the 2nd Defendant

to receive the Letters of Demand as admissible evidence was once more

taken at the close of the case of the Plaintiff Bank.

Section 162 of the Civil Procedure Code states that when a document,

the admission of which is objected to, is put forward as the copy of an absent

original, it is not proved until both such evidence as is sufficient to prove the

correctness of the copy, and also such evidence as would be sufficient to prove the

original, had it been tendered instead of the copy, has been given. In the absence

of such evidence to satisfy the trial Court by proving the correctness of the

copy as well as to prove the original, the trial Court rightly answered the

issues Nos. 14(1) and 14(2) in favour of the 2nd Defendant and against the

Plaintiff Bank. In appeal, this finding of fact was affirmed by the Provincial

S.C. Appeal No. 31/2017

19

High Court of Civil Appeal which decided to dismiss the appeal, preferred

by the Plaintiff Bank against the judgment of the trial Court.

In view of the reasoning contained in the preceding paragraphs, I

am of the opinion that the Courts below have acted rightly in terms of the

applicable principles of law in coming to the conclusions they did

eventually reach on this particular point. Those Courts have reached the

said conclusions after applying those very principles to the factual

assertions made by the witness for the Plaintiff Bank.

The requirement of establishing the assertion made by the 2nd

Defendant that none of the Letters of Demand were received by him arises,

only after the Plaintiff Bank fulfilled its part by establishing that the two

letters, which informed him of the demand to pay were posted to the

address given, in compliance with the terms and conditions contained in

the Letters of Offer and the Immovable Bond No. 511. The 2nd Defendant

pointed out during his submissions that neither the testimony of the

Attorney-at-Law who prepared the Letters of Demand nor the receipts of

posting were offered as evidence tendered before Court in support of the

position that a demand had been made.

In the absence of any admissible evidence presented before the trial

Court by the Plaintiff Bank, in order to establish that the Letters of

Demand P27 and P28 were sent to the address of the 2nd Defendant under

registered cover, as required in terms of the applicable terms and

conditions with regard to the granting of loan facilities, there cannot arise a

corresponding obligation imposed on the latter to establish the negative.

Therefore, the contention presented by the Plaintiff Bank that, by the

S.C. Appeal No. 31/2017

20

marking of Letters of Demand through its witness prima facie establishes

that those letters were sent to the address of the 2nd Defendant under

registered cover cannot succeed.

The factual position of the instant appeal is clearly distinguishable to

the ones on which Edrick Silva v Chandadasa 70 NLR 169, Cinemas Ltd v

Soundararajan (1998) 2 Sri L.R. 19, Rajapakshe v Weerakoon (SC Appeal

No. 120/09 – decided on 01.08.2017 and Chandra Gunasekara v Peoples

Bank 2020 [B.L.R] 143 were decided and the principle enunciated in them,

to the effect where one party to a litigation leads prima facie evidence and

the adversary fails to lead contradicting evidence by cross-examination

and also fails to lead evidence in rebuttal, then it is a matter falling within

the definition of the word ‘proof’ in the Evidence Ordinance.

Moving on to the other contention of the Plaintiff Bank that the 2nd

Defendant had admitted the receipt of the Letters of Demand by his reply

letter marked P29, which was sent under “without prejudice” by the 2nd

Defendant fulfils the requirement of the demand being made. The learned

President’s Counsel placed heavy reliance on the judgment of Oceanbulk

Shipping & Trading SA v TMT Asia Ltd., and Others [2010] UKSC 44,

where the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom considered the

exceptions to the “without prejudice rule”.

Before considering the contention of the Plaintiff Bank that the

contents of letter P29, qualify to be considered as an exception to the said

rule, as it was written in reply to the Letters of Demand P27 and P28, it is

necessary to make a superficial reference to the contents of each of these

documents.

S.C. Appeal No. 31/2017

21

P27 is a Letter of Demand which carries the date 06.07.2005. It

demands Rs. 1,001,645.48 from the 1st and 2nd Defendants as the dues from

the capital and interest of a loan of Rs, 1,000,000.00 with an annual interest

rate of 15.5%. It is addressed to the 1st and 2nd Defendants. Letter of

Demand P28 is dated 06.06.2005. It is a letter through which the Plaintiff

Bank demanded from the 1st and 2nd Defendants a sum of Rs. 988,872.54

due to it over a loan facility of Rs. 1,000,000.00 with an annual interest rate

of 15.5%.

Letter P29 is a letter written by the 2nd Defendant addressed to the

Plaintiff Bank with an insertion of the words “without prejudice” at its top

part. This letter was written by the 2nd Defendant as a reply to two letters

he received from the Plaintiff Bank dated 06.06.2005. It speaks of three

loans. The amounts of these loans that are indicated by the 2nd Defendant

in P29 refer to Rs. 1,000,000.00, Rs. 700,000.00 and Rs. 200,000.00

respectively. P29 is dated 11.06.2005.

Of the two Letters of Demand sent by the Plaintiff Bank, only P28

predates the letter P29. P27, carrying a date of 06.07.2005 sent only after

P29 was written by the 2nd Defendant. Thus, even if the contents of P29 are

accepted as an admission of the demand made by the Plaintiff Bank by

ignoring the fact that it was written without prejudice, it then applies to

the Letter of Demand P28 only. Letter of Demand P28 refers to a loan of

Rs. 1,000,000,00. But the 2nd Defendant, in replying to two letters dated

06.06.2005 refers to three loans of Rs. 1,000,000.00., Rs. 700,000.00 and Rs.

200,000.00 granted to the 1st Defendant. Of the copies of many Letters of

Demand, tendered to Court as P25, P26, P27, P28, P32 and P33, only P25

and P28 are dated 06.06.2005. P25 is addressed to the 1st Defendant

S.C. Appeal No. 31/2017

22

informing of the demand of the Plaintiff Bank. The name of the 2nd

Defendant only appears at the end of the letter and that too after the

signature of the Attorney-at-Law, indicating it was sent to him, merely for

the purpose of being a recipient of a copy of that letter. Therefore, P25

cannot be taken as a Letter of Demand by which the 2nd Defendant was

called upon by the Plaintiff Bank to make payments of the dues he owed to

the latter. It is interesting to note that in P25 there is reference to three

loans obtained and the demand made over them from the 1st Defendant.

Letter of Demand P28 refers to a demand made to recover dues of a

loan of Rs. 1,000,000.00 and it does not make any reference to any other

loan facilities granted either to the 2nd Defendant or to the 1st Defendant.

The 2nd Defendant clearly referred to in P29 that he replies to both letters

dated 06.06.2005, which indicated that he was granted three loans, a fact he

disputed in the said reply. Thus, it is more likely that P29 was not sent, as a

reply to P28, but in reply to two other letters received by the 2nd

Defendant, which is in line with his claim that he never received P27 and

P28.

The trial Court considered these factors in its determination of the

issues Nos. 14(1) and 14(2) and the Provincial High Court of Civil Appeal

concurred with the view taken by the trial Court that P29 does not contain

any admission on the part of the 2nd Defendant that he did receive Letters

of Demand P27 and P28. The conclusions reached by the Courts below are

the reasonable conclusions that could be reached on the available evidence

and therefore are affirmed. In view of these findings, this Court finds no

necessity to consider the instances where the Courts would make an

exception to the general rule applied on letters written subject to “without

S.C. Appeal No. 31/2017

23

prejudice” for the reason highlighted by Lord Clarke quoting Lord Hope (as

reproduced in para 28 of the judgment of Oceanbulk Shipping & Trading

SA v TMT Asia Ltd., and Others);

“The essence of [the rule] lies in the nature of the protection

that is given to parties when they are attempting to negotiate

a compromise. It is the ability to speak freely that indicates

where the limits of the rule should lie. Far from being

mechanistic, the rule is generous in its application. It

recognises that unseen dangers may lurk behind things said

or written during tis period, and it removes the inhibiting

effect that this may have in the interests of promoting

attempts to achieve a settlement. It is not to be defeated by

other considerations of public policy which may emerge later,

such as those suggested in this case, that would deny them

that protection.”

In these circumstances and in view of the above reasoning; the

questions of law that were raised by the Plaintiff Bank in relation to the

instant appeal are answered as follows;

a. In civil actions, upon production of a Letter of Demand as

evidence by the Plaintiff;

i. Does the burden of proof shift to the Defendant to

establish and/or lead evidence that it was not received by

him?

In view of the fact that the Plaintiff Bank had failed

to establish the demand was made to the 2nd

S.C. Appeal No. 31/2017

24

Defendant, this question does not arise for

consideration in relation to the instant matter.

ii. Does the burden of proof shift back to the Plaintiff only if

the Defendant elicits evidence that he had not received

such letter?

In view of the answer provided to the previous

question, this question too does not arise for

consideration.

b. Was there any evidence before Court to determine that the

Letters of Demand had not been sent to the Defendants, when the

2nd Defendant had failed and/or refused to give evidence to the

effect that he had not received such Letters of Demand?

There was no evidence that the Letters of Demand were

sent to the 2nd Defendant.

c. Has the Provincial High Court of the Western Province erred in

law in holding that the letter P29 cannot be considered as a reply

to Letters of Demand P25 & P28 [ both dated 06.06.2005], when

there was no evidence to the contrary given by the Defendant to

the effect that P29 was in reply to some other letter?

The Provincial High Court of the Western Province made

no error in law in holding that P29 cannot be considered as

a reply to Letters of Demand P25 and P28.

S.C. Appeal No. 31/2017

25

d. Has the Provincial High Court of the Western Province erred in

law in properly evaluating the evidence led in the case?

The Provincial High Court of the Western Province made

no error in law or in fact, in evaluating the evidence led in

the case.

The judgment of the Provincial High Court of Civil Appeal is

therefore affirmed along with that of the District Court and the appeal of

the Plaintiff Bank is accordingly dismissed.

I make no order as to costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

P. PADMAN SURASENA, CJ. I agree. CHIEF JUSTICE A.H.M.D. NAWAZ, J. I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT