IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of Section 5C(1) of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Amendment) Act No. 54 of 2006 against the Judgment of the Civil Appeal High Court of Avissawella.

Udage Arachchige Wijayadasa,

Kudagammana, Giriulla.

Plaintiff

Vs.

S.C. Appeal No. 211/2015

(SC/HCCA/LA No. 154/2015)

Civil Appeal High Court Avissawella

Case No. WP/HCCA/AV 1305/12/(F) &

1306/12/ (F)

D.C. Pugoda Case No. 551/P

1. Malawi Pathirennehelage David Singho (Now Deceased)

1A. Malawi Pathirennehelage Vajira Malkanthi

No.67, Iddamaldeniya, Dompe.

2. Udage Arachchige Sirimal Kanthi Wickramasinghe

Wanaluwawa, Gampaha.

3. Udage Arachchige Lavinis Singho (Now Deceased)

S.C. Appeal No. 211/2015

2

3A. Udage Arachchige Sirimal Kanthi Wickramasinghe

No.6/1, Wanaluwawa, Gampaha.

4. Udage Arachchige Jayanthi Chandani Siriyalatha

No.6/1, Wanaluwawa, Gampaha.

5. Udage Arachchige Christi Terrance Rupasinghe

No.6/1, Wanaluwawa, Gampaha.

6. Udage Arachchige Karunaratne Tony Rupasinghe

No.6/1, Wanaluwawa, Gampaha.

Defendants.

AND BETWEEN

1A. Malawi Pathirennehelage Vajira

Malkanthi

No.67, Iddamaldeniya, Dompe.

1A Defendant-Appellant

Vs.

Udage Arachchige Wijayadasa,

Kudagammana, Giriulla.

Plaintiff-Respondent

2. Udage Arachchige Sirimal Kanthi Wickramasinghe

Wanaluwawa, Gampaha.

3. Udage Arachchige Lavinis Singho (Deceased)

S.C. Appeal No. 211/2015

3

3A. Udage Arachchige Sirimal Kanthi Wickramasinghe

No.6/1, Wanaluwawa, Gampaha.

4. Udage Arachchige Jayanthi Chandani Siriyalatha

No.6/1, Wanaluwawa, Gampaha.

5. Udage Arachchige Christi Terrance Rupasinghe

No.6/1, Wanaluwawa, Gampaha.

6. Udage Arachchige Karunaratne Tony Rupasinghe

No.6/1, Wanaluwawa, Gampaha.

Defendant-Respodents.

AND NOW BETWEEN

2. Udage Arachchige Sirimal Kanthi Wickramasinghe

Wanaluwawa, Gampaha.

3. Udage Arachchige Lavinis Singho (Deceased)

3A. Udage Arachchige Sirimal Kanthi Wickramasinghe

No. 6/1, Wanaluwawa, Gampaha.

4. Udage Arachchige Jayanthi Chandani Siriyalatha

No. 6/1 Wanaluwawa, Gampaha.

5. Udage Arachchige Christi Terrance Rupasinghe

No. 6/1, Wanaluwawa, Gampaha.

S.C. Appeal No. 211/2015

4

6. Udage Arachchige Karunaratne Tony Rupasinghe

No.6/1, Wanaluwawa, Gampaha.

Defendant-Respondent- Appellants

Vs.

1A. Malawi Pathirennehelage Vajira Malkanthi

No.67, Iddamaldeniya, Dompe.

1A Defendant-Appellant-Respondent

Udage Arachchige Wijayadasa,

Kudagammana, Giriulla.

Plaintiff-Respondent-Repondent

BEFORE : MURDU N.B. FERNANDO, PC, CJ KUMUDINI WICKREMASINGHE, J. ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J. COUNSEL : S.A.D.S. Suraweera for the 2nd - 6th Defendant-Respondent-Appellants Seevali Amithirigala, PC with Pathum Wijepala instructed by Ms. Manoja Gunawardhana for the Plaintiff-Respondent -Respondent. Kamal Suneth Perera for the 1A Defendant-Appellant-Respondent ARGUED ON : 14th June, 2024 DECIDED ON : 25th July, 2025

S.C. Appeal No. 211/2015

5

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

The Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the

Plaintiff) instituted the instant action, seeking to partition a land called

Kahatagahawatta alias Kiriwanagalawatta in total extent of four acres and five

perches, described in the Schedule to the Plaint and held in common. The

pedigree relied on by the Plaintiff, if accepted by Court, made him entitled to a

share of the corpus while remainder allocated to the 1st substituted Defendant-

Appellant-Respondent, (hereinafter referred to as the 1st Defendant).

Describing the devolution of title to the land sought to be partitioned, the

Plaintiff averred that the original owners of the said land were

Hewakankanamalage Punchi Nona and Udage Arachchige Davith, who became

entitled to that land upon a final decree of partition entered in case No. 3817/P of

the District Court of Gampaha. Davith had transferred his share in favour of

Malavipatirennehelage David Singho, after execution of deed No. 8173 (1V1) on

24.09.1967, whereas Punchi Nona and her husband had transferred the remaining

share, in favour of the Plaintiff by execution of deed No. 606 (P2) on

18.01.1972.

The Plaintiff had named the 2nd and 3rd Defendants in the partition action

not because they are co-owners, but as persons who challenge his rights to the

corpus. The 4th, 5th and 6th Defendants were also added as parties when they

sought to intervene into the instant action.

The Statement of Claim of the 4th to 6th Defendant-Respondent- Appellants

(hereinafter referred as the 4th to 6th Defendants) indicate that the 3rd Defendant

has acquired the prescriptive rights over the corpus by uninterrupted possession

S.C. Appeal No. 211/2015

6

from the year 1976. They also allege that the deed No. 606 is a forgery, as the

executant was totally paralysed by 1972 and therefore could not have executed

the said deed, on which the Plaintiff claimed title.

A similar position was taken by the 2nd and 3rd Defendant-Respondent-

Appellants (hereinafter referred to as the 2nd and 3rd Defendants) in their joint

Statement of Claim. They further claimed that the 3rd Defendant exclusively

holds the land since 1976 against the rights of the others and acquired

prescriptive title to the land.

Parties have settled to a total of 18 points of contest before the trial Court

and proceeded to trial. The 2nd to 6th Defendants were jointly represented before

the trial Court.

At the conclusion of the trial, the District Court dismissed the Plaintiffs

action, primarily on the basis that he had failed to prove his title to a share to

the corpus. The trial Court justified the said conclusion on the premise that the

due execution of the deed No. 606 was not proved by the Plaintiff by calling the

Notary and the Witnesses, as the 2nd to 6th Defendants have objected to the

admissibility of a certified copy of the said deed, which was tendered subject to

proof and that they have reiterated the said objection at the close of the

Plaintiffs case. The trial Court also held that the due execution of the title deed,

relied on by the 1st Defendant too was not proved.

Turning to the other Defendants, trial Court also found that the points of

contest raised by the 2nd to 6th Defendants that the deed No. 606 is a forgery as

not proved, while determining the Point of Contest No. 15, which was raised on

the claim of prescriptive acquisition of title, as does not arise.

S.C. Appeal No. 211/2015

7

Only the Plaintiff and the 1st Defendant have preferred appeals against the

judgment of the trial Court for dismissing the Plaint. Despite the fact that the

claim of acquisition of prescriptive title over the corpus being determined as does

not arise, none of the 2nd to 6th Defendants sought to challenge that finding, even

when they were served with notices of appeal by the Plaintiff and the 1st

Defendant. Neither they made any application under Section 772(1) of the Civil

Procedure Code.

At the hearing before the High Court of Civil Appeal, all parties have

agreed to have the two appeals consolidated.

The appellate Court identified that the only question to be considered in this

appeal is whether the plaintiff failed to prove the due execution of the deeds marked P2

and 1V1 at the trial. The appellate Court, in allowing the appeal, held that the

burden of proving the allegation of forgery, in respect of both these deeds, was

on the 2nd to 6th Defendants, who failed to adduce sufficient evidence to establish

that claim and therefore the trial Court misdirected itself in holding that the

Plaintiff failed to prove due execution of the two deeds.

The 2nd to 6th Defendants sought leave to appeal from this Court against

the said judgment of the High Court of Civil Appeal. After affording a hearing to

the Counsel, this Court decided to grant leave to appeal on the following

questions of law, by its order made on 17.12.2015.

Did the learned Judges of the Provincial High Court err in law in

only considering the legality of the judgment of the District Court of

Pugoda and allowing the appeal without taking into consideration

of the fact that as to whether the alleged paper title of the Plaintiff

S.C. Appeal No. 211/2015

8

and the 1st Defendant have been superseded by a prescriptive title as

averred by the Defendant-Respondent-Appellants?

Did the learned Judges of the Provincial High Court err in law in

their failure to consider the applicability of the special provisions

contained in Section 68 of Partition Law but and in only considering

the provisions of section 90 of the Evidence Ordinance ?

It is for the purpose of convenience; I wish to consider the second question

of law first.

The Plaintiff relied on Deed of Transfer No. 606, executed in his favour by

his parents, to satisfy Court that he had derived title to his share, claimed from

the corpus. During the Plaintiffs case, and whilst giving evidence, the Plaintiff

tendered a certified copy of the said deed, marked as P2. The 2nd to 6th

Defendants objected and the said document was marked to subject to proof.

Similarly, when the Plaintiff tendered a certified copy of the Deed of Transfer

No. 8173 marked as 1V1, through which the 1st Defendant derived title from the

original owner Malavipatirennehelage David Singho, to establish his own title to the

remaining share of the corpus, the same objection was raised and that

document too was marked subject to proof.

Neither the Plaintiff nor the 1st Defendant called the respective Notaries

and the witnesses, who attested these deeds, as witnesses. At the close of the

Plaintiffs case the 2nd to 6th Defendants once again raised their objection to the

deeds P2 and 1V1 as not proved. The District Court, by its judgment dismissed

the Plaint. In appeal the High Court of Civil Appeal held that the burden of

proving the allegation of forgery in respect of both these deeds was on the 2nd to

S.C. Appeal No. 211/2015

9

6th Defendants who failed to adduce sufficient evidence to establish their position

and therefore the trial Court misdirected itself in holding that the Plaintiff failed

to prove due execution of the two deeds.

Points of Contest Nos. 10, 11 and 12, that were raised by the 2nd to 6th

Defendants have placed the very act of signing the two deeds as a disputed fact

in issue. Particularly, Points of Contest No. 11 was framed to the effect whether

the deed Nos. 8173 and 606 are forgeries, as the respective executants were not

physically capable of executing those deeds due to their extreme ill health. The

High Court of Civil Appeal allowed the appeal as the 2nd to 6th Defendants have

failed to adduce sufficient evidence to establish that they are forgeries, the

position which they averred, to the required degree of proof. Perusal of the

proceedings indicate that it is so.

Since the appellate Court was called upon to determine a solitary ground

of appeal, namely the only question to be considered in this appeal is whether the

plaintiff failed to prove the due execution of the deeds marked P2 and 1V1 at the trial, it

appears that the basis on which the High Court of Civil Appeal made the

impugned determination, does not only hinges on this ground of appeal, but are

connected to the issue Nos. 10, 11 and 12.

Learned Counsel for the 2nd to 6th Defendants contended that the High

Court of Civil Appeal misdirected itself, in not directly determining the

inadmissibility of the title deeds P2 and 1V1, but by determining the appeal on a

different basis. In relation to the question of law under consideration, it was his

submission that, the failure of the Plaintiff and the 1st Defendant to establish that

the two title deeds were duly executed, particularly when an objection was taken

for the admissibility on that very ground by an opposing party in terms of

S.C. Appeal No. 211/2015

10

Section 68 of the Evidence Ordinance, the District Court had no other option but

to dismiss the Plaint.

Learned Presidents Counsel, who represented the Plaintiff and the

learned Counsel, who represented the 1st Defendant have contended that the

admissibility of the documents in a partition action is not only governed by

Section 68 of the Evidence, but also by Section 90 of that Ordinance, as the latter

Section confers a presumption on such documents that they are duly executed.

They also relied on Section 68 of the Partition Law, in support of that contention.

In view of these applicable statutory provisions, it was further contended by the

learned Counsel that the error committed by the trial Court, in its failure to

consider that vital factor, which in turn resulted in the dismissal of the Plaint,

had been cured by the appellate Court by acting on the said presumption.

The relevant part of the text of Section 90 of the Evidence Ordinance

applicable to this appeal reads Where any document purporting or proved to be

thirty years old is produced from proper custody which the Court in the particular case

considers proper, the Court may presume in the case of a document executed or

attested, that it was duly executed or attested by the persons by whom it purports to be

executed and attested.

Of the two title deeds, P2 was executed on 18.01.1972 and the partition

action was instituted on 25.10.2000. The title deed P2 does not qualify to the

presumption under Section 90 of the Evidence Ordinance, but the deed 1V1,

which was executed on 24.09.1967 does. This is particularly so, when the 1st

Defendant presented uncontradicted evidence before the trial Court that the

Notary, who executed 1V1, the two witnesses who attested the said deed, have

all died. One of the witnesses Malavipatirennehelage Norbert died on 19.06.2007 at

S.C. Appeal No. 211/2015

11

Dompe District Hospital whereas the other witness H.W. Nomis too had died on

07.05.2007 also at Dompe District Hospital. Thus, it was impossible for the

substituted 1st Defendant to call any of them to prove the due execution of the

said deed.

The 2nd to 6th Defendants objected to the admissibility of the deed 1V1 on

the basis that the execution of the said deed was not the act of the executant.

They raised points of contest on that basis. However, as pointed out by the

learned Presidents Counsel for the Plaintiff, the 2nd and 4th Defendants have

admitted, accepted and acquiesced the deed 1V1, in their evidence before the trial

Court. The 2nd Defendant, who is a grandson of the executant, accepted the

signature that appear on the said deed as the executant, is a signature similar

to his grandfathers.

He further admitted that after the execution, the executant continued to

occupy the land, a factor which has no significance as the parties to the instant

action are either offspring of the original owners or their grandchildren. It is not

uncommon in our society that an elder of a family, who transferred his rights to a

his own child, to continue to wield his authority of that property, despite the

legal implications of such a transfer would entail and the transferor, on his part

would silently await patiently without exercising his newly acquired rights over

the land .

The 2nd Defendant admitted that his grandfather, Davith who died in 1975,

gave two parcels of land each to the Plaintiff and to the 1st Defendant. He further

admitted that he is unable to say whether the disputed deeds were genuine or

not, but added that, to his knowledge, the Plaintiff was given only one land by

Davith, which is the land subject to this partition action. He also conceded that

S.C. Appeal No. 211/2015

12

there was no complaint made to police alleging forgery despite the fact that they

came to know of the execution of the said two deeds. The 4th Defendant, after

admitting that he had seen his grandfather signing on other documents,

admitted the signature of the executant in 1V1 is similar to the one of his

grandfather Davith. The 4th Defendant thereafter recants from that position, but

when suggested that on order to secure right over the corpus he had falsely

accused that the said deed is a forgery, the witness had no answer to offer.

According to Coomaraswamy, (The Law of Evidence, Vol. I, pages 647-648),

the authenticity of a document may be proved in any one or more of the

following ways: (a) The evidence of the party who signed or wrote the

document; (b) The evidence of a person who saw him sign or write it; (c) The

evidence of someone who is acquainted with his handwriting. He further states

in relation to (c) that, this can be in one of the three ways set out in the

explanation to Section 47 of the Evidence Ordinance; (a) By the evidence of an

expert who compares the writing with some other writing known to be that of

the signatory; (b) By proof of the admission by the writer; (c) By comparison by

the court under Section 73 of the Evidence Ordinance; (d) Circumstantial

evidence arising from the intrinsic evidence of the contents or by presumptions.

Moreover, Section 68 of Partition Act states thus

It shall not be necessary in any proceedings under this Law to adduce

formal proof of the execution of any deed which, on the face of it, purports

to have been duly executed, unless the genuineness of that deed is

impeached by a party claiming adversely to the party producing that deed,

or unless the court requires such proof.

S.C. Appeal No. 211/2015

13

In relation to the instant appeal, the genuineness of the deed 1V1 could be

assessed by applying one of the ways, as identified by Coomaraswamy, i.e. by

assessing the circumstantial evidence arising from the intrinsic evidence of the

contents or by presumptions. The presumption that can be drawn in the

circumstances adverted to in the preceding chapters in terms of Section 90 of the

Evidence Ordinance was not rebutted by any of the 2nd to 6th Defendants and the

trial Court should have accepted that evidence in the investigation of the title in

relation to the 1st Defendant and allocated shares accordingly. In Sangarakkita

Thero v Buddharakkita Thero (1951) 53 NLR 457, Rose CJ observed (at p.459)

where the relevant witnesses were called [T]here is, of course, a presumption that a

deed which on its face appears to be in order has been duly executed, and it seems to me

that the mere framing an issue as to the due execution of the deed, followed in due course

by a perfunctory question or two on the general matter of execution, without specifying

in detail the omissions or irregularities which are relied upon, is insufficient to rebut that

presumption.

This observation made by the Rose CJ, has a direct relevance to the instant

appeal. The trial Court already determined that the 2nd to 6th Defendants have

failed to impeach the genuineness of the deed 1V1, which they sought to achieve

by doing nothing, other than simply objecting to its reception as evidence and

that too, as a mere tactical tool, to gain an advantage over the other litigants. In

my view, adoption of this approach to determine the genuineness of the deed

would not offend the Explanation to Section 154(3) of the Civil Procedure Code,

which deals with the first question referred to in that section.

There is no dispute as to the identity of the corpus, as determined by the

trial Court. In fact, the 2nd to 6th Defendants claim of acquisition of prescriptive

title to the different lots, which they presented before the surveyor, during the

S.C. Appeal No. 211/2015

14

preliminary survey, were upon the identification of their respective boundaries

that separated them.

The resultant position in the acceptance of the deed 1V1 by the High Court

of Civil Appeal, as a title deed that confers share of the corpus to the 1st

Defendant, not only made it a commonly held land and thereby bringing it

withing scope of Partition Law, but also make the 1st Defendant a plaintiff, who

could thereupon proceed with the partition action, when the Plaintiff failed to

prove his title to the share claimed by him.

Turning to the consideration of the first question of law, did the learned

Judges of the High Court of Civil Appeal err in law in only considering the

legality of the judgment of the District Court of Pugoda and allowing the appeal

without taking into consideration of the fact that as to whether the alleged paper

title of the Plaintiff and the 1st Defendant have been superseded by a prescriptive

title, as averred by the Defendant-Respondent-Appellants, neither need no

detailed analysis of the evidence presented before the trial Court nor requires an

scholarly treatment of the jurisprudence developed thus far by the Courts on

acquisition of prescriptive rights over someone elses property.

Except for an order made under Section 66 of the Primary Courts

Procedure Act on 25.08.2000, which placed the father of the 2nd Defendant in

possession, which he must have held for the last two months, and the claims

made before the surveyor, there are no other documentary evidence presented

by the 2nd to 6th Defendants, in support of their collective position other than

verbally asserting various claims of enjoying fruits of the land sought to be

partitioned.

S.C. Appeal No. 211/2015

15

Learned Presidents Counsel for the Plaintiff submitted to this Court that

the 2nd to 6th Defendants have abandoned their claim of prescriptive acquisition

of title to the land to be partitioned.

Having failed to agitate the finding made by the trial Court over their only

claim over the corpus, and, conceding to restrict the appellate jurisdiction of the

High Court of Civil Appeal, only to the question whether the plaintiff failed to

prove the due execution of the deeds marked P2 and 1V1 at the trial at the hearing of

the consolidated appeal preferred by the Plaintiff as well as the 1st substituted

Defendant, the 2nd to 6th Defendants appear to have indeed abandoned the

prosecution of that claim.

Given the fact that the parties are closely related to each other and, some of

them, in the absence of P2 and 1V1 (as they claim), become co-owners to the

land, and therefore needed to establish the starting point of the claim of

prescription among co-owners by an overt act. The focus on this vital

consideration got lost in the multiple pages of proceedings containing long cross-

examination of the Plaintiff and the 1st Defendant, as the 2nd to 6th Defendants

have failed to elicit material during that process, in support of their claim of

prescription. Other than making bare claims that I was in possession and I

tapped rubber the 2nd to 6th Defendants failed to present any evidence of ouster.

The Plaintiff called two witnesses Somasiri and Jayatilake in support of his claim

of possessing the land after the deed P2 was executed.

Somasiri is the person employed by the Plaintiff to look after the land, who

sold its produce on behalf of his employer. Somasiri claimed that from the early

1970s he was looking after the property on behalf of the Plaintiff. He knew the

cases instituted by the parties over this land from time to time. The suggestion

S.C. Appeal No. 211/2015

16

put to him that Lavanis Singo, the 3rd Defendant and a brother of the Plaintiff, was

occupying the house that stood on the land to be partitioned, he totally denied.

The witness added that the said house remained abandoned after the passing of

the Plaintiffs parents, until it was demolished by him a few years ago.

Learned Counsel for the 2nd to 6th Defendants addressed this Court on the

issue of proscription. He relied on the electoral registers (2V2 to 2V5) and the

recital in the Deed of Gift No. 2660 (2V11), executed by the 3rd Defendant, few

months before the institution of the instant partition action, gifting a three-acre,

twenty-one perch land he claimed to have inherited from his father, in favour of

his four children. The address of the executant is given in as 6/1, Vanaluwawa

similar to the one that appear on the electoral registers. This evidence was in

support of the position that the 3rd Defendant was residing on the corpus. Other

than the verbal assertion that 6/1, Vanaluwawa in fact refers to the corpus, there

was no evidence presented through any official witness supporting that claim.

Learned Presidents Counsel pointed out that despite the executant stating

the said address in the recital, the Schedule in which the land is described, there

is no such reference other than a reference to a non-existent partition action No.

31312/P, connecting the two lands.

The surveyor, in the preliminary plan identified as house standing on Lot

No. 1 of the corpus, consisting of a total of six lots, as an abandoned house and in

his evidence said that the 3rd Defendant, who claimed to him that he lives there,

only occupied it only in the previous night. Both, the Plaintiff and the 3rd

Defendant claimed the plantation and the abandoned house before the surveyor.

This is the evidence placed before the District Court that the 3rd Defendant was in

uninterrupted and continued adverse possession against other co-owners. The

S.C. Appeal No. 211/2015

17

reference made in the judgment of the District Court that the Plaintiff admitted

the 2nd Defendants possession since 1978, is not supported by evidence and the

clear evidence to his occupation of the corpus emerges only after the 66 action, in

which an order was made by Court only on 25.08.2000, placing the daughter of

the 3rd Defendant in possession.

The 2nd to 6th Defendants, being members of the 2nd and 3rd generation of

the direct descendants of the original owners, and when they accepted the fact

that they were given different lands by Davith away from the land under

partition, conceded to the fact that the Plaintiff and the 1st Defendant too were

similarly given lands by their father and particularly the land given to the

Plaintiff is the land to be partitioned. They further conceded that they knew that

the deeds P2 and 1V1 were executed over twenty years ago and they never made

any complaint to police accusing forgery the said group of Defendants have

failed to satisfy the trial Court that they are entitled to that recognition.

The answer to Point of Contest No. 15 does not arise cannot be taken to

mean that the trial Court did not consider their claim of prescription at all. The

erroneous observation made by the trial Court that in view of the fact that the 3rd

Defendants position that he was in possession for the last 22 years, was accepted

by the Plaintiff, coupled with his failure to establish his title to the land, made the

trial Court to dismiss the partition action seem to suggest that the Court did not

want to make a positive pronouncement on that aspect.

The Plaintiff had withdrawn a partition action, in 1989, which he instituted

in the same year (2V4). During cross-examination, it was erroneously suggested

by his Counsel that since 1978 the 2nd Defendant was in possession, instead of

S.C. Appeal No. 211/2015

18

1988, which the trial Judge mistakenly taken into consideration as his possession

over the corpus since 1978.

In view of these considerations, I proceed to answer the points of contest

No. 5 raised by the 1st Defendant in the affirmative, and the point of contest No.

15, raised by the 3rd Defendant that whether he had prescribed to the corpus since

1978, in the negative with the answer not proved by replacing the answer of

the trial Court to the same, does not arise.

The two questions of law, referred to earlier on in this judgment and

argued before this Court, are therefore answered in the negative. However, in

consideration of the fact that only the 1st Defendant had established the share

of the corpus, acting in terms of Section 26(2)(g) of the Partition Act, this Court

orders that the remaining share of the corpus to remain unallotted. The deed P2

cannot claim the benefit of the presumption under Section 90 of the Evidence

Ordinance, for it does not satisfy the required time period. The Plaintiff therefore

is not entitled to any share allocation, in the absence of any acceptable proof of

title. The 2nd to 6th Defendants are entitled to be compensated for, only on

satisfying the Court of any improvements, made on the land.

The judgment of the High Court of Civil Appeal, by which the judgment of

the District Court was set aside is therefore affirmed, but subject to the said

variation. The instant partition action is herewith restored and, in these

circumstances, the District Court is directed to enter interlocutory decree

accordingly and proceed to partition the land, depicted in the preliminary plan

X, in terms of the law.

S.C. Appeal No. 211/2015

19

In view of the orders made by this Court, the appeal of the 2nd to 6th

Defendants is partly allowed.

Parties will bear their costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

MURDU N.B. FERNANDO, PC, CJ

I agree.

CHIEF JUSTICE KUMUDINI WICKREMASINGHE, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT