IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Sierra Construction Ltd.,

No. 112, Havelock Road,

Colombo 05.

Petitioner

SC/FR/135/2023 Vs.

1. Road Development Authority,

Maganeguma Mahamedura

No. 216, Denzil Kobbakaduwa Mawatha,

Koswatta, Battaramulla.

2. Project Director,

Miscellaneous Foreign Aided Projects

Division, Road Development Authority,

No. 465, Ganahena, Battaramulla.

3. Secretary,

Ministry of Transport and Highways,

7th Floor, Sethsiripaya Stage II,

Battaramulla.

4. Maga Engineering (Pvt) Ltd,

No. 200, Nawala Road,

Narahenpita, Colombo 05.

5. Tudawe Brothers (Pvt) Ltd,

No. 505/2, Elvitigala Mawatha,

Colombo 05.

6. International Construction Consortium

(Pvt) Ltd,

2

SC/FR/135/2023

No. 70, S. De S. Jayasinghe Mawatha,

Nugegoda.

7. Nawaloka Construction Company (Pvt)

Ltd,

No. 115, Sir James Pieris Mawatha,

Colombo 02.

8. Kanwel Constructions and Civil

Engineering (Pvt) Ltd,

Wattegedara Road, 41A, Purana Road,

Maharagama 10280.

9. K. D. Ebert & Sons Holdings (Pvt) Ltd,

No. 5/41, Madiwela Road,

Embuldeniya,

Nugegoda.

10. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

11. M.M.P.K. Mayadunne,

Chairperson,

12. L.V.S. Weerakoon,

Member,

13. P. K. Melani,

Member,

Ministry Procurement Committee for the

Tender for Rehabilitation/Improvements

to B 367 Piliyandala Maharagama Road

Section from Piliyandala to Maharagama

(0+000km 1+800km),

Ministry of Transport and Highways,

7th Floor, Sethsiripaya Stage II,

Bataramulla.

3

SC/FR/135/2023

14. H.H.N.A. Hettiarachchi,

Chairperson,

15. R. P. K. P. R. Perera,

Member,

16. D.M.G. Abeyratne,

Member,

17. P.P. Jayasekara,

Member,

18. W.A.A. Pushpakumara,

Member,

Technical Evaluation Committee for the

Tender for Rehabilitation/Improvements

to B 367 Piliyandala Maharagama Road

Section from Piliyandala to Maharagama

(0+000 km 1+800 km),

Road Development Authority,

No. 465, Ganehena,

Battaramulla.

Respondents

Before: Hon. Justice S. Thurairaja, P.C.

Hon. Justice E.A.G.R. Amarasekara

Hon. Justice Mahinda Samayawardhena

Counsel: Suren Gnanaraj with Rashmi Dias for the Petitioner.

Nerin Pulle, P.C., A.S.G., with Nayanathara Balapatabendi,

S.C. for the 1st 3rd and 10th 18th Respondents.

Manoj Bandara with Mrs. Praveena Muhandiram for the

4th Respondent.

Argued on: 15.10.2024

4

SC/FR/135/2023

Written submissions:

By the Petitioner on 22.11.2024

By the 1st 3rd and 10th 18th Respondents on 21.11.2024

By the 4th Respondent on 20.11.2024

Decided on: 10.02.2025

Samayawardhena, J.

The petitioner company invoked the fundamental rights jurisdiction of

this Court, challenging the decision of the 1st to 3rd respondents (Road

Development Authority) and the 11th to 18th respondents (Ministry

Procurement Committee and Technical Evaluation Committee) to reject

the petitioners bid as substantially non-responsive and to award the

tender to the 4th respondent. The tender pertains to the project titled

Rehabilitation/Improvements to B367 Piliyandala-Maharagama Road

Section from Piliyandala to Maharagama (0+000 km-1+8000 km)

Contract No. RDA/MFAP/ICB/OFID 2/08(a), funded by the OPEC Fund

for International Development (OFID). The petitioner contends that the

decision is contrary to the bidding documents and the National

Procurement Guidelines and is in breach of the petitioners fundamental

rights guaranteed by Articles 12(1) and 14(1)(g) of the Constitution.

In paragraph 25 of the petition, the petitioner states that on 04.05.2022,

the 1st respondent opened and read out the bids of all bidders, including

that of the petitioner. The petitioner has also provided a table detailing

the names of the bidders and their respective bid prices.

The notice of award dated 02.05.2023 was published by the 2nd

respondent (Project Director) on the 1st respondents (Road Development

Authority) website on or about 03.05.2023 and a copy of which has been

5

SC/FR/135/2023

tendered by the petitioner marked P9. The body of the notice of award

reads as follows:

1. The Government of Sri Lanka has applied for a loan (US $ 50 mn)

from the OPEC Fund for Development (OFID) towards the cost of

the Miscellaneous Foreign Aided Projects (MFAP) and a part of

this loan will be utilized for payments under the Contract named

above.

2. The Road Development Authority (the Employer) invited

separate sealed bids from eligible bidders for the said project.

Bids were received at the deadline for submission on 04th May

2022 at 14:00hrs for the above Contract package.

3. The bidders who have submitted complete bids along with bid

prices were read out at the bid opening held on 04th May 2022

and the evaluated bid prices are as follows for the substantially

responsive bidders.

Name of Bidder

Read out Bid Price (including all PS items

& Contingencies)

(LKR)

Corrected & Discounted Bid Price (including all PS items

& Contingencies)

(LKR) Maga Engineering (Pvt) Ltd

1,150,504,236.88 1,050,691,912.98

Tudawe Brothers (Pvt) Ltd

1,192,057,671.57 1,192,057,671.57

International Construction Consortium (Pvt) Ltd

1,264,776,772.65 1,264,776,773.90

4. As per the evaluation criteria given in the bidding document the

substantially responsive and financially lowest bidder is as

follows:

Maga Engineering (Pvt) Ltd 1,050,776,773.90

5. All appeals should be submitted on or before 12th May 2023.

6

SC/FR/135/2023

The petitioner promptly responded to this notice by a letter dated

04.05.2023 addressed to the 2nd respondent requesting the grounds for

rejection of its bid and a debriefing in terms of Clause 39.2 of the

Instructions to Bidders contained in the Bidding Document marked P3.

This letter written in amicable terms was tendered as P10. In reply, the

2nd respondent by letter dated 12.05.2023 marked R5, informed the

petitioner that the details regarding the debriefing on the rejection of the

petitioners bid had already been communicated to the Secretary of the

Line Ministry who is the Chief Accounting Officer, and that the Secretary

would convey the reasons to the petitioner.

The petitioner later changed its mind and wrote P11 dated 08.05.2023 to

the same 2nd respondent in a hostile tone. In this letter, the petitioner

referred to paragraph 5 of the Notice of Award marked P9, which stated,

All appeals should be submitted on or before 12th May 2023, and

requested strictly without prejudice that P11 be treated as its formal

appeal against the rejection of its bid and the awarding of the tender to

another party.

Before responding to P10 and P11, the petitioner filed this fundamental

rights application dated 09.05.2023 on 10.05.2023. The gravamen of the

complaint of the petitioner is that although its bid was substantially

responsive in respect of all the criteria set out in the bidding documents,

and the bid price it offered was substantially lower than that of the 4th

respondent, awarding the tender to the 4th respondent is violative of its

fundamental rights enshrined in Articles 12(1) and 14(1)(g) of the

Constitution. In addition to the formal declarations, in the prayer to the

petition, the petitioner seeks as substantive reliefs directions on the 1st

respondent or any other respondent to accept the petitioners bid as the

substantially responsive and financially lowest bid and award the tender

to the petitioner.

7

SC/FR/135/2023

I must state at this stage that, according to the National Procurement

Guidelines and the Bidding Document, the bid price is not the sole

determining factor in deciding whether a bid should be accepted. Both

price and quality are crucial considerations. The tender process should

aim to select suppliers who provide the most financially advantageous

terms while also meeting the highest quality standards, thereby ensuring

the best outcome for the country.

In the bidding document marked P3, Section 1 is dedicated to

Instructions to Bidders, and Clause 38 thereof which deals with Award

Criteria reads as follows:

38.1 The employer shall award the Contract to the Bidder whose

offer has been determined to be the lowest evaluated bid and is

substantially responsive to the Bidding Document, provided further

that the Bidder is determined to be qualified to perform the Contract

satisfactorily.

According to Clause 38.1, for the tender to be awarded, three criteria

must be satisfied:

(a) The bid should be the lowest evaluated bid;

(b) The bid should be substantially responsive to the Bidding

Document; and

(c) The bidder is determined to be qualified to perform the contract

satisfactorily.

Section 3 of the Bidding Document marked P3 is dedicated to Evaluation

and Qualification Criteria. Clause 2.4 thereof deals with Experience.

Clause 2.4.2(a) requires the bidder to satisfy that the bidder has previous

experience in Contracts of Similar Size and Nature. It reads as follows:

8

SC/FR/135/2023

Participation as contractor, management contractor, or

subcontractor, in at least 1 contract of road construction,

rehabilitation with asphalt concreate pavement within the last 5

years, with a value of at least US$ 2.38 Million that has been

successfully or is substantially completed and that is similar to the

proposed works. The similarity shall be based on the physical size,

complexity, methods, technology or other characteristics as

described in Section 6 (Employers requirements).

Under Contracts of Similar Size and Nature, the petitioner has provided

the details of 5 Contracts and their descriptions as stated in paragraph

5 of the petition are as follows:

(a) Rehabilitation/ Improvement of 77km of Rural Roads in Nuwara

Eliya District Contract 1 including Performance based

Maintenance for three years [(Contract No.

RDA/ABD/iROAD(CP)/NCB/CP/RR(NE1)] for a contract sum of

USD 7,864,327.36;

(b) Rehabilitation/ Improvement of 39km of Rural Roads in the

Nuwara Eliya District Contract 2 including Performance based

Maintenance for three years [(Contract No.

RDA/ABD/iROAD(CP)/NCB/CP RR(NE2)] for a contract sum of

USD 4,023,614.58;

(c) Rehabilitation/ Improvement of 65km of Rural Roads in the

Nuwara Eliya District Contract 3 including Performance based

Maintenance for three years [(Contract No.

RDA/ABD/iROAD(CP)/NCB/CP RR(NE3)] for a Contract sum of

USD 8,089,525.76;

(d) Rehabilitation/ Improvement of 77km of Rural Roads in the

Kandy District Contract 1 including Performance based

Maintenance for three years [(Contract No.

9

SC/FR/135/2023

RDA/ABD/iROAD(CP)/NCB/CP RR(KA1)] for a Contract sum of

USD 5,600,632.46;

(e) Rehabilitation/ Improvement of 71km of rural roads in the Kandy

District Contract 2 including Performance based Maintenance

for three years [(Contract No. RDA/ABD/iROAD(CP)/NCB/CP

RR(KA 2)] for a Contract sum of USD 5,878,867.22.

Upon the direction given to the 1st respondent by this Court, the 1st

respondent tendered the Ministry Procurement Committee Report and

the Technical Evaluation Committee Report marked R1 and R2

respectively. According to these Reports, out of the 8 contractors who

collected bid documents, 7 submitted their bids on time, and only 3 were

deemed substantially responsive: K.D. Ebert & Sons Holdings (Pvt) Ltd

and Nawaloka Construction Company (Pvt) Ltd had non-performing

contracts. Kanwel Constructions & Civil Engineering (Pvt) Ltd failed to

provide the required contract value of US$ 2.38 million for the

construction experience. The petitioner failed to provide evidence of

contracts of similar size and nature as required in the Bidding Document.

It is the position of the respondents that the afore-mentioned 5 contracts

are not Contracts of Similar Size and Nature to consider the petitioner

as a substantially responsive bidder, primarily because those projects

involve Rural Roads. According to the several affidavits filed by a

number of respondents at different times including those of the 14th

respondent who was the Chairman of the Technical Evaluation

Committee and the appeal decision marked R6 dated 22.12.2023, the

proposed contract pertains to a B Grade Road located in an urban area

of Colombo and a complex project. The 14th respondent in paragraph 10

of his affidavit dated 17.11.2023 inter alia states that in terms of sections

2.4.2(a) and 6.3.2 of the Bidding Document the bidder was intended to

10

SC/FR/135/2023

have experience in the construction of standard two-lane road of National

High way in high traffic density.

In describing the complexity, the 11th respondent, the Chairperson of the

Ministry Procurement Committee, in R6 inter alia states:

The ARB observed that, above projects given by the appellant to

substantiate this criterion has several numbers of rural roads which

are categorized in PRDA and Pradeshiya Sabha roads. The proposed

contract is B class road located in urban area of Colombo district.

Also proposed contract differs from physical size (per km cost, 4 lane

600m section with the width of 18.4m and 2 lane 1200m section

with the width of 13.0m), complexity (There are total of 4

intersections within a 600m length such as 2 intersections are in 4

lane. Configuration and 2 intersections are in 4 lane and 2 lane

configuration) methods, technology (Geometry and Design criteria) or

other characteristics mention in Section 6 (Employers requirements)

and hence, Contract given by the petitioner does not come under

similar size and nature.

Although the petitioner later alleges bias, the Expert Panel nominated by

this Court with the concurrence of the parties to assist the Court, in its

Report dated 10.03.2024 also came to the same conclusion.

The petitioner did not file any report expressing expert opinion to the

contrary. Neither the Court nor the petitioner possesses the requisite

expertise, resources and capacity to challenge through a fundamental

rights application the accuracy of the findings in the several reports filed

by the Technical Evaluation Committee, the Ministry Procurement

Committee, and the Expert Committee appointed by the Court. Based on

the facts and circumstances of the case, the findings in those reports are

not perverse and are prima facie acceptable to the Court. In such cases,

11

SC/FR/135/2023

in exercising its writ or fundamental rights jurisdiction, this Court must

exercise caution in revisiting decisions that are highly technical in

nature. This restraint is necessitated by the Courts institutional

limitations.

If the petitioner truly wishes to challenge the findings of those reports,

the petitioner would have to go before a different forum, and this cannot

practically be done within the context of a fundamental rights application

decided on limited pleadings without oral evidence, and meant to be

concluded within two months of its filing, as stipulated by Article 126(5)

of the Constitution. Those are statutory limitations.

I am aware that the contours of the applicability of Article 12(1), the right

to equality, have expanded significantly over the years to encompass

virtually any violation under its purview. However, every procedural or

substantive error does not and cannot attract the invocation of the

fundamental rights jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.

In Wijesinghe v. Attorney General and Others [1978-79-80] 1 Sri LR 102,

the petitioner contended that her termination from service as a sub-post

mistress was effected without any charges being brought against her and

without being afforded an opportunity to be heard, thereby violating the

equal protection and non-discrimination guarantees under Articles 12(1)

and 12(2) of the Constitution. The Supreme Court, while recognizing that

the petitioner may have suffered an injustice, held that it did not

constitute a violation of a fundamental right guaranteed by Article 12 of

the Constitution. Wanasundera J. at pages 105-106, quoting, inter alia,

Siddappa v. State of Mysore & Another AIR 1967 (Mysore) 67, Budhan

Chowdhary v. State of Bihar AIR 1955 (SC) 191 and Snowden v. Hughes

(1944) 321 US 1,88 L. ed. 497 opined:

12

SC/FR/135/2023

This Court is undoubtedly the guardian and protector of the

fundamental rights secured for the people and our powers are given

in very wide terms; but our authority is not absolute for these powers

are subject to certain well defined principles and we have to concede

that there are limits which we cannot transgress, however hard and

unfortunate a case may be. We have to take cognizance of the

distinction between ordinary rights and fundamental rights, and it

is only a breach of a fundamental right that calls for our intervention.

Every wrong decision or breach of the law does not attract the

constitutional remedies relating to fundamental rights. Where a

transgression of the law takes place, due solely to some corruption,

negligence or error of judgement, I do not think a person can be

allowed to come under Article 126 and allege that there has been a

violation of the constitutional guarantees. There may also be other

instances where mistakes or wrongful acts are done in the course of

proceedings for which ordinarily there are built-in safe-guards or

adequate procedures for obtaining relief.

In Farook v. Dharmaratne, Chairman, Provincial Public Service

Commission, Uva [2005] 1 Sri LR 133, the petitioner alleged an

infringement of his fundamental rights guaranteed under Article 12(1)

arising from his transfer as the principal of a school to which he had been

appointed without possessing the required qualifications. Refusing to

grant relief, Bandaranayake J. observed at page 140:

When a person does not possess the required qualifications that is

necessary for a particular position, would it be possible for him to

obtain relief in terms of a violation of his Fundamental Rights on the

basis of unequal treatment? If the answer to this question is in the

affirmative, it would mean that Article 12(1) of the Constitution

would be applicable even in a situation where there is no violation

13

SC/FR/135/2023

of the applicable legal procedure or the general practice. The

application of Article 12(1) of the Constitution cannot be used for

such situations as it provides to an aggrieved person only for the

equal protection of the law where the authorities have acted illegally

or incorrectly without giving due consideration to the applicable

guidelines.

In Jayawardena v. Dharani Wijayathilake, Secretary, Ministry of Justice

and Constitutional Affairs and Others [2001] 1 Sri LR 132 at 158, Mark

Fernando J. stated that while each and every breach of the law does not

amount to a denial of the protection of the law, yet some fundamental

breaches of the law will result in denying the protection of the law which

attracts fundamental rights jurisdiction of this Court.

In Chamal Sanjeewa v. Keheliya Rambukwella and Others

(SC/FR/371/2022, SC Minutes 26.05.2023), the petitioner, a

government medical officer, was interdicted from service after publicly

sharing unauthorized and inaccurate findings on child malnutrition

following a medical clinic. He filed an application alleging, inter alia, that

his fundamental rights under Article 12(1) had been violated. In

addressing the application of Article 12(1) to arbitrary decisions,

Priyantha Fernando J. observed:

The fact that a decision is not in ones favour does not make it

arbitrary. In accordance with the rule of law, if a decision is

predictable and in accordance with existing rules and principles, it

cannot be arbitrary.

William Wade and Christopher Forsyth, in Administrative Law, 11th

Edition (2014), at page 574, citing R v. Lord Chancellor ex p Hibbit and

Saunders [1993] COD 326where a firm of shorthand writers

complained that their tender for Court services was unfairly rejected, but

14

SC/FR/135/2023

the matter was held to be purely commercial and ineligible for judicial

reviewstate: Contractual and commercial obligations are enforceable by

ordinary action and not by judicial review. I see no reason why the same

reasoning cannot be logically extended to cases invoking fundamental

rights jurisdiction.

If every breach of the law or violation of a right or breach of a contract

were treated as a violation of a fundamental right, it would open the

floodgates to a multitude of claims, thereby diluting the Supreme Courts

role in addressing genuine violations of fundamental rights. The hearing

of fundamental rights applications is not the sole function of the Supreme

Court. As outlined in Article 118 of the Constitution, the Court plays

numerous crucial roles, including matters of constitutional importance

and the exercise of final appellate jurisdiction over the judgments of all

other Courts. In this case, for example, the substantive relief sought by

the petitioner is the annulment of the decision to award the tender to the

4th respondent and the subsequent awarding of the tender to the

petitioner. In my view, this does not constitute a violation of a

fundamental right guaranteed by Article 12 of the Constitution.

The petitioner, in the petition, asserts that the petitioner had a legitimate

expectation that the contract would be awarded to it, as, in its

assessment, the bid was substantially responsive to all the specified

criteria. However, legitimate expectation, in the legal sense, cannot be

established merely on the basis of a subjective assessment by the

petitioner. In Siriwardana v. Seneviratne and Four Others [2011] 1 Sri LR

1 at 2, Bandaranayake C.J. while quoting with approval of the judgment

in Union of India v. Hindustan Development Corporation 1994 AIR 998

held that a a mere hope or an expectation cannot be treated as having a

legitimate expectation.

15

SC/FR/135/2023

In Union of India v. Hindustan Development Corporation, Reddy J. at page

1015 held:

Time is a three-fold present: the present as we experience it, the past

as a present memory and future as a present expectation. For legal

purposes, the expectation cannot be the same as anticipation. It is

different from a wish, a desire or a hope nor can it amount to a claim

or demand on the ground of a right. However earnest and sincere a

wish, a desire or a hope may be and however confidently one may

look to them to be fulfilled, they by themselves cannot amount to an

assertable expectation and a mere disappointment does not attract

legal consequences. A pious hope even leading to a moral obligation

cannot amount to a legitimate expectation. The legitimacy of an

expectation can be inferred only if it is founded on the sanction of

law or custom or an established procedure followed in regular and

natural sequence. Again it is distinguishable from a genuine

expectation. Such expectation should be justifiably legitimate and

protectable. Every such legitimate expectation does not by itself

fructify into a right and therefore it does not amount to a right in the

conventional sense.

For a claim of legitimate expectation to be upheld in law, it must be

demonstrated that there was a clear and unequivocal representation or

assurance made by the public authority that it will act or refrain from

acting in a particular way. Legitimate expectation may also be created by

an established practice. If a person has reasonably relied on such a

representation or practice, the doctrine seeks to ensure that the public

authority cannot arbitrarily rescind from it, thereby upholding principles

of natural justice and fairness. This doctrine prevents public authorities

from abusing their power by ensuring consistency and accountability in

their actions.

16

SC/FR/135/2023

However, a legitimate expectation must be founded on a lawful and

legitimate basis, not on an illegal basis. This principle also applies to

purportedly established practices, which are patently unlawful practices.

Similarly, representations based on erroneous facts or mistakes cannot

give rise to a legitimate expectation.

In this case, no evidence has been presented to establish that the

petitioner was given a representation or assurance by the respondents

that would give rise to a legitimate expectation in the legal sense. The

petitioners subjective belief or assessment of the bids responsiveness

does not suffice to create such a legitimate expectation enforceable in

law.

In my view, the petitioner primarily challenges the decision to award the

contract to the 4th respondent not on the merits, but rather on procedural

irregularities.

The petitioner states that the 1st respondent violated Clause 39.2 of

Section 1 of Part 1 of the Bidding Document. Clauses 39.1 and 39.2 read

as follows:

39.1 Prior to the expiration of the period of bid validity, the Employer

shall notify the successful Bidder, in writing, that its bid has been

accepted.

39.2 At the same time, the Employer will publish in an English

language newspaper or well-known freely accessible website the

results identifying the bid and lot numbers and the following

information: (i) name of each Bidder who submitted a Bid; (ii) bid

prices as read out at bid opening; (iii) name and evaluated prices of

each Bid that was evaluated; (iv) name of bidders whose bids were

rejected and the reasons for their rejection; and (v) name of the

winning Bidder, and the price it offered, as well as the duration and

17

SC/FR/135/2023

summary scope of the contract awarded. After publication of the

award, unsuccessful bidders may request in writing to the Employer

for a debriefing seeking explanations on the grounds on which their

bids were not selected within two weeks. The Employer shall

promptly respond in writing to any unsuccessful Bidder who, after

Publication of contract award, requests a debriefing.

The petitioner complains that in the notice of award P9 quoted previously,

several elements listed under Clause 39.2 were not there and it amounts

to violation of Article 12(1). P9 states that bid prices of all the bidders

were read out at the bid opening on 04.05.2022 and there were only three

substantially responsive bidders. The names and other details of the

substantially responsive bidders are stated therein. The petitioners name

was not among the three. To put differently, the petitioner has not been

considered a substantially responsive bidder. According to Clause 39.2,

After publication of the award, unsuccessful bidders may request in

writing a debriefing from the Employer, seeking explanations on the

grounds for their bids not being selected, within two weeks. The Employer

shall promptly respond in writing to any unsuccessful bidder who requests

a debriefing after the publication of the contract award. This implies that

detailed reasons for the rejection of substantially non-responsive bids

need not be provided in the notice of award, but only brief reasons for

rejection. The grounds for rejection should be disclosed when such a

request is made within two weeks of the publication of the notice of

award.

The petitioner further alleges that the respondents failed to comply with

Clause 8.5 of the National Procurement Guidelines 2006 which reads as

follows:

8.5 Contract Award in relation to MPC

18

SC/FR/135/2023

8.5.1 (a) The Secretary to the Line Ministry shall within one week of

being informed of the determination of MPC inform in writing

simultaneously to all the bidders:

(i) of the selection of the successful bidder and the intention to

award the contract to such bidder.

(ii) to make their representations, (if any) to him/her against

the determination of the MPC within one week of being so

notified. Such representations should be self-contained.

(b) If any representations are received within the said one week

period, the Secretary to the Line Ministry in consultation with the

Chairperson of MPC and TEC shall organize a joint meeting of the

MPC and TEC to consider such representations.

(c) The joint committee so appointed shall adopt its own procedure

for expeditious inquiry and disposal.

(d) The findings/recommendations of the joint committee will be

forwarded to the Secretary of the Line Ministry no later than fourteen

(14) days of appointment of such committee and the Secretary shall

act in accordance with such findings/recommendations.

8.5.2 If no such representations are received, the Secretary to the

Line Ministry shall promptly award the contract to the successful

bidder.

The award of contract process is governed by two regimes: the Bidding

Document and the National Procurement Guidelines. The OFID Bidding

Document P3 sets out one process of Award of Contract, which expects

the Employer (the 1st respondent Road Development Authority) to inform

the decision to the bidders. The National Procurement Guidelines 2006,

on the other hand, sets out another process of Award of Contract in

19

SC/FR/135/2023

Chapter 8 and expects the Secretary to the Line Ministry to inform the

decision to the bidders. It is inconceivable that notice of award should be

informed both by the Road Development Authority and the Secretary to

the Line Ministry.

Clause 1.3.3. of the National Procurement Guidelines states:

In the case of a Foreign Funded Project, if the Foreign Funding

Agency mandates the use of Procurement Guidelines of such funding

agency, such funding agency guidelines shall prevail over these

Guidelines to the extent applicable. In the event of a conflict between

these Guidelines and that of the funding agency, the funding agency

guidelines shall take precedence over these Guidelines.

Although the project involved in this application is a foreign funded

project, according to P2, it may be noted that this is not a grant but a

loan. Accordingly, informing the decision of the award of contract by

publishing it on the Road Development Authority website by the

Employer is acceptable. The 11th to 18th respondents, the Chairpersons

of the Ministry Procurement Committee and Technical Evaluation

Committee and their Members, have followed the Bidding Document read

with the National Procurement Guidelines in reaching their decisions.

The appeal presented by the petitioner through P11 was referred to the

Secretary of the Line Ministry, who subsequently communicated the

decision on the appeal by R6 dated 22.12.2023. Learned Additional

Solicitor General in his post argument written submissions states that

the delay in sending R6 was due to the ongoing Court proceedings, which

is acceptable because the petitioner filed this fundamental rights

application before waiting for the reply.

In any event, the non-compliance with procedural requirements pertains

only to the process of awarding the contract and not to the evaluation of

20

SC/FR/135/2023

bids, which directly relates to substantial justice. Therefore, as there has

been no compromise on substantial justice, I am not inclined to place

significant weight on procedural irregularities, particularly as no

prejudice has been caused to the petitioner, as evidenced by P10 and

P11.

The petitioner contends that failure to give reasons is violative of the right

to equal protection of the law guaranteed under Article 12(1) of the

Constitution.

It is widely accepted that ideally the decision-maker should give reasons

at the time of making the decision and not afterwards. A decision devoid

of reasons is fundamentally flawed and amounts to no decision. The

requirement to provide reasons serves as a safeguard against

arbitrariness and upholds the principles of justice, fairness and

transparency in decision-making. However, if reasons were given but

could not be communicated for some valid reason, the Court may allow

the decision-maker to submit those reasons to the Court if the decision

is challenged for failure to give reasons. Conversely, if reasons are

suggested ex post facto for the first time in Court, they should be rejected

as afterthoughts. The rationale is that reasons must precede the decision,

not follow it. In other words, the decision-maker should not arrive at a

decision based on extraneous factors first and then somehow attempt to

justify it by contriving reasons.

In Kusumawathie v. Aitken Spence Co. Ltd. [1996] 2 Sri LR 18 at 28, S.N.

Silva J. (as he then was) approved the tendering of reasons to the Court,

with notice to the petitioner, when a judicial review of the order is

initiated. Similarly, in Karunadasa v. Unique Gem Stones Ltd. [1997] 1 Sri

LR 256, Mark Fernando J. remitted the case to the Court of Appeal for

rehearing after calling for and examining the file maintained at the

21

SC/FR/135/2023

Labour Department, which apparently contained reasons for the

decision.

In the unique facts and circumstances of this case, although detailed

reasons were not initially provided to the petitioner at the time of issuing

the notice of award (P9), such reasons available at the time of taking the

decision were subsequently communicated. These reasons satisfy the

requirement, as they were not fabricated after the filing of this

application.

I am not convinced that the 1st respondent or any one or more of the

respondents have violated the fundamental rights of the petitioner

guaranteed under Article 12(1) of the Constitution. Furthermore, the

right guaranteed under Article 14(1)(g) of the Constitution, which ensures

every citizen the freedom to engage by himself or in association with

others in any lawful occupation, profession, trade, business or

enterprise, has not been infringed upon. I dismiss the petitioners

application but without costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

S. Thurairaja, P.C., J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

E.A.G.R. Amarasekara, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court