1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application under and

in terms of Articles 17 and 126 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

SC FR No. 195/2022 1. Dr. Athulasiri Kumara Samarakoon. The Open University of Sri Lanka P.O.Box 21 Nawala, Nugegoda. 2. Soosaiappu Neavis Morais. 49/7, Cyril Peiris Mawatha Palliyawatte, Wattala 3. Dr. Mahim Mendis. 301/1A, Kotte Road Mirihana, Nugegoda. Petitioners Vs.

1. Hon. Ranil Wickremesinghe Minister of Finance 2022-Present.

2. Mahinda Rajapakse Former Cabinet Minister of Finance 2019 – 2020.

2A. Basil Rajapakse

Former Cabinet Minister of Finance 2020 – 2022. 2B. M.U.M.Ali Sabri, PC Former Cabinet Minister of Finance 2022.

3. Prof. G.L. Peiris. 4. Dinesh Gunawardena.

2

5. Douglas Devenanada.

6. Dr. Ramesh Pathirana.

7. Prasanna Ranathunga.

8. Rohitha Abeygunawardhana.

9. Dullas Alahapperuma.

10. Janaka Wakkumbura.

11. Mahindananda Aluthgamage.

12. Mahinda Amaraweera.

13. S.M. Chandrasena.

14. Nimal Siripala de Silva.

15. Johnston Fernando.

16. Udaya Gammanpila

17. Bandula Gunawardana.

18. Gamini Lokuge.

19. Vasudeva Nanayakkara.

20. Chamal Rajapakse.

21. Namal Rajapakse

22. Keheliya Rambukwella.

23. C.B. Ratnayake.

24. Pavithradevi Wanniarachchi.

25. Sarath Weerasekera.

26. Wimal Weerawansa.

27. Janaka Bandara Tennakoon.

The 1st to 27th Respondents are all former Members of the Cabinet of

3

Ministers of the Republic and presently sit as Members of Parliament of the Republic. Parliament of Sri Lanka Sri Jayawardenapura Kotte. 28. The Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka. Central Bank of Sri Lanka P.O.Box 590, Colombo 01 29. Ajith Nivad Cabral Former Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka. 32/7, School Lane, Nawala.

30. Deshamanya Professor W.D. Lakshman Former Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka. No. 224, Ihalayagoda, Imbulgoda. 31. S.R. Attygalle Former Secretary to the Treasury No. 23, Madapatha, Piliyandala. 32. S.S.W. Kumarasinghe Former Member of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka. No. 62/4, 11th Lane, Wickramasinghepura Road, Battaramulla. 32A. Gotabaya Rajapakse Pangiriwatte Road, Mirihana. 32B. Mr. Sanjeeva Jayawardena, PC. Member of the Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka. Central Bank of Sri Lanka P.O.Box 590, Colombo 01. 32C. Dr. Ranee Jayamaha Member of the Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka. Central Bank of Sri Lanka P.O.Box 590, Colombo 01.

4

33. Hon. Attorney General. Attorney General’s Department Colombo 12.

34. Chulantha Wickramaratne Auditor General. 306,72 Polduwa Road, Battaramulla.

35. Hon. Justice Eva Wanasundara. 36. Hon. Justice Deepali Wijesundara.

37. Mr. Chandra Nimal Wakishta. Members of the Commission To Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption. 36, Malalasekera Mawatha Colombo 07, Sri Lanka.

38. Mr. P.B. Jayasundera. Pelawatte, Battaramulla. 39. Mr. Dhammika Dasanayake. Parliament of Sri Lanka Sri Jayawardenapura Kotte.

Respondents SC FR No. 212/2022 1. Chandra Jayaratne No.2 Greenland Avenue Colombo 05. 2. Julian Bolling No. 72, 5th Lane, Colombo 05. 3. Jehan CanagaRetna, No. 05, Bullers Lane, Apartment 3B, Colombo 05. 4. Transparency International Sri Lanka

5

No. 366, Nawala Road, Nawala, Rajagiriya

Petitioners Vs 1(a) Hon. Attorney General. Attorney General’s Department Colombo 12. 1(b) Hon. Gotabaya Rajapakse Former President of Sri Lanka. Pangiriwatte Road, Mirihana. 2. Hon. Mahinda Rajapakse Former Prime Minister, Former Minister of Buddhasasana, Religious & Cultural Affairs Former Minister of Urban Development & Housing, Former Minister of Economic Policies and Plan Implementation and Former Minister of Finance. No. 117, Wijerama Mawatha, Colombo 07. 3. Hon. Basil Rajapakse Former Minister of Finance. No.1315, Jayanthipura, Nelum Mawatha, Battaramulla. No.1316, Jayanthipura, Nelum Mawatha, Battaramulla. 4. Hon. M.U.M. Ali Sabry, PC Former Minister of Finance. No. 5, 27th Lane, Colombo 03. 5. Hon. Ranil Wickremesinghe

Prime Minister. Minister of Finance, Economic Stability and National Policies, No.117, 5th Lane, Colombo 03. 6. Deshamanya Professor W.D. Lakshman Former Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka. No. 224, Ihalayagoda, Imbulgoda.

6

7. Mr. Ajith Nivad Cabral Former Governor of the Central Bank. 32/7, School Lane, Nawala. 8. Dr. P. Nandalal Weerasinghe Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka. Central Bank of Sri Lanka P.O.Box 590, Colombo 01, Sri Lanka. 9. The Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka. Central Bank of Sri Lanka P.O.Box 590, Colombo 01, Sri Lanka. 10. S.R. Attygalle Former Secretary to the Treasury/ Ministry of Finance No. 23, Madapatha, Piliyandala. 11. Mr. K.M. Mahinda Siriwardana Secretary to the Treasury/ Ministry of Finance The Secretariat, Colombo 01. 12. Mr. Saliya Kithsiri Mark Pieris, PC. President of the Bar Association of Sri Lanka. No. 153, Mihindu Mawatha, Colombo 12. 12(a) Kaushalya Navaratne Attorney-at-Law President of the Bar Association of Sri Lanka No. 153, Mihindu Mawatha, Colombo 12.

13. Mr. Isuru Balapatabendi, AAL Secretary of the Bar Association of Sri Lanka No. 153, Mihindu Mawatha, Colombo 12. Respondents

7

Before : Jayantha Jayasuriya, PC, CJ

Buwaneka Aluwihare, PC, J

Priyantha Jayawardana, PC, J

Vijith K. Malalgoda, PC,J

Murdu N.B. Fernando, PC, J

Counsel : Upul Jayasooriya, PC with Vishwaka Peiris, Sampath Wijewardene, and Hasith Samayawardana for the Petitioners in SCFR 195/22. Chandaka Jayasundera, PC with S.A. Beiling, Chinthaka Fernando, Manisha Dissanayalke, Sayuri Liyanarachchi and Imaz Imthiyas for the Petitioners in SCFR 212/22. Romesh de Silva, PC with Uditha Egalahewa, PC and Niran Anketell for the 28th , 32B and 32C Respondents in SCFR 195/22 and 9th Respondent in SCFR 212/22. Shavendra Fernando PC with Mrs. Anika Arawwala, Jeewantha Jayathilaka, Ralitha Amarasekera and Sapumal Tennakoon for the 29th Respondent in SCFR 195/22 and 7th Respondent in SCFR 212/22.

Manohara de Silva, PC with Boopathy Kahathuduwa for 32nd Respondent in SCFR 195/22.

Gamini Marapana, PC with Navin Marapana, PC and Uchitha Wickremesinghe for the 2nd &2A respondents in 195/22 and 2nd & 3rd respondents in SCFR 212/22.

Nihal Jayawardena, PC with R. Herath for the 31st Respondent in SCFR 195/22 and 10th Respondent in SCFR 212/22.

Nerin Pulle,PC, ASG, with Madhushika Kannangara, SC., Shiloma David SC, Indumini Randeny SC and Vishni Ganepola, SC for the

8

33rd, 34th and 39th Respondents in SCFR 195/22 and 1A &11th Respondents in SCFR 212/22.

Anura Meddegoda, PC with Ms. Yasa Jayasekera, Ms. Nadeesha Kannangara, Chathura Galhena, Isuru Deshapriya and Ms. Ashani Kankanange for the 38th Respondent in SCFR 195/22.

Gamini Marapana, PC with Navin Marapana, PC and Uchitha Wickremesinghe for the 2nd &2A respondents in 195/22 and 2nd & 3rd respondents in SCFR 212/22.

K. Kanag-Isvaran, PC with Shivaan Kanag-Isvaran & Lakshmanan Jayakumar for the 12th & 13th Respondents in SCFR 212/22.

Suren Gnanaraj with Rashmi Dias, Wathsala Kekulawala and Sakuni Weeraratne for the 30th Respondent in SCFR 195/22 and 6th Respondent in SCFR 212/22.

Written Submissions : Petitioners in SCFR 195/22 on 03.10.23. filed by 2nd and 2A Respondents on 04.07.23 and 02.10.23 2B Respondent on 02.10.23 28th Respondent on 04.07.23 and 02.10.23 29th Respondent on 23.06.23 and 02.10.23 30th Respondent on 30.06.23, 27.09.23 and 02.10.23 31st Respondent on 28.06.23 and 02.10.23 32nd Respondent on 02.10.23 32B Respondent on 06.10.23 32C Respondent on 02.10.23 33rd Respondent on 02.10.23 and 38th Respondent on 02.10.23 in SCFR 195/22. Petitioners in SCFR 212/22 on 30.06.2023 and 02.10.2023 1A Respondent on 04.10.23 2nd and 3rd Respondents on 04.07.23 and 02.10.23 4th Respondent on 02.10.23 6th Respondent on 30.06.23 and 02.10.23 7th Respondent on 23.06.23 and 02.10.23 9th Respondent on 04.07.23 and 02.10.23 in SCFR 212/22. Argued on : 06.07.2023, 07.07.2023, 13.07.2023, 25.07.2023, 27.07.2023, 28.07.2023, 08.08.2023, 19.09.2023, 20.09.2023 and 22.09.2023. Decided on : 14.11.2023

9

Petitioners in these two applications invoked the jurisdiction of this Court vested under Article

126 of the Constitution. Both these matters are public interest litigations. In both these matters

petitioners are claiming violations of their rights too. This Court, having considered the material

placed by all parties, granted leave to proceed in both matters. In SC FR 195/2022 leave to

proceed was granted against 2nd, 2A, 2B, 3rd to 27th, 28th to 32nd, 32A and 38th respondents.

Furthermore, petitioners were directed to add two members of the 28th respondent as 32B and

32C respondents. In SC FR 212/2022, the Court granted leave to proceed against 1(b), 2nd, 3rd,

6th, 7th, 9th, and 10th respondents.

The learned President's Counsel for the petitioners in both these applications drew the attention

of the Court to the fact that Gotabaya Rajapaksa – the former President who is cited as 1(b)

respondent in SC FR 212/2022 and who is cited as 32A respondent in SC FR 195/2022

(hereinafter referred to as “32A respondent”) had neither filed objections nor has made

arrangements for legal representation in Court even though notices were issued on him through

Court. The learned President’s Counsel further contended that the allegations made against the

32A respondent therefore remain uncontroverted.

The learned President's Counsel Chandaka Jayasundera in presenting his case in SC FR

212/2022 submitted that the petitioners do not challenge the policy of the government in these

proceedings. In further elaborating this submission he contended that the conduct impugned in

these proceedings include illegal, arbitrary, unreasonable or capricious executive and or

administrative actions and or inactions. It is claimed that such actions and/or inactions arise from

the implementation of arbitrary and/or capricious decisions, by the executive and/or

administrative branches of the Government. It is his contention that the impugned conduct of the

respondents breached the ‘public trust’ reposed in them. It is his position that the conduct

impugned in these proceedings led to the economic collapse of an unprecedented magnitude.

Acute shortages in essentials such as fuel and gas, food and medicine and prolonged power cuts

became the regular pattern of life. Long queues for fuel and gas brought in severe hardships to

the entire society and led to many deaths. This situation brought in a total breakdown of

economic and social life of the entire society. Such breakdown ultimately led to the collapse of

the public order and the complete undermining of the rule of law.

10

Petitioners contend that it is a series of decisions taken during the relevant period, including the

decisions to revise taxes, artificial control of the exchange rate, failure to maintain official

reserves leading to serious depletion of reserves, failure to seek assistance from the International

Monetary Fund (IMF) in a timely manner and the failure to make necessary adjustments to the

interest rates which were the main causes for this economic collapse.

It is further contended that the decision to reduce various taxes was taken without proper analysis

and study of its possible repercussions to the government revenue. Furthermore, it was

contended that no remedial measures were adopted even after the adverse repercussions were

apparent. It was the “inaction to remedy” even after warnings by the officials brought in

irreversible consequences. Mr Jayasundera PC further submitted that the respondent’s claim, that

the failure to honour the foreign debt repayment instalments in May 2022 is the cause for the

economic debacle, is nothing but a futile attempt to absolve themselves from the responsibility

arising from their own conduct. It is his contention that the impugned conduct of the respondents

is the cause for the failure to honour the debt obligations of the State. It was further contended

that the default of foreign debt repayment by the Government in May 2022 is nothing but an

inevitable result of the conduct of the respondents that is impugned in these proceedings. The

learned President’s Counsel’s position was that, if remedial measures were taken such as seeking

assistance from the IMF in a timely manner, a crisis of this nature could have been averted.

The learned President’s Counsel for the petitioners in SC FR 195/2022 Mr Upul Jayasuriya, fully

associated himself with the aforementioned submissions of the learned President’s Counsel for

the petitioners in SC FR 212/2022. He further contended, that the failure to introduce tax

revisions without a proper consideration of its impact to the government revenue triggered off a

series of events that had a domino effect that caused the economic crisis. He further contended

that introduction of tax revisions without setting up necessary effective mechanisms to ensure

that the extra earnings accrued by persons due to tax revisions are invested to the benefit of the

overall economic growth of the country demonstrate that such revisions were implemented to the

benefit of a selected group of persons and not to the benefit of the society and hence amounts to

corruption. It is his contention, that a proper investigation under the relevant laws relating to

Bribery and Corruption will ensure due respect to accountability. The learned President’s

Counsel further contended that the downgrading of credit rating by international rating agencies

11

that brought in severe impact on foreign investment and borrowings is a direct result of arbitrary

tax revisions. Furthermore, direct consequences of the artificial pegging of foreign exchange

rates further aggravated the depletion of foreign reserves. Under these circumstances, the failure

to honour foreign debt obligations in the absence of any support mechanism such as an

assistance scheme from the IMF was inevitable. Explaining the consequences of such a non-

negotiated disorderly default – a hard default – the learned President’s Counsel submitted that

would have been disastrous and would have led to total collapse of the social life.

Learned President’s Counsel for the petitioners further submitted that the failure to take remedial

measures when the adverse consequences of the tax revisions were felt and the persistent

reluctance to take remedial measures further aggravated the situation and brought in the most

damaging result to the economy as well as social lives of the entire population. In his

submissions averting to several remedial measures, the learned President’s Counsel submitted

that such measures ought to have been taken on a priority basis to avoid the crisis.

According to the Petitioners, the adverse impact on the economy was primarily due to the tax

revisions. It further aggravated due to a few other measures including artificial fixing of the

exchange rate and the interest rate, maintaining an open account for foreign exchange

transactions and the failure to introduce proper mechanisms to ensure that the profits and/or

revenue earned due to tax revisions are properly invested to bolster the economy. The learned

Counsel submitted that the failures identified above made an environment for any person to

convert the extra earnings due to tax revisions to foreign exchange at an artificial rate and engage

in imports or any other overseas transactions to the detriment of official reserves. It was further

submitted that the artificial exchange rate discouraged receipt of foreign exchange remittances

through official financial institutions and thereby led to further depletion of official reserves.

It was further contended that the above situation fell well within a renowned concept in

international economics – the “impossible trinity”-. It is an accepted theory that three main

factors namely a fixed exchange rate, free capital flow across borders and an independent

monetary policy should not co-exist. If such a situation is created, dire consequences to the

economy are inevitable. The learned President’s Counsel contended that the conduct of the

respondents during the relevant period created such an environment in Sri Lanka, which brought

in disastrous consequences. It was his contention that this situation was created due to the

12

arbitrary, capricious and unreasonable conduct of the respondents. He contended that the

impugned conduct of the respondents was not based on any scientific analysis or reasoning.

The learned President’s Counsel submitted that constant and repeated concerns raised by the

officials of the Central Bank on the overall situation and the need to seek assistance and initiate a

programme with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) were ignored by the Government. It was

further contended that the failure to take timely action on seeking IMF assistance heavily

contributed to the downfall of the economy. It was their contention that the arbitrary,

unreasonable, irrational and capricious conduct of the respondents led not only to the denial of

the last tranche of the IMF programme commenced in 2016 but also refusal to grant a relief

facility – Rapid Financing Instrument (RFI) - to overcome ill-effects of the pandemic. A facility

that was made available to many other countries that helped them overcome difficulties caused

due to the pandemic. It was further contended that the presence of an IMF assisted programme

would not only have brought much needed foreign exchange but also credibility and confidence,

enabling the government to attract foreign investment and assistance.

Both Mr Jayasundera and Mr Jayasuriya contended that the conduct of the respondents

impugned in these proceedings amounts to a breach of the public trust and also had a direct

impact on Rule of Law. They contended that the impugned conduct of the respondents resulted

in the violation of the Fundamental Rights guaranteed under the Constitution. Both President’s

Counsel did concede that the pandemic had an adverse impact on the economy, but they claimed

that the failure on the part of the respondents to take remedial measures, led to this crisis.

Mr Suren Gnanaraj, who represented W.D.Lakshman, the 6th respondent in SC FR 212/2022 and

the 30th respondent in SC FR 195/2022 (hereinafter referred to as the “30th respondent”)

submitted that Professor Lakshman functioned as the Governor of the Central Bank for a period

of less than two years namely from 24th December 2019 to 14th September 2021. The learned

Counsel further contended that the conduct assailed in these proceedings relate to the

performance of his duties as the Chairman of the Monetary Board. In this context it is his

submission that none of the decisions of the Monetary Board can be attributed to any particular

individual member of the Board but they are decisions of the Board. Therefore, it was his

contention that no individual responsibility can be attached to a particular member or members in

relation to any decision of the Board. In this context, he drew the attention of the Court to

13

sections 8 and 9 of the Monetary Law, that stipulates that the Governor of the Central Bank be

the Chairman of the Monetary Board and the Board is a body corporate with perpetual

succession. It was his contention that none of the decisions of the Board is a decision of any

particular individual member including the Chairman but remains a decision of the Board.

However, the composition of the Board and the practice has made way for divergent views of the

members to be considered and a final decision of the Board to be reached on consensus. Section

47 (1) of the Monetary Law Act grants protection to each member of the Board for acts done in

good faith. It is his contention that none of the petitioners were able to establish that the 30th

respondent acted in bad faith or his impugned conduct amounts to a misconduct or a wilful

default. It was further contended that the said respondent cannot therefore be held liable to any

breach of a Fundamental Right.

He also emphasized that the impugned conduct of the 30th respondent should be viewed in the

proper context of the legal framework relating to the scope, functions and the relationship

between the Central Bank and the Government. Legislative framework as recognized by the

jurisprudence of this Court envisages “a continuous and constructive cooperation between the

Central Bank and the Government '' and the Central Bank is only an “agent of the Government”.

The learned Counsel submitted that the petitioners have invoked the jurisdiction of this Court on

an incorrect premise. Attributing to the three factors referred to by the petitioners namely the tax

revisions introduced in 2019, pegging of the US Dollar and the delay to seek assistance from the

IMF, as the only causes for the economic collapse, is a misconception. Mr Gnanaraj submitted

that there were numerous other factors for the economic crisis other than the three factors

referred to by the petitioners. On this basis Mr Gnanaraj submitted that the contention that

downgrading by the international rating agencies for the reason of unsustainable debt is a result

of the aforesaid factors is incorrect.

He contended that the unsustainability of debt was envisaged even in the year 2016 and the

downgrading commenced in that year itself and therefore, the petitioners have failed to act bona

fide by fixing the downgrading to the year 2019.

It was his contention that even though an IMF facility was obtained in 2016 there was no proper

investment of such funds to uplift the economy but such funds were utilized for non-income

generation projects. Furthermore, he contended that there was a failure to fulfil conditions on

14

which such facility was granted and thereby failed to draw the last tranche of the said facility. He

conceded that in the year 2019, diametrically opposed policy in the context of taxation was

adopted. He emphasized that low level of reserves was observed even by October 2019.

It was his contention that the continued adverse conditions in the economy were further

aggravated due to the onset of the pandemic in early 2020. The adverse impact on the economic

activities and growth caused due to various steps taken by the Government to arrest the spread of

the disease including lock downs and robust vaccination drives, further depleted reserves of an

economy which was already ailing. He further submitted that the adverse conditions existed in

the year 2020 due to the pandemic, impacted on the income and profits earned by most of the

legal and natural persons other than public servants whose full salaries were continued to be paid

by the Government. This situation was further compounded by the non-availability of the IMF

assisted RFI.

Mr Gnanaraj further contended that at no instance fixing of the exchange rates as provided under

sections 74 and 76 of the Monetary Law took place, during the relevant time. However, moral

suasion is a legitimate tool available to the Central Bank and use of such tool is neither unlawful

nor arbitrary. In this process the Central Bank uses influence by way of advice, suggestions,

requests and persuasion extended to the commercial banks. It was his submission that the

decision to seek IMF assistance is solely a prerogative of the Government and it is reflected

through the statutory reports submitted as provided under the Monetary Law. The 30th

respondent had briefed the Minister of Finance the benefit of reaching out to the IMF.

Mr Gnanaraj reiterated that no individual responsibility can be attributed to the 30th respondent

as he had always acted in accordance with the law.

Mr Shavendra Fernando PC, representing Nivard Cabraal - the 29th respondent in SC FR

195/2022 who is also the 7th respondent in SC FR 212/2022 - (hereinafter referred to as the “29th

respondent”) who served as the Governor of the Central Bank from 15th September 2021 to 4th

April 2022, associated himself with the submissions of Mr Gnanaraj in particular, the duties and

responsibilities of the Chairman of the Monetary Board and the legal framework within which

the Chairman and the other members of the Monetary Board discharge their duties and

responsibilities. Furthermore, he contended that the petitioners are impugning the conduct of the

29th respondent qua Chairman of the Monetary Board. In this regard he emphasised that all the

15

decisions of the Monetary Board are collective decisions of the Board and none of them could be

classified as decisions of the individual members. On this basis, it was argued that as far as the

decisions of the Board are concerned, no responsibility could be attached to any individual

member by excluding one or several of other members, as all the members are bound by the

principle of collective responsibility.

Mr Fernando PC also reiterated that the petitioners in both these applications are challenging the

policy decisions of the Government and hence this Court lacks jurisdiction to entertain both these

applications. Furthermore, he submitted that in SC FR 212/2022 necessary parties are not before

Court and in SC FR 195/2022 the petitioners are attempting to attribute responsibility on a few

public servants selectively, even though the entire Cabinet of Ministers are cited as respondents.

He therefore contends that both these applications are politically motivated. He further

contended that the responsibility of formulating the policies of the Government lies with the

Executive.

It was Mr Fernando’s submission that the 29th respondent had no role to play in relation to the

impugned decisions on tax revisions. He contended that the responsibility on the decision

whether to seek assistance from the IMF or not cannot be attributed to the Monetary Board or

any of its members. It was his submission, that the said responsibility lies with the President.

Even prior to the 29th respondent assuming office as Governor of the Central Bank, the Monetary

Board in this regard [seeking IMF assistance] had expressed views on two options, namely;

seeking IMF assistance or to rely on alternative “structural reforms”.

Although the learned President’s Counsel submitted that the Cabinet of Ministers had decided to

adopt the option to work on a homegrown solution instead of seeking the assistance from the

IMF, we observe that there is no such material before this Court of a Cabinet Decision on the

said option up until 3rd January 2022.

Mr Fernando PC submitted that the Central Bank adopted a six-month road map as part of the

home grown solution. It is to be noted that, at a point closer to the date the country declaring

bankrupt, however, during the 29th respondent’s tenure as Governor of the Central Bank /

Chairman of the Monetary Board, the President did take a decision to seek the assistance of the

IMF.

16

The Learned President’s Counsel further submitted that the pegging of the US Dollar or fixing

the exchange rate, were not based on a decision of the Central Bank but was a policy decision [of

the Government]. The parity of the US Dollar was initially fixed at Rupees 203 on a directive of

the Minister [of Finance] but thereafter the exchange rate was partially floated subject to a cap of

Rupees 230 as the rate of exchange. This was achieved using a legitimate tool, “moral suasion”.

It was further contended that honouring the ISB in January 2022 was nothing but discharging an

obligation of the country and a failure of which could have brought in dire consequences. Any

default could have triggered cross-default clauses and a demand on other commitments would

have created an unmanageable situation. He submitted that the funds necessary for the repayment

was already allocated by the Parliament by the annual budget.

Mr Fernando PC submitted that no responsibility can be attributed to the 29th respondent as at no

stage the respondent had acted outside the legal framework but always had lawfully discharged

duties as the Chairman of the Monetary Board as provided by law.

Mr Manohara de Silva PC, representing Samantha Kumarasinghe, an appointed member of the

Monetary Board, the 32nd respondent in SC FR 195/2022, (hereinafter referred to as the “32nd

respondent”), at the outset submitted that this application (SC FR 195/2022) should be dismissed

as the petitioners have failed to cite all necessary parties as respondents. It was his contention, as

far as the allegations, made against the 32nd respondent is concerned, they arise from and out of

his conduct as a member of the Monetary Board and the petitioners have selectively made him

and two others as respondents whereas two other members of the Monetary Board had been

conveniently left out for inexplicable reasons. He further contended that the petitioners have

abused the process by selectively targeting the 32nd respondent causing great inconvenience to

him. The learned President’s Counsel argued that there is no merit in the case against the 32nd

respondent and the petitioners have clearly acted mala fide in citing him as a respondent in these

proceedings. Mr de Silva PC further argued that the petitioners’ attribution of the responsibility

regarding the mismanagement of the economy is selective in that only selected persons such as

the Prime Minister, Minister of Finance, and four others have been cited as respondents. He

further contended that the petitioners are impugning the decisions of various persons that fall

within the ambit of economic and political decisions. It is his contention that the Court is not

17

equipped to examine merits or demerits of such decisions and therefore Court should refrain

from making any attempt to tread into areas beyond its competency.

According to his submission the decision to honour the ISBs was a decision of the Government

and the petitioners are acting maliciously by making an attempt to attribute responsibility on a

few selected individuals, including the 32nd respondent.

Mr De Silva PC, further contended that the petitioners are maliciously claiming that the 32nd

respondent was in control of the Monetary Board. Whilst pointing out that the previous sixteen

programmes with the IMF has resulted in failures, the learned President’s Counsel contended

that the 32nd respondent always took up the stand that seeking IMF assistance, is not the best

solution for the country and wanted to stop the leakage of foreign exchange and thereafter pursue

other avenues.

Mr de Silva PC further submitted that in ascertaining the reasons for economic debacle, it is

neither possible nor reasonable to confine to a few years, as to how the economy was managed

(ie 2019-2022). The management of the economy during this period should not be considered in

isolation for the reason that the sharp increase in the borrowings from 2017 to 2019 had placed

an unbearable burden on the economy and the debt management.

He pointed out that the decisions of the sub-committee of the Monetary Board cannot be

regarded as the decisions of the Board. The Monetary Board at no stage had delegated its

authority to the sub-committee. Mr de Silva PC also submits that this application (SC FR

195/2022) is time barred.

On behalf of the 38th respondent in SC FR 195/2022 (P.B.Jayasundera) (hereinafter referred to as

the “38th respondent”) President’s Counsel Mr. Anura Meddegoda, while associating himself

fully with the submissions of Mr Gnanaraj in relation to the operation and applicability of the

Monetary Law Act and the submissions of Mr de Silva PC on the jurisprudence relating to the

extent to which the policy decisions should be examined by courts, submitted that the petitioners

have not only failed to plead any specific allegation against Dr Jayasundera in the petition but

also had failed to produce any material to establish a violation of any fundamental rights

resulting from the conduct of this respondent. He submitted that the application is misconceived

in law. The learned President’s Counsel further contended that the petitioner’s allegations are

18

palpably untenable and the application should be dismissed. He further claimed that the 38th

respondent had been added as a respondent maliciously and the application is devoid of any

merit.

According to Mr Meddegoda PC, the 38th respondent at no stage acted arbitrarily, unreasonably

or capriciously but performed the responsibilities and duties attached to the post of Secretary to

the President lawfully. The 38th respondent accepted the post of Secretary to the President on 19th

November 2019 and relinquished all duties on 14th January 2022. It was further submitted that

the 38th respondent always acted according to the instructions, guidance and advise of the

President (32A respondent). He facilitated national and international initiatives to give effect to

the policies of the Government. It was also contended that allocation of funds through a proper

annual budget took place only in 2020 and allocation of funds in the preceding two years was

effected by votes on account. By the time the budget was presented in 2020 the adverse

conditions due to the onset of pandemic had already made an impact on the economy and the

Government adopted a policy prioritising solutions to public health issues. Implementation of

such policy required a collective effort at national and international levels. Further, explaining

the circumstances under which the 38th respondent sent the letter dated 21st June 2021 to the

Governor of the Central Bank (the 30th respondent) the learned President’s Counsel submitted

that he conveyed to the Governor the policy of the Government while drawing his attention to

the role and the scope of functions of the Monetary Board. He contended that a closer

examination of this letter in its proper context clearly shows that the Governor was appraised

with the suggestions and options enabling him to take decisions exercising his discretion as

opposed to any directions compelling a particular course of action. In his submission the

response of the Governor dated 13th July 2021 clarifies this position.

Mr Meddegoda PC drew the attention of this Court to paragraph 3(i) of the petition and

submitted that the petition fails to substantiate the basis of the assertion that the 38th respondent

is responsible for the decisions of the Monetary Board. He further submitted that the absence of a

specific reference to the 38th respondent in the prayers (b), (c) and (d) reflects that the petitioners

themselves accept that no responsibility could be attributed to the 38th respondent for

infringement of any fundamental right. It is a futile attempt to argue that the Court could grant

19

relief against the 38th respondent on the strength of the omnibus clause in the prayer of the

petition.

Mr Nihal Jayawardena PC on behalf of S.R.Attygalle Secretary to the Treasury, the 31st

respondent in SC FR 195/2022 - who is also cited as 10th respondent in SC FR 212/2022 –

(hereinafter referred to as the “31st respondent”) submitted that the 31st respondent functioned as

Secretary to the Treasury from 13th November 2019 to end of March 2022. He submitted that

the 31st respondent was the chief financial officer of the Ministry and an ex officio member of

the Monetary Board. Therefore, this respondent had the duty to implement the government

policy as well as appraise the Monetary Board on details of such policy. It was his submission

that no responsibility could be attributed to the 31st respondent based on the change of tax

policies introduced in 2019. He contended that such change did take place as a pledge to the

people by the President (32A respondent) during his election campaign and subsequently

adopted as the policy of the Government. In his capacity as the Secretary to the Treasury and the

Ministry of Finance he was acting on the instructions and guidance of the Minister and taking

necessary measures to implement policy decisions of the Government. Furthermore, the decision

to seek assistance from the IMF or not was a decision that should have been taken by the

Government and his function is only to make necessary administrative arrangements to

implement the decision. Therefore, it was argued that the 31st respondent cannot be faulted on

the basis of any delay in making the decision to seek assistance from the IMF.

It was the submission of the learned President’s Counsel that the payments made to the investors

on ISBs in early 2022 was nothing but honouring the commitment following the maturity of such

ISBs. Any default could have brought about serious repercussions. Not only such a default would

have created a deep dent on the reputation of the Country preserved over several decades since

independence but also would have dried off all current and future avenues for foreign

investments and borrowings. Furthermore, it was contended that the Parliament through the

budget had already allocated funds necessary for the payment in issue and as such there was no

reason for this respondent not to have made arrangements necessary to honour the pledge

utilising available funds.

He further submitted that the adverse conditions to the economy is not due to the conduct of any

of the respondents but due to the irresponsible borrowings and the depletion of reserves that took

20

place prior to this respondent assuming duties as Secretary to the Treasury. He submitted that

the reserves of USD 8.6 billion that existed in the year 2014, sharply declined to USD 6.3 billion

within a period of five years due to mismanagement and irresponsible policies. It was further

contended that the increase in the volume of borrowings during the same period also caused a

serious impact on debt sustainability.

The learned President’s Counsel submitted that the petitioners have failed to establish a case

against this respondent and therefore urged the Court to dismiss both applications.

Sanjeeva Jayawardena, President’s Counsel who was added as 32B respondent (hereinafter

referred to as the “32B respondent”) at the hearing appeared in person. Sanjeeva Jayawardena

was added as a respondent pursuant to the Order of this Court at the point this Court granted

leave to proceed. He was made a respondent in his capacity as a Member of the Monetary Board

along with Ranee Jayamaha (who was also a member of the Monetary Board) who was added as

32C respondent. Both these said respondents filed affidavits jointly before this Court. It is to be

noted however, that leave to proceed was not granted against either of them.

32B respondent at the outset submitted that the impact of the tax revisions introduced in the year

2019 removed 600 billion rupees from state coffers as taxes and fiscal revenue. Such depletion in

Government revenue adversely impacted on the service of recurring domestic debt liabilities and

the day to day running and management of the affairs of the State. It is his submission that the

downgrading by the rating agencies on the basis of unsustainability of debts caused immense

hardships to the economy. The failure to attract foreign direct investments due to downgrading

and loss of confidence among the investors aggravated the balance of payment crisis. The

inability to maintain the level of foreign reserves needed for three months of imports had a

serious impact on the Government’s capacity to import essential items such as fuel, gas,

medicinal drugs and food. It was his submission, that the government failed to take necessary

effective remedial measures even after realising the serious repercussions of the tax revision. The

situation was further aggravated due to continued refusal and/or the resistance to seek an

unqualified assistance programme from the IMF, in a timely manner. He contended that he along

with the 32C responded repeatedly urged the importance of obtaining an IMF assisted

programme at the meetings of the Monetary Board. Furthermore, he contended that upon his

suggestion, a board level committee namely “Monetary Board External Debt Management

21

Committee” – MBEDMC - was established within the Central Bank. The first meeting of the

said Committee was held on 12th January 2021. Mr Jayawardena and the 32C respondent had

functioned as the Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the committee which comprised of Deputy

Governors, Assistant Governors, Heads of Departments as well as a senior officer from the

Treasury as an ex officio member. However, the ex officio member – the officer from the

treasury - had abstained from participating at these meetings other than on the very first day

where he was requested to provide details of sources of inflow of foreign currency, claimed by

the said official as “firmly expected sources of inflows of foreign currency”, for reasons

unknown. 32B respondent further submitted that the critical importance of the presence of an

IMF programme was apparent; even friendly countries were reluctant to provide SWAP facilities

or any other financial assistance in the absence of an IMF programme.

It is Mr Jayawardena’s contention that no positive steps were taken due to the policy of the

government, as made known to them, despite several discussions emphasising the need to seek

IMF assistance. According to the minutes of the Monetary Board meeting held on 3rd February

2021 the 31st respondent had said “since the Government policy is not to go to the IMF, as

officials we have to abide by it. Therefore (he stated) that other means of inflows need to be

considered”. Under these circumstances time passed by without any real solution to the crisis

that was gradually reaching alarming levels. Repercussions were aggravated in the absence of

any effective remedial measures in place.

On 6th April 2022, both the 32B & 32C respondents had presented themselves before the

Parliamentary Committee on Public Finance. 32B respondent contended that following the

revelations made before the said Parliamentary Committee at the request of one of the members

of the said Committee, a one-on-one meeting took place between him and the President (32A

respondent). In preparation of this meeting Mr Jayawardena had obtained statistics with regard

to foreign reserves and the inflows expected and the outflows that would be imminent due to the

upcoming debt service deadlines and the expected further decline of the reserves. Furthermore,

he had been informed that a letter the President had sent to the IMF on 18th March 2022 was

ambiguous and no request was made for a full programme but referred only to an engagement.

Therefore, the IMF was not prepared to extend any meaningful assistance. At the meeting this

respondent had briefed the President on all aspects and had stated to him that there is no other

22

option but to reach out to the IMF for a fully pledged programme. At this discussion the

President had revealed that he in fact had inquired as to how the country could recover without

an IMF programme and whether promised influx of monies from foreign countries would

actually materialise. The President himself has expressed serious scepticism on such assured

inflows. Furthermore, the President had said that the impression given to him was that the

Central Bank was against seeking assistance from the IMF. After this meeting on the suggestion

of Mr Jayawardena, the President had communicated with the IMF with a request for a full IMF

programme. Accordingly, on the 7th April 2022 a letter signed by the President (32A respondent)

seeking a full IMF programme was prepared and on the following day a further communication

to the IMF by the new Governor (who had assumed duties on 08th April 2022) was made,

resulting a positive response from the IMF which facilitated the GOSL to formally announce on

the debt standstill on 12th April 2022. He submitted that debt restructuring with the backing of a

fully blown IMF programme has made a significant impact on the recovery process. He further

submitted that the hardships the country was experiencing in the year 2021 could have been

averted if the intervention of the IMF was sought in a timely manner.

In relation to the maintenance of the exchange rate, Mr Jayawaradena submitted, that the policy

of the Government had been to maintain a fixed exchange rate. However, the dire situation did

not permit the Central Bank to use reserves to defend the exchange rate but moral suasion was

used to maintain the exchange rate without allowing a sudden spike, which could have serious

repercussions. He pointed out, however, that the failure to impose effective restrictions on

imports had a direct impact on the exchange rate. The Minister of Finance by his letter dated 12th

August 2021 had called upon the Central Bank and the Monetary Board to initiate ten specific

measures on an expeditious basis. One such measure was to release a total of USD 250 million to

all commercial banks with the instructions not to exceed the parity of the exchange rate beyond

Rs. 202 per 1 USD. The Monetary Board and the MBEDMC closely monitored the exchange

rate continuously. The Monetary Board at the meeting of 7th March 2022 decided to allow the

market to have a greater flexibility in the exchange rate with immediate effect. The Board further

decided to communicate that decision by way of a notice informing that the Central Bank is of

the view that forex transactions would take place at levels which are not more than Rs. 230 per

US Dollar. However, the 29th respondent (Nivard Cabraal) at a meeting with the chief executive

officers of the commercial banks and licenced specialised banks held on 09th March 2022 had

23

informed that “certain trades may take place beyond the exchange rate stated by the Central

Bank considering the greater flexibility that has been permitted”. According to Mr Jayawardena,

the abovementioned statement of the 29th respondent did completely subvert and over-ride the

carefully considered decision of the Monetary Board and the banks felt free to take an

exponential increase of the forex rate. This situation escalated the forex rate and resulted in the

USD appreciating to Rs.365 (interbank) and in the informal banking (hawala) to around Rs. 420.

He contended that the impact of this overshoot of the exchange rate, on inflation and the cost of

essential imports like fuel, gas, coal, medicines and food, were unbearable. The Rupee cost of

purchasing such items from international markets, was not something that the liquidity levels of

the treasury could bear under any circumstances. He further contended that this had a deep

impact on the cost of living and also created shortages of essential items needed as there was

insufficient currency in Sri Lanka rupees to meet the costs of these purchases and no purchase of

US dollars from the Central Bank was possible. This issue had been raised at the meeting of the

Parliamentary Committee on Public Finance. He contended that the Monetary Board had to take

various steps thereafter in order to resuscitate the situation. In his submission the conduct of the

29th respondent was not only a clear deviation from the well-considered decision of the Monetary

Board but aggravated the economic crisis, further deepening the enormous hardships caused to

the general public.

Mr Navin Marapana PC represented both, Mahinda Rajapaksa and Basil Rajapaksa who are cited

as the 2nd and 2A respondents in SC FR 195/2022 and 2nd and 3rd respondents in SC FR

212/2022 (hereinafter referred to as “2nd respondent” and “2A respondent” respectively). Mr

Marapana PC at the outset submitted that both these applications should be dismissed. He

contended that the impugned conduct of the two respondents in these applications are arising

from policy decisions of the Government. He contends that the case of the petitioners is based on

the premise that the decisions of the respondents are not the best decisions and in hindsight,

different decisions could have averted the economic crisis. It is his contention that the petitioners

have failed to establish as to which fundamental right was infringed due to the conduct of the

respondents. He further contended that if the Court grants relief in these applications, the Court

will be recognising a right to have infallible decisions from the executive or administrative

authorities. He submitted that no such right is recognised by the Constitution. He further

contended that at no stage, the petitioners claim that the respondents could not have taken the

24

impugned decisions nor they allege that the decisions they took are tainted with mala fide.

Learned President’s Counsel further submitted that the Court should desist from hearing these

applications as a Parliamentary Select Committee is examining the same issues that the Court is

invited to examine in these proceedings. In his submissions these decisions fall in the realm of

public finance and it is the Parliament which has the sole jurisdiction to consider such matters.

In response to the contention of the petitioners that the tax revision was the root cause for the

economic collapse, Mr Marapana PC submitted that the claim of the petitioners is misconceived.

In his submission, attributing the sole responsibility to the tax revision not only is artificial but

would be a complete disregard to many other factors that contributed to the economic collapse. It

is his submission that the tax revisions were introduced with the expectation to revive the

economic growth that was badly affected due to the easter attack in April 2019. It is common

ground that one of the main avenues for foreign exchange earnings, tourism, was badly affected

due to the unfortunate events that took place in April 2019. However, tax revisions that were

introduced in late 2019 were with the expectation to help revive the economic growth.

Unexpectedly however, within a very short period the global health crisis – Covid 19 pandemic –

caused serious disruption to the day-to-day life of the entire society and continued to adversely

impact on the economic growth. During the period of the pandemic, the main priority of the

government was the safety of the people. This policy caused unexpected loss of revenue as well

as the need to divert funds to protect peoples’ lives. When tax revisions were introduced, several

parties including Colombo Chamber of Commerce commended the move and expressed

optimism. Furthermore, the decision to revise taxes was a lawful decision giving effect to the

policy adopted by the Government in keeping with the promise in the election manifesto. He

further contended that it is unrealistic to have reversed the tax revisions in the year 2020 as all

the people were badly affected by the pandemic. However, in the first given opportunity, at the

budget in 2021, steps were taken to bring in certain changes to the tax regime with the view to

enhance government revenue. Furthermore, Mr Marapana PC contended that the claim the tax

revisions caused a loss of Rs. 600 billion is a myth. He claims that the impact of the pandemic

itself would have lowered the earnings of people and thereby reduced the tax income of the

Government. Furthermore, Government earnings from excise duty and custom duties on

imported vehicles dropped as the sales of excise items dropped and importation of vehicles was

suspended by the Government. The learned President’s Counsel contended that the petitioners

25

have failed to demonstrate that these factors were taken into account in quantifying the loss of

revenue due to tax revisions. It is only in hindsight that the tax revisions are criticised. He

contends that the attempt to attribute sole responsibility on the decision for tax revisions as the

cause for the economic collapse has no merit.

On behalf of the 2nd and 2A respondents, Mr Marapana PC conceded that the decision to seek

or not to seek assistance from the IMF lies with the Government. In his submission, the decision

on this matter at no stage ignored the advise and/or the recommendations of the Monetary Board.

He submitted that all the cabinet papers submitted by the respondents in this regard were in line

with the expert opinion of the Monetary Board as provided by its statutory reports in compliance

with section 68 of the Monetary Law. He drew the attention of this Court to the fact that in none

of the statutory reports the Monetary Board identifies seeking IMF assistance as the only

available path to economic recovery. The Monetary Board in the statutory reports identified

seeking assistance from the IMF as an option vis a vis the “home grown” solution that was also

identified as an alternative option. He contended that all the cabinet memorandums submitted in

this regard are based on the statutory reports provided by the Monetary Board. Therefore, no

responsibility could be attributed to any particular individual or individuals in this regard. He

drew the attention of this Court to nine such reports submitted by the Monetary Board to the

Minister of Finance. He contends that in none of the reports, seeking assistance from the IMF is

recognised as the only way forward to recover from the crisis. To the contrary, the Monetary

Board had commended various steps taken by the Government, including the adoption of the

“home grown solution” as opposed to seeking assistance from the IMF.

Dr Romesh de Silva PC representing the Monetary Board, cited as 28th respondent in SC FR

195/2022 and as 9th respondent in SC FR 212/2022 (hereinafter referred to as the “28th

respondent”) at the outset submitted that even if the Court accepts the submissions of the

petitioners, no responsibility can be attributed to the Monetary Board. The 28th respondent had

discharged all duties in accordance with the law and had taken all possible measures to avert the

crisis, acting within the statutory powers vested on it. It was his submission that the impugned

conduct and the decisions which the petitioners claim that their rights were breached, have been

taken by the Government and not by the Monetary Board. Furthermore, he submitted that the

Monetary Board by its statutory reports had informed the Minister of Finance the dire situation

26

in the economy and the need to seek assistance from the IMF due to the situation that prevailed

at the relevant period. It was his submission that these reports even though did not specifically

mention that seeking assistance from the IMF as the only viable option available, provided a

clear picture of the situation leaving for the Minister to take an informed decision in this regard.

Furthermore, these reports themselves reflect that the Government was averse to seeking

assistance from the IMF despite the critical condition in the economy. Therefore, as an agency of

the Government the Monetary Board had to continue with the discharge of its duties while

respecting the policy decisions of the Government. It was the responsibility of the Monetary

Board to engage and discharge its duties at the best possible levels within the policy framework

of the Government. Even under these constraints, the Monetary Board made all attempts to

convey the importance of seeking an IMF programme to avert the crisis and overcome the

difficulties.

In his submission Dr de Silva contended that the 28th respondent is vested with the powers,

duties and functions of the Central Bank and be generally responsible for the management,

operations and administration of the Central Bank. The Central Bank and the Monetary Board

are created by the Monetary Law, Act No 58 of 1949 as amended from time to time. He

submitted that within the statutory framework of the Monetary Law, the Central Bank is an

agency of the Government and not an entirely independent entity. In this regard he drew the

attention of this Court to the “Report on the Establishment of a Central Bank for Ceylon”,

Sessional Paper XIV-1949 (commonly known as Exter Report) and the determination of this

Court in SC SD 6-12/2023 (determination on the Bill titled “Central Bank of Sri Lanka”).

The learned President’s Counsel further contended that the 28th respondent which operated under

the Monetary Law Act has now ceased to operate. By virtue of section 125 of the Central Bank

of Sri Lanka, Act No 16 of 2023, which came into operation on 15th September 2023, the

Monetary Law Act has been repealed and the “Central Bank” and a “Governing Board of the

Central Bank” are established under sections 2 and 8 respectively of the said Act. Governor and

the Members of the Monetary Board who were holding office on the day immediately prior to

the appointed date have now become the Governor of the Central Bank and members of the

Governing Body, by the operation of a deeming provision in sections 126(1) and 126(2) of the

Act No 16 of 2023. Furthermore, under section 134(h) of the Act, all applications instituted

27

against the Central Bank, the Monetary Board, its members under the repealed Act, is deemed to

be an application instituted against the Central Bank under the new Act.

Therefore, the learned President’s Counsel submits that any finding by this Court against the 28th

respondent will have serious repercussions on the Central Bank functioning under the new law.

He submitted that it is just and equitable for this Court not to make any adverse finding on the

agency which has ceased to exist, the Monetary Board. However, in the event the Court reaches

the conclusion that the conduct of some of the members of the Monetary Board have resulted in

the violation of any rights, such members cannot hide behind the corporate veil and the Court

could find them individually responsible for such conduct.

Dr de Silva contended that the Monetary Board has discharged all its duties as required by law

and hence no responsibility can be attributed for any violation of a Fundamental Right.

Additional Solicitor General Mr Nerin Pulle PC, represented the Attorney-General. At the outset

Mr Pulle PC submitted that the Court should accord great weight to the two reports of the

Auditor-General in considering economic, public finance auditing and related aspects raised in

the two instant applications.

The learned Additional Solicitor General drew our attention to the observations and conclusions

of the Auditor-General in these reports and submitted that the Auditor General has the legal

competency to make such observations and express opinions having reviewed and examined all

necessary material available at the Central Bank. He further contended that even though the

Auditor-General has refrained from expressing an opinion as to whether or not any loss had been

caused to the Central Bank, the report does show the background in which various issues

occurred as well as the direct or indirect impact of each factor on the other.

In relation to the complaint of the petitioners that the revision of taxes had a direct impact on the

subsequent events which led to the economic collapse, Mr Pulle PC submitted that there are

several legal principles and legislative provisions that need to be considered when examining this

issue. According to him the imposition of taxes is within the full control of Parliament and

enactment of tax legislation with retrospective effect is a lawful exercise of such powers. The

Constitution does not provide for post enactment judicial review of legislation. In this context the

28

learned ASG posed the question, “would the exercise of wide sweeping powers of Parliament to

impose taxes precludes the Court examining the merits or demerits of such legislation?”

The learned Additional Solicitor General contended that the formulation of national policy is a

matter that is solely vested with the Central Government and the economic policy does form part

and parcel of the national policy. He drew the attention of this Court to a series of judgements of

this Court as well as judgments from foreign jurisdictions including the judgments of the Indian

Supreme Court that recognises limitations on the power of judicial review on economic policy. It

was his submission that the mere disagreement with a policy is not a ground on which courts

could review economic policy and therefore, when there are various theories and hypotheses

regarding the correct course of action it would not be possible to evaluate the correctness or

otherwise of the policy. He contended that the Court should refrain from acting as a “super

auditor”. Mr Pulle PC further drew the attention of this Court to the scope of the “doctrine of

political question” and submitted that courts have declined judicial review in instances where a

political judgement has been made based on the assessment of diverse factors and varied factors,

and there are no judicially discoverable and manageable standards other than in instances where

the policy is mala fide and/or manifestly unreasonable and/or the policy is based on wholly

extraneous and irrelevant grounds. Furthermore, he submitted that the Court should be mindful

of the issue of whether the Court has the institutional capacity to examine the matters raised in

the two instant applications. The doctrine of separation of powers is another matter he said that

the Court needs to be mindful of when considering these two applications as matters of economic

policy which are within the exclusive power of the Executive and taxation which is within the

exclusive purview of the legislature.

The learned Additional Solicitor General having drawn our attention to the jurisprudence of this

Court finally submitted that the Court has the power to make directions as it seems fit even if the

Court decides that no violation of Fundamental Rights had been established.

REPORTS OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL

This Court when granting leave to proceed, directed the Auditor General to conduct an audit

upon examining all relevant material and submit a report on (a) the decision made by the 28th

respondent (Monetary Board) to set the value of the Sri Lanka Rupees at or around 203 as

against the US Dollar and all matters connected to the said decision; (b) the delay in seeking

29

facilities from the IMF by the Republic and (c) all matters relating to the settlement of

International Sovereign Bond/s to the value of USD 500 million on 18.01.2022 utilising foreign

reserves. In addition, the Auditor General was further directed that the said report should

comprise observations, including whether any loss had been caused to the Central Bank due to

one or more of the three matters referred to above.

The Auditor General in compliance with the said direction, submitted to this Court the report

titled “Audit Report Including Observations of the Auditor-General pertaining to the

Fundamental Rights Case No 195/2022”, on 08th March 2023. Furthermore, a copy of the report

titled “Special Audit Report on Financial Management and Public Debt Control in Sri Lanka

2018-2022” dated 04th July 2022 was also tendered along with the said report, as per the

direction of this Court.

We accept the submission of the learned Additional Solicitor General that the two reports of the

Auditor General provide material including views, observations and opinions that could be taken

into account by this Court in examining the instant applications.

In this regard we note that the Auditor General has refrained from making any observations on

the issue whether any loss has been caused to the Central Bank. The Auditor General has

refrained from making any observations on this issue for the reasons, (a) examination on the

positive or negative aspects of matters that are prima facie policies of the Government is open for

challenge; (b) the inability to identify the loss caused that resulted from the specific issues

referred to by this Court as the pandemic also could have had an adverse impact on the economy

and (c) the difficulty of ascertaining what ought to have been the best decision the Government

could have taken in the face of limited foreign resources available at the relevant time.

Nonetheless, the Auditor General states that the report sets out the background in which the

matters under consideration had taken place and further goes on to state that the interconnection

of such matters as well as the impact those factors had on each other can be observed by the

examination of this report.

This Court had the benefit of both these reports in considering the material tendered by all parties

and the submissions of Counsel.

30

NON-COMPLIANCE WITH ARTICLE 126(2)

The petition in SC FR 195/2022 is dated 3rd June 2022. The petition in SC FR 212/2022 is dated

16th June 2022. In both these applications, several respondents took up the preliminary objection

that both applications were time-barred in that the applications were not in compliance with

Article 126(2) of the Constitution, and they are therefore liable to be dismissed in limine. The

learned President’s Counsel for the 2nd and 2A respondents argued that in both applications, no

act or omission on the part of the 2nd and 2A respondents are alleged to have been committed or

occurred within one month of the date of the petitions, and that the said respondents, namely

Mahinda Rajapaksa and Basil Rajapaksa had ceased to be the Ministers of Finance prior to one

month of the dates of each petition. That is, the 2nd and 2A respondents had ceased to be the

Ministers of Finance prior to 3rd May 2022 and 16th May 2022 respectively.

The learned President’s Counsel for the 29th respondent argued that the applications were time-

barred in respect of the 29th respondent too, as the 29th respondent had been named respondent

qua Chairman of the Monetary Board and the Governor of the Central Bank, positions he had

only held till 4th April 2022. Similarly, Counsel for several other respondents took up the

objections on the basis that the applications were time-barred in respect of their clients, citing

their final date in office as being beyond the reach of one month prior to the dates of the

petitions. These objections will be addressed as a composite argument.

Each respondent claimed to have held office during a period of time beyond the reach of one

month prior to the dates of the petitions. Essentially, Counsel for the respondents argued that by

failing to name any act or omission committed or alleged to have occurred at the hands of the

said respondents after either 3rd May 2022 or 16th May 2022, both sets of petitioners before this

Court were not in compliance with Article 126(2) of the Constitution.

This Court cannot ex facie dismiss, nor has it considered it prudent to dismiss fundamental rights

applications for their failure to conform to an arithmetic stricture of 30 days without first

examining the context of such applications. The petitioners in both applications placed their

grievances before this Court while stating that the matters impugned in both applications relate

directly and greatly to the entire citizenry, and the consequences of decisions, actions, omissions

or irregularities committed by the respondents have transpired over a period of time and at the

time of filing their applications, appeared to be deep-set in a manner which may affect successive

31

generations of Sri Lankans. The petitioners claimed to have filed their applications in the public

interest. It would be correct to state that this Court has not previously been called upon to take

cognizance of such a predicament.

It was submitted on behalf of the petitioners that the public was unaware of the contributory

elements for the critical condition of the economy until the 4th Respondent in SC FR 212/2022 –

the then Minister of Finance - conceded in parliament on 4th May 2022 that,

a) The reduction in income taxes reduced government revenue and resulted in grievous

ramifications to the economy;

b) The rupee should have been ‘floated’ earlier and its depreciation should have been

managed;

c) The assistance of the IMF should have been sought with greater promptitude;

d) The delay in rescheduling foreign loans resulted in severe ramifications to the

economy;

e) There was a significant and rapid decrease in foreign reserves.

The Judgement in the case of Nanayakkara v Choksy (SLIC case) [2009] BLR 1 at 28-29 is

particularly relevant here. The preliminary objection that the application (in that case) was time

barred was overruled for the reason that the impugned transaction was an ongoing one and also

since, “in applications which have been filed in the public interest”, the Court can take

cognizance of the time required to obtain relevant documents, study the subject matter of the

impugned transaction and formulate the application to be submitted to this Court. Succinctly, his

Lordship Justice Amaratunga held that the time period of one month should be deemed to

commence only after the petitioners had a reasonable opportunity to complete the preparatory

work which was essential to formulate and file their application.

“…….when the Court has to deal with any objection to such application the Court has to

consider Articles 12 (1), 17, 126 and 28 (d) in combination.”

“It must be remembered that these two applications have been filed in the public interest

to make the fundamental right enshrined in article meaningful- that is to make it

“tangible” and “palpable”, and also to ensure that all officers of the State and its

agencies entrusted with the duty to discharge their functions and obligations, do so in

32

accordance with the law, bearing in mind the concept of equality enshrined in the

Constitution and the basic tenet of the Rule of Law.”

“The Petitioners have stated that they learnt about the alleged irregularities relating to

the sale of SLIC after they read the COPE report tabled in Parliament. Thereafter, they

had to obtain the relevant documents, which as revealed by this judgment itself, were in

various government bodies not readily accessible to the public. Even after they managed

to get the necessary documents, they have to study those documents to have a proper

insight into the transaction to prepare their affidavits to be presented to this Court along

with their applications.”

As already observed, the petitioners in the present applications are public spirited persons and

both these applications have been filed in the public interest. The alleged events, decisions,

actions, omissions and irregularities complained of by the petitioners are matters connected with

the mismanagement of the economy of the country. The events, decisions, actions, omissions and

irregularities and the complaints which have flown from them are elaborate and complex in

nature. The learned President’s Counsel for the petitioners stated that relevant documents and

material essential to obtain even a preliminary understanding of what had occurred and how the

petitioners’ fundamental rights were violated were difficult to discover, acquire and analyse. The

voluminous court briefs and records which this Court scrutinised and examined over nearly a

fortnight of hearings evidences the complexity of their claims. Therefore, considering the

aforesaid circumstances and the inherent nature of the events, decisions, actions, omissions and

irregularities impugned, it would be correct to state that the petitioners required additional time

to reasonably complete the preparatory work which was essential to formulate and file their

applications.

Furthermore, in the case of Sugathapala Mendis and Another v Chandrika Kunarathunga and

Others (Waters Edge Case) [2008] 2 SLR 339,at pages 354, 355, in determining whether the

application was time-barred (as this application too was filed in respect of a series of acts which

ka Kunarathunga and Othershad occurred several years ago), Tilakawardane, J. considered the series

of acts in totality, and in respect of the “particulars” which had changed over time which were

“central to the case”. Her Ladyship further held that “...For this Court to ignore the continuing

33

nature of a large-scale development project would be to ignore it the continuing nature of any

violations that stem out of such a project…”.

Similarly, for this Court to ignore the long and sustained nature of the matters impugned in these

present cases, would be to ignore any possible violations which may stem from these actions.

For the aforementioned reasons, the preliminary objection concerning the time-bar is overruled

in respect of all respondents.

POLICY OF THE GOVERNMENT, ECONOMIC POLICY AND DOCTRINE OF

“POLITICAL QUESTION”

One of the main contentions of the respondents, particularly the 29th,30th,31st,32nd,38th,2nd and 2A

respondents was that this Court lacks jurisdiction to entertain, hear and determine these

applications as the impugned mattes, cumulatively challenged by the petitioners before this

Court are of fiscal, economic and political in nature and also are ‘policy decisions of the

Government’.

To substantiate the above argument, the respondents heavily relied upon the dicta of Sripavan, J.

(as he then was) in the case of Sujeewa Senasinghe v. Ajith Nivard Cabraal (the Greek Bond

Case) SC.FR 457/2012 S.C. Minutes 18-09-2014, wherein His Lordship observed;

“We must not forget that in complex economic policy matters every decision is

necessarily empiric and therefore its validity cannot be tested on any rigid

formula or strict consideration. The Court while adjudicating the constitutional

validity of the decision of the Governor or Members of the Monetary Board must

grant a certain measure of freedom considering the complexity of the economic

activities. The Court cannot strike down a decision merely because it feels

another policy decision would have been fairer or wiser or more scientific or

logical. The Court is not expected to express its opinion as to whether at a

particular point of time or in a particular situation any such decision should have

been adopted or not. It is best left to the discretion of the authority concerned.”

Further, it was the contention of the respondents, that issues relating to policy or its

appropriateness are not matters for consideration by the judicial branch of the Government. The

34

respondents drew the attention of Court to the Statutory Determinations of this Court in the

Nation Building Tax (Amendment) Bill SC.SD. 34/2016, [Decisions of the Supreme Court on

Parliamentary Bills 2016-2017 Vol XIII 65], the Fiscal Management (Responsibility)

(Amendment) Bill SC.SD. 28- 29/2016 [Decisions of the Supreme Court on Parliamentary Bills

2016-2017 Vol XIII 53] and The Inland Revenue (Amendment) Bill SC.SD. 17/1997 [Decisions

of the Supreme Court on Parliamentary Bills 1991-2003 Vol VII 103] to bolster its argument.

The respondents also relied on the pronouncements made in the Special Goods and Services Tax

Bill [SC.SD. 1-9/2022, Hansard of 22.02.2022] to propound that, formulation of policy is very

much the prerogative of the Executive and the Legislature and converting the policies into

legislation is within the exclusive domain of the legislative power of the Parliament and, that it is

not prudent for the judiciary to comment upon policy formulation by the Executive.

Another judgement the learned Counsel for the respondents relied upon was Jathika Sevaka

Sangamaya v. Sri Lanka Hadabima Authority SC/App 15/2013- S.C. Minutes 16.12.2015, a

judgement of this Court, wherein it was observed;

“The doctrine of separation of powers is based on the concept that concentration

of the powers of Government in one body will lead to erosion of political freedom

and liberty and abuse of power. Therefore, powers of Government are kept

separated to prevent the erosion of political freedom and liberty and abuse of

power. This will lead to controlling of one another.

There are three distinct functions involved in a Government of a State, namely

legislative, the executive and the judicial functions. Those three branches of

Government are composed of different powers and functions as three separate

organs of Government. Those three organs are constitutionally of equal status

and also independent from one another. One organ should not control or interfere

with the powers and functions of another branch of Government and should not

be in a position to dominate the others and each branch operates as a check on

the others. This is accomplished through a system of ‘checks and balances’,

where each branch is given certain powers so as to check and balance the other

branches”

35

Thus, the submission of the respondents was, since this Court has consistently recognized that

the formulation of Government policy is very much the prerogative of the Executive and the

Legislature elected by the People, that this Court should neither approve, critique or quash

policies adopted by the Executive and the Legislature, or comment regarding its appropriateness

in comparison with what the Court believes to be in national and public interests.

Additional Solicitor General Nerin Pulle PC in his submissions, responding to the petitioners

contention that three main reasons contributed to the economic crisis, and one of which was

arbitrary tax reductions, strenuously argued that the reduction and /or increase of taxes is a

matter which is entirely within the purview of Parliament under Article 148 of the Constitution

and this Court lacks jurisdiction to determine such matters and drew the attention of this Court to

a number of tax revisions passed by Parliament in line with Article 148 of the Constitution.

The attention of the Court was also drawn to Article 80 (3) of the Constitution that prohibits post

review of enactments and a plethora of Statutory Determinations of this Court, pertaining to

fiscal statutes, to put forward the argument, that in tax matters, the legislator is the best judge and

must benefit from greater freedom of classification and is at liberty to make reasonable

classification and the Court lacks institutional capacity to assess or appraise such policy

decisions and therefore, should not intervene in matters of policy unless such policy is found to

be ‘manifestly unreasonable.’[Vide Inland Revenue (Amendment) Bill SC.SD. 64-71/2022

Hansard of 17.11.2022]

Further, it was the contention of the learned ASG that the challenge by the petitioners to certain

actions of the Executive which amounts to matters of economic policy, falls within the ambit of

national policy and since national policy on all subjects and functions is listed under the

‘reserved list’ (List II of the 9th Schedule to the Constitution under Article 154 G (7) of the

Constitution), the Central Government has sole control over such matters and thus the scope of

judicial review of economic policy is limited and the Court cannot strike down a policy decision

taken by the Government unless it is manifestly unreasonable and relied upon judicial dicta of

the Indian Supreme Court to justify the said contention. [Vide - M/S Prag Ice and Oil Mills and

another v. Union of India (1978) 3 SCC 459 and Balco Employees Union (Regd) v. Union of

India and others [2002] AIR 350]

36

Another argument forcefully presented by the learned ASG is that certain narratives of the

petitioners in these applications leading up to actions / inactions and the policies adopted by the

Government would attract the application of the doctrine of political question- questions said to

be ‘non-justiciable’ and as observed by the Supreme Court of the United States, the law is that

the judiciary has no right to entertain the claim for unlawfulness, because such question is

entrusted to one of the political branches and in view of a lack of judicially discoverable and

manageable standards for resolving it and it involves no judicially enforceable rights.[Vide

Baker v. Carr 369 US 186 (1962), Vieth and Furey v Jubelirer et al 541 US 267 (2004)] .

He further submitted, that although the ‘doctrine of political question’ was considered and

rejected in the case of Premachandra v Major Montegue Jayawickrema and another [1994] 2

SLR 90, the said judgement can be distinguished and the doctrine of political question could be

applied in the matter under consideration. The argument presented by the learned ASG was that

in Premachandra (supra) the doctrine was rejected, since the impugned decision was made by a

Provincial Governor and the Provincial Councils which are a subordinate arm of the Government

viś-â-vis the Superior Courts. The learned ASG further submitted that even if the Court decides

to examine decisions of the Executive disregarding the doctrine of political question the Court

should be cautious and should be mindful, whether the Court has the institutional capacity to

review matters of economic policy and formulate standards for the management of economic

policy. Hence, it was submitted that the case of the petitioners is ‘non-justiciable’ and should be

dismissed.

The attention of this Court was drawn by the learned Counsel for the Respondents to the judicial

pronouncements of the Indian Supreme Court, to contend that this Court lacks jurisdiction to

review taxation policies unless it is in violation of a law or is done ultra vires; and also drew our

attention to specific passages of the said judgements: -

Prag Ice & Oil Mills & another v. Union of India (1978) 3 SCC 459

“We do not think that it is the function of this Court or of any Court to sit in judgment

over such matters of economic policy as must necessarily be left to the Government of the

day to decide. Many of them, as a measure of price fixation must necessarily be, are matters

of prediction of ultimate results on which even experts can seriously err and doubtless differ.

Courts can certainly not be expected to decide them without even the aid of experts.”

37

Bharat Aluminium Company, Ltd. Employees Union v Union of India (2002) 2 SCC 333

(The BALCO case)

“In a democracy, it is the prerogative of each elected Government to follow its own

policy. Often a change in Government may result in the shift in focus or change in

economic policies. Any such change may result in adversely affecting some vested

interests. Unless any illegality is committed in the execution of the policy or the same is

contrary to law or mala fide, a decision bringing about change cannot per se be

interfered with by the court. […] Wisdom and advisability of economic policies are

ordinarily not amenable to judicial review unless it can be demonstrated that the policy is

contrary to any statutory provision or the Constitution.”

Sidheswar Sahakari Sakhar Karkhana Ltd. v Union of India (2005) 3 SCC 369

“Normally the Court should not interfere in policy matter which is within the purview of

the government unless it is shown to be contrary to law or inconsistent with the

provisions of the Constitution.”

Ugar Sugar Works Ltd. v Delhi Administration and others (2001) 3 SCC 635

“In tax and economic regulation cases, there are good reasons for judicial restraint, if not

judicial deference to the Executive. The Courts are not expected to express their opinion as

to whether at a particular point of time or in a particular situation any such policy should

have been adopted or not. It is best left to the discretion of the State.”

However, we are of the view that these passages cannot be taken in isolation. It must be

considered and understood holistically. It must be examined with the narration of its facts.

In the Ugar Sugar case (supra) the Indian Supreme Court categorically observed:

“It is well settled that the Courts, in exercise of their power of judicial review, do not

ordinarily inter fere with the policy decisions of the Executive unless the policy can be

faulted on grounds of mala fide, unreasonableness, arbitrariness or unfairness etc, Indeed,

arbitrariness, irrationality, perversity and mala fide will render the policy unconstitutional.

However, if the policy cannot be faulted on any of these grounds, the mere fact that it would

38

hurt business interests of a party, does not justify invalidating the policy.” (emphasis

added).

Furthermore, this Court is conscious that the Indian Supreme Court in Delhi Development

Authority v Joint Action Committee, Allottee of SFS Flats (2008) 2 SCC 672 the Court held as

follows-

“An executive order termed as a policy decision is not beyond the pale of judicial review.

Whereas the superior courts may not interfere with the nitty-gritty of the policy, or

substitute one by the other but it will not be correct to contend that the court shall lay its

judicial hands off, when a plea is raised that the impugned decision is a policy

decision. Interference therewith on the part of the superior court would not be without

jurisdiction as it is subject to judicial review.” (emphasis added)

Similarly in the case, Centre for Public Interest Litigation v Union of India (2012) 3 SCC 1

(The 2G case) the Court observed as follows-

“...The power of judicial review should be exercised with great care and circumspection and

the Court should not ordinarily interfere with the policy decisions of the Government in

financial matters. There cannot be any quarrel with the proposition that the Court cannot

substitute its opinion for the one formed by the experts in the particular field and due respect

should be given to the wisdom of those who are entrusted with the task of framing the

policies. We are also conscious of the fact that the Court should not interfere with the fiscal

policies of the State. However, when it is clearly demonstrated that the policy framed by the

State or its agency/instrumentality and/or its implementation is contrary to public interest

or is violative of the constitutional principles, it is the duty of the Court to exercise its

jurisdiction in larger public interest and reject the stock plea of the State that the scope of

judicial review should not be exceeded beyond the recognised parameters.”

“...When matters like these are brought before the judicial constituent of the State by public-

spirited citizens, it becomes the duty of the Court to exercise its power in larger public

interest and ensure that the institutional integrity is not compromised by those in whom the

people have reposed trust and who have taken an oath to discharge duties in accordance

with the Constitution and the law without fear or favour, affection or ill-will and who, as any

39

other citizen, enjoy fundamental rights and, at the same time, are bound to perform the duties

enumerated in Article 51-A.” (emphasis added)

In contradistinction, to the contention of the respondents the main thrust of the case presented by

the petitioners was the conduct of the 2nd,2A,29th,30th,31st,32nd, 32A and 38th respondents

demonstrate a ‘patent breach of public trust’ and thereby a complete disregard of the ‘rule of

law’. The petitioners contend that in considering these applications the Court need not examine

the policies adopted by the Government but focus on the failure to take necessary steps to

remedy the situation which amounted to irrational and arbitrary conduct of the respondents. It

was the position of the petitioners that even if this Court is to go into the policies of the State in

determining whether any one or more of the Fundamental Rights of the petitioners had been

violated as the law stands today, this Court is both empowered and has the jurisdiction to go into

the policies adopted by the State in determining as to whether the Fundamental Rights of the

petitioners have been violated by any of the respondents.

In the determination of the Appropriation Bill of 2012 [Decisions of the Supreme Court on

Parliamentary Bills 2010-2012 Vol X] it was observed that ‘due and proper fiscal accountability

must be viewed as the bedrock of good governance by any Government and must at all times be

balanced and viewed through the lens of intra and intergenerational responsibility and equity.’

This Court in its determination on the Inland Revenue (Amendment Bill) [SC SD 63-64/2023,

Hansrad of 05.09.2023] in dealing with the issue of classifications in revenue matters recognized

that “such measures would be considered as inconsistent with Article 12 of the Constitution only

if they are manifestly unreasonable”. Hence the Court in Statutory Determinations too

recognized its jurisdiction even to examine matters relating to revenue, when such matters are

manifestly unreasonable.

Indian authorities also provide that economic decisions are reviewable. Although an extent of

judicial deference should be exercised in such review.

In Shri Sitaram Sugar Company v Union of India and Others (1990) AIR 1277 the price of

levy on sugar was questioned. The Indian Supreme Court held that the doctrine of judicial review

implies that the repository of power acts within the bounds of the power delegated, and he does

not abuse his power. He must act reasonably and in good faith. It is not sufficient that the

40

instrument is intra vires the parent Act but must also be consistent with the constitutional

principles. It was held that;

“The doctrine of judicial review implies that the repository of power acts within the

bounds of the power delegated, and he does not abuse his power. He must act reasonably

and in good faith. It is not only sufficient that an instrument is intra vires the parent Act,

but it must also be consistent with the constitutional principles: Maneka Gandhi v. Union

of India, [1978] 1 SCC 248, 314-315.”

“The true position, therefore, is that any act of the repository of power, whether

legislative or administrative or quasi-judicial, is open to challenge if it is in conflict with

the Constitution or the governing Act or the general principles of the law of the land or it

is so arbitrary or unreasonable that no fair-minded authority could ever have made it”

“Judicial review is not concerned with matters of economic policy. The court does not

substitute its judgment for that of the legislature or its agents as to matters within the

province of either. The court does not supplant the “feel of the expert” by its own views.

When the legislature acts within the sphere of its authority and delegates power to an

agent, it may empower the agent to make findings of fact which are conclusive provided

such findings satisfy the test of reasonableness. In all such cases, judicial inquiry is

confined to the question whether the findings of fact are reasonably based on evidence

and whether such findings are consistent with the laws of the land.”

Similarly, in Small Scale Industrial Manufactures Association (Registered) v Union of India

and Others (2021) 8 SCC 511 the Indian Supreme Court observed that;

“What is best in the national economy and in what manner and to what extent the

financial reliefs/packages be formulated, offered and implemented is ultimately to be

decided by the Government and RBI on the aid and advise of the experts. The same is a

matter for decision exclusively within the province of the Central Government. Such

matters do not ordinarily attract the power of judicial review. Merely because some

class/sector may not be agreeable and/or satisfied with such packages/policy decisions,

the courts, in exercise of the power of judicial review, do not ordinarily interfere with

41

the policy decisions, unless such policy could be faulted on the ground of mala fides,

arbitrariness, unfairness, etc.”

In the recent judgement of Vivek Narayan Sharma v Union of India Writ petition (Civil) No.

906 of 2016 the Indian Supreme Court observed that the Court would not interfere with any

opinion formed by the government if it is based on relevant factors. The judgement was

concerned with the decision of the Central Government of India to demonetise certain legal

tenders. In para 224 the Indian Supreme Court observed that;

“This Court observed that the Court would not interfere with any opinion formed by the

government if it is based on the relevant facts and circumstances or based on expert’s

advice. The Court would be entitled to interfere only when it is found that the action of

the executive is arbitrary and violative of any constitutional, statutory or other provisions

of law. It has been held that when the government forms its policy, it is based on a

number of circumstances and it is also based on expert’s opinion, which must not be

interfered with, except on the ground of palpable arbitrariness. It is more than settled

that the Court gives a large leeway to the executive and the legislature in matters of

economic policy.”

These series of Indian judgements demonstrate that the role of Courts is to expand and not to

attenuate fundamental rights. This view is stated by Justice Y.V Chandrachud et.al in

‘Commentary on the Constitution of India’ 8th edn Vol. 1 at page 227 as follows;

“Until recently, the Indian Supreme Court judges eschewed the policy approach as they

treated the Indian Constitution as a statute and construed it according to the ordinary

canon of statutory construction, except in one area, viz. The amenability of the

Constitution and they usually stated that ‘This Court is not concerned with policy or

economic considerations’ (vide State of Bombay v Bombay Education Society, AIR 1954

SC 561, 567).

In Cooper’s case the attitude was displayed, and it seems to continue. However, in recent

times a ‘policy’ approach in interpreting constitutional interpretation is seen and

emphasis is placed on a more creative law-making judicial role as regards to

constitutional interpretation. In Maneka Gandhi it was openly declared that the role of

42

the Courts is to expand not to attenuate the Fundamental Rights. This judicial policy has

been translated into practical terms through a series of post-Maneka cases. Particularly

in the order of personal liberty and freedom of speech.”

Similar to Indian authorities, when we consider the jurisprudence of this Court it is clear that the

scope and content of the Right to Equality guaranteed by Article 12 of the Constitution has

evolved with the passage of time. Such evolution is in accord with the progressive changes that

have taken place in other jurisdictions as well. To quote Justice Y.V Chandrachud (supra) at

page 228:

“Judicial interpretation is a process of slow and gradual metamorphosis of

Constitutional principles. Change caused thereby has to be deciphered by an analysis of

a body of judicial precedents. This process is slow because it develops from case to case

over a length of time and may take a long period for a view to crystalize. As per Dr Jain

it is also somewhat haphazard because the Courts do not take initiative; they interpret

the Constitution only when the question is raised before them, and the course of

interpretation depends on the nature of cases and constitutional controversies which are

presented to the Courts for adjudication.”

In its current form the Right to Equality guarantees protection from arbitrary exercise of power

and discretion by State functionaries and enhances the Rule of Law. It further requires State

authorities to ensure that their conduct will not breach the trust placed on them and ensure that

public resources placed in their custody are protected and preserved for the benefit of the people

and not to exhaust for political or personal benefit. Exercise of discretionary powers in the

decision-making process should be guided by the Directive Principles as recognized by the

Constitution and callous disregard of such principles will pollute decisions with arbitrariness.

Thus, the Rule of Law is not only rights and equality. The Rule of Law is also about

functionality and efficiency for sustainable economic development of the nation and all of its

People. Hence, the respondents will not be absolved of liability merely because the decision

and/or decisions are concerned with economic policies. This is not to state that the Court

will not provide a margin of deference to the relevant decision makers in implementing

national economic policies. However, such decisions should be considered decisions, for the

long-term sustainable development and for the public benefit.

43

This Court has considered the submissions made in respect of the “economic policy” and the

“doctrine of political question”, the judicial dicta of our Courts and other jurisdictions and we are

convinced that this Court has jurisdiction to look into the grievances of the petitioners in these

applications.

We are also of the view as laid down in the case of Jathika Sewaka Sangamaya v Sri Lanka

Hadabima Authority (supra) one organ of a State should not dominate, control or interfere with

the powers and functions of another branch of a government but operate as a check on the other

through the mechanism of “checks and balances”.

In coming to this conclusion, we are mindful that in the case of Sujeewa Senasinghe v Ajith

Nivard Cabraal (supra) though leave to proceed was not granted the Court pronounced that it

has to focus on the applicable law and ascertain whether the impugned decision to invest in

Greek bonds was an arbitrary exercise of power serving a collateral purpose. The Court

considered the totality of the circumstances, the risk management strategy in particular and the

decisions complaint of in the said case viz. that the Central Bank investing in the bonds issued by

the Hellanic Republic Ministry of Economy and Finance Public Debt Management Agency was

based on the trade-off between the different risks faced and the Central Bank’s tolerance for

higher risks on a very small part of its portfolio (only 0.6 of its portfolio); and investing in high

yielding Sovereign paper is an integral part of fund management of many funds in the world over

and the Central Bank too had followed a similar practice in investing a tolerable proportion of its

resources (0.6 percent) in Greek Bonds, The Court went on to observe when the euro zone took a

turn for the worst several weeks later after the investment was made, the Central Bank sold a part

of the Greek bonds at a loss of USD 6.6 million and this measure was taken to mitigate the risk

of the Greek investment losing further value due to subsequent development in the euro zone and

came to the conclusion, that it is neither possible nor desirable to hold that the Monetary Board

in taking a decision to invest in Greek bonds have acted arbitrarily, unreasonably or in a

fraudulent manner.

In view of the factors discussed above we see no merit in the submission of the learned Counsel

for the respondents that the applications of the petitioners are non-justiciable or that this Court

lacks jurisdiction to determine the impugned decisions of the Government.

44

RIGHT TO EQUALITY, RULE OF LAW AND ‘PUBLIC TRUST’

Under Article 3 of the Constitution, the inalienable Sovereignty that is vested in the People

includes powers of Government and Fundamental Rights. The Executive power of the People is

exercised by the President who is the Head of the State, Head of the Government and the Head

of the Executive. Within this Constitutional framework, The Cabinet of Ministers is charged with

the direction and control of the Government and the President is the Head of the Cabinet of

Ministers. The Constitution which is the Supreme Law recognises that FREEDOM, EQUALITY,

JUSTICE, FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS and the INDEPENDENCE OF THE JUDICIARY as

intangible heritage of succeeding generations of the People of Sri Lanka.

Article 3 of the Constitution reads as follows;

“In the Republic of Sri Lanka sovereignly is in the People and is inalienable.

Sovereignty includes the powers of Government, fundamental rights and the

franchise.”

Article 4 of the Constitution speaks of exercise of such power in the People and Article 4(d) of

the Constitution declares;

“the fundamental rights which are by the Constitution declared and recognized

shall be respected, secured and advanced by all the organs of government and

shall not be abridged, restricted or denied, save in the manner and extent

hereinafter provided.”

In Rajavarothiam Sampanthan v Attorney General (Dissolution Case) SC/FR/351 to 356 of

2018 and SC/FR/358 to 367 of 2018, SC minutes of 13-12-2018 at page 31, a Seven Judge

Bench of this Court observed as follows;

“It has been emphasised time and again by this Court that it is a foremost duty of

the Supreme Court to protect, give full meaning to and enforce the fundamental

rights which are listed in Chapter III of the Constitution. Thus, Sharvananda, CJ

observed in Mutuweeran v The State - 5 Srikantha’s Law Reports 126 at page

130, ‘Because the remedy under Article 126 is thus guaranteed by the

Constitution, a duty is imposed upon the Supreme Court to protect fundamental

45

rights and ensure their vindication’. In the same vein, Ranasinghe, J stated in

Edirisuriya v Navaratnam [1985 1 SLR 100 at page 106], that “A solemn and

sacred duty has been imposed by the Constitution upon this Court, as the highest

Court of the Republic, to safeguard the fundamental rights which have been

assured to the citizens of the Republic as part of their intangible heritage. It

therefore, behoves this Court to see that the full and free exercise of such rights is

not impeded by any flimsy and unrealistic considerations.””

“In honouring this duty, the Supreme Court is giving tangible and effective life

and meaning to the sovereignty of the people. The single and only instance

specified in the Constitution where the exercise of these fundamental rights may

be restricted is in circumstances falling within the ambit of Article 15 of the

Constitution and the present application do not fall with the ambit of Article 15 in

the absence of any laws which have been passed prescribing restricting the

operation of Article 12(1) in the interests of national security, public order or any

other of the specified grounds referred to in Article 15(7) of the Constitution

[……] In the absence of a specific and express provision in the Constitution

which strips the Supreme Court of jurisdiction under Article 118(b) read with

Article 126 and Article 17 for the protection of fundamental rights, the provisions

of Article 118(b) read with Article 126 and Article 17 will prevail. Therefore, this

Court has the jurisdiction and, in fact a solemn duty to hear and determine these

applications according to the law.”

Thus, this Court is not fettered or precluded from exercising the fundamental rights jurisdiction

and has a solemn and a bounden duty to uphold the rule of law and to safeguard the sovereignty

of each and every citizen of this country.

Over the last period of forty-five years since the adoption of the Constitution in the year 1978,

Right to Equality remains one of the mostly invoked rights by the People before the Supreme

Court through the process provided under Article 126 of the Constitution.

The Right to Equality is guaranteed under Article 12(1) of the Constitution and it reads as

follows:

46

“All persons are equal before the law and are entitled to the equal protection of

the law”.

The expression ‘equality before the law’ which is found in written Constitutions, originated from

the English Law and the expression ‘equal protection of the law’ first appeared in the American

jurisprudence. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights as well as the International Covenant

on Civil and Political Rights use the said expressions which exemplify that the object of these

phrases is equal justice to mankind.

Sharvananda, J. (as he then was) in the case of Palihawadana v. Attorney General [1978]1 SLR

65, postulates that the Preamble to our Constitution recognizes that the People of Sri Lanka have

ranked equality with justice and freedom and the notion of equality underlies all religious and

political philosophies.

The Supreme Court which has the sole and exclusive jurisdiction to hear and determine any

question relating to the infringement of fundamental rights in exercising this jurisdiction had

examined and interpreted the scope and content of the right to equality as guaranteed by Article

12. The right to equality as guaranteed under Article 12 had evolved to its present form over a

period of four decades. In this process the co-relationship between the Democracy, Rule of Law

and the doctrine of Public Trust has been clearly recognised in the context of arbitrary and / or

irrational exercise of power by Executive and / or Administrative authorities as well on violation

of right to equality due to inaction of the Executive and / or Administrative authorities.

Equality is the corollary of the ‘Rule of Law’ and Sharvananda, J. in Sirisena & others v

Kobbekaduwa, Minister of Agriculture and Lands 80 NLR 1 at 169-170 observed:

“Rule of law is the very foundation of our Constitution and the right of access to

the Courts has always been jealously guarded. Rule of Law depends on the

provision of adequate safeguards against abuse of power by the executive. Our

Constitution promises to usher in a welfare state for our country. In such a state,

the Legislature has necessarily to create innumerable administrative bodies and

entrust them with multifarious functions. They will have power to interfere with

every aspect of human activity. If their existence is necessary for the progress and

development of the country the abuse of power by them, if unchecked, may defeat

47

the legislative scheme and bring about an authoritarian or totalitarian state.

The existence of the power of judicial review and the exercise of same

effectively is a necessary safeguard against such abuse of power.” (emphasis

added)

In Visualingam and others v Liyanage and others [1983] 2 SLR 311 at page 380 it was

observed that

“...there is a firm judicial policy against allowing the ‘Rule of Law’ to be undermined by

weakening of the power of the Courts”.

In the year 1984, in Jayanetti v The Land Reform Commission and others [1984] 2 SLR 172,

Wanasundera J with other four judges agreeing with him observed that:

“Article 12 of our Constitution is similar in content to Article 14 of the Indian

Constitution. The Indian Supreme Court has held that Article 14 "combines the English

doctrine of the rule of law with the equal protection clause of the 14th amendment to (the

U.S.) Constitution". We all know that the rule of law was a fundamental principle of

English Constitutional Law and it was a right of the subject to challenge any act of the

State from whichever organ it emanated and compel it to justify its legality. It was not

confined only to legislation, but extended to every class and category of acts done by or

at the instance of the State. That concept is included and embodied in Article 12.” (at

184-185).

In De Silva v Atukorale [1993] 1 SLR 283, Mark Fernando, J. in interpreting the term public

purpose relied on the following opinion of H. W. Wade –

“... Statutory power conferred for public purposes is conferred as it were upon

trust, not absolutely - that is to say, it can validly be used only in the right and

proper way which Parliament when conferring it is presumed to have

intended.”(at 296)

Based on the said observation, the Court held that discretion of a public authority is not

absolute, and that such discretion must be used exclusively for the public good, and went onto

observe;

48

“It was a power conferred solely to be used for the public good, and not for his

personal benefit; it was held in trust for the public; to be exercised reasonably

and in good faith, and upon lawful and relevant grounds of public interest.”

(emphasis added)(at 297)

The principle that there is no absolute or unfettered power is also recognized in Marie

Indira Fernandopulle and Another v E.L Senanayake, Minister of Lands and

Agriculture 79 2 N.L.R 115 at page 120 wherein the Court held that;

“...Are the Courts obliged to turn a deaf ear merely because some statutory

officer is able to proclaim, "I alone decide". “When I open my mouth let no dog

bark”? If that be the position when the rights of the subject are involved, then the

Court would have abdicated its powers necessary to safeguard the rights of the

individual.”

Another case wherein the public interest was considered is Bandara v Premachandra [1994] 1

SLR 301. In this case Fernando, J. at page 318 reasoned that;

“The State must, in the public interest, expect high standards of efficiency and

service from public officers in their dealings with the administration and the

public. In the exercise of Constitutional and statuary powers and jurisdictions,

the Judiciary must endeavour to ensure that this expectation is realised.”

In Heather Mundy v Central Environmental Authority and Others SC Appeal 58

60/2003 - SC Minutes 20.01.2004- Fernando, J. reiterated that powers vested in public

authorities are not absolute and unfettered;

“...Further, this Court itself has long recognized and applied the "public trust"

doctrine: that powers vested in public authorities are not absolute or unfettered

but are held in trust for the public, to be exercised for the purposes for which they

have been conferred, and that their exercise is subject to judicial review by

reference to those purposes” (page 13)

Similarly, in Premachandra v Major Montague Jayawickrema and another [1994] 2 SLR 90

G.P.S. de Silva, C.J. held;

49

“There are no absolute and unfettered discretions in public Law; discretions are

conferred on public functionaries in trust for the public, to be used for the public

good, and the propriety of the exercise of such discretions is to be judged by

reference to the purposes for which they were so entrusted.” (page 105)

Further, Shirani Bandaranayake, J. (as she then was) in Azath Salley v Colombo

Municipal Council S.C. (FR) Application No. 252/2007 -S.C Minutes 04.03.2009-

referring to the above position, states as follows;

“It is therefore apparent that a public authority has no absolute or unfettered

discretion. Referring to this position, Professor Wade (supra pgs. 354 - 355) had

stated that,

‘Statutory power conferred for public purposes is conferred as it were upon

trust, not absolutely - that is to say, it can validly be used only in the right and

proper way which Parliament when conferring it is presumed to have

intended’(emphasis added).” (page 30)

Fernando, J. in Priyangani v Nanayakkara and others [1996] 1 SLR 399 at 404-405 reiterated

the interrelationship between the Right to Equality guaranteed by Article 12 of the Constitution

and Rule of Law. Furthermore, the Court held that

“We are not concerned with contractual duties, but with the safeguards based on the

Rule of Law which Article 12 provides against the arbitrary and unreasonable exercise

of discretionary powers. Discretionary powers can never be treated as absolute and

unfettered unless there is compelling language; when reposed in public functionaries,

such powers are held in trust, to be used for the benefit of the public, and for the purpose

for which they have been conferred - not at the whim and fancy of officials for political

advantage or personal gain”. (emphasis added)

In Bulankulama v Secretary, Ministry of Industrial Development (Eppawela case) [2000] 3

SLR 243 a case involving an imminent infringement of fundamental rights, the respondents

sought to argue that the government and not this Court is the trustee of the natural resources of

50

the country and as long as the government acts correctly the Courts will not put itself in the shoes

of the government and the Court could not ‘interfere’ in the exercise of discretion of the

Government in situations where the Government acts as a ‘trustee’. This Court rejected the

argument and Amerasinghe, J. held that under Articles 4, 17 and 126 of the Constitution, the

Court is expressly authorised to exercise its jurisdiction where the actions / omissions of the

executive, violates fundamental rights of the people and that such jurisdiction applies even in

situations where the Government exercises its powers as a ‘trustee’.

Amerasinghe, J. at page 253 and 257 further observes:

“The Constitution declares that sovereignly is in the People and is inalienable

(Article 3). Being a representative democracy, the powers of the People are

exercised through persons who are for the time being entrusted with certain

functions”

“The Executive does have a significant role in resource management conferred by

law, yet the management of natural resources has not been placed exclusively in

the hands of the Executive. The exercise of Executive power is subject to judicial

review. Moreover, Parliament may, as it has done on many occasions, legislate

on matters concerning natural resources and the Courts have the task of

interpreting such legislation in giving effect to the will of the People as expressed

by Parliament.”

The above dicta of this Court amply demonstrate that during the last few decades, the Public

Trust Doctrine has been applied by this Court when violations of the fundamental rights of

People were considered. Furthermore, in relation to powers, functions and duties which are

public in nature, this Court has always had respect for the Rule of Law and specifically to the

principles of openness, fairness and accountability and observed that process of making a

decision should not be shrouded in secrecy and that the powers are conferred upon the Executive

in the public interest and in trust for the public and these powers must be governed by reason.

In Vasudeva Nanayakkara v Choksy (Lanka Marine Case) [2008] 1 SLR 134 at 181 Sarath N

Silva, CJ. held as follows:

51

“...As firmly laid down in the Determination of the Divisional Bench of Seven

Judges of this Court in regard to the constitutionality of the proposed 19th

Amendment to the Constitution (2002 3 SLR page 85) the principle enunciated in

Articles 3 and 4 of our Constitution is that the respective organs of Government,

the Legislature, the Executive, and the Judiciary are reposed power as custodians

for the time being to be exercised for the people. In Bulankulame and others v

Secretary, Ministry of Industrial Development (2000 3 SLR 243) this Court has

observed that the resources of the State are the “resources of the People” and the

Organs of the State are “guardians to whom the people have committed the care

and preservation” of these resources (p.253). That, there is a confident

expectation (trust) that the Executive will act in accordance with the law and

accountably in the best interests of the people of Sri Lanka (p 258)”.

In Sugathapala Mendis and another (Waters Edge Case) [2008] 2 SLR 339 Tilakawardane, J.

elaborated the Public Interest Doctrine as follows;

“The principle that those charged with the upholding the Constitution- be it a

police officers of the lowest rank or the President- are to do so in a way that does

not “violate the Doctrine of Public Trust” by state action / inaction is a basic

tenet of the Constitution which upholds the legitimacy of Government and the

Sovereignty of the People. The “Public trust Doctrine” is based on the concept

that the powers held by the organs of the government are, in fact, powers that

originate with the People, and are entrusted to the Legislature, the Executive and

the Judiciary only as a means of exercising governance and with the sole

objective that such powers will be exercised in good faith for the benefit of the

People of Sri Lanka. Public power is not for personal gain, favour, but always to

be used to optimize the benefit of the People. To do otherwise would be to betray

the trust reposed by the People within whom, in terms of the Constitution the

Sovereignty reposes. Power exercised contrary to the Public Trust Doctrine

would be an abuse of such power and in contravention of the Rule of Law. This

Court has long recognized and applied the Public Trust Doctrine, establishing

that the exercise of such powers is subject to judicial review”.

52

“The Public Trust Doctrine, taken together with the Constitutional Directives of

Article 27, reveal that all state actors are so principally obliged to act in

furtherance of the trust of the People that they must follow this duty even when a

furtherance of this trust necessarily renders inadequate an act or omission that

would otherwise legally suffice.” (Vide pages 352-353).

“The oral arguments and written submissions presented on behalf of the principal

respondents in this case engage in precisely this abdication of responsibility, that

have come to be seen as a hallmark of Sri Lanka’s governmental bureaucracy.

Following Bandara v Premachandra in which the Court held that “….the State

must, in the public interest, expect high standards of efficiency and service from

public officers in their dealings with the administration and the public. In the

exercise of constitutional and statutory powers and jurisdictions, the judiciary

must endeavour to ensure that this expectation is realized…” we recognize that

this duty has to be upheld not only in the name of good governance but also for

sustainable economic development of the nation and all of its People, especially

the economically challenged, the disadvantaged and the marginalised. In time this

will empower the marginalised and disempowered members of our society, and

will in due course establish a true Democratic Socialist Republic with equality for

all.” (vide page 354) (emphasis added)

In Vasudeva Nanayakkara v K.N. Choksy and others (SLIC Case) [2009] BLR 1 at page 56

and 57 Amaratunga, J. observed as follows:

“Fundamental rights jurisdiction forms a part of the equitable jurisdiction of the

Supreme Court which exercises, at the highest level, the judicial power of the

people according to the Rule of Law and the fundamental rights provisions

enshrined in the Constitution.”

“The petitioners have filed this application in public interest alleging that the

executive power of the people, delegated to the Executive by the Constitution, to

exercise in good faith and according to law have been wrongfully and illegally

exercised, to the prejudice of the people. The trust reposed on the executive to

which the peoples’ executive power has been delegated is, in the words of

53

Amarasinghe J in Bulankulama Case,” the confident expectation (trust) that the

executive will act in accordance with the law and accountability, in the best

interest of the people” (2000 3 SLR 243 at 258). The ruler’s trusteeship of the

resources of the State which belong to the people is a part of the legal heritage of

Sri Lanka dating back at least to the third century BC as pointed out by Justice

Weeramantry in his separate opinion in the International Court of Justice in the

Danube Case, by quoting the sermon of Arahath Mahinda to King

Devanampiyatissa as recorded in the Great Chronicle-Mahawamsa.”

“This concept of the public trust which curtailed the absolute power of the

monarch is in perfect harmony with the doctrine of public trust developed by the

Supreme Court on the basis of sovereignty of the people set out in Articles 3 and 4

of the Constitution, Article 12(1) and the principle of the Rule of law, which is the

basis of our Constitution. The Rule of Law is the principle which keep all organs

of the State within the limits of the law and the public trust doctrine operates as

a check to ensure that the powers delegated to the organs of the government are

held in trust and properly exercised to the benefit of the people and not to their

detriment. When the Executive which is the custodian of the People’s Executive

Power act “ultra vires” and in derogation of the law and procedures that are

intended to safeguard the resources of the State, it is in the public interest to

implead such action before Court.” (emphasis added)

Furthermore, in Sugathapala Mendis and another (supra) Tilakawardane, J., at page 374

elaborated that public officials must exercise executive and administrative power subject to the

Rule of Law and for the long-term sustainable development of the country and for the larger

benefit of the People;

“…any person who is elected to the Presidency or appointed to ministerial services [….]

are so chosen because they are deemed able to embrace, uphold and set example as a

follower of the Rule of Law created pursuant to the Constitution and they hold in trust the

executive power of the People acquired through the Sovereignty of the People. while the

exercise of Presidential power is a duty that must accord with the Rule of Law, such

compliance should also come from one’s own conscience and sense of integrity as owed

54

to its People. This means that whilst they can use their private power and their private

property in an unfettered manner when granting any privileges or favours and, even in

an overwhelming act of great generosity, give all their private property away, their

public power must only be used strictly for the larger benefit of the People, the long-

term sustainable development of the country and in accordance with the Rule of Law.”

“Consequent to this framework it is to be noted for our purposes that all facets of the

country - its land, economic opportunities or other assets - are to be handled and

administered under the stringent limitations of the trusteeship posed by the public trust

doctrine and must be used in a manner for economic growth and always for the benefit of

the entirety of the citizenry of the country,” (emphasis added)

In the more recent past, in Wijeratne v Warnapala SC.FR 305/2008 (S.C. Minutes 22-09-2009),

Sripavan J., (as he then was) quoting Bhawati, J. in S.P.Gupta v Union of India and others

1982AIR (SC) 149 observed;

“It has been firmly stated in several judgements of this Court that the “Rule of

Law” is the basis of our Constitution [….] ‘If there is one principle that runs

through the entire fabric of the Constitution, it is the principle of the Rule of Law

and under the Constitution, it is the judiciary which is entrusted with the task of

keeping every organ of the State within the limits of the law and thereby making

the Rule of Law meaningful and effective’”

Similarly, in Jayawardena v Wijayatilake [2001] 1 Sri LR 132; Senarath and others v

Chandrika Bandaranayake Kumaratunga and others SCFR 503/2005 - S.C. Minutes

03.05.2007; Hapuarachchi and others v Commissioner of Elections and Another [2009] 1

SLR 1; Watte Gedera Wijebanda v Conservator General of Forests [2009] 1 SLR 337; and

Environmental Foundation Ltd. v Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka [2010] 1 SLR 1, the

concept of the ‘Public Trust Doctrine’ and the ‘Rule of Law’ was recognized and applied.

Furthermore, this Court went onto hold, that administrative acts and decisions contrary to ‘public

trust’ would be in excess and/or abuse of power by the Executive and therefore, violative of the

55

fundamental rights in general and Article 12(1) of the Constitution in particular, which

guarantees equality before the law and equal protection of the law.

The above position is explicitly recognized by Fernando J, in Heather Mundy v Central

Environmental Authority and Others (supra) at page 13;

“Besides, executive power is also necessarily subject to the fundamental rights in

general, and to Article 12(1) in particular which guarantees equality before the law and

the equal protection of the law. For the purposes of the appeals now under consideration,

the "protection of the law" would include the right to notice and to be heard.

Administrative acts and decisions contrary to the "public trust" doctrine and/or violative

of fundamental rights would be in excess or abuse of power, and therefore void or

voidable.”

Commenting on the unfettered discretion, this Court in Premalal Perera v Tissa Karaliyadda

SC FR 891/2009 - SC Minutes 31.03.2016, categorically held, quoting many judgements of this

Court, that;

“The said authorities have specifically rejected the notion of unfettered discretion

given to those who are empowered to act in such capacity and held that

discretions are conferred on public functionaries in trust for the public, to be

used for the good of the public, and propriety of the exercise of such discretions

is to be judged by reference to the purposes for which they were entrusted”.

(emphasis added)

In Shanmugam Sivaraja and another v OIC Terrorist Investigation Division and others, SC

FR 15/2010, SC Minutes of 27.07.2017, Aluwihare, J. cited with approval the dicta of

Wanasundera, J. in Jayanetti v Land Reform Commission (supra) and re-iterated that it was a

right of the subject to challenge any act of the State from whichever organ it emanated and

compel it to justify its legality.

H.N.J.Perera, CJ. in the Full Bench decision of this Court in R Sampanthan and others v

Attorney-General and others, [SC FR 351/2018 and other applications SC minutes of 13th

56

December 2018] agreeing with the jurisprudence of this Court in Wijeyratne v Warnapala [SC

FR 305/2008 SC minutes of 22.9.2009], Premachandra v Major Montegu Jayawickrema [1994

2 SLR 90], Vasudeva Nanayakkara v Choksy [2008 1 SLR 134], Sugathapala Mendis v

Chandrika Kumaratunga [2008 2 SLR 339], Jayanetti v Land Reform Commission [1984 2

SLR 172] and Shanmugam Sivaraja v OIC Terrorisdt Investigation Division and others SC FR

15/2010, SC minutes of 27.07.2017 recognized that the jurisprudence of this Court under Article

12 of the Constitution had extended the scope of the said guarantee to encompass the protection

of Rule of Law.

Thus, this Court has recognized that when different organs of the State exercise the respective

powers attributed to them as the Sovereignty of the People, such organs exercise such powers on

behalf of the People and therefore, a duty is cast on State organs not to use such powers

arbitrarily or irrationally. This Court has through its decisions had developed the “Public Trust

Doctrine” by examining use of the discretionary power vested on executive and / or

administrative authorities, initially focusing on the protection of natural resources and

subsequently expanded to exclude arbitrariness in decisions where public authorities exercise

powers vested on the said organs, to ensure the said bodies exercise such powers to the ultimate

benefit of the people.

In Ravindra Kariyawasam v Central Environment Authority (Chunnakam case) - SC FR

141/2015 – SC minutes of 04.04.2019, where the petitioner alleged, pollution of the groundwater

making it unfit for human use, the Court held that the failure of the State agencies, i.e., CEA and

BOI to fulfil its statutory obligations was ‘a breach of the public trust’ reposed in them and the

Court held that the said agencies have violated the fundamental rights guaranteed by Article

12(1) of the Constitution, of the residents of Chunnakam as well as the Petitioner, a member of

the public.

Noble Resources International Pte Limited v. Minister of Power and Renewable Energy - SC

FR 394/2015 SC Minutes of 24.06.2016, is a unique case in which the Public Trust Doctrine was

applied by this Court, as the events that transpired, literally and metaphorically “shocked the

conscience of court”. The Petitioner claimed that the decision of the Standing Cabinet Appointed

Procurement Committee (SCAPC) not to award the tender for the supply of coal, to the petitioner

57

was unlawful and violative of petitioner’s fundamental rights and the Court granted the

Petitioner Leave to Proceed for the alleged violation of the petitioner’s fundamental rights

guaranteed in terms of Articles 12(1) and 14(1)(g) of the Constitution.

When the application was taken up for hearing, a preliminary objection was raised by the

respondents, that the petitioner company is a company registered in Singapore and was not a

registered company in Sri Lanka and has invoked the jurisdiction of this Court by itself without a

local agent, representative or an Attorney-at-Law enjoining him as a petitioner. The Court

nevertheless, decided to go into the merits of the case as ‘some of the events that took place in

the award of the tender shocked the conscience of the Court’ and the Court pronounced as

follows;

“The Court is mindful that the fundamental rights provisions in the Constitution

must be interpreted having regard to the constitutional objectives and goals and

in the light of the action taken by the Governmental Authority at a given point of

time. As it is essential to the maintenance of the rule of law that every organ of

the State must act within the limits of its power and carry out the duty imposed

upon it in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution and the law, the

Court cannot close its eyes and allow the actions of the State or the Public

Authority to go unchecked in its operations, in the public interest. If the Petitioner

with a good case is turned away, merely because he is not sufficiently affected or

the Petitioner has no “locus standi” to maintain this application, that means that

some Government Agency is left free to violate the law and this is not only

contrary to the public interest but also violate the Rule of Law, the object of

which is to protect the citizens from unlawful governmental actions. It will be a

travesty of justice if, having found as a fact that a fundamental right has been

infringed or is threatened to be infringed, the Court yet dismisses the application

on a preliminary objection raised by the Respondents. This Court has been given

power to grant relief as it may deem just and equitable. The Court therefore

decided to go into the merits of the case as some of the events that took place, in

the award of the tender to the 22nd Respondent shocks the conscience of the

58

Court, especially when the awarding of the tender involves public funds.”

(emphasis added)

Having considered the merits of the case, the Court came to the finding that the decisions made

by the SCAPC was outside its jurisdiction and therefore cannot be considered as a valid decision

and Sripavan, J. (as he then was) opined;

“The power of the State is conferred on the Members of the SCAPC and the PAB

to be held in trust for the benefit of the public. The Supreme Court being the

protector and guarantor of the fundamental rights cannot refuse to entertain an

application seeking protection against infringement of such rights. The Court

must regard it as its solemn duty to protect the fundamental rights jealously and

vigilantly. It has an important role to play not only preventing or remedying the

wrong or illegal exercise of power by the authority but has a duty to protect the

nation in directing it to act within the framework of the law and the

Constitution.” (emphasis added)

Though this Court dismissed this application in limine on the preliminary objection raised,

pertaining to maintainability of the application Sripavan, J. quoted with approval the words of

Md Faizal Karim J, in the case of SSA Bangladesh Ltd. v Engineer, Mahmudul Islam 9 BLC

(AD)(2004), that;

“The judiciary has an important role to play not only preventing or remedying the wrong

or illegal exercise of power by the authority but has a duty to guide the nation in shaping

its destiny within the framework of the law and the Constitution. The Court of Law would

always jealously guard against any abuse or misuse of power/authority by the State

functionary in dealing with the State property.” and went on to make directions,

considering the procedural flaws in the award of tender upon the basis, “...the award of

tender involved public funds, and the solemn duty of the Court to protect the Rule of

Law embodied in the Constitution in order to ensure its credibility in the faith of the

people.” (emphasis added)

Similarly, in the words of Tilakawardane, J. in her dissenting opinion in Vasudeva Nanayakkara

v Choksy and Others [2009] 2 SLR 1;

59

“The entire fabric of the Constitution mandates that the Rule of Law be the ultimate

framework of all acts carried out under the Constitution, including the acts of the

executive, the legislature and the judiciary.”.(at page 5)

The foregoing exemplifies the bounden duty that is cast on this Court to protect the Rule of Law

and jealously guard against the abuse and misuse of power and authority by the State and its

functionaries in dealing with public funds.

In Ajith C.S. Perera v Daya Gamage SC FR 273/2018, SC Minutes of 18.04.2019, the petitioner

complained to this Court of ‘continued inaction’ of the authorities to give effect to the

regulations made under the Protection of Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act No 28 of 1996.

The Court having been satisfied that there was no satisfactory or meaningful compliance with the

said regulations held, that the rights guaranteed under Article 12 (1) of the Constitution of the

petitioners and other persons with disability rights, have been violated by the State and its

agencies and opined as follows;

“…that the concept of human dignity, which is the entitlement of every human being, is at

the core of the fundamental rights enshrined in our Constitution. It is a fountainhead

from which these fundamental rights spring forth and array themselves in the

Constitution, for the protection of all the people of the country”

It is also pertinent to observe that Article 27(1) of the Constitution requires the President and the

Cabinet of Ministers in the governance of Sri Lanka to be guided by the Directive principles of

State Policy including (a) the full realization of the fundamental rights and freedom of all

persons and (b) realization by all citizens of an adequate standard of living for themselves and

their families including adequate food, clothing and housing, the continuous improvement of

living conditions and the full enjoyment of leisure and social and cultural opportunities.

In Sri Lanka the Supreme Court recognized that when the different organs of the State exercise

the respective powers attributed to them as the Sovereignty of the People such organs exercise

such powers on behalf of the People. Therefore, a duty is cast on State organs not to use such

powers arbitrarily or irrationally. This Court through its decisions had developed the “Public

60

Trust Doctrine” in examining use of discretionary power vested on executive and / or

administrative authorities. Initially the Court focused on the protection of natural resources as in

the Indian Supreme Court in M.C.Mehta v Kamal Nath [1997] 1 SCC 388. In the said case it

was observed that:

“The State is the trustee of all natural resources which are by nature meant for public

use and enjoyment. Public at large is the beneficiary of the sea-shore, running waters,

air, forests and ecological fragile lands. The State as a trustee is under a legal duty to

protect the natural resources. These resources meant for public use cannot be converted

into private ownership”.

The Supreme Court later expanded to exclude arbitrariness in decisions in instances where public

authorities exercise powers vested on them and ensure that they exercise such powers to the

ultimate benefit of the people. [vide Bandara and another v Premachandra and others (1994) 1

SLR 301, Jayawardena v Wijayatilake – (2001) 1 SLR 132]. It is also pertinent that this Court

had extended the doctrine of Public Trust to protect national resources from use of arbitrary

power. [vide Fernando v Sri Lanka Broadcasting Corporation (1996) 1 SLR 157, Mundy v

Central Environmental Authority (SC Appeal 58/2003, SC minutes of 20.01.2004, Watte

Gedara Wijebanda v Conservator General of Forests (2009) 1 SLR 337]

There is no dispute that the ‘corner stone’ or the ‘Grundnorm’ of our Constitution is the

Sovereignty of its People and this Court has time and time again held that unfettered discretion is

anathema to the Rule of Law on which our Constitution is founded.

In the case of Premachandra v Major Montague Jayawickrema (supra) at page 111, this Court

succinctly held “In Sri Lanka, however it is the Constitution which is supreme, and a violation of

the Constitution is prima facie a matter to be remedied by the Judiciary.”

In R Sampanthan and others (supra) having considered curses curiae and jurisprudence of this

Court it was held that in interpreting the provisions in the Constitution, the Court should adopt an

approach which enforces the Rule of Law. Furthermore, the Court held that our law does not

recognize that any public authority, whether they be President or an officer of the State or organ

of State, has unfettered or absolute discretion of power.

61

Whilst this Court in Fundamental Rights applications have always safeguarded and preserved the

relationship between Democracy, Rule of Law, Public Trust and Human Dignity this Court in its

Statutory Determinations too have recognised the said relationship.

In the Appropriation Bill of 2008, [Decisions of the Supreme Court on Parliamentary Bills 2007-

2009 Vol IX] this Court went onto hold that Parliament’s power of control over public finance is

exercised ‘in trust for the People’ and therefore ‘the process should be transparent and in the

public domain, so that People who remain Sovereign are informed as to the manner of control

exercised.’

In Assistance to and Protection of Victims of Crime and Witnesses Bill SC SD 1-6/2014

[Decisions of the Supreme Court on Parliamentary Bills 2014 Vol XII – 3] this Court opined that

“When considering the exercise of statutory power certain fundamental principles can never be

overlooked. The first is that our Constitution and System of Courts are founded on the rule of

law; secondly statutory power conferred for public purposes is conferred as if it were upon trust

and not absolutely”.

In the Inland Revenue (Amendment Bill) SC SD 63-64/2023, Hansard 05-09-2023 in dealing

with the issue of classifications in revenue matters, this Court recognized that “such measures

would be considered as inconsistent with Article 12 of the Constitution only if they are manifestly

unreasonable” and thus recognized its jurisdiction even to examine matters relating to revenue,

when such matters are based upon the principles of Public Trust.

Furthermore, this Court concluded its determination by observing as follows;

“[…] It was submitted that there had been corruption and mismanagement of public

funds which had led to the present economic predicament. […] This Court is exercising

its constitutional jurisdiction over the Bill. These are not matters which we can take into

consideration in this exercise. Nevertheless, we are mindful that this Court is the last

bulwark to protect the Rule of Law and prevent any breach of public trust. […] In

order to do so, the jurisdiction of this Court must be properly invoked in the

appropriate proceedings.” (emphasis added)

In the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill [SC SD 62-63/2023 Hansard of 10.11.2022] it was

opined,

62

“This Court shall continue to exercise its Constitutional role as the sentinel on the qui

vive over executive and administrative action.” (at page 22)

When we consider the jurisprudence of this Court it is clear that the scope and content of the

Right to Equality guaranteed by Article 12 of the Constitution has evolved with the passage of

time. Such evolution is in accord with the progressive changes that had taken place in other

jurisdictions such as in India. In its current form this Right guarantees a protection from arbitrary

exercise of power and discretion by state functionaries and enhances the Rule of Law. It further

requires State authorities to ensure that their conduct will not breach the trust placed on them and

make certain that public resources in their custody are protected and preserved for the

benefit of the people and not to be exhausted for political or personal benefit. Furthermore,

the exercise of discretionary powers in the decision-making process, should be guided by the

Directive Principles as recognized by the Constitution and callous disregard of such principles

will pollute decisions with arbitrariness. Thus, Rule of Law is not only rights and equality. It’s

about functionality and efficiency for sustainable economic development of the nation and all of

its People.

INACTION AND / OR OMMISSION TO ACT

In Janath S Vidanage and others v Pujith Jayasundara and others (Easter Sunday case), SC

FR 163/2019 and other applications (SC minutes of 12.01.2023) a full Bench of this Court

considered the Constitutional framework within which the Executive branch of the Government

performs its duties and responsibilities while examining the complaint of the petitioners that the

inaction of the President and other State officials led to the disastrous consequences including

destruction to life and property. Having examined the statutory frame work and the common law

principles governing the obligations of a Minister attached to his supervisory role over the

institutions assigned to him, the Court held that the inaction on the part of the Minister as well as

the State Officials, that led to the serious impact on the entire society, violated the rights

guaranteed under Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

63

In the Easter Sunday Case (supra) this Court observed that

“The heads of Department and responsible officers remain liable for the infractions of

not performing their duties assigned to them to safeguard the security and integrity of the

nation. The Minister becomes liable when he fails in his constitutional and common law

duties to have robust systems and mechanisms to protect and promote national security.

It is for this reason that there has to be constant supervision and control of his officials.

There must be structures and mechanisms which facilitate transparent exchange of

intelligence and information. A proper mechanism to acquaint himself with intelligence

and information would serve the Minister proper notice of intelligence and information

and such an absence of supervisory mechanism will expose the Minister to allegations of

failure of his constitutional, statutory and common law duties”. (at page 89)

This Court further proceeded to consider the relevant factors in deciding the required standard of

care when the liability is attributed due to inaction or omission. Court recognised inter alia

factors such as the magnitude of the risk, the cost and practicability of precautions, the social

value of the respondent’s activities and what reasonable man would have foreseen. The Court

cited with approval the following dictum in Blyth v Birmingham Waterworks [(1856) 11 Exch

781]

“the omission to do something which a reasonable man guided upon those considerations

which ordinarily regulate the conduct human affairs would do, or doing something which

a prudent and reasonable man would not do”.

PARLIAMENTARY SELECT COMMITTEE

The learned President’s Counsel for the 2nd and 2A respondents submitted that the instant

applications are futile and ought to be dismissed by this Court as a Parliamentary Select

Committee had been appointed to investigate into the matters that are also the subject matters

relating to which this Court will examine in determining these two applications. It is his

contention that it is the Parliament, which has full control over public finance, is now

investigating into the reasons for the economic setback through this select committee process and

such select committee is empowered to submit proposals and recommendations.

64

In this regard it is pertinent to observe that the petitioners in these two applications invoked the

jurisdiction of this Court as provided under Article 17 read with Article 126 of the Constitution.

Article 118 (b) of the Constitution recognises the Supreme Court’s jurisdiction to protect

fundamental rights. The Supreme Court is the highest and final Superior Court of record of the

Republic. Article 4(c) of the Constitution recognizes that the Parliament exercises people’s

judicial power through courts created and established or recognized by the Constitution or

created and established by law. However, the Parliament is empowered to exercise People’s

judicial power, directly, in regard to matters relating to the privileges, immunities and powers of

Parliament and of its Members, according to law. Therefore, there is no doubt or ambiguity as to

the power of Courts to exercise judicial power of the People in regard to all matters that are

recognized by law other than the specific instance excluded by Article 4(c). The Constitution

which is the Supreme law of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka assures that

independence of the judiciary as an intangible heritage that guarantees the dignity and well-being

of succeeding generations of the People of Sri Lanka.

This Court in its Determination in “Industrial Disputes (Special Provisions) Bill”, SC SD

30/2022, cited with approval the following passage from Blackstone (Blackstone's

Commentaries Vol. 1 at p. 269):

"In this distinct and separate existence of the judicial power in a peculiar body of men,

nominated indeed, but not removable at pleasure by the Crown, consists one main

preservative of the public liberty which cannot subsist long in any state, unless the

administration of common justice be, in some degree, separated both from the legislative

and also from the executive power. Were it joined with the legislative, the life, liberty and

property of the subject would be in the hands of arbitrary judges, whose decisions would

be then regulated only by their opinions, and not by any fundamental principles of law;

which though legislators may depart from, yet judges are bound to observe. Were it

joined with the executive, this union might soon be an overbalance for the legislative.”

65

This Court, further observed that:

“….except in regard to matters relating to the privileges, immunities and powers of

Parliament and of its Members, Parliament has only the power to provide for the

creation of courts, tribunals and institutions for the exercise of the judicial power of the

people. This judicial power can only be exercised by a judicial officer duly appointed

under the law.”

The manner in which the Parliament could replace or abolish or amend the powers, the

jurisdiction of any court other than of the Supreme Court is recognised by Article 105(2).

This Court in Ratnasiri Perera v Dissanayake [1992] 1 SLR 286 at 300 held:

“The Constitution now entrenches some of the jurisdictions of the Supreme Court and of

the Court of Appeal, precluding an erosion of such jurisdictions by ordinary law. Other

jurisdictions, however, can be taken away by ordinary law, provided of course that if they

are transferred to other bodies, the officers or members thereof must be appointed in

terms of Articles 114 and 170.”

Therefore, the only manner in which the Parliament could change the jurisdiction of the Supreme

Court is by way of an amendment to the Constitution and any deviation is a breach of the

doctrine of separation of powers. In this regard it is also pertinent to note that Standing Order

91(f) recognises the “sub judice” Rule in relation to proceedings in Parliament. Paragraphs

20.11 and 21.19 of Erskin May, online edition of the 25th print edition1 provides inter alia

Para 20.11 “The House has resolved that no matter awaiting adjudication by a court of law

(including a coroner's court or a Fatal Accident Inquiry) – ie matters sub judice – should be

brought before it. This covers both the content of Members' speeches and the subject matter of

motions and questions. The resolution means that matters currently before the courts cannot be

raised in a motion or amendment save where legislation is under consideration”.

Para 21.19 “Subject to the discretion of the Chair and to the right of the House to legislate on

any matter or to discuss any matters of delegated legislation, matters awaiting the adjudication

of a court of law should not be brought forward in debate.”

1 (https://erskinemay.parliament.uk/)

66

The applicability of this Rule to the select committees in the United Kingdom is discussed in

para 38.25 which reads:

“The resolution of the House prescribing its practice with regard to matters that are

awaiting judgment in the courts (see paras 20.11, 21.19) includes proceedings in select

committees. The discretion available to the Chair should be exercised only in exceptional

circumstances and, if time allows, following consultation with the Speaker. Committees

have suspended inquiries in progress because a witness had been charged with criminal

offences related to the subject-matter of the inquiry or have decided not to take evidence

from particular witnesses in the course of an inquiry because the committee had been

informed that the witnesses would also be witnesses in impending criminal or civil

proceedings. The bar does not, however, operate when committees are deliberating, since

they do so in private, nor when evidence is being taken in private and, since there is no

restriction on the right of the House to legislate, the proceedings of a select committee on

a bill need not be affected by it”

According to the material submitted to this Court, the “Select Committee of Parliament to

Investigate Causes for Financial Bankruptcy declared by the Government and to report to

Parliament and submit its proposals and recommendations in this regard” had been appointed by

Parliament on 19th January 2023 whereas the petitioners, invoked the jurisdiction of this Court in

June 2022 and this Court having heard all parties granted leave to proceed on 7th October 2022.

Therefore, by the time the select committee was appointed in Parliament, the petitioners had

already invoked the jurisdiction of this Court and leave to proceed had been granted. As

discussed hereinbefore, the jurisdiction vested by the Constitution on this Court under no

circumstances could be curtailed or abridged by the Select Committee process of Parliament.

Hence, we are of the view that the submission of the learned President’s Counsel on this issue is

devoid of any merit.

67

JURISDICTION OF THE COURT

One of the main complaints of the petitioners in these instant applications is that one or more of

the respondents failed to take necessary remedial measures having come to know the adverse

consequences to the economy due to the tax revisions introduced in December 2019. They

contend that such inaction on the part of the State functionaries taken together with the inaction

to seek assistance from the IMF in a timely manner contributed heavily to the economic collapse

which caused immense hardships and damage to persons and property, including death of

persons. They contend that such inaction infringed the Right to Equality guaranteed under

Article 12 of the Constitution.

In our view the examination of this contention of the petitioners does not amount to an

examination of the policies of the Government. In our view the jurisprudence developed with

the passage of time as discussed hereinbefore requires the Court to exercise its jurisdiction vested

under Article 126 of the Constitution and examine whether the executive and/or administrative

authorities have acted arbitrarily and / or irrationally and / or with manifest unreasonableness and

thereby breached the Public Trust and Rule of Law, in situations where the petitioners allege an

infringement of the right to equality guaranteed by Article 12 of the Constitution. Therefore, we

are not inclined to accept the submission that the Court lacks jurisdiction on the basis of “public

policy”, “economic policy” or “doctrine of political question”.

In addition to the main objections raised on behalf of the respondents, that are discussed

hereinbefore, regarding the maintainability of these applications, several other objections were

raised, which the learned counsel argued, had made the petitions misconceived in law and should

be dismissed for those reasons. This Court gave its mind to those objections and finds no merit in

any of them. Accordingly, we are of the view that the petitions are valid and can be proceeded

with.

RESPONDENTS AGAINST WHOM LEAVE TO PROCEED GRANTED

Gotabaya Rajapaksa - 32A respondent – assumed duties as the President on 18th November 2019,

after being declared elected to the Office of the President following the resounding victory at the

election held on 16th November 2019. Under Article 4(b) of the Constitution the executive power

68

of the People, including the defence of Sri Lanka, is exercised by the President, elected by the

People. As held by this Court, it is the People’s executive power that the President is exercising

on behalf of the People. The President holds executive powers in trust for the People and needs

to exercise such powers with due regard to rule of law. The President is the Head of the Cabinet

of Ministers which is charged with the direction and control of the Government. Among the

powers and functions of the President, the act of appointing the Prime Minister and other

Ministers of the Cabinet of Ministers is recognised under Article 33(f) of the Constitution. On

21st November 2019, a new Government was formed by the 32A respondent. Mahinda

Rajapakse – 2nd respondent - was appointed as the Prime Minister of the new Government on 21st

November 2019 and the Cabinet of Ministers of the new Government was appointed on the 22nd

November 2019. Cabinet portfolio of Defence in the newly formed Government was held by the

32A respondent.

P.B.Jayasundera – 38th respondent – assumed duties as the Secretary to the President on 19th

November 2019 and he resigned on 22nd January 2022. The President is empowered to appoint

the Secretary, as provided under Article 41 (1) of the Constitution.

Mahinda Rajapaksa – 2nd respondent - was appointed Minister of Finance, Economy and Policy

Development on 21st November 2019. Scope of responsibilities attached to the Minister can be

derived from the subjects and functions assigned by the President in accordance with the

Constitution. Once the subjects and functions are assigned, the responsibility lies with the

Minister to ensure that the relevant duties are performed and goals are achieved through the

institutions that are placed under the supervision and control of the Minister. The Central Bank

of Sri Lanka is one of the institutions that is placed under the supervision of the Minister of

Finance. Some of the duties and functions attributed to the Minister of Finance include:

● Formulation, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of policies, programmes and

projects; in relation to Public Finance, Taxation and Economic Affairs in accordance with

the National Policy Plan and the subject of the departments, specified statutory

institutions and laws and regulations

● Formulation of policies relating to public finance and national revenue preparation of the

legal framework and operation of the other programmes

69

● Formulation of public finance and macro finance management policies and their

operation and co-ordination

● Liaison with international development finance institutions, organizations and

international financial market.

● Preparation of Annual Budget, implementation, enforcement of financial control,

implementation and financial resources management.

● Implementation of National Taxation policies, strengthening the institutional structure

and effective utilization of state revenue

● Formulating National Policies in order to achieve National Economic and Social

Development Goals

● Supervising all specified institutions and matters relating to all subjects assigned to such

institutions.

It is also pertinent to note that the Monetary Law Act No 58 of 1949 and several other fiscal

statutes including Value Added Tax Act No 14 of 2002 and Inland Revenue Act No 10 of 2006

are among the statutes that are to be implemented by the Minister of Finance. (vide Gazette

Extraordinary No 2153/12 dated 10 December 2019).

Examination of these duties and functions clearly show that key features in economic

development and financial management are placed under the responsibility of the Minister of

Finance. This responsibility requires the Minister to establish proper mechanisms of supervision

and to obtain necessary data and information from the institutions that are placed under his

supervision. Such flow of data and information is of utmost importance to ensure that the powers

vested on him are exercised to the benefit of the people and desist from arbitrary exercise of

power. Even though, the duties and functions assigned to the Minister of Finance have been

revised time to time during the period relevant to these applications, core duties, institutions

placed under the supervision of the Minister including the Central Bank of Sri Lanka and core

statutes including Monetary Law Act and other fiscal statutes had remained under him without a

change.

Basil Rajapaksa – 2A respondent – replaced the 2nd respondent and assumed duties on 08th July

2021 as the Minister of Finance. Mahinda Rajapaksa (2nd respondent) was sworn in as Minister

of Economic Policies and Planning on the same day. The 2A respondent functioned as the

70

Minister of Finance till 04th April 2022. It is pertinent to note that the 2A respondent prior to

assuming duties as the Minister of Finance in July 2021, functioned as the Chairman of the

Presidential Task Force on Economic Revival and Poverty Alleviation.

Members of the Cabinet of Ministers – 03rd to the 27th respondents in SC FR 195/2022

S.R.Attygalle – 31st respondent – was appointed Secretary to the Treasury and Ministry of

Finance on 19th November 2019. Ex Officio he is a member of the Monetary Board as per

section 8(2) of the Monetary Law. Under Article 51(2)(b) of the Constitution the Secretary

exercises supervision over the Departments and other institutions in charge of the Minister,

subject to direction and control of the Minister. Being an ex officio member of the Monetary

Board, his responsibility is explained in the Exter Report. Accordingly, it is observed that:

“The ideal which it is hoped that the proposed law will achieve is one in which there will

be continuous and constructive co-operation between the Monetary Board and the

Government. The principal instrument for achieving this co-operation should be the

Permanent Secretary to the Ministry of Finance whose membership on the Board will

ensure at all times that his Minister’s views will be made known to the other members of

the Board. The effectiveness of the co-operation and co-ordination between the Board

and the Government will depend more upon the men occupying the key positions at

particular times than upon any legal formula no matter how carefully or elaborately it

might be worked out. A relationship as complex and sometimes as delicate as this one is

certain to be, cannot be established full-blown by a piece of legislation. It must be the

result as in other countries of years of experience and the slow growth of political

conventions” (page 13 Exter Report).

The 31st respondent resigned on 07th April 2022.

W.D.Lakshman – 30th respondent – assumed duties as Governor of the Central Bank on 24th

December 2019 and resigned on 14th September 2021. Section 8(1) of the Monetary Law Act

provides for the Governor of the Central Bank to be the Chairman of the Monetary Board.

71

Ajith Nivard Cabraal – 29th respondent – assumed duties as Governor of the Central Bank on 15th

September 2021 and resigned on 04th April 2022. Prior to him assuming duties as the Governor

this respondent functioned as the State Minister of Finance, Capital Markets and State Enterprise

Reforms.

Samantha Kumarasinghe – 32nd respondent – was an appointed member of the Monetary Board.

He functioned in this capacity from 29th June 2020 to 31st March 2022.

The Monetary Board of the Central Bank– 28th respondent – is a statutory body created under the

Monetary Law Act. Section 9(1) recognizes that the Monetary Board is a body corporate with

perpetual succession. Under section 5 of the Monetary Law Act, the Central Bank is established

as the authority responsible for the administration and regulation of the monetary and banking

system. The Central Bank is charged with the duty of regulating the supply, availability, cost and

international exchange of money to secure objects including the stabilization of domestic

monetary values, determining the par value of the Sri Lankan Rupee and the preservation of the

par value and preservation of the stability of the exchange rate when there is no determination on

the par value. Furthermore, the Central Bank is recognized as the fiscal agent, banker and

financial adviser of the Government.

One of the main duties of the Central bank in the context of its duty to secure international

monetary stabilization is the duty to endeavor to maintain among the assets of the Central Bank

an international reserve adequate to meet any foreseeable deficits in the international

balance of payments. Section 66(2) of the Monetary Law Act provides that

“In judging the adequacy of the International Reserve, the Monetary Board shall be

guided by the estimates of prospective receipts and payments of foreign exchange by Sri

Lanka; by the volume and maturity of the Central Bank’s own liabilities in foreign

currencies; and, in so far as they are known or can be estimated, by the volume and

maturity of the foreign exchange assets and liabilities of the Government and of banking

institutions and other persons in Sri Lanka. So long as any part of the foreign currency

assets of Sri Lanka are held in currencies which are not freely convertible by the Central

Bank, whether directly or indirectly, into special drawing rights or such other common

72

denominator prescribed by the International Monetary Fund or into foreign currencies

freely usable in international transactions, or are frozen, the Monetary Board shall also

take this factor into account in judging the adequacy of the International Reserve of the

Central Bank”.

TAX REVISION AND DOWNGRADING BY RATING AGENCIES

In a note to the Cabinet by the 32A respondent on 26th November 2019, had recommended

implementation as a matter of priority a series of measures to revise taxes. These proposals to

lower taxes had been introduced to give effect to an election pledge to “restructure and introduce

a simplified tax mechanism”. In the note to the Cabinet, it was acknowledged that a reduction of

Government revenue would take place as a result of such revisions. However, the 32A

respondent had expressed the view that “potential benefit from re-engineering the tax system will

eventually revive revenue”. In the same note, the 32A respondent had urged the line ministries

and agencies to go slow on public spending to manage fiscal imbalance. He also urged that the

government expenditure incurred by semi government agencies and State Owned Enterprises

(SOEs) should also be curtailed as taxes on goods and services are to be lowered. The 32A

respondent in this Note to the Cabinet titled “An Economic Revival Initiative” recommended

implementation of a series of measures as a matter of priority “pending parliamentary approval

for amendments to the relevant tax statutes”. These measures included inter alia bringing down

the rate of VAT from 15% to 8% and to do away the 2% NBT with effect from 1st December

2019. In addition, the threshold for VAT liability was raised from 12 million per annum to 300

million per annum on the turnover. Further, tourism business was to be treated as an export and

VAT would be zero rated provided 60 % of the turnover is sourced from locally. Further tax

concessions were offered to the construction industry by reducing the tax liability to 14% from

the existing rate of 28%. Religious institutions were removed from tax liability and further the

threshold for collection of tax through PAYE was raised from all inclusive monthly income of

Rs 150,000.00 to Rs 250,000/-.

The 32A respondent requested the Minister of Finance, Economy and Policy Development to

take appropriate action to implement this programme. The 2nd respondent, who held the

portfolio of Finance, Economy and Policy Development by his observations to the Cabinet

agreed with the said proposals. It was envisaged that such tax revisions would create a conducive

73

environment for businesses and a positive impact on all prices. It is pertinent to note that the 38th

respondent had been present on invitation at the deliberations of the Cabinet and had explained

the desirable immediate impact on the economy and the well-being of the People by the

implementation of the proposed measures. The Cabinet of Ministers had granted the approval to

implement these proposals.

It is pertinent to observe that Article 148 of the Constitution provides that “Parliament shall

have full control over public finance. No tax, rate or any other levy shall be imposed by any local

authority or any other public authority, except by or under the authority of a law passed by

Parliament or of any existing law”. However, these proposals had been implemented through an

administrative mechanism by way of public notices released by the Commissioner General of

Inland Revenue in early 2020 whereas the necessary legislation had been introduced only in mid

2021. It is significant to note that the Commissioner General of Inland Revenue has failed to

identify the basis on which he derived authority to issue such notices but merely states that such

notices were issued either on the instructions of the Ministry of Finance or as instructed by the

Ministry of Finance as approved by the Cabinet of Ministers.

The income from taxes remains a significant portion of government revenue and the reduction of

taxes would inevitably result in depletion of government revenue. Therefore, an important issue

that arises in this regard is whether a credible mechanism was introduced parallel to the

introduction of tax reductions and whether the reductions did in fact bring in the expected results.

The Auditor-General observes, that the statistics does not show such a positive change in prices

indices and inflation rate, as expected by these changes. The Inland Revenue Department had

estimated the potential loss from tax income resulting from the proposed tax for the year 2020

amounts to 493,394 million rupees. The loss of government revenue due to the measures referred

to resulted in an unmanageable budget deficit. It is to be noted that the country had been facing

the phenomenon of budget deficits over a considerable period and the respondents should have

been aware of this fact.

Furthermore, a major adverse consequence that resulted directly from the tax revisions was

lowering of the country’s credit rating by the international agencies. This remains an immediate

outcome from the tax revisions introduced in late 2019. Fitch Ratings downgraded Sri Lanka

from B stable to B negative on 18th December 2019. It is uncontroverted that the Fitch Rating by

74

27th September 2019 remained B Stable. Standard & Poor's downgraded the country rating from

B stable to B negative on 14th January 2020. Fitch Ratings, directly attributed the downgrading to

the sweeping tax cuts introduced in late 2019. It is recognised that such downgrading reflects the

debt sustainability position of the country. This trend continued unabated, throughout the next

two years (2020 and 2021) resulting in further gradual downgrading of credit rating from CCC to

CC and finally reaching C. On 19th May 2022 it culminated in a “restricted default”. According

to the Fitch Ratings “B” represents the presence of material default with a limited margin of

safety, “CCC'' represents a substantial credit risk with a very low margin for safety and default is

a real possibility, “CC” reflects a very high levels of credit risk and a default of some kind

appears probable and “C” reflects “a default or default like process had begun, or the issuer is in

standstill, or for a closed funding vehicle, payment capacity is irrevocably impaired”. Ratings by

two other agencies namely Moody’s Investor Service and Standard & Poor’s also reflect a

similar pattern of downgrading. The main impact of such downgrading was the loss of access to

capital markets at reasonable costs which resulted in drying up foreign exchange inflows from

such sources.

When one examines the trend in downgrading by foreign rating agencies, it makes clear that

remedial measures were mandatory, if the trend was to be reversed and to take control of the

situation. These downgradings by multiple agencies have had a serious impact on the strength

and the capacity to obtain foreign assistance and to attract foreign investment. The situation that

prevailed had the obvious result in the depletion of foreign reserves deeply, affecting the

capacity of importation of essentials such as fuel, gas, medicines and food. Therefore, taking

remedial measures to reverse the trend of downgrading was of paramount importance. However,

the reaction to these downgradings reflect the resistance to accept the errors or the mistakes and

to take immediate steps to remedy the situation. The response of the Government to the

downgradings had been confrontational without seeking a way out. The Ministry of Finance and

the Central Bank through public statements released from September 2020 had made an attempt

to criticise these downgradings and had refused to accept them. It is pertinent to note at this point

that the Gross Official Reserves which stood at USD 7,780.08 million as at 31st October 2019

had decreased to USD 5,555 million by November 2020. It had further depleted to USD 2362

million in January 2022.

75

It is apparent that the continued inaction to reintroduce and/or to raise taxes and regain the

government revenue that was lost, brought about an adverse impact on the economy which had a

domino effect on the entire social fabric.

It is also important to examine these events in the context of another factor. The Government of

Sri Lanka in June 2016 had entered into an agreement with the International Monetary Fund

(IMF) for an Extended Fund Facility (EFF). Through this process the total funds that were made

available amounts to USD 1.5 billion. In May 2019, the Executive Board of the IMF approved an

extension of the arrangement by an additional year spanning up to June 2020 with rephasing of

remaining disbursements. In October 2019, by a letter of intent signed by the Minister of Finance

and the Governor of the Central Bank had requested the completion of the sixth review and the

disbursement of the 7th instalment under the programme. Through this letter of intent, a request

was also made for waivers on non-observance of certain targets. Furthermore, it was emphasised

that the Government will continue to consult in advance with the Fund on adoption of new

measures or revisions of the policies. On 01st November 2019, the Executive Board of the IMF

completed the sixth review of economic performance under the programme and the 7th

instalment of USD 164 million was released making a total of USD 1.31 billion under the

arrangement. The final instalment was expected to be released on 03rd April 2020 upon the

completion of the seventh review and continuous performance criteria. However, there is no

material available to indicate that the Government pursued the final instalment scheduled to be

disbursed in April 2020. There had been a visit to Sri Lanka by the IMF Staff during the period

29th January 2020 to 7th February 2020 to meet with the new administration and to discuss its

policy agenda. Through a press release the preliminary findings of the visit were conveyed. One

of the findings of the visit was that the primary deficit could widen further in 2020 due to newly

implemented tax cuts and exemptions and two other factors. In view of the risks to debt

sustainability and large refinancing needs it was recognised that renewed efforts to advance

fiscal consolidation was essential.

In this context we will examine the submissions of the learned Counsel for the respondents. They

contended that reversing tax cuts was delayed due to the adverse impact of the pandemic. It was

their contention that it was impractical to have raised taxes at a time there were restricted

economic activity due to the pandemic. Furthermore, they contended that no extra revenue could

76

have been collected even if taxes were revised. However, it is pertinent to observe that the

Parliamentary authority for most of the tax revisions introduced in late December 2019 was

granted by way of legislation one and half years after the tax revisions were introduced. [Value

Added Tax (Amendment) Act no 9 of 2021 and Inland Revenue (Amendment) Act no 10 of

2021]. Therefore, by the time these Bills were presented in Parliament by the Executive, the

adverse repercussions on the economy due to the pandemic as well as due to the tax revisions

that took place in December 2019 were apparent. Yet, no steps were taken to reassess and

reconsider the grave repercussions of the tax revisions on the economy. Continued efforts to

move forward ignoring the adverse repercussions, in our view is both irrational and arbitrary.

We observe that no adequate steps had been taken to remedy the adverse repercussions on the

deficit due to loss of revenue following the tax revisions, in a timely manner even when it was

apparent that the changes failed to bring the expected positive outcomes. Such failure heavily

contributed and had a domino effect on the economy which ultimately collapsed bringing in

serious hardships to the entire society. The Governor of the Central Bank in his report submitted

to the Minister of Finance on 15th September 2020 had drawn the attention of the Minister to the

fact that the IMF raised concerns on debt sustainability during the discussions to obtain

emergency financing and had proposed certain revisions in the tax regime with a view to

enhance government revenue while highlighting the negative results following the changes made

to collection of tax through PAYE.

It is pertinent to note, that when the tax revisions were introduced in December 2019, there had

been no consultations or discussions with the officials of the Central Bank or the Monetary

Board. Failure to embark on a study relating to the tax revisions and the possible adverse impact

it would have on the ongoing Extended Fund Facility arrangement with the IMF, cannot be

comprehended. The responsibility for the failure to complete the IMF facility that was in force

from 2016 rests on the introduction of tax revisions in late 2019. The Government failed to

engage in any consultation with the IMF as agreed upon through its letter of intent based on

which the 7th EFF instalment was released, before introducing sweeping tax reforms.

We are of the view that the 32A respondent as the person who introduced these tax revisions as

one of his election pledges and the 2nd respondent who undertook the responsibility to implement

those proposals in his capacity as the Minister of Finance, Economy and Policy Development

77

had the responsibility to follow up and examine whether the changes made have produced the

results envisaged. When the 2nd respondent relinquished duties as Minister of Finance and the 2A

respondent assumed duties as the Minister of Finance on 08th July 2022, this responsibility

shifted to him. We also observe that the 38th respondent who had played a major role in

introducing the proposal for tax revision to the Cabinet of Ministers also had a duty to follow up

to see whether the tax revisions have brought in the desired results or whether any adverse

impact was caused to the economy. If they embarked on such an inquiry, they would have had

the opportunity to observe the adverse consequences that had flown as a result of these changes.

In our view they also had the responsibility to take remedial measures on priority basis without

letting the situation aggravate. Furthermore, as observed hereinbefore, by the Governor’s report

submitted to the 2nd respondent (15th September 2020) the attention of the 2nd respondent was

drawn on the grave consequences of the tax revisions and the need to bring in changes to

increase government revenue.

In our view, the continued inaction and callous disregard to take remedial measures on the part

of the 2nd (Mahinda Rajapaksa), 2A (Basil Rajapaksa), 32A (Gotabaya Rajapaksa) and 38th

(P.B.Jayasundera) respondents is arbitrary and irrational and they had breached the public trust

reposed in them by the People.

DEPLETION OF GROSS OFFICIAL RESERVES AND SEEKING ASSISTENCE FROM

THE IMF

As discussed hereinbefore, the Government had entered into an Extended Fund Facility

programme with the IMF in 2016 and the penultimate tranche was received in early November

2019. The last tranche was due in April 2020 after a review in December 2019. It was in October

2019 the Minister of Finance and the Governor of the Central Bank in the letter of intent signed

by them stated that the Government will continue to consult in advance with the IMF, if any new

measures or a change or revision of the policies are to be adopted. The Executive Board of the

IMF thereafter approved the release of the penultimate tranche having satisfied with the progress

made by Sri Lanka. The Governor of the Central Bank in the “Road Map 2020” delivered on 06th

January 2020 had recognised “the continuation of the EFF programme with the IMF is likely to

be instrumental in supporting external sector stability in the medium term”. However, in

December 2019, no steps had been taken to request the release of the last tranche or to engage in

78

negotiations and/or any consultation with the IMF after the introduction of tax revisions. No such

steps had been taken even at the IMF staff visit from January 29th to 7th February, 2020.

In this background on 08th April 2020 the 38th respondent had communicated with the Managing

Director of the IMF and had requested assistance in the form of Rapid Financing Instrument

(RFI). In this letter the adverse impact on the economy due to the pandemic was highlighted and

it was acknowledged that the “sharp decline in the economic growth, fiscal revenue and foreign

exchange receipts would create a large and urgent fiscal and balance of payment needs”.

Furthermore, a suggestion to replace the current Extended Fund Facility arrangement with the

requested Rapid Financing Instrument was also made. In the same letter it was said that Sri

Lanka will be requesting additional support from other development partners, particularly Japan,

the People’s Republic of China, the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank.

In response to the request made by the 38th Respondent, the Director of the Asia Pacific

Department of the IMF while reaffirming the commitment to support Sri Lanka had observed

that the particular economic challenges may require additional time and coordination among

relevant parties including other International Financing Institutions. He had further said that he

and his staff would do their utmost to process the request and to follow up on the intention to

replace the current Extended Fund Facility arrangement with the Rapid Finance Instrument. The

Auditor General has not found any material indicating a follow up on this request by the

Government. However, the 38th respondent had referred to a series of meetings and

correspondence as follow up steps to the initial request. Nonetheless, this request had not

brought any positive results as there was no follow up response acceptable to the IMF on their

concerns as to how the key requirements including policies to continue ensuring debt

sustainability, concerns on balance of payment challenges and preserving international reserves,

would be fulfilled.

The Auditor General had observed that a major change had taken place to the economic policies

relating to the Government’s tax income set out in the letter of intent sent to the IMF in October

2019 under the hands of the Minister of Finance and the Governor of Central Bank, within a

month. This is a clear instance where the sudden departure or deviation of commitments and

undertakings with the international organisation resulted in consequences detrimental to the

country.

79

It is pertinent to observe that the last tranche of the EFF that was due in April 2020 could have

been secured if either the policies agreed with the IMF in obtaining the EFF in 2016 and

reiterated in the October 2019 letter of intent were carried forward as agreed or if the tax

revisions had been introduced in consultation with the IMF, as assured by the letter of intent.

Such a scenario would not only have paved the way for the inflow of foreign exchange and

enhance foreign reserves but have preserved ratings without being downgraded. This would have

created an environment conducive for foreign investment and other sources of foreign funds.

The Auditor General had observed that there is no material to indicate whether any discussion

and/or deliberations took place between the President, Finance Minister, Central Bank and its

officials as to whether the Government is continuing with the EFF or not. It appears that there

had been no decision based on a proper study on the possible repercussions of abandoning the

programme. There is no indication that any discussion had taken place on any reasons as to why

the continuation up to obtaining the last tranche has adverse consequences or possible ill-effects

to the economy. In this background the inaction to take necessary steps to obtain the last tranche

of the IMF facility which was in operation since 2016 is irrational and arbitrary. In this regard it

is also pertinent to observe that since 1965 Sri Lanka had entered into agreements with the IMF

to obtain funds from its Extended Fund Facility Programme in 1979, 1991, 2003 and in 2016 and

the Government had drawn funds agreed in the said programmes and completed them other than

in 2016. Furthermore, in 2003 funds from an Extended Fund Facility as well as from an

Extended Credit Facility have been drawn fully.

On 4th August 2020, the 30th respondent by his report has drawn the attention of the 2nd

respondent on multiple issues relating to the status of the economy and challenges envisaged due

to many reasons. Downgrading by the rating agencies due to the growing concerns on debt

sustainability, possibility of further downgrading on the basis that the economic growth and the

growth of foreign currency earnings are not on par with the rising debt stock, in the event

planned funding did not materialize were highlighted in the said report. Furthermore, the

importance of active engagement with major multilateral and bilateral agencies was highlighted

while observing that loans from such agencies are likely to follow an IMF facility. This report

further predicted the depletion of foreign reserves to critical levels in 2020 due to large foreign

debt service payments falling due in the period ahead and deterioration of confidence and

80

appetite for Sri Lanka’s equity and bond markets. This report further highlighted the urgent need

to secure foreign financing in two months and the possibility of triggering the automatic

prepayment clauses in project loan agreements in the event of a failure to secure such financing

in a timely manner.

This report had been compiled by the 30th Respondent in compliance with section 68 (1) (b) of

the Monetary Law. Section 68(1)(b) reads as follows:

Section 68 (1) Whenever the Monetary Board anticipates that there may develop

a deficit in the international balance of payments of such magnitude as to

cause a serious decline in the international Reserve, or whenever there is

an imminent threat of a serious decline in the International Reserve, or

whenever the International Reserve actually falls to a level which the

board considers to be a threat to the international stability of the Sri Lanka

rupee, or whenever international payments or remittances are being made

which in the opinion of the board constitute an actual or a potential threat

to such stability or are prejudicial to the national welfare, it shall be the

duty of the board ……..

(b) To submit to the Minister in Charge of the Subject of Finance a

detailed report which shall include, as a minimum, an analysis of

i. The nature, causes, and magnitude of the actual or potential

threat to the international stability of the Sri Lanka rupee; and

ii. The measure which the board has already taken, and the further

monetary, fiscal or administrative measures which it proposes

to take or recommends for adoption by the Government.

Eight months from the initial report, on 06th April 2021, the 30th respondent has submitted

another report to the 2nd respondent under section 64(3) and 68(2) of the Monetary Law. In the

said report the 30th respondent had set out the challenges due to the pandemic as well as the

bleak situation in the domestic economy. In the said report challenges faced by the Central Bank

due to decline of official reserves were described and emphasised the need for the Government

to secure adequate foreign financing on an urgent basis.

81

Furthermore, it is said that the Central Bank is actively working with the Government to

facilitate enhancing non-debt sources of foreign exchange inflow in view of “the Government’s

stance not to approach the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for emergency financing.”

(emphasis added). This report further provided a detailed account on the depleted foreign

exchange reserves and the need to secure sufficient inflows. While recognizing positive results of

facilities provided by certain agencies such as People’s Bank of China, Asian Infrastructure

Investment Bank, China Development Bank, Reserve Bank of India and SAARCFINANCE in

foreign exchange inflows, the report in no uncertain terms emphasised that;

“these inflows are barely sufficient to finance the remaining debt service obligations and

the likely deficit in the balance of payments in 2021. Furthermore, these facilities

provide only temporary relief, as debt service payments remain large over the near to

medium term. Therefore, the Government’s foreign currency debt service challenge is

considerable, particularly in the context of sovereign rating downgrades by all three

credit rating agencies in 2020. These downgrades have reduced country’s ability to

access the international capital markets at a reasonable cost”.

This statutory report from the 30th respondent to the 2nd respondent dated 06th April 2021, needs

to be examined along with a development that had taken place within the Monetary Board. The

Monetary Board had established two Committees to monitor the external debt situation. One

such committee namely External Debt Monitoring Committee (DEDMC) was led by the Deputy

Governor and the other namely Monetary Board External Debt Monitoring Committee

(MBEDMC) was chaired by the 32B respondent and 32C respondent has functioned as the Vice

Chairman. This Committee comprised of three Deputy Governors and five other officers of the

Central Bank. The MBEDMC after its first two meetings had submitted a report titled “Note on

the views of the Monetary Board Level External Debt Monitoring Committee on the Need for a

Close Engagement with the International Monetary Fund” to the 30th respondent on 02nd

February 2021. In this report having set out the decline of foreign reserves to USD 4.8 billion by

end January had predicted that the reserves will further decline to USD 4 billion by end March

based on the confirmed projected inflows and outflows. It is the first time that reserves had

declined below USD 5 billion after 2009. The report had further detailed the concerns raised by

and the reluctance showed by different sources of foreign funding agencies to continue with any

82

funding facilities to Sri Lanka, in the absence of an IMF intervention. Having set out the actual

situation the Committee has said “initiating active negotiations with IMF may well be necessary

to rebuild the confidence of the international investor and financial sector community on Sri

Lanka”. Having expressed this view the Committee had observed a possible change of policy

approaches by the IMF and commented that “it may be possible to arrive at an agreement with

the IMF to allow the new economic model that is currently being pursued by the Government to

continue with little adjustment and without being subject to standard IMF conditionality and

policy prescriptions”.

Having laid out all these background facts, the Committee in no uncertain terms had highlighted

the need for an early engagement with the IMF. It had further said that “the MBEDMC and

DEDMC strongly agree on this requirement in order to ensure that external debt service

obligations are met while maintaining adequate levels of gross official reserves and exchange

rate stability, thereby preserving macroeconomic stability and financial system stability”.

The 30th respondent at the Monetary Board meeting held on 03rd February 2021 at the discussion

on “The impending acute foreign exchange shortfall as reflected in the estimated steady decline

in official reserves and related challenges” had informed the Board the fact that the MBEDMC

has submitted a report with several suggestions. However, he had suggested considering a few

other measures relating to forex inflows. Furthermore, he had requested the 31st respondent, (the

Secretary to the Treasury who was an, ex-officio member of the Monetary Board) to outline the

sources of foreign exchange inflows that are in the pipeline. The 31st respondent thereafter had

listed out five expected sources of inflows including divesting of EPF holding in West Coast

Power (Pvt) Ltd, another investment in a hotel project and facilities from China Development

Bank, People’s Bank of China and Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank.

The 30th respondent thereafter had suggested to review the progress in those anticipated inflows

by the end of March 2021 and thereafter to consider making appropriate proposals to the

Government, if necessary. However, the Deputy Governor(S) observed the difficulty to

accurately estimate the volume of inflows due to the exceptional global situation and he

expressed the view that negotiations for borrowing facilities should commence without delay if

funds are to be received in a few months. Both the 32C respondent and Deputy Governor(N) had

emphasised that it is not the quantum of funding that can be obtained from the IMF but the

83

restoration of the investor confidence due to an engagement with the IMF is the key factor. It

was further pointed out that even inflows from many bilateral agencies are also conditional upon

Sri Lanka having an engagement with the IMF. Furthermore, the 32C respondent had said that

necessary measures should be taken as a matter of urgency without deferring the process to end

of March. However, at these discussions the 31st respondent had remarked that “obtaining USD

165 million from IMF will not be the final solution” and had further said that “since the

Government policy is not to go to the IMF, as officials we have to abide by it". He had

emphasised that other means of inflows need to be considered.

These discussions that took place at the Monetary Board meeting held on 03rd February 2021

explains the position taken up by the 30th respondent in his statutory report dated 06th April 2021.

It is reasonable to conclude that the 30th respondent had been influenced by the comments made

by the 31st respondent that the Government’s policy is not to seek the assistance of the IMF.

Therefore, the 30th respondent had formulated his recommendations on the premise that there is a

Government Policy not to seek assistance from the IMF. However, in this regard, it is pertinent

to observe that there had been no cabinet decision by April 2021 not to seek assistance from the

IMF. There is no material before this Court to conclude that such policy had been developed as

the policy of the Government having considered advantages and disadvantages based on all

material facts. It is the Cabinet of Ministers who is charged with the duty of direction and control

of the Government.

Minutes of the meeting of the Monetary Board held on 21st April 2021 reveal that both the 30th

and the 32nd respondent had expressed the view that their personal opinion as well as the policy

of the Government is to move away from the IMF.

At the said meeting the 32nd respondent remarked that he personally felt that “majority of the

Central Bank officials feel that we should go to the IMF”. The 32C respondent while noting

that 170 countries have already gone to the IMF to overcome the impact of pandemic that several

Central Banks that were approached by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka have indicated that Sri

Lanka should negotiate with the IMF. The 32C respondent at the Monetary Board meeting held

on 11th May 2021 also had reiterated the difficulty for the Central Bank to release foreign

currency to commercial banks to meet their import bills. She had also remarked that the

84

Commercial Banks wasted USD 200 million of funds received from the China Development

Bank by spending on non-essential imports such as telephones, sugar and garments.

It is in this backdrop the 30th respondent submitted the statutory report dated 30th June 2021, to

the 2nd respondent.

In this report while recognising that the pandemic exacerbated the vulnerabilities and challenges

to the economy, the 30th respondent recognised that the opportunities to access international

financial markets were restricted due to downgrading of sovereign credit ratings. This report

further provides details on further depletion of reserves. By May 2021 reserves had come down

to USD 04 billion which was equivalent only to 2.7 months of imports whereas the minimum

international standard is to maintain three months imports. In this report the 30th respondent

reiterates that the Central Bank has been actively working with the Government to facilitate

enhancing non-debt sources of foreign exchange inflows as the Government’s stance is not to

approach the International Monetary Fund. Further, the report predicted that the reserves

would deplete to USD 2.5 – 3 billion by end July 2021.This report further goes on to state that

“by way of an advance warning, it is the duty of the Monetary Board to keep the Honourable

Prime Miniter informed of debt service obligations falling due in 2022. There are Government

foreign currency debt service obligations of around USD 6.6 billion….. Significant foreign

exchange inflows have to be secured, to maintain reserves in 2022”.

However, on 8th July 2021, within a week of the said report the 2nd respondent had relinquished

duties as Minister of Finance and the 2A respondent assumed duties as Minister of Finance.

The next report of the 30th respondent dated 26th July 2021 which is addressed to the 2A

respondent who had assumed duties as the Minister of Finance by then makes reference to his

earlier reports submitted to the 2nd respondent and copies of them had been annexed. In this

report the 30th respondent reiterates the dire state of the economy and the challenges faced due to

the pandemic. It recognises with all the guaranteed foreign exchange inflows, the gross official

reserves “are projected to remain at a critically low level of around USD 3.3 billion by end

2021”. The report predicts that the reserves will be further depleted to around USD 1.5 billion

by end March 2022, “without any further significant foreign exchange inflows in the pipeline”.

The above clearly indicated that the 2A respondent was put on notice that the reserves would

deplete to around USD 1.5 billion by March 2022 [roughly about one month’s imports] and there

85

were no foreign exchange inflows forthcoming. Thus, 2A respondent would have been alive to

the precarious situation of the economy at that point of time.

This report further draws attention to the need to address the concerns raised by the rating

agencies. It states “The rating agencies have raised their concern on the ability of servicing Sri

Lanka’s foreign currency debt in the period ahead. Most recently, on 19 July 2021, Moody’s

Investor Service placed Sri Lanka’s sovereign credit rating ‘under review for

downgrade’…………It is important that the concerns of rating agencies are addressed urgently

to prevent any further rating downgrades in the near future, failing which would keep

international investors further away from Sri Lanka and would further reduce the possibility of

accessing international capital markets. The decline in reserves below the critical levels would

also prompt the friendly nations and central banks to reconsider the provision of financing that

are being negotiated at present”.

In its concluding remarks interalia the report says: “In the context of extremely challenging

economic conditions, the Monetary Board is of the view that recent regulatory and policy

measures to stabilise the external sector have helped to arrest the situation to a certain extent.

However there is dire need of urgent implementation of drastic policy measures as proposed

above aiming at resorting the stability of the external sector of the economy to reduce foreign

exchange outflows and increase foreign exchange inflows, avoiding the sharp depletion of gross

official reserves of the country and a resultant loss in confidence on the macroeconomic stability

by key stakeholders including foreign lenders, potential investors, corresponding foreign banks

of local banking sector. The Government may alternatively consider approaching the globally

accepted lender of last resort for balance of payment needs, the International Monetary Fund

(IMF). The intervention of the IMF, whilst bolstering the confidence of international investors

on Sri Lankan economy, may on the other hand require aggressive reforms in the fiscal

sector, interest rates and the exchange rate, and even restructuring of the debt stock of the

Government”.

This report, compared to the earlier reports submitted since August 2020, reflects a change of

stance / strategy in relation to the need to seek assistance from the IMF. In this report, as it

appears to us, the 30th respondent had recommended to the Government (2A respondent) to seek

assistance from the IMF as an alternative to other possibilities. In this regard it is pertinent to

86

note that at a meeting of the Monetary Board held on 04th August 2021 the 32C respondent had

remarked; that it will be the Monetary Board that will be summoned before a Commission of

Inquiry in the event the Government or the CBSL defaults, in a backdrop where even China had

reached out to IMF for assistance due to the situation caused following the COVID-19 pandemic.

In response to the above remark, the 30th respondent had said that “he is flexible on seeking IMF

assistance if considered necessary and the Government also will have to be convinced if that

option is to be pursued”

However, the 2A respondent has not accepted this proposal - seeking IMF assistance - as a viable

solution. The 2A respondent whilst noting the contents of the report dated 26th July 2021 has

made the following observation in his letter addressed to the 30th respondent, dated 12th August

2021.

“Your report suggests to consider approaching IMF to address these challenges. It indicates that

such involvement of IMF requires aggressive reforms in the fiscal sector, interest rates,

exchange rate and even restructuring of debt stock of the Government. I would like the Central

Bank of Sri Lanka to clearly advise me why such reforms cannot be done without resorting to

IMF loan programme, for instance as Malaysia did, to manage the challenge of Asian Financial

Crisis. The country may need a fresh thinking altogether as Sri Lanka has had 16 IMF

programmes since 1965”

The 2A Respondent inter alia observes that “There is also a shortage of foreign exchange in the

Forex Market as has been reported by shipping lines, the business community and the media.

This has resulted in a large number of containers at the Colombo port not being cleared. I have

also noted that most of the cargo comprises of essential food and raw material which are

essential for the smooth functioning of day-to-day life and country’s economy”.

The above observation of the 2A respondent clearly demonstrates that the 2A respondent is fully

aware of the critical status of the social and economic situation that prevailed by August 2021. It

is pertinent to observe that the continued warnings sounded by the 30th respondent from his

initial report to the 2nd respondent one year ago (04th August 2020) and repercussions predicted

due to severe depletion of gross official reserves, have become the reality by this time.

87

The 2A respondent in the same letter had identified certain measures as necessary to be initiated

by the Central Bank to “signal market to move on to a stabilization path”. Despite the

difficulties expressed by the 30th respondent in his earlier reports to continue providing foreign

exchange to meet the Government’s import bills, the 2A respondent has required the Central

Bank to “release of USD 250 million immediately to all Commercial Banks, since they are in

need urgent foreign exchange to honour payments on account of imports under various trade

instruments (DP term of payment, Sight LCs etc). This will enable all cargo currently at the ports

to be cleared”. Furthermore, the 2A respondent had wanted the Central Bank to release another

USD 250 million in early September 2021, to meet petroleum and LP gas financing.

The 30th respondent by his letter dated 14th September 2021, whilst acknowledging series of

discussions and the close dialogue he had with the 2A respondent and officials of the Ministry of

Finance, has observed that the gross official reserves had declined significantly as large external

debt servicing requirements were met in the absence of adequate financial inflows. The 30th

Respondent also observed that “the recent interventions in the foreign exchange market by the

Central Bank at the request of the Government has helped to ease conditions in the supply of

essential imports, but could also weaken the country’s external position further, if the expected

inflows are further delayed”.

In relation to the 2A respondent’s views on seeking assistance from the IMF, the 30th respondent

while emphasising the need to implement an agenda of structural reforms to achieve economic

prosperity have welcomed a reform package without the IMF, and had described it as the most

preferred way forward as a country, as many other countries have graduated by implementing

far-reaching economic reforms. However, having made this observation, the 30th respondent had

further said that “we are prepared to work with you, learning from past experiences of our own

and other country experiences to get out of the present difficulties through required structural

reforms. Although under totally different domestic and international conditions, Sri Lanka

also achieved external sector stability without an IMF intervention during early 1970s. In

2009, we obtained an IMF programme which was negotiated within the broader frame work of

the Government Policy agenda of the time, Mahinda Chinthana”.

The 30th respondent had further stated that “While the Government with a strong commitment to

long lasting structural reforms, may consider a decisive reform agenda to be implemented

88

gradually, there are advantages of maintaining links with the IMF, backed by a well-structured

policy. The countries which obtain financial assistance from the IMF are increasingly

encouraged to implement home grown reforms. Accordingly, if Sri Lanka decides to obtain an

IMF programme in 2021 as well, negotiations could be based on Government’s policy

framework “Vistas of Prosperity”. The advantages that would be gained by indicating to the

market that we are closely working with the IMF, even without any commitment to an IMF

stabilisation programme, could boost confidence among international financial community, so

that conditions for borrowing, if the need arises, could be made easy. Even a home-grown

reform programme may entail significant sacrifices to be made”.

As a concluding remark, the 30th respondent inter alia had stated that “some countries in the

world even Sri Lanka, in some past occasions have successfully steered through crisis without

the IMF support in the past. But as different country experience show, being engaged with the

IMF even without an agreed programme would bring in much needed investor confidence and

improve the sentiments of all other stakeholders, including multilateral and bilateral lenders and

Sovereign rating agencies. This could prevent any further credit rating downgrades and may

pave the way to attract foreign exchange inflows while helping to unlock the access to

international markets gradually. This point is presented for the consideration of the

Government”.

Ironically, the 30th respondent had resigned from the post of Governor Central Bank on the same

day he sent the above report to the 2A respondent. In our view this report sent by the 30th

respondent sufficiently demonstrates the advantages of seeking the assistance of the IMF in

stabilising the critical condition in the economy.

In all the reports submitted by the 30th respondent to the Minister of Finance under section 68 of

the Monetary Law, he had clearly set out the critical condition of the economy and the

challenges to remedy the situation. The adverse consequences due to down-grades by the

international agencies and the need to address their concerns were highlighted. While

recognising the adverse impact the pandemic caused to the economy, they recognised the

immediate need to secure foreign exchange inflows to curtail the depletion of gross official

reserves and maintain the internationally accepted ratio between the gross official reserves and

the foreign exchange requirement of import bills. Even though they do not contain a specific

89

recommendation to seek IMF assistance describing it as the only way out, they have provided

material emphasising the critical condition and the advantages in seeking assistance from the

IMF to mitigate the situation.

On 15th September 2021, the 29th respondent had assumed duties as Governor of the Central

Bank.

The continued deterioration of the economy and the status it has reached by December 2021 is

succinctly described by the 29th respondent in his statutory report to the 2A respondent submitted

on 09th December 2021. The report states:

“The urgent attention of the Government is crucial to resolve the foreign currency liquidity

issues faced by the state banks as well as the entire economy in order to prevent a banking and a

sovereign default in the immediate future. Their continuous reliance on the Central Bank to

honour payment obligations on essential imports has caused a severe stress on gross official

reserves, which have already declined to a critical level at present with inadequate coverage for

upcoming debt servicing or to finance essential imports”.

The report further says that “the shortage of foreign currency inflows to the government amidst

the sovereign rating down grade aggravated the decline of gross official reserves. The Central

Bank continued to provide foreign exchange to maturing debt obligations of the Government”.

Having set out these factors and while reiterating the immediate and critical need of securing

sizeable amount of foreign financing to maintain the macro-economic and financial system

stability, the 29th respondent had expressed hope that the efforts the 2A respondent has currently

undertaken, would bring necessary foreign financing through Government to Government

collaboration, syndicated loan arrangements, credit lines for essential imports and monetisation

of underutilised and non-strategic state assets. The specific details of these avenues, however, are

not referred to in this report.

It is also interesting to note that the 29th respondent had expressed the view that this situation

may not have arisen if envisaged inflows to the Government such as the monetisation of

identified assets, including the shares of West Coast Power, East Container Terminal of the

Colombo Port etc. Apart from this bare statement, this report does not further elaborate the

reasons for such non-materialisation of such avenues. The critical situation in which the

90

economy was facing is further demonstrated by the fact that the Monetary Board at its meeting

on 08th December 2021 has granted its approval to proceed with the disposal of gold on a

staggered basis and had predicted the maximum amount that could be derived from disposal of

gold would be USD 350-400 million.

The 29th respondent in his next report to the 2A respondent dated 31st December 2021 had drawn

the attention of the 2A respondent the critical level to which Gross Official Reserves had

depleted and had projected the foreign currency debt service payments for 2022 to be USD 7.3

billion which includes repayment of ISB of USD 500 million in January 2022. This report

further reflects that the Net Foreign Assets of the Central Bank has deteriorated to negative

levels of around Rs. 330 billion by end November 2021 mainly due to meeting the foreign

currency debt service obligations of the Government and financing essential imports using the

foreign exchange reserves of the Central Bank. According to this report Gross Official Reserves

had depleted to USD 1.6 billion by November 2021 and recognises that such reserves were

equivalent only to around one month of imports. The report claims that this amount was

augmented to USD 3.1 billion by end 2021 with the activation of SWAP facility of People’s

Bank of China. However, he fails to disclose the conditions on which the SWAP facility was

initiated and the inability to draw it unless the Gross Official Reserves would grow to the

equivalent of three months of import. Even though the 29th respondent had observed the steps

taken by the rating agencies which resulted in a significant loss of investor confidence, he has

failed to make any recommendations to remedy this situation and win the investor confidence in

order to obtain more investments to overcome the crisis situation.

Immediately after the said report, 2A respondent submitted a Cabinet Memorandum to the

Cabinet of Ministers dated 03rd January2022 where he referred to the said SWAP facility as an

opportunity the Government had got to strengthen the foreign reserves of the Country.

In the said Cabinet paper, the Minister, explaining the ill effects of an IMF programme had

invited the Cabinet of Ministers to deliberate on a home-grown solution.

91

The Cabinet of Ministers after considering the said Cabinet Memorandum had decided as

follows;

zzixfoaYfha 4 fþofhys olajd we;s lreKq ie,ls,a,g f.k oekg YS% ,xldj uqyqK oS we;s

.eg¨ i|yd rg;=,u y÷kd .kq ,nk úiÿula ls%hd;aul lsÍu i|ydZZ

However, when considering the critical level of the Sri Lankan Economy as of 01st January 2022,

with foreign reserves only to meet its import bill for only one month, a serious issue arises

whether the Cabinet of Ministers were properly briefed or appraised of the critical situation of

the economy in the said Cabinet paper in order to obtain objective views of the policy makers

whether it is viable to resolve the economic ills by adopting a “home grown solution”. Specially

so when mechanics of a home grown solution were not placed before the Cabinet. It is to be

noted that the Cabinet of Ministers were starved of the critical information relating to foreign

reserves, a vital factor that ought to have been taken into account in deciding the viability of a

home grown solution as an alternative to seeking IMF assistance. Question arises whether the

Cabinet of Ministers was properly briefed of the said position in the said Cabinet Paper to obtain

the decision to “identify a home-grown solution” without knowing what is the “so-called home-

grown solution” that is going to bail out the Sri Lankan economy from its critical condition. It is

also pertinent to observe that the Cabinet Memorandum dated 03rd January 2021 in which the 2A

respondent invited the Cabinet of Ministers to deliberate on the issue whether to seek the

assistance of the IMF, had not set out one of the most important factors enabling the Ministers of

the Cabinet to take a well-considered decision. The Cabinet paper is silent on the critical

situation in the Gross Official Reserves and the ill effects on the failure to secure inflow of

foreign exchange on an urgent basis. As it was discussed herein before, the report of the 29th

respondent dated 31st December 2021 clearly sets out that “Gross Official Reserves had depleted

to a critical level of USD 1.6 billion by end November 2021 which was equivalent only to around

1month imports”. In this report, the 29th respondent had proceeded to say that the reserves were

augmented by USD 3.1 billion by end 2021 with the activation of the SWAP facility of the

People’s Republic of China.

In this regard it is also important to note that the pros and cons of adopting any measures to

overcome the critical economic conditions need to be assessed in the proper context in a given

situation, when a decision is to be taken on the viability of such measures. This was not a

92

straightforward case of assessing the suitability of seeking IMF assistance under normal

circumstances but the call to seek IMF assistance was critically relevant given the unique

circumstances our economy was placed in. The depleted official reserves; the need to secure

foreign exchange on an urgent basis; the reluctance of the other agencies to extend support

without an IMF programme were critical factors in deciding whether seeking assistance was in

the best interest of the country at the relevant time.

In this backdrop was it not the duty or the responsibility of the 2A respondent to place all

relevant factors referred to above before the Cabinet of Ministers when they were invited to

deliberate and decide on matters that were so serious as they had a direct impact on the entire

society?

In our view the 2A respondent has breached the public trust deposed in him in exercising his

executive powers of the people in his capacity as the Minister of Finance in this regard by his

failure to place all relevant facts with sufficient details in the Cabinet Memorandum when he

invited the Cabinet of Ministers to make a choice between seeking assistance from the IMF and

adopting a “home grown solution” at the given situation. As elaborated before, the following

comment of the 30th respondent in his letter dated 14th September 2021 addressed to the 2A

respondent reiterates this position:

“Although under totally different domestic and international conditions, Sri Lanka also

achieved external sector stability without an IMF intervention during early 1970s”

The report of the 29th respondent dated 27th January 2022 also sets out the critical condition in

which the economy is ailing. Even though he emphasises the need to secure foreign currency

inflows to avert an economic crisis, he maintains a stoic silence on the possibility of any

engagement with the IMF for assistance.

The report of the 29th respondent dated 28th February 2022 describes the status of reserves and

its’ potential impact on the economy in the following manner: “As the current reserve level is

inadequate to meet this significant debt serving requirements, not having new foreign currency

inflows into official reserves would result in a default by the Central Bank as well as the

Government of Sri Lanka in the immediate future in which eventuality the economic management

of the country will experience severe repercussions in the future. Such an event would be

93

catastrophic, resulting in a serious loss of confidence in the Sri Lankan economy, including the

rupee and it would even be developed to serious and far reaching social and political

implications as well”.

According to the material presented before this Court, the payment of ISB of USD 500 million

took place before the February 2022 report was presented. By this time the Gross Official

Reserves had come down to a critical level of USD 2.4 billion including the SWAP facility of

USD 1500 million from the People’s Bank of China, SWAP facility of USD 400 million from

Reserve Bank of India and another SWAP facility of USD 200 million from the Bangladesh

Bank.

Even though there is no reference to the restrictions imposed in the Chinese SWAP facility, in

the said report, it appears that the Gross Official Reserves of Sri Lanka were only USD 300

million when the SWAP facilities referred to above are not factored in. This reserve was not

sufficient to meet Sri Lanka’s foreign expenditure even for one week, but this report except for

the recommendation for import restrictions on non-essential goods and revision of energy prices,

failed to make any recommendations to overcome the critical situation the country faced at that

time, specially, in the context of there being no avenues for foreign exchange inflows.

It is surprising and hard to comprehend the reason for the 29th respondent to maintain a complete

silence in all these reports on the possibility of remedying this situation by initiating a

programme with the IMF. The 29th respondent has been fully aware of the critical condition in

the Gross Official Reserves and the disaster the entire country would face without taking

immediate steps to secure sufficient foreign funding inflows. However, he failed to make this

recommendation without any justification whatsoever.

In this regard it is also pertinent to note that the Monetary Policy Committee of the Central Bank

by a Board Paper titled “Review of the Monetary Policy Stance Monetary Policy Cycle No 2 –

March 2022” had recommended to the Monetary Board for its consideration at its meeting on

03rd March 2022 inter alia to “initiate discussions with the IMF to have a credible anchor:

Announce immediately to the public that the Monetary Board is prepared to propose to the

Government to commence discussions with the IMF”. At the Monetary Board meeting of 03rd

March 2022, Director of Economic Research while summarising the contents of the

aforementioned Board Paper had inter alia invited the Monetary Board to approve the

94

recommendations of the Monetary Policy Committee including the recommendation to initiate

discussions with the IMF to have a credible anchor and to immediately make a public

announcement that the Monetary Board is prepared to propose to the Government to commence

discussions with the IMF. However, it is surprising and extremely difficult to comprehend the

complete silence the Monetary Board maintained in regard to this recommendation. Records do

not show that they at least considered this recommendation by the Monetary Policy Committee.

The learned President’s Counsel who represented the 2nd and 2A respondents, whilst referring to

some of the recommendations made in the reports submitted in terms of sections 64 and 68 by

the Monetary Board, to the Minister, took up the position that it was the duty of the Monetary

Board to advice the Minister, but the Monetary Board had failed to advice the Minister with the

steps that should be followed to get over from the critical condition of the Sri Lankan economy.

As already referred to, even though the few reports submitted by the 29th respondent do not

explain the real situation the country was facing, the two detailed reports the 2A respondent

received from the 30th respondent had placed the 2A respondent on notice of the critical

condition of the Sri Lankan economy at that time. The 2A respondent had in fact responded

strongly to the report submitted on 26th July 2021 by his letter dated 12th August 2021.

As already referred to above, the 30th respondent has submitted reports under Sections 64 and 68

to the 2nd respondent on 4th August 2020, 6th April 2021, and 30th June 2021 explaining the

challenges faced by the Sri Lankan economy at that time. In the report, the 30th Respondent sent

to the 2nd respondent on 4th August 2020, whilst explaining the sharp drop of international

reserves, low level of Gross Official Reserves and urgent need to make available the foreign

financing for the upcoming ISB payment, had said,

a) Most of the loans from the multilateral sources referred to above are likely to follow an

IMF facility for which the IMF has indicated debt sustainability to be a significant

impediment.

b) In the absence of an IMF program in the near future the options available are to seek

bilateral financial assistance from friendly nations and to explore avenues of commercial

borrowings.

95

In addition to the above 30th Respondent had further advised the 2nd Respondent,

a) The Monetary Board is of the view that the country’s external sector stability remains

vulnerable, necessitating corrective measures without delay.

b) Every possible initiative should be taken by all stakeholders in real, financial and fiscal

sectors to prevent further depletion of the country’s official reserves.

If the above recommendation of the Monetary Board is properly understood, it is clear that the

Monetary Board wanted the 2nd respondent to consider the Government economic policy

seriously in order to prevent further depletion of the country’s official reserves.

During his submissions before this Court the 32B respondent referred to a meeting with the 2nd

respondent by the Monetary Board. On a request made by the Monetary Board the said meeting

was arranged on 1st July 2021 and all the members of the Monetary Board along with senior

officials of the Central Bank had participated at the meeting. At the said meeting a presentation

was made in Sinhala by the Central Bank and the critical condition of the Sri Lankan economy

was explained. The said presentation specifically referred to an engagement with the IMF as the

final resort in the following terms;

zztjeks yosis l%shdud¾. l%shd;aul fkdjkafka kï cd;Hka;r uÜgñka wjidk Kh

fokakd jYfhka ms,s.;a cd;Hka;r uQ,H wruqo,ska iydh ,nd .ekSu wjYH jkq we;ZZ

According to the minutes of the said meeting Superintendent of Public Debt had explained the

need for an internationally accepted anchor and the points referred to by him at the meeting was

recorded under paragraph 3.7 of the said meeting as follows;

“3.7 Superintendent of Public Debt stated that in the recent discussions with Sovereign

rating agencies they have highlighted concerns about the current situation, and

there is a likelihood of such rating agencies issuing further adverse comments on

the Sri Lankan economy. Rating agencies as well as foreign investors also

constantly inquire about possible engagement with the International Monetary

Fund (IMF) or the submission of a credible repayment plan from the

Government”.

On behalf of the 28th Respondent the Monetary Board, it was submitted that “it is the

Government which has the responsibility to approach the IMF and agree on a programme, if

96

any, with the IMF. The agreements must be concluded by the Government and no other. It is

not possible for the Central Bank (Monetary Board) to approach the IMF if the Government is

unwilling.”

With regard to the above submission, it is necessary to consider the provisions in Sections 64 (1)

and 68 (1) (2) of the Monetary Law.

As per the said provisions,

a) Whenever the Monetary Board anticipates economic disturbances that are likely to

threaten domestic monetary stability or whenever abnormal movements in the money

supply or in the price level are actually endangering such stability;

b) Whenever the Monetary Board anticipates that there may develop a deficit in the

international balance of payment that cause a serious, decline in the international reserve

or there is an imminent threat of such decline;

The Monetary Board has a duty to submit reports to the Minister explaining and making

recommendations and the steps the Government should adopt.

As already observed in this judgement, during the period the 30th respondent was functioning as

the Governor of the Central Bank and in that capacity heading the Monetary Board, several

reports had been submitted explaining to the 2nd and 2A respondents the magnitude of the crisis

faced by the Government of Sri Lanka.

However, when the 29th respondent was appointed the Governor, a significant difference was

observed in the reports submitted to the 2A Respondent and a question arises whether the 29th

respondent fulfilled his responsibilities as the Chairman of the Monetary Board in discharging

the duty of the Monetary Board when submitting statutory reports to the 2A respondent.

The petitioners have produced several statements issued by the 29th respondent in his capacity as

the Governor Central Bank, where he assured the public that the country is moving towards the

correct path and it will recover soon.

According to the material available a decision to seek assistance from the IMF, was ultimately

taken by the 32A respondent on 16th March 2022. On the 14th March 2022 the Cabinet of

Ministers had decided “to authorise the Minister of Finance to take necessary action to obtain

97

technical assistance of the International Monetary Fund with a view to resolving the current

situation encountered by the Sri Lankan economy” (emphasis added). The Cabinet of Ministers

had taken this decision having given their mind to the note [to the Cabinet] of the 2A respondent

on “Staff Report Recommendations for the 2021 Article IV Consultation of the International

Monetary Fund (IMF)”. The note of the 2A respondent was critical of the findings of the IMF

after Article IV consultation and had observed that “some of these risks are overstated in the

press release and the efforts of the authorities to address these challenges are understated”. It is

to be observed that the engagement with the IMF referred to in the Cabinet Decision in March

2022 was only “to obtain technical advise and the assistance of the IMF” which appears to be

noncommittal and tentative as opposed to the request made by the 32A respondent in April 2022

for an appropriate fund supported programme to address the economic challenges the country

was facing mainly from the balance of payment difficulties and broader macro-economic issues

the country was confronted with at the time. It is to be noted the said letter was sent to the IMF

with an assurance by the Government of Sri Lanka of its full commitment to achieve the

objectives of such a programme. In the course of the submissions of the 32B respondent it was

brought to the attention of Court that the sending of letter by 32A respondent in April 2022 was

facilitated by him sequel to a one-on-one meeting he had with the 32A respondent.

Even Though, there were reports (referred to above) recommending an engagement with the IMF

on an urgent basis from the two subcommittees (MBEDMC and DEDMC) and other officers of

the Central Bank, the Monetary Board (28th respondent ) failed to take a firm decision in this

regard. The Monetary Board was fully aware of the crisis resulting from the continued depletion

of Gross Official Reserves as well as the reserves of the Central Bank which reached critically

low levels, yet no consensus could be reached by the members. The situation that prevailed

within the Monetary Board is aptly reflected in the comments made by the 32nd respondent

(Kumarasinghe) at the meeting held on 21st March 2022 and the views of the Deputy Governor

(S) on the comments of the 32nd respondent. The 32nd respondent had said “From the day I

joined the Monetary Board in July 2020, for almost two years Dr Ranee Jayamaha and DG(S)

have been tirelessly pushing the Monetary Board to go for an IMF programme but the majority

including the past and present Governors were not willing to accept the path till the MB meeting

held on 07.03.2022. However, now with the MB decisions taken on 07.03.2022, Dr Ranee

98

Jayamaha and DG(S) have won the long fought battle on IMF within the MB meetings and I and

the Governor(s) have been defeated”.

These comments referred to above demonstrate the exact situation that prevailed within the

Monetary Board. As discussed hereinbefore the 30th, and 31st respondents have continuously

maintained that there was a government policy not to reach out to the IMF. However, there is no

material before this Court as to the existence of any such policy prior to January 2022. The

Cabinet of Ministers, however, approved the 2A respondent’s proposal for a home grown

solution without seeking the IMF assistance. During the course of this period, the Members of

the Monetary Board were put on notice of the critical situation that prevailed in the Gross

Official Reserves and the need to secure foreign exchange inflows on an urgent basis. They were

also aware of the unlikelihood of receiving such inflows from other sources and further certain

sources from which inflows could be obtained were insisting on an IMF anchor if they were to

provide assistance. Severe hardships people underwent over this period was mainly due to the

scarcity in essential items such as fuel and gas. The depletion of foreign reserves to meet the

import bill was the main hurdle to secure such essentials.

The continued reluctance for a specific recommendation to the Government to seek assistance

from the IMF by the majority of the members of the Monetary Board in these circumstances, in

our view is a violation of public trust reposed in the Monetary Board as a collective body as well

as on individual members who maintained such continued resistance despite severe depletion of

Gross Official Reserves in the absence of any viable alternative to overcome this predicament. It

also appears that their reluctance was not based solely on the purported policy of the

Government but also due to their personal views and/or beliefs. The 32nd respondent having

considered the decision of the Monetary Board to recommend to the government to seek IMF

assistance as a personal defeat in a long fought battle had suggested that “the best persons to get

involved in way-forward discussions with the IMF are Dr Ranee Jayamaha and DG(S) who have

the best relationships and influence with IMF”. On the following day (22nd March 2022) the said

respondent had tendered his resignation from the Monetary Board. This conduct mirrors the

aversion this respondent had towards reaching out to the IMF and the reluctance to consider

issues objectively in the larger interest of the people who had deposed trust on him. When one

accepts public office, they should have the capacity to look at issues objectively and resolve

99

them in the best interest of the people rather than being obsessed with their personal beliefs.

Comments and the conduct of the officials of the Central Bank over this period clearly points to

the direction that the need to seek assistance from IMF did exist over a period of time and any

prudent person who did not act arbitrarily would have foreseen the serious repercussions in the

failure to act swiftly to remedy the situation. Deputy Governor (S) in his comments says that

“the little experience I had in working with macroeconomic policy making enabled me to foresee

well in advance the economic crisis that the country is experiencing at present. This is the exact

reason for me to recommend and emphasize to the MB to approach IMF”. He further said “It

appears that at least at this very late stage, the Government has finally realized that there is no

other option but to approach IMF. The pain to the economy and the people of Sri Lanka would

have been less if this decision was taken at least one year ago” (emphasis added).

K.M.M.Siriwardane – Deputy Governor (S) in his note to the Monetary Board dated 04.04.2022

had listed out the board papers and submissions made to the Monetary Board since 11.11.2020

on “Macroeconomic development and foreign exchange reserves”.

In this regard it is also pertinent to note that the Board Paper dated 11th November 2020 titled

“Challenges in Government foreign currency debt service payments in 2021 and beyond”

discusses the status of Gross Official Reserves as it stood by October 2020, the probability of the

reserves dropping to critical levels in 2021, the advantages of an IMF assisted programme and

the sentiments of other funding agencies on the absence of such programme. None of these

matters, however, were taken up for discussion at the Monetary Board. The main reason for the

non-discussion, appears to be the insistence of the 31st respondent to defer the discussion to a

date after the presentation of the Budget speech in Parliament; this is despite the fact that the 32C

respondent is urging paying urgent attention to the said issues.

In this regard it is also pertinent to note the conduct of the 38th respondent (Jayasundera) as

revealed in the minutes of the Monetary Board meeting held on 21st April 2021. The Deputy

Governor (S) has placed on record an incident that took place in the morning of that day.

According to him there had been a meeting at the Presidential Secretariat chaired by the 38th

respondent. This meeting was attended by the officials from the Ministry of Finance including

the 31st Respondent, officials of the Central Bank including the 30th respondent, officials from

the two state banks and officials from the Board of Investment. At this meeting the 38th

100

respondent had been critical of the officials of the Central Bank with an allegation of misleading

the Monetary Board and their inability to send statutory reports required under sections 64 and

68 of the Monetary Law Act. Furthermore the 38th respondent had questioned the conduct of DG

(S) at the Central Bank with insinuations that the latter is a person who tries to serve as per the

needs of IMF. Two other Deputy Governors, DG(N) and DG(F) also have placed on record that

at several occasions, the 38th respondent reprimands officials of the Central Bank in the presence

of officials of the state banks and neither minutes of such meetings nor any official documents

were shared of such meetings. The 38th respondent, however, had denied that he had caused

“any intimidation” as alleged by the Central Bank officials who attended meetings chaired by

him. The 30th respondent also had acknowledged that the 38th respondent was speaking to the

Central Bank officials in a critical manner questioning their competencies and allegiances.

Furthermore, the 30th respondent had observed that “the interpretations given by officials of the

Central Bank on matters relating to banks and market operations vary with that of market

participants and Government authorities such as Dr Jayasundera”.

Learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioners submitted that this conduct of the 38th respondent

clearly exceeds the boundaries of the legitimate exercise of powers of the Secretary to the

President. This conduct is a clear interference with the discharge of duties of public officials. In

their submissions this arbitrary use of power is a breach of public trust placed on the 38th

respondent.

All factors referred to above clearly establishes that the relevant state organs / officials

demonstrated reluctance to reach out to the IMF in the face of the critical situation the country’s

economy was facing in spite of the fact there was no other viable alternative. This position,

namely, the delay on the part of the Government and the Monetary Board in seeking assistance

from the IMF has been commented upon by the Auditor-General as well.

It is apt to reiterate that the persons holding public office have a duty to ensure that they exercise

due diligence and discharge their duties and responsibilities reasonably and rationally without

acting arbitrarily. In our view, 2nd (Mahinda Rajapaksa), 2A (Basil Rajapaksa) 28th (Monetary

Board), 29th (Ajith Nivard Cabraal), 30th, (W.D.Lakshman), 31st (S.R.Attygalle) and 32nd

(Samantha Kumarasinghe) respondents failed to take remedial action, when the option to take

such action was available, namely by not taking measures to seek assistance from the IMF in a

101

timely manner when they were under a duty to do so. The said inaction on the part of the said

respondents, in our opinion was not only manifestly unreasonable but also irrational and

arbitrary. Thus, the said respondents in our view had breached public trust reposed in them by

the inaction referred to.

EXCHANGE RATE AND OUTFLOW OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE

The relevant provisions of the Monetary Law with regard to determining the par value of Sri

Lanka Rupee, International Reserve and International stability of Sri Lanka Rupee reads as

follows;

Section 3. (1) The Monetary Board shall by unanimous decision, recommend to

the Minister in charge of the subject of Finance that the par value of the

Sri Lanka rupee be determined in terms of special drawing rights or in

terms of such other common denominator as may be prescribed by the

International Monetary Fund, and upon such recommendation, the

Minister in charge of the subject of Finance shall, by Order published in

the Gazette, determine and declare the par value of the Sri Lanka rupee in

accordance with the terms specified in such recommendation:

Provided, however, that if the Monetary Board is of the view that

international economic conditions do not warrant the introduction or

maintenance of exchange arrangements based on stable but adjustable par

values, it may, by unanimous decision, recommend to the Minister in

charge of the subject of Finance that no determination be made under the

preceding provisions of this section or that any Order made under this

section be revoked, and upon any such recommendation, the Minister in

charge of the subject of Finance shall desist from making an Order under

this section, or, as the case may be, revoke an Order made under this

section.

(2) The Monetary Board may by unanimous decision recommend to

the Minister in charge of the subject of Finance the alteration of the par

102

value of the Sri Lanka rupee, if the Board is of the opinion that such

alteration of the par value of the Sri Lanka rupee is rendered necessary in

any of the following circumstances, that is to say–

(a) If the continuance of the existing par value hinders or is likely to

hinder unduly, the achievement and maintenance of a high level of

production, employment and real income and the full development

of the productive resources of Sri Lanka, or results, or is likely to

result, in a serious decline in the International Reserve of the

Central Bank or in other utilizable external assets of Sri Lanka or if

such decline cannot be prevented except by–

(i) a large scale increase in the external liabilities of Sri Lanka;

(ii) the persistent use of restrictions on the convertibility of the

rupee into foreign currencies in settlement of current

transactions; or

(iii) Undue or sustained Government assistance to one or more

of the major export industries; or

(iv) Prolonged use of measures designed to restrict the volume

of imports of essential commodities; or

(b) If the maintenance of the existing par value is producing, or is

likely to produce, a persisting surplus in the balance of payments

on current account and a monetary disequilibrium which cannot be

adequately corrected by other Government or by Central Bank

action authorized by this Act; or

(c) If uniform proportionate changes in the par values of currencies of

its members are made by the International Monetary Fund, and

upon such recommendation, the Minister in charge of the subject

of Finance may, by Order published in the Gazette, amend, in

103

accordance with the terms specified in such recommendation, any

Order made under subsection (1).

(3) Any Order made under subsection (1) or subsection (2) shall cease

to have effect after a period of ten days from the date of publication

thereof, unless such Order is approved by Parliament within that period:

Provided however, that if Parliament is not in session on the date of

publication of the Order, the Order shall cease to have effect after a period

of ten days from the date of the next meeting of Parliament, unless such

Order is approved by Parliament within that period.

Section 65. In determining its international monetary policy the Monetary Board shall

endeavour to maintain the par value of the Sri Lanka rupee, or where no

determination of such par value has been made under section 3, maintain

such exchange arrangements as are consistent with the underlying trends

in the country and so relate its exchange with other currencies as to assure

its free use for current international transactions.

Section 66. (1) In order to maintain the international stability of the Sri Lanka

rupee and to assure the greatest possible freedom of its current

international transactions, the Monetary Board shall endeavour to maintain

among the assets of the Central Bank an international reserve adequate to

meet any foreseeable deficits in the international balance of payments.

(2) In judging the adequacy of the International Reserve, the Monetary

Board shall be guided by the estimates of prospective receipts and

payments of foreign exchange by Sri Lanka; by the volume and maturity

of the Central Bank’s own liabilities in foreign currencies; and, in so far as

they are known or can be estimated, by the volume and maturity of the

foreign exchange assets and liabilities of the Government and of banking

institutions and other persons in Sri Lanka. So long as any part of the

foreign currency assets of Sri Lanka are held in currencies which are not

freely convertible by the Central Bank, whether directly or indirectly, into

104

special drawing rights or such other common denominator prescribed by

the International Monetary Fund or into foreign currencies freely usable in

international transactions, or are frozen, the Monetary Board shall also

take this factor into account in judging the adequacy of the International

Reserve of the Central Bank.

Section 68. (1) Whenever the Monetary Board anticipates that there may develop

a deficit in the international balance of payments of such magnitude as to

cause a serious decline in the International Reserve, or whenever there is

an imminent threat of a serious decline in the International Reserve, or

whenever the International Reserve actually falls to a level which the

board considers to be a threat to the international stability of the Sri Lanka

rupee, or whenever international payments or remittances are being made

which in the opinion of the board constitute an actual or a potential threat

to such stability or are prejudicial to the national welfare, it shall be the

duty of the board–

(a) To adopt such policies, and to cause such remedial measures to be

taken, as are appropriate to the circumstances and authorized by

this Act, and

(b) To submit to the Minister in charge of the subject of Finance a

detailed report which shall include, as a minimum, an analysis of–

(i) The nature, causes, and magnitude of the actual or potential

threat to the international stability of the Sri Lanka rupee;

and

(ii) The measures which the board has already taken, and the

further monetary, fiscal or administrative measures which it

proposes to take or recommends for adoption by the

Government.

105

(2) The Monetary Board shall submit further periodical reports to the

Minister in charge of the subject of Finance until the threat to the

international stability of the rupee has disappeared.

Section 3 (1) and (2) of the Monetary Law empower the Monetary Board, by a unanimous

decision to recommend to the Minister with specified terms, to declare the par value of the Sri

Lanka Rupee.

However according to the proviso to subsection (1) of section 3 of the Monetary Law, if the

Monetary Board decides that the economic conditions do not warrant introducing par value, the

said decision too may be communicated to the Minister.

As per the provisions in section 65 of the law it is the duty of the Monetary Board to maintain the

international stability of the Sri Lanka Rupee and in order to maintain stability, there is a duty cast

under Section 66 (of the said law) for the Monetary Board, to endeavour to maintain among the

assets of the Central Bank an international reserve adequate to meet any foreseeable deficit in the

international balance of payment.

Other than reporting and submitting periodic reports to the Minister when there is a potential

threat to the international stability of Sri Lanka Rupee the Monetary Board is required under

Section 68 (1) of the Monetary Law to adopt policies and remedial measures as are appropriate.

The case for the petitioners before this Court was that the Monetary Board as well as the

Minister had failed to take correct decisions at the relevant time to float the rupee and thereby

caused a loss to the Government.

As revealed before us, the exchange rate regime in Sri Lanka had gradually evolved from a fixed

exchange regime in 1948 to an independently floating regime in 2002. However, at the time

relevant to these applications Sri Lanka had a flexible exchange regime.

Export proceeds, worker remittances, tourist earnings, foreign direct investments, and foreign

loans were the main sources of inflow to the country whereas import payments and loan

repayments are the major outflows of foreign exchange.

One salient feature observed in our economy was the current account deficit due to the excessive

outflow of foreign currency as opposed to the inflow of foreign exchange to the Country. In the

106

said circumstances the exchange rate is expected to be an automatic adjuster under the flexible

exchange rate regime, but if the exchange rate is to be maintained at a stable rate, then a

depletion of reserves would take place as foreign exchange will have to be pumped to the market

to meet the demand.

As revealed before us the average exchange rate was around Rs. 185.00 per US Dollar towards

the end of 2019 and was fluctuating between Rs.180.00-200.00 during 2020-2021. According to

the reports published by the Central Bank, the buying rate of the US Dollar between 29.04.2021

and 06.09.2021 was between Rs. 195.0848- Rs.198.9023, and the selling rate was between Rs.

199.8700- Rs.204.8977.

As observed by the Auditor General, few members of the Monetary Board and some high-

ranking Central Bank officials were not supportive of maintaining a fixed exchange rate at the

cost of the foreign reserves of the country and were of the view that the exchange rate should be

decided by the supply and demand for foreign exchange.

The Auditor General had observed, that the Central Bank however had made efforts to control

the exchange rate using moral suasion, which was confirmed before us by several respondents.

During the period 2019 and 2021 (especially after March 2020) Sri Lankan economy

experienced a drop in foreign remittances by Sri Lankan workers abroad due to the COVID-19

pandemic. There was a significant drop in Foreign Direct Investment and the inflow of foreign

earnings from export markets too.

As revealed before us, it appears that although the need was to retain the meagre remittances

received and creating a conducive environment to enhance the inflow, the Finance Ministry and

the Central Bank however worked towards maintaining the exchange rate at around Rs 200

which mainly benefitted the importers. This is amply reflected in the letter sent by the 38th

respondent to the Governor (30th respondent) requiring the Central Bank to maintain the

exchange rate at Rs 185, which would have contributed towards the outflow of foreign exchange

rather than boosting the inflows. In the said letter (dated 23rd March 2020), the 30th respondent

had been directed to “take immediate steps to stabilse exchange rate preferably around Rs

185/USD (commercial bank selling rate) to prevent uncertainties to the business community

and unwarranted speculation.” The 38th respondent, having given the said direction, has stated

107

that the depreciation of the Sri Lanka Rupee will not help export promotion, import substitution

and debt servicing. The said respondent in giving these directions stated that it was the President

who directed him to take said measures referred to above.

The argument placed before us, in favour of not to depreciate the Sri Lanka Rupee was the

additional fiscal burden that would result in debt servicing if the rupee was to depreciate. The

Auditor General has opined, however, that it is a misconception that it would significantly

increase the debt burden of the government due to the depreciation of the rupee. The comments

of the Auditor General are reproduced below:

“Therefore, comments that the external debt burden of the government has increased

significantly due to the depreciation of the rupee are misinterpretation of facts. The

comments that if such depreciation of the rupee did not arise, the government could have

saved billions and this money could have been used for other mega developments

projects are not correct. If the exchange rate is overvalued/appreciated especially for a

country like Sri Lanka, which continues to record a budget deficit and imposes significant

tariffs on foreign trade, the budget deficit would further expand and this would

necessitate to borrow more from domestic and external sources to finance the budget

deficit.”

The Auditor General had referred to a meeting between the Governor and the licensed banks on

11th May 2021 where the banks had informed that due to the increase in imports and reluctance

of exporters to convert foreign exchange, the outflow of foreign exchange remained high while

inflows were low.

This matter was raised at the Monetary Board meeting held on the same day (i.e. on 11th May

2021) by the 30th respondent who chaired the meeting. He had informed the Board that the 10%

conversion imposed on the exporters were insufficient and to enhance it to 25% in order to

increase the liquidity situation in the forex market. Appointed member, Jayawardena (32B

respondent) agreed with the said proposal but it was strongly objected to by the Secretary to the

Treasury (31st respondent). The position he has taken at the said meeting was that, without

ensuring the conversion of the 10 percent margin of exports, increasing the percentage of the

conversion is futile. Appointed member Kumarasinghe (32nd respondent) too had agreed with the

view expressed by the 31st respondent. At this stage 32B respondent whilst disagreeing with the

108

31st respondent had taken up the position, merely because 10% cannot be enforced, the decision

to increase the margin to 25% should not be taken, is not rational. The 32B respondent has

emphasised the importance of ensuring the enforcement while increasing the conversion

percentage to an appropriate amount in order to improve the liquidity in the market; which was

the most burning issue at that point of time.

In addition to the above discussion, the Monetary Board had made a strong plea to the 31st

respondent to impose import duties on non-essential items or to agree to the Central Bank

imposing LC margins on non-essential imports.

In this respect, a meeting was held at Temple Trees with the Prime Minister (2nd respondent) on

16th June 2021, to discuss the liquidity issues. The Central Bank had submitted a proposal to

introduce LC margins, between 100%-150 % until 31st December 2021 as a temporary measure

to resolve the liquidity crisis faced by the country. The 29th respondent as the State Minister of

Finance (as he then was) had requested the Central Bank to implement the said proposal without

delay.

However, even before the implementation of any decision of the Monetary Board, the 38th

respondent addressing a letter to the 30th Respondent dated 21st June 2021 under the heading

“Proposal to impose 150 percent deposit margin on letters of credit” had referred to the

following matters:

“Secretary to the Treasury has brought to my notice that despite his objection the

members of Monetary Board are pursuing a proposal to impose a 150 percent deposit

margin on letters of credit to curtail imports to manage international reserves. [..]”

“Furthermore, Government policy initiatives has put significant emphasis to curtail

imports through the encouragement of viable import substitution production activities

with food production including dairy, grains, fish and dried fish, organic fertilizer

manufacturing, essential drugs and vaccines, renewable energy sources, IT and enabling

services which are on the top of the list. These import substitutions are being pursued

through rigorous and front loaded policy initiatives and actions. The targeted import is

around USD 17,000Mn. to keep trade deficit below USD 5,000Mn.

109

In this background, imposition of 150 percent deposit margin without clearly defined

items being identified, may have serious repercussions on a much needed economic

recovery in both domestic and in export industries and recreating employment and

livelihood opportunities to the people.”

Having referred to the above matter the 38th respondent had reproduced “Report on the

Establishment of the Central Bank of Ceylon; Sessional paper XIV- explanatory note given to

paragraph 08 in order to emphasize the importance of close working relation with the

Government and had finally informed the 30th respondent in the final paragraph,

“Therefore, it is advisable that the Monetary Board refrains from the imposition of

deposit margins on LC’s without proper appraisal and approval of the Cabinet of

Ministers.”

We observe that the 38th respondent had generated the above letter neither on instructions nor on

directions of the President as opposed to the letter of 23rd March 2020 referred to above. From

the tenor of this letter (21st June 2021) it is apparent that the reason to generate this

communication is the information conveyed to him by the 31st respondent. This Court also

observes that this communication is a clear attempt by the 38th respondent to interfere with the

functions of the Monetary Board / Central Bank without any authority whatsoever at a time the

country was facing a major crisis due to lack of liquidity.

In this regard it is pertinent to note that at all times relevant to these applications, the Central

Bank was placed as an institution coming within the purview of the Finance Minister and at no

stage the portfolio of the Finance Minister was held by the President. In fact, the 38th respondent

emphasises this fact in presenting his argument to counter the allegation that he interfered with

the affairs of the Central Bank and/or the Monetary Board.

We further observe that the minutes of the Monetary Board meeting dated 07th July 2021 reveal

that no approval to introduce LC margins as proposed by the Monetary Board had been received.

The 30th respondent in his letter addressed to the 38th respondent on 13th July 2021 having

described the circumstances under which the introduction of LC margins was proposed had

confirmed that the said proposal was not given effect to as the Central Bank did not receive the

approval of the Cabinet.

110

According to the reports of the Central Bank, there is a significant drop in foreign remittances

from workers abroad and it came down from USD 580.9 million in January 2020 to USD 204.9

million in February 2022. However, a significant increase in the use of informal methods in

transferring money such as Hawala / Undial by Sri Lankan workers abroad was observed mainly

due to the high exchange rates offered in the “Gray market” compared to the exchange rate

maintained by the Central Bank. Additional few rupees offered by the banks to encourage

foreign remittances through the banking system showed no results.

As found out by the Auditor General, by April 2021 the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) had

observed the potential risks associated with foreign currency debt service payments and had

recommended to take expeditious measures to attract financial flows through government

intervention.

The Auditor General had not found in his report any meaningful decision taken by the

Government to recover from this position until March 2022.

As further observed by the Auditor General under paragraph 3.1.35 of his report, the Central

Bank, had maintained Sri Lanka Rupee at a static position using moral suasion for the period

April 2021 to 5th September 2021 and 6th September 2021 to 7th March 2022. During this period

the Central Bank had sold USD 1773.8 million and purchased USD 746.2 million from the

Domestic Exchange Market making a net sale of USD 1,027.6 million. This outflow of USD had

led to further depletion of the reserves.

There is also an observation by the Auditor General with regard to the interference by the 38th

respondent P.B. Jayasundera in deciding the exchange rate even though he had absolutely no role

to play under the Monetary Law. As observed in paragraph 3.2.1 there is reference to a

discussion having taken place at the Monetary Board meeting on 21st April 2021 regarding

carrying out a directive given by the 38th respondent to utilize 100 million USD out of a loan of

500 million USD received from the Chinese Development Bank. These monies were released

mainly for the purpose of maintaining the rupee at the rate of Rs.192.00. The above instructions

were given by the 38th respondent at a meeting where the Central Bank Officials were present at

his office on 16th April 2021. They had been further instructed that in implementing the said

directive, to issue to the two state banks USD 75 million each and the State Banks in turn had

been instructed to sell USD 50 million at the domestic interbank Forex market at the rate of Rs.

111

192. Due to the above sale Sri Lanka Rupee appreciated to Rs 191.97 (on 19.04.2021) from Rs.

200 (on 12.04.2021). An appreciation by Rs. 8.03.

In this regard it is pertinent to note that on 20th April 2021, the 30th respondent in a note

addressed to the 38th respondent had conveyed the observations of the Central Bank relating to

the release of USD 150 million to two state banks and the appreciation of the rupee in the

manner referred to above. According to these observations the sudden appreciation of the Rupee

had resulted in an outflow of foreign exchange greater than the average customer foreign

exchange outflows reported by the banks. Whereas outflows on 16th April 2021 remained at USD

92 million however, on 19th April 2021 it had increased to USD 137 million. They further

observed that “CBSL is of the view that it will be utmost difficult to maintain the exchange rate

at around Rs 192.00 levels immediately without allowing gradual appreciation of LKR in a

sustainable manner while creating sizable FX inflows to the banking system to ensure the smooth

behaviour of the domestic FX market with a view to curb an undue volatility in the exchange

rate”.

However, the response of the 38th respondent to these observations suggest that he disagrees with

these views of the Central Bank. The 38th respondent in a note dated 27th April 2021 to the 30th

respondent had observed that “I am of the view that the release of USD 150 million to two state

banks have worked well to ease the undue market scarcity. Further, infusion could have

stabilized the rate since a US $ 175 Mn is expected by AIIB by this week to enhance forex cover

of the two state banks”. He further observes that “however you seem to believe “gradualism”

and “moral suasion” will stabilize the market. Since this is your subject, I do not wish to discuss

this matter. However, I request a clarification as to how “gradualism” works and what and how

the “moral suasion” is carried out by the CBSL to raise official reserve position of the country”.

Furthermore the 38th respondent had observed that “The management of external stability within

Government Policy Framework is a responsibility of the Monetary Board and the Governor of

the Central Bank of Sri Lanka”.

Even though the Monetary Board was using moral suasion in controlling the depreciation of Sri

Lanka Rupee, the Board had finally observed the danger in continuing it for a longer period and

in the report submitted to the Finance Minister (2A respondent) under section 64 and 68 of the

Monetary Law dated 14th April 2021 had stated that;

112

“Exchange rate adjustment: After following various types of exchange rate regimes in

the world, we have moved to a flexible exchange rate regime since 2001, in which the rupee

has been allowed to fluctuate according to market forces. Because of the extensive adverse

side effects (on government debt, domestic price level, etc.) we have attempted over the last

few months to maintain the exchange rate at around Rs. 202.00 per US dollar. To do this

effectively for a long period of time, the Central Bank does not have the intervention strength

in terms of reserves to be supplied to the market, and moral suasion on banks alone is unable

to sustain exchange rate stability. If exchange rate stability could be maintained, it is better

than continuous depreciation as it happened since late 1970s. To maintain such a policy;

a) The policies being taken to achieve a current account balance (if not a surplus) need

to indicate a gradual success and

b) A large replenishment of reserves through a significant inflow of funds is needed.

If these do not take place, then some sacrifice in the exchange rate stability objective of

the Government may have to be made.”

However, no progress was made in achieving the recommendations made in order to protect the

official reserves until the official reserves dropped to a point that it was only sufficient for two

weeks of imports. Finally, the Monetary Board floated the exchange rate with effect from 08th

March 2022 and informed the public that “greater flexibility in the exchange rate will be allowed

to the markets with immediate effect. The Central Bank is also of the view that forex transactions

would take place at levels which are not more than Rs. 230 per US dollar”. The 29th respondent

at a meeting of the CEOs of Licensed Commercial Banks and Licensed Specialised Banks on 9th

March 2022 had stated that “certain trades may take place beyond the exchange rate stated by

CBSL considering the greater flexibility that has been permitted”. 32B respondent submitted that

the above statement of the 29th respondent resulted in the sudden depreciation of the rupee

between 225 to 364 (buying rate) and 229 to 377 (selling rate).

Within the statutory scheme of Monetary Law, the Central Bank is responsible for securing

economic and price stability and mapping out the monetary policy. However, if a difference of

opinion between the Minister of Finance and the Monetary Board exists as to whether the

monetary policy of the Monetary Board is directed to the greatest advantage of the people, the

Minister and the Board shall endeavour to reach an agreement. In the event such agreement

113

cannot be reached, the Minister may direct the Board to follow the policy in accordance with the

opinion of the Government. In such situations the Minister should inform the Board that the

Government accepts the responsibility for adoption of such policy. According to the Auditor-

General there had been no such direction made by the Minister in relation to the manner in which

exchange rate should be determined. He had expressed the view that until the Minister makes

such a direction, the Monetary Board has the statutory power to decide on this issue. However,

the Monetary Board had not taken a decision on this matter until 08th March 2022.

The situation that prevailed at the Monetary Board and surrounding circumstances is reflected in

the minutes of the Monetary Board meeting held on 04th August 2021. These minutes relate to

the discussions of the Monetary Board on the Board Paper titled “Performance of Foreign

reserve management activities for the six months ended on 30th June 2021”. At this meeting 32C

respondent (Ranee Jayamaha) had said “it is time for the Monetary Board to assess its own

performance” and had noted that by law, the Monetary Board had been given instruments to deal

with situations like what prevailed at that time and had further observed that “over the last one

and half years the Monetary Board has only been debating about using these instruments”.

Further elaborating on this the 32C respondent had identified the “exchange rate” as one such

instrument and had said that the Monetary Board did not use it. The 32C respondent had

observed that “the exchange rate is fixed by moral suasion and it is currently at an unrealistic

level with hardly any transactions taking place at that rate”. She had further stated that the

Monetary Board had not used these instruments given by the statute and thereby has brought the

Central Bank reserves to a negative level. At the same meeting the 30th respondent

(W.D.Lakshman) had observed that the government fears a political backlash due to the

impact on the prices following an upward adjustment to the exchange rate. The DG(S) had

observed that the Monetary Board and the Government must understand and act swiftly as time

is very critical. He had further said that “these issues have been repeatedly brought to the

attention of the Monetary Board by himself as well as by many departments over and over again

and no tangible decisions have been taken by the Monetary Board”. The 30th respondent had

said that the 2A respondent (Basil Rajapaksa) is not in favour of any adjustment to the exchange

rate, but agreed to discuss the issue with the other members of the Cabinet. However, the 29th

respondent in his capacity as the State Minister, was strongly against any adjustment being made

to the exchange rate.

114

This Court observes, that the Monetary Board is empowered to intervene and take necessary

measures in the face of a deficit in the international balance of payment by virtue of the

provisions in the Monetary Law and is also under a duty to report to the Minister the steps so

taken by virtue of Section 68 of the said Law. When we consider the material placed before us,

this Court did not, however, observe any proactive measures taken by the Monetary Board to the

challenges it faced either in bolstering the foreign reserves or preserving the meagre foreign

reserve the country had during the period in question. Considering the sequence of events, it

appears that the Monetary Board had succumbed to the dictates of officials who had no authority

to intervene in the affairs of the Central Bank. We were also privy to material that disclosed that

a series of discussions had been held with a view to permit the exchange rate to be determined

by market forces, supply and demand of USD, but we note with dismay that no positive steps

were taken to implement a ‘moderate method’ to protect the reserves and stem the depletion

when the need to do so was felt but waited till the 11th hour to take the decision to float the Sri

Lanka Rupee, by which time the reserves had dipped to such critical level and reserves were

barely sufficient only for the purchases required for two weeks.

There is no material before us to draw the conclusion that the Monetary Board had acted in terms

of Section 3 of the Monetary Law regarding the determination of the par value of the Sri Lanka

Rupee. What can be seen from the available facts is that the Monetary Board had taken steps to

maintain the Rupee value through ‘moral suasion’ which does not appear to have been effective

in stemming the depletion of foreign reserves.

Apart from the failures referred to on the part of the Monetary Board, which is a pivotal

institution in shaping the monetary policy of the country, this Court also cannot condone the

conduct of the 31st and 38th respondents. The 31st respondent (S.R.Attygalle) being a top level

senior public servant, as the Secretary of the Treasury having the full knowledge of the bleak

situation in which the economy of the country was, yet stood in the way of the Monetary Board

taking decisions which might have had a positive effect on the fiscal position. We also note with

dismay the conduct of the 38th respondent (P.B.Jayasundera) who appears to have had

considerable clout on the public servants. From the material placed before us it is clear that he

had interfered with the functions of the Monetary Board and had prevailed upon the decision

115

making process of the Monetary Board. The directives he had given to the treasury officials and

the Central Bank to use USD 100 million out of the USD 500 million loan received from the

Chinese Bank and to maintain the par value of the Sri Lanka Rupee at Rs.192.00 as against the

US Dollar and the directive on the Governor not to pursue the proposal to enhance the LC

margin to 150 percent without Cabinet approval are two such instances, both of which are

arbitrary and ultra vires of his powers.

In view of findings of this Court as elaborated hereinbefore, we observe that the Monetary Board

(28th respondent) that has the statutory duty to take necessary initiatives regarding the par value

and the exchange rate of the Sri Lanka Rupee and the power to determine international monetary

policy, maintaining international stability of the Sri Lanka Rupee and to adopt necessary policies

to cause remedial measures to remedy serious decline in the international reserves have failed to

take meaningful measures in a timely manner. This inaction in our view breaches the public trust

reposed on the 28th respondent. Furthermore, the arbitrary and irrational conduct of the 31st and

38th respondents as discussed hereinbefore had contributed to the aforementioned inaction of the

28th respondent. This conduct of the 31st and 38th respondents in our view breaches the public

trust reposed in them.

CONCLUSION

When we considered these two applications, the main focus was on the economic situation of the

country between November 2019 and April 2022. The reason for this focus was that the core

issue the Court was invited to consider was whether the impact of the unprecedented economic

crisis on the society resulted in the infringement of fundamental rights of the people and if so,

whether any one or more of the respondents were responsible for such infringements due to their

actions and / or inaction during this period, while holding office in executive and/or

administrative branches of the Government. Many of the respondents argued that the root causes

for this debacle spread well beyond this time period and therefore no responsibility could be

attributed to these respondents in the manner alleged by the petitioners. They claimed that heavy

borrowings of previous Governments and the mismanagement of such funds had a direct impact

on the debt sustainability of the country. While we take note of this argument, in considering the

responsibility of the respondents, our attention was drawn to the issue as to whether the conduct

of the respondents during the relevant period directly contributed to the economic crisis.

116

In deciding this issue, we are of the view that the respondents ought to have known the factual

situation that prevailed when they assumed public office and they should have fashioned their

acts and efforts to ensure that the situation is not further aggravated but resolved. On assumption

of public office, it was their duty to ensure that the existing issues were addressed and resolved

in the best interest of the country and take every possible measure to avoid an aggravation to the

detriment of the people.

Public trust reposed on them demands resolving of issues. Any conduct which is manifestly

unreasonable, arbitrary or irrational that would lead to further aggravation of issues which are

detrimental to the public, tantamount a breach of the trust bestowed on them. This is not the

recognition of a ‘new right’ – a right to infallible decisions by the public authorities – but

recognition of public officers requiring to discharge their duties to the satisfaction of their

inherent core obligations, with due respect to the public trust reposed on them.

It is common ground that the country’s economy deteriorated not overnight but over a period of

time under consideration in the matters before us. It was evident from the material placed before

us that the Gross Official Reserves and the Reserves of the Central Bank were depleted and had

reached unprecedented low levels, creating a situation of which the effects were devastating on

the entire citizenry without exception. The severe hardships the people had to suffer due to

scarcities in essentials such as fuel, gas and medicines coupled with long hours of power

shortages brought the lives of people to a standstill and the suffering the public had to undergo

was undoubtedly immeasurable.

The respondents holding high public offices bestowed with powers which bear a direct impact on

the lives of the people, we presume, were alive to the Directive Principles of State Policy and

Fundamental Duties. They were duty bound to discharge in the manner spelt out in the directive

principles in our Constitution.

“The directive principles of State policy are not wasted ink in the pages of the Constitution. They

are a living set of guidelines which the State and its agencies should give effect to” per Prasanna

Jayawardena, PCJ. in Ravindra Gunawaradane Kariyawasam v CEA, SC FR 141/2015 Sc

minutes of 4.4.2019.

117

They cannot shirk their responsibilities by merely claiming that the decisions that were taken

were “policy decisions” they were entitled to take. We note that Article 27 of the Constitution

pledges a democratic socialist society the objectives of which include the realisation by all

citizens of an adequate standard of living for themselves and their families including adequate

food, clothing and housing, the continuous improvement of living conditions and the full

enjoyment of leisure and social and cultural opportunities, which the public were deprived of

during this unfortunate period due to mishandling of the economy when it was within the full

power of the respondents to take meaningful action to prevent such a calamity. From the material

placed before this Court it is as clear as can be, that the respondents had failed to act when they

were not only put on notice but were fully alive to the predicament the country would face.

The respondents argued that they took all possible measures within their purview to remedy the

situation. They further argued that the time period under consideration overlapped with the time

period where serious challenges that resulted due to the COVID-19 pandemic that had to be

overcome. As we have discussed hereinbefore, prolonged inaction due to arbitrary, irrational

and/or manifestly unreasonable decisions and inadequate measures over the period under

consideration had heavily contributed to disastrous consequences.

The following observations and/or comments as recorded in the minutes of the Monetary Board

meeting held on 4th August 2021 shed light on the situation which prevailed at the relevant time.

During the period between January and June 2021 – within a short period of six months -

reserves of the Central Bank and Gross Official Reserves had decreased by 35 and 28 percent

respectively. For the first time in the history of our country the net Central Bank foreign reserves

recorded a negative balance of USD 78 million. As at 03rd August 2021 net Central Bank assets

were negative by USD 124 million and net Gross Official Reserves remained at USD 155

million. The Deputy Governor (S) had observed that

“Government does not have foreign exchange and the Gross Official Reserves has declined to

critical levels, government has no rupees either, government is depending on the CBSL for the

foreign exchange as well as rupees for its domestic and foreign financing and very soon the

CBSL will be required to meet the obligations of state banks and state entities such as CPC as

well. Sri Lanka cannot go to the international market and borrow, foreign governments are not

118

lending to Sri Lanka because of the credit ratings of the country and its high default risk”. The

DG(N) had noted that the

“Minister himself (2A respondent) stated that it is difficult to expect any sizeable funds coming

into the country at this stage”.

The above quote aptly depicts the bleak picture and the disastrous state of our economy even by

August 2021.

It is also pertinent to observe that in deciding the issues before us, this Court while considering

each matter separately, had to consider all matters together in a holistic manner to decide the

core issue, whether there was any infringement of fundamental rights. The reason being, the

matters we considered are intrinsically interwoven and a focus on issues in isolation would fail to

capture reality. In this regard, we are mindful of one of the arguments of the petitioners that the

purported imprudent decision brought about a domino effect and led to a series of events to

which we paid attention. Such an event being the tax revision introduced in December 2019,

which resulted in downgrading by rating agencies, depletion of foreign reserves, losing access to

international financing institutions and single digit inflation spiralling to double digits.

Additionally, the continued maintenance of an artificial exchange rate and the failure to reverse

tax reliefs and seek assistance from the IMF in a timely manner collectively, contributed towards

the rapid deterioration of the economy. The cumulative effect of the conduct of the respondents,

in our view, is what contributed to the ultimate debacle. Gross Official Reserves which stood at

USD 7,642 million by end 2019 had depleted to USD 155 million by August 2021. The scarcity

of foreign exchange with the Government and the Central Bank brought about severe hardships

to the people.

The trust reposed in the respondents was not a higher principle or epithet unique to their offices.

‘Public trust’ is an inherent responsibility bestowed on all officers who exercise powers which

emanate from the sovereignty of the People. Therefore, as public officers, the respondents were

obliged, at all times, to act in a manner which honoured the trust reposed in them. We are of the

view that by the actions, omissions, decisions and conduct hereinbefore identified to have

demonstrably contributed to the economic crisis and we are of the view that the 2nd (Mahinda

Rajapaksa), 2A (Basil Rajapaksa), 28th (Monetary Board), 29th (Nivard Cabraal), 30th

(W.D.Lakshman), 31st (S.R.Attygalle), 32nd (Samantha Kumarasinghe), 32A (Gotabaya

119

Rajapaksa) and 38th (P.B.Jayasundra) respondents had violated the Public Trust reposed in them

and we hold that they were in breach of the fundamental right to equal protection of the law

ordained by Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

These petitioners both in applications SC FR 195/2022 and SC FR 212/2022 have invoked the

fundamental rights jurisdiction of this Court in the interest of the public. We note that none of the

petitioners are claiming any loss had impacted on the petitioners on an individual basis but their

assertion is as a result of the conduct of the respondents the entire citizenry had to undergo

hardships which could have been avoided. In the circumstances aforesaid, we are of the view that

it would not be appropriate to order the respondents to pay compensation to the petitioners and as

such we are not inclined to order compensation. We order however that each petitioner in both

applications would be entitled to costs in sum of rupees 150,000.00 each.

Jayantha Jayasuriya, PC.

Chief Justice

Buwaneka Aluwihare, PC.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Vijith K. Malalgoda, PC.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Murdu N.B. Fernando, PC.

Judge of the Supreme Court

120

Priyantha Jayawardena PC, J

Both the aforementioned applications were taken up together for hearing. Accordingly, one

judgment is delivered in respect of both applications. I am afraid I am not in agreement with the

majority judgment.

The petitioners in both applications stated that they filed the instant applications on behalf of

their own interests and on behalf of the interests of the public.

SC/FR/Application No. 195/2022

The Fundamental Rights Application No. 195/2022 was filed on the 3rd of June, 2022 and an

amended application was filed on the 18th of July, 2022.

In the said application, inter alia, the following persons were made respondents;

(a) The 2nd, 2A, and 2B respondents are the former Cabinet Ministers charged

with the subject of Finance,

(b) The 3rd to the 27th respondents are the remaining members of the Cabinet of

Ministers at the time the Cabinet made the decision to reduce taxes,

(c) The 28th respondent is the Monetary Board of the Central Bank. The 29th to

31st respondents are the former Governors of the Central Bank and the

Secretary to the Treasury of the Republic, who were members of the 28th

respondent. The 32nd respondent is a former appointed member of the 28th

respondent,

(d) The 38th respondent is the former Secretary to the President,

(e) The 32A respondent is the former President of the Republic (hereinafter

referred to as the “former President”), and the Head of State, Head of

Executive, the Cabinet of Ministers, and the Government at the time material

to this application.

121

Later, two members of the Monetary board were added as the 32B and 32C respondents.

However, leave was not granted against them.

Facts averred in the SC/FR/Application No. 195/2022

In the said petition, under the heading “The petitioners’ application in a nutshell”, the petitioners

stated that a significant economic hardship was faced by the citizens of the Republic, including

high levels of inflation, the non-availability of vital resources, goods, commodities and other

essential items, including fuel, liquid petroleum gas, medicine and food, and the dearth of

foreign currency, all of which arose consequent to the mismanagement of the economy of the

Republic by the respondents to the said application.

Furthermore, the acts of the 29th to 32nd respondents in their official capacities as members of the

28th respondent, by neglect and wilful default, caused loss and damage to the Central Bank of

Sri Lanka and consequently, to the citizens of Sri Lanka at large.

The petitioners further stated that since 2008, the various governments of the Republic have

increased their reliance on foreign sources for financing the debt of the Republic. Further,

between the years 2015 and 2019, 46% of the Republic's fiscal debt was financed by foreign

financing means. Consequently, the exposure to foreign debt commensurately increased.

Moreover, the policy decisions taken by consecutive governments resulted in the foreign debt

owed by the Republic to foreign nations being almost equivalent to the local debt when the 1st

respondent was appointed as the Prime Minister of the Republic in 2019.

Further, when the former President was elected in 2019 as the President of the Republic, the

fiscal debt of the Republic had risen to a proportion as high as 86.6% of the Republic's GDP.

Furthermore, he was also faced with increasing foreign debt.

The petitioners stated that the former President Gotabaya Rajapaksa published an election

manifesto titled "Vistas of Prosperity and Splendour", containing several policy changes, inter

alia, for the purpose of providing "emergency relief" to people and local ventures who were

suffering under the policies of the previous government. Further, he promised to deliver a "new

122

people-oriented policy on economics focused on reducing the cost of living and taxes

imposed”. Moreover, in the said Manifesto, the former President undertook to replace the Inland

Revenue Act with a system that would achieve an economic revival of the country.

Further, after the former President assumed duties as the President of the Republic, the

government reduced the taxes payable by the people of the country. Accordingly, the petitioners

stated that the former President, together with the 2nd respondent, reduced the taxes for the sole

purpose of delivering the election promises made. Hence, the decision to reduce taxes was

purely politically motivated. Furthermore, due to the said reduction in taxation, the Republic

suffered enormous and unprecedented economic damage.

The petitioners further stated that at the time the instant application was filed, the people of the

Republic were facing unprecedented economic hardships, with extreme levels of inflation

causing the prices of essential goods and services to increase at extreme rates. In particular, the

petitioners stated that in April 2022, the price of essential goods had increased from the previous

year. Thus, people are unable to buy basic commodities. Moreover, because of the high levels of

inflation, a large portion of the public staged protests throughout the country.

Furthermore, the severity of the Republic's intentional depletion of foreign currency reserves

under the watch of the 28th to the 32nd respondents, the 2nd and the 2A respondents and/or one or

more of them is evident by default in servicing foreign debt.

The petitioners stated that the aforementioned circumstances, effecting the economic situation,

can be attributed to the wilful mismanagement of the economy by the 38th, 2nd, 2A, and the

29th to the 32nd respondents, who were in control of the 28th respondent at the time material

to the instant application.

Further, the petitioners stated that the 2B respondent, during his brief tenure as the Cabinet

Minister of Finance of the Republic, provided in his speech a realistic and transparent overview

of the state of the economy of the country on the 4th of May, 2022.

The petitioners further stated that it was only on the 25th of May, 2022 that they became

aware of the acts perpetuated by the 29th to the 32nd, and 38th respondents, which caused

the mismanagement of the economy of the Republic.

123

Moreover, the Central Bank of Sri Lanka is the apex body and authority of the Republic,

responsible for the administration, supervision and regulation of the monetary, financial, and

payment systems of Sri Lanka, and is charged with the duty of securing economic and price

stability, as well as financial system stability, with a view to encouraging and promoting the

development of productive resources belonging to the Republic. The 28th respondent is vested

with the powers, duties, and functions of the Central Bank and is responsible for the

management, operations, and administration of the Central Bank.

Accordingly, the 28th respondent failed and/or neglected to maintain an international reserve

adequate to meet any foreseeable deficits in the international balance of payments, so as to

maintain the international stability of the rupee, and thus acted in contravention of section 66 of

the Monetary Law Act.

Furthermore, in January 2022, the Republic took steps to pay an International Sovereign Bond in

a sum of US$ 500,000,000/-, notwithstanding the depleting foreign reserves available to the

Republic.

Moreover, fixing the exchange rate to a value below Rs. 203 to the US$ caused loss and damage

to the Central Bank of Sri Lanka and irreparable loss and damage to the citizens of the Republic.

The petitioners stated that, as far as the petitioners are aware, the 28th respondent has not sought

to pursue any form of legal proceedings and/or disciplinary action against the 29th to 32nd

respondents and/or any one or more of them, despite their contravention of the provisions of the

Monetary Law Act and by wilful default and/or by misconduct causing loss and damage to the

Central Bank of Sri Lanka.

The petitioners further stated that the actions and decisions of the former President, and/or the

2nd to 27th respondents, and/or the 28th to the 32nd respondents and/or the 33rd respondent and/or

any one or more of them in mismanaging the economy of the Republic and failing to abide by

the mandatory provisions of the Monetary Law Act have violated and/or imminently violated

and/or continuously violated the Fundamental Right to equality and equal protection of the Law

guaranteed to the petitioners and to the people of the Republic under Article 12(1) of the

Constitution. Further, the said decisions violated the Fundamental Right to the freedom to

124

engage by himself or in association with others in any lawful occupation, profession, trade,

business or enterprise guaranteed to the citizens of the Republic under Article 14(1)(g) of the

Constitution.

In the circumstances, petitioners prayed for the following;

“

(a) Grant Leave to Proceed with this Application;

(b) Declare that the Fundamental Right guaranteed to the petitioners under Article 12(1)

of the Constitution is being imminently infringed and/or has been infringed and/or is

continuously being infringed by the 1st to 32nd Respondents (save and except for the

2B Respondent) and/or the 33rd Respondent (in his representative capacity) and/or

any one or more of the Respondents;

(c) Declare that the Fundamental Right guaranteed to the Petitioner under Article

14(1)(g) of the Constitution is being imminently infringed and/or has been infringed

and/or is continuously being infringed by the 1st to 32nd Respondents (save and except

for the 2B Respondent) and/or the 33rd Respondent (in his representative capacity)

and/or any one or more of the Respondents;

(d) Declare that the Fundamental Right guaranteed to the Petitioner under Article

14(1)(g) of the Constitution is being imminently infringed and/or has been infringed

and/or is continuously being infringed by the 28th, 29th, 31st and 32nd Respondent by

causing the Republic to settle the International Sovereign Bond in January 2022 as

evinced by P21(a);

(e) Make Order directing the 28th Respondent to recover and/or take steps to recover all

losses and damages occasioned onto the Central Bank of Sri Lanka by officers of the

28th Respondent and/or former officers of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, including

the 29th to the 32nd Respondents and/or any one or more of them, consequent to the

decision made to set the value of the Sri Lankan Rupee at a value of and/or around

Rs. 203/-, which may be uncovered by an audit prayed for hereinunder and/or

otherwise;

125

(f) Make Order directing the 28th Respondent to recover all losses and damages

occasioned onto the Central Bank of Sri Lanka by officers of the 28th Respondent

and/or former officers of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, including the 29th to the 32nd

Respondents and/or any one or more of them, consequent to the decision made to

settle the payment referred to in P21(a), which may be uncovered by an audit prayed

for hereinunder and/or otherwise;

(g) Grant an Interim Order directing the 35th to 37th Respondents to expeditiously look

into the matters contained in the Application (P22) and submit its observations to

Your Lordships’ Court within 3 months, or such other time which Your Lordships’

Court may deem reasonable;

(h) Grant an Interim Order directing the 34th respondent to conduct an audit into the

affairs of the 28th Respondent, and determine the loss caused to the Central Bark of

Sri Lanka by

i. the decision made to set the value of the Sri Lankan Rupee at a value of

and/or around Rs. 203/- in a manner contrary to Section 66 of the Monetary

Law Act, and further determine;

ii. the delay in obtaining facilities from the IMF by the Republic consequent to

the decisions made by the 29th Respondent.

(i) Grant an Interim Order preventing the 29th and/or the 30th and/or the 31st and/or the

32nd Respondents from alienating any assets belonging thereto which are situated in

the Republic pending the hearing and determination of this application by Your

Lordships' Court;

(j) Grant an Interim Order preventing the 2nd and/or the 2A and/or the 38th Respondents

from alienating any assets belonging thereto which are situated in the Republic

pending the hearing and determination of this application by Your Lordships' Court;

(k) Grant an Interim Order directing the 28th Respondent to produce to Your Lordships

Court the documents made reference to by Mr. Jayawardena PC and Dr. Ranee

Jayamaha at the Committee On Public Enterprise meeting held on 25.05.2022

126

wherein it was suggested that the Republic should seek relief and/or other financial

assistance from the International Monetary Fund;

(l) Grant an Interim Order directing the 28th Respondent to produce to Your Lordships'

Court the documents made reference to by Mr. Jayawardena PC and Dr. Ranee

Jayamaha at the Committee on Public Enterprise meeting held on 25.05.2022

wherein it is recorded that the appointed members of the 28th Respondent objected to

and/ or otherwise disagreed with the artificial maintenance exchange rate of the Sri

Lanka Rupee at and/or at a level below Rs. 203/-;

(m) Grant an Interim Order directing the 39th Respondent to produce to Your Lordships'

Court, the minutes of the Committee on Public Enterprise meeting held on

25.05.2022;

(mm) Grant an Interim Order preventing the 2nd Respondent and/or the 2A Respondent

and / or the 32A Respondent, and/ or any one or more of the 29th to the 32nd

Respondents and / or the 38th Respondent from leaving the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka without obtaining the prior permission of Your Lordships

Court;

(mmm) Grant an Interim Order preventing the 32A Respondent from alienating any

assets belonging thereto which are situated in the Republic pending the hearing

and determination of this application by Your Lordships Court:

(n) Costs;

(o) Such other and further relief as Your Lordships Court shall seem meet.”

[emphasis added]

127

Facts averred in the SC/FR Application No. 212/2022

The SC/FR Application No. 212/2022 was made on the 17th of June, 2022. Thereafter, an

amended petition was filed on the 15th of July, 2022, naming, inter alia, the following

respondents;

a) the 1(b) respondent is the former President of Sri Lanka and was the President

of the Republic at all times material to the instant application,

b) the 2nd respondent is the former Prime Minister and the former Minister of

Finance, inter alia, from the 21st of November, 2019 to the 2nd of March,

2020, from the 9th of August, 2020 to the 8th of July, 2021,

c) the 3rd respondent was the Minister of Finance from the 28th of July, 2021 to

the 3rd of April, 2022,

d) the 6th respondent was the Governor of the Central Bank from December,

2019 to September, 2021 and the Chief Executive Officer of the Central Bank

and the Head of the Monetary Board of the Central Bank,

e) the 7th respondent was the Governor of the Central Bank from the 15th of

September, 2021 to the 4th of April, 2022 and the Chief Executive Officer of

the Central Bank and the Head of the Monetary Board of the Central Bank,

f) the 9th respondent is the Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka

which has the power to do and perform all such acts as maybe necessary for

carrying out the duties under the Monetary Law Act,

g) the 10th respondent was the Secretary to the Ministry of Finance of Sri Lanka

from the 20th of November, 2019 to the 7th of April, 2022.

The petitioners in SC/FR/Application No. 212/2022 stated that the former President and the 2nd,

3rd, 6th, 7th, 9th and 10th respondents made a series of irrational, arbitrary, patently illegal and

wrongful decisions in complete dereliction of their statutory duties and fiduciary responsibility,

for collateral and extraneous purposes, during the years 2019 to 2022. As a result, the petitioners

128

and the public were denied their right to equality, equal protection of the law, and their right to

life as guaranteed by the Constitution.

The petitioners further stated that the aforesaid series of irrational, arbitrary, patently illegal, and

wrongful acts on the part of the former President and the 2nd, 3rd, 6th, 7th, 9th and 10th respondents

resulted in catastrophic long-term and short-term ramifications to the economy, caused the

country to default on the repayment of foreign debts for the first time in its history, and relegated

Sri Lanka to declare bankruptcy.

Further, the actions and/or inaction and gross mismanagement of the economy by the former

President of the Republic and the 2nd, 3rd, 6th, 7th, 9th and 10th respondents have resulted in an

unprecedented economic crisis driven by debt unsustainability.

Moreover, the International Monetary Fund (hereinafter referred to as the "IMF"), in its IMF-Sri

Lanka Staff Report for the 2021 Article IV Consultation dated 10th of February, 2022,

categorised, for the first time, the sovereign debt of Sri Lanka as "unsustainable” in general and

the external debt portfolio in particular. Thereafter, Sri Lanka issued a Notice of Default dated

12th of April, 2022 whereby Sri Lanka informed its creditors that all foreign debt repayments

would be suspended, which included the following categories of debt;

(a) all outstanding series of bonds issued in international capital markets,

(b) certain bilateral (government to government) credit,

(c) all foreign-currency denominated loan agreements or credit facilities with

commercial banks or institutional lenders, including those owned by foreign

governments, and

(d) all amounts payable following a call during the said interim period upon a

guarantee issued in respect of a debt of a third party.

Furthermore, on or around the 19th of May, 2022, Sri Lanka defaulted on loans that fell due and

was downgraded by rating agencies as a defaulting nation.

The petitioners further stated that they invoked the Fundamental Rights jurisdiction of this court

on the basis that the former President of the Republic and the 2nd, 3rd, 6th, 7th, 9th and 10th

129

respondents, by a series of actions commencing from 2019 and continuing to date, including acts

that have necessitated the defaulting of Sovereign debt, have infringed and/or violated and

continue to infringe and/or violate the Fundamental Rights of the petitioners and of all citizens

of Sri Lanka.

Moreover, at the Committee on Public Enterprises (COPE) meeting held on or about the 25th of

May, 2022, it transpired that the actions of the said respondents, inter alia, the RFI facility

(Rapid Financing Instrument) of the IMF and the management of the rupee, had engendered the

present crisis.

Further, the petitioners stated that the actions and/or inactions of the former President of the

Republic and the 2nd, 3rd, 6th, 7th, 9th and 10th respondents can be broadly categorised as follows;

(i) the illegal, arbitrary and unreasonable abolition, removal and/or reduction of

taxes effected in the year 2019 and the consequent reduction in government

revenue,

(ii) the refusal to change the aforesaid illegal, irrational and arbitrary decisions

to reduce taxes despite the consequent downgrading of Sri Lanka's credit

rating and the emergence of the COVID-19 Pandemic,

(iii) the failures and/or omissions to take remedial measures subsequent to

rating downgrade caused, inter alia, by the illegal, arbitrary and unlawful

actions of the 2nd, 3rd, 6th, 7th, 9th and 10th respondents,

(iv) the refusal and failure of the 2nd, 3rd, 6th, 7th, 9th and 10th respondents to

ensure conditions were met in a manner that would permit Sri Lanka to

avail itself of the sum of money agreed to be given to Sri Lanka by the IMF

in terms of the Extended Fund Facility agreement as set out hereinafter,

(v) the failure to obtain available aid to combat the economic hardships faced as

a consequence of COVID-19, especially in the face of a lack of government

revenue,

130

(vi) the failure to act in terms of the Monetary Law of Sri Lanka, to maintain

international reserves and the international stability of the rupee,

(vii) the failure to devalue the Sri Lankan rupee in a timely, orderly and

appropriate manner, despite widespread calls and demands to do so,

(viii) the failure and/or omissions to appropriately devalue the rupee which

resulted in fluctuations in worker remittances, and subsequently, the

country's foreign reserves and Sri Lanka's balance of payment,

(ix) the decision to continue to service Sovereign debt without any restructuring,

despite the futility and grievous prejudice in doing so,

(x) the continued refusal to seek the assistance of the IMF, despite widespread

calls and demands to do so,

(xi) the subsequent admission by the former President of the Republic that the

aforementioned refusal to seek the assistance of the IMF was wrong and

misconceived, and

(xii) the unreasonable, arbitrary actions and / or omissions which resulted in a

default of the country's foreign debt.

As such, the petitioners stated that the aforementioned respondents are directly responsible, inter

alia, for the unsustainability of Sri Lanka's foreign debt, its default on foreign loan repayments,

and the current state of the economy of Sri Lanka, and must be held accountable for the illegal,

arbitrary and unreasonable acts and/or omissions that culminated in the above.

Thus, the respondents have violated the Fundamental Rights guaranteed to the citizens of Sri

Lanka under Articles 12(1) and 14(1)(g) of the Constitution.

In the circumstances, the petitioners prayed for the following;

“

1. Grant the petitioners, Leave to Proceed;

131

2. Declare that the Fundamental Rights of the Petitioners and / or the citizens of Sri

Lanka to Equality and Equal Protection of the Law, as guaranteed by Article 12

(1), 14(1)(g) and 14A of the Constitution, have been infringed by the 1(b)

Respondent and the 2nd, 3rd, 6th, 7th, 9th and 10th Respondents, and/or their

servants or their agents, and that there is a continuing violation of their said

rights;

3. Declare that the Fundamental Rights of the Petitioners and/ or the citizens of Sri

Lanka to Equality and Equal Protection of the Law, as guaranteed by Articles

12(1), 14(1)(g) and 14A of the Constitution are in imminent danger of

infringement by the actions and/or inactions of the State including the actions/

inactions of the 1(b) Respondent and the 2nd, 3rd, 6th, 7th, 9th and 10th respondents;

4. Grant and issue the following interim reliefs/orders:

a) Make Order in terms of Article 126(4) of the Constitution, and call for and

examine the following record, including, but not limited to:

i. All records pertaining to communications and recommendations

received by and / or given to the 2nd, 3rd, 6th, 7th, 9th and 10th Respondents

by the Central Bank;

ii. All communications between the 1(b) Respondent and the 2nd, 3rd, 6th,

7th, 9th and 10th respondents in respect of the decisions taken with regard

to the matters impugned in this Application;

iii. The fiscal records, all reports published and or given to the 2nd, 3rd and

/or 9th respondents of and by the 9th Respondent Board under and in

terms of Sections 64 and 68 of the Monetary Law Act, No. 37 of 1974;

iv. Relevant Cabinet decisions in respect of the Ministry of Finance and the

2nd and 3rd Respondents, as well as decisions and Regulations by the 2nd

and 3rd Respondents with regard to the matters impugned in this

Application;

v. A transcript of the proceedings of the Committee on Public Enterprises

(COPE) held on or about 25th May 2022.

132

b) Direct the appointment of a committee under the auspices of Your Lordships'

Court to investigate the causes, steps taken by the aforementioned Respondents,

and compile a report on the financial irregularities and mismanagement of the

economy in relation to the specific instances enunciated in the present

Application;

c) Restrain the 2nd, 3rd, 6th, 7th and 10th Respondents, from overseas travel without

the prior approval of the Supreme Court, pending the investigation by the

aforementioned Committee;

5. Upon the submission of a report by the said Committee (appointed under the

auspices of Your Lordships' Court) to direct the Hon. Attorney General or any

other appropriate authorities or officers of the State to consider initiation of

investigations and prosecutions against any persons (as necessary) based on the

findings from the said report.

6. Make such further and other just and equitable orders as Your Lordship's Court

shall seem fit in the circumstances of this Application, under and in terms of

Article 126(4) of the Constitution;

7. Grant Costs;

8. Grant further and such other relief as Your Lordships Court may seem meet.”

[emphasis added]

Main issues raised by the petitioners in both applications are as follows;

The grounds urged by the petitioners can be broadly set out as follows;

(i) the introduction of tax cuts and the failure to reverse them,

(ii) delay in seeking assistance from the IMF,

133

(iii) the decision by the Monetary Board not to float the rupee, and thereafter floating

the same without any safeguards, and

(iv) the pay out of International Sovereign Bond of US$ 500 million on the 18th of

January, 2022.

Granting of leave to proceed by the Supreme Court

After the aforementioned applications were supported in court by the counsel for the petitioners

and after the hearing of the counsel for the respondents, the court made the following Orders on

the 7th of October, 2022;

“The court is inclined to grant leave to proceed in both applications for alleged

violations of Fundamental Rights guaranteed under Articles 12(1) and 14(1)(g) of

the Constitution. Accordingly, leave to proceed is granted for the said violations

in terms of Article 126(2) of the Constitution in both applications.

Court made the following orders in SC/FR/195/2022:

1. Leave to proceed is granted against 2nd, 2A, 2B, 3rd to 27th, 28th to 32nd,

32A and 38th respondents;

2. In view of Court's decision to grant leave to proceed against the 28th

respondent board and the fact that two of former Governors of the

Central Bank and two of the members who served in the 28th respondent

board during the period relevant to this application have been cited as

respondents in this application, Court is of the view that the remaining

members of the 28th respondent board who served during the said

period should also be made respondents.

Hence, petitioners are directed to add Dr. Sanjeewa Jayawardane P.C

and Dr. Ranee Jayamaha who are current members of the 28th

respondent board, as 32B & 32C respondents. Petitioners are further

134

directed to amend the Caption accordingly and the amended caption

should be filed within two weeks from today;

3. 34th respondent - Auditor General - is directed to conduct an audit

upon examining all relevant material and submit a report on the

following:

a. the decision made by the 28th respondent (Monetary Board) to set

the value of the Sri Lankan Rupee at or around 203/- as against

the US Dollar and all matters connected to the said decision;

b. the delay in seeking facilities from the IMF by the Republic;

c. all matters relating to the settlement of International Sovereign

Bond/s to the value of US$ 500 million on 18.01.2022, utilising

foreign reserves;

The said report should comprise observations, including whether any loss has

been caused to the Central Bank due to one or more of the three matters

referred to above. 34th respondent is further directed to submit to this court the

report titled “Special Audit Report on Financial Management and Public Debt

Control in Sri Lanka 2018-2022” dated 4th July 2022.

34th respondent is further required to comply with the above directions not later

than 2nd January 2023;

4. 28th respondent - The Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka -

is directed to produce all documents, relating to matters referred to by

Dr. Sanjeewa Jayawardane P.C and Dr. Ranee Jayamaha, at the meeting

of the Committee on Public Enterprise held on 25.05.2022, specifically;

a. the suggestion said to have been made, that the Republic

should seek relief and / or other financial assistance from the

International Monetary Fund,

b. objection to and/or otherwise disagreement expressed

regarding the artificial maintenance of exchange rate of the Sri

135

Lankan Rupee at / or at a level below 203/- as against the US

Dollar.

Said documents are required to be submitted to this Court not later than 30th

November 2022

5. Petitioners are directed to issue notices through the Registrar of this Court

on all the respondents against whom leave to proceed is granted and 32B

and 32C respondents within one week of filing the further amended caption

as per the direction (2) above.

6. Registrar is directed to communicate this order to the 28th and 34th

respondents forthwith.

Court makes the following orders in SC/FR/212/2022:

7. Leave to proceed is granted against 1(b), 2nd, 3rd, 6th, 7th, 9th and 10th

respondents;

8. 8th respondent - Governor of the Central Bank - is directed to produce

copies of communications and recommendations given to the 1(b), 2nd, 3rd,

6th, 7th, 9th and 10th respondents by the Central Bank with regard to the

matters impugned in this application during the time material to this

application, not later than 30th November 2022;

9. 9th respondent - The Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka - is

directed to produce copies of all reports given to the 2nd and 3rd

respondents in terms of sections 64 and 68 of the Monetary Law Act, No 37

of 1974, during the time relevant to this application, not later than 30th

November 2022

10. Petitioners are directed to issue notices through the Registrar of this Court

on all the respondents against whom leave to proceed is granted within one

week.

136

11. Registrar is directed to communicate this order to the 8th and 9th

respondents, forthwith…”

[emphasis added]

Objections filed by the respondents

Thereafter, the 28th, 32B, 32C, 29th to 34th, 38th and 39th respondents of SC/FR Application No.

195/2022 and the 1(a), 2nd, 3rd, 6th, 7th, 9th, 10th and 11th respondents of SC/FR Application No.

212/2022 filed objections denying responsibility with regard to the allegations set out in both

petitions and proceeded to justify their actions during the time material to the instant

application. Further, some of the respondents raised the following objections to the

maintainability of the instant applications;

(a) the Applications are misconceived in law,

(b) the subject matter of both the applications relates to policy of the government and

thus, this Court has no jurisdiction to hear and determine the said applications,

(c) the reliefs sought in both the Applications are beyond the scope of the

Fundamental Rights jurisdiction of this Court and contrary to the doctrine of

Separation of Powers enshrined in Articles 3 and 4 of the Constitution,

(d) there is no evidence whatsoever to show that the respondents have carried out any

act ultra vires or in violation of any law during their tenure,

(e) the petitions do not disclose any specific infringement of any particular

Fundamental Right of the petitioners by any particular executive or administrative

act within the meaning of the Constitution,

(f) the petitioners have not disclosed whether they are citizens of Sri Lanka in the

petition and therefore, are not entitled to any relief prayed for in terms of Article

14(1)(g) of the Constitution,

(g) institutional incapacity,

137

(h) the doctrine of political question and judicially discoverable and manageable

standards,

(i) the applications are out of time and ought to be dismissed in limine in terms of

Article 126(2) of the Constitution,

(j) the Parliament of Sri Lanka has now appointed a Select Committee to look into

the same matters that have been urged by the petitioners in both the

Applications, and therefore this court has no jurisdiction to entertain the

applications.

Did the respondents violate the Fundamental Rights of the petitioners by introducing tax

cuts and thereafter failing to revive them?

Events Leading to the Introduction of the New Tax Policy

The 32A respondent (in SR/FR/195/22 application) and the 1(b) respondent (in SR/FR/212/22

application), the former President published an election manifesto titled "Vistas of Prosperity

and Splendour", containing several policy changes, inter alia, for the purpose of providing

"emergency relief" to the people and local ventures who were suffering under the previous

government's policies. Further, he promised to deliver a "new people oriented policy on

economics focused on reducing the cost of living and taxes imposed”.

The said Manifesto stated;

“The prevailing tax system has contributed to the collapse of the domestic economy

by entirely discouraging domestic entrepreneur. We would instead, introduce a tax

system that would help promote production in the country.

The current Inland Revenue Act will be replaced by a new tax law. A new taxpayer

friendly simple tax system will be introduced so that it will remain active for several

years without changing haphazardly and frequently.”

138

Thus, a new tax regime with the following would be introduced;

“

(a) Income tax on productive enterprises will be reduced from 28 to 18 percent,

(b) The Economic Service Charge (ESC) and Withholding Tax (WHT) will be

scrapped,

(c) A simple value added tax of 8 percent will be introduced replacing both the

current VAT of 15 percent and the Nation Building Tax (NBT) of 2 percent,

(d) PAYE tax will be scrapped and personal income tax will be subject to a

ceiling of 15 percent,

(e) A five year moratorium will be granted on taxes payable by agriculturists and

small and medium enterprises,

(f) Various taxes that contribute to the inefficiency, irregularities, corruption and

lack of transparency of the tax system will be abandoned. Instead, a special

tax will be introduced for different categories of goods and services,

(g) Import tariff on goods competing with domestically produced substitutes will

be raised,

(h) A simple taxation system will be introduced to cover annual vehicle

registrations and charges for relevant annual services, replacing the

cumbersome systems that prevails now,

(i) Various taxes imposed on religious institutions will be scrapped,

(j) A zero VAT scheme will be adopted in the case of businesses providing

services to Tourist hotels and tourists, if they purchase over 60% of the food,

raw materials, cloths and other consumer items locally,

(k) Service charges levied on telephones and Internet will be reduced by 50%,

(l) Special promotional schemes will be implemented to encourage foreign

investments,

(m) A tax free package will be introduced to promote investment in identified

subject areas,

139

(n) A clear and uncomplicated system of taxing will be in place with the use of

internet facilities, special software and other technological services,

(o) Information Technology (IT) services, will be totally free from taxes (Zero

Tax), considering said industry as a major force in the national

manufacturing process,

(p) All the Sri Lankans and Foreigners, who bring foreign exchange to Sri Lanka

through consultancy services are exempted from income tax.”

At the Presidential Elections held on the 16th of November, 2019, the former President was

elected by the people, by a majority vote, as the President of the Republic.

On the 21st of November, 2019, the 2nd respondent was appointed as the Minister of Finance.

Thereafter, the former President forwarded a note to the Cabinet of Ministers dated 26th of

November, 2019 under the heading “An Economic Revival Initiative”. It stated, inter alia, that

the tax system of the country will be restructured as follows;

“As a matter of priority, I recommend the implementation of following measures

pending parliamentary approval for amendments to the relevant tax statutes.

(i) Replace the 15 per cent VAT and 2 per cent NBT on Goods and Services at 8 per

cent with effect from 1st December, 2019.

(ii) VAT on banking, financial services and insurance to be maintained at 15 per

cent and NBT on such services to be removed along with the proposal No. 1.

(iii) Tax free threshold for turnover for VAT to be raised from Rs. 1 Mn per month to

Rs. 25 million per month or Rs. 300Mn per annum along with the implementation

of proposal 1 to provide immediate relief particularly to small and medium

businesses in all sectors in the economy.

(iv) Tourism business will be treated as export for zero rate provided that 60 per cent

of turnover is sourced from local supplies. Tourism industry will be beneficial to

local agriculture and locally made manufacturing businesses.

140

(v) Construction Industry to be placed on 14 per cent income tax instead of 28 per

cent.

(vi) Farm income from agriculture, fishing & livestock to be made income tax free to

motivate those engaged in agricultural farming including fish and livestock

farming to get the maximum production from the already commenced 2019/2020

Maha season which has been blessed by favourable weather.

(vii) Tax imposed on religious institutions to be removed with effect from 1st

December 2019.

(viii) Pay As You Earn (PAYE) taxes to be removed for these earnings on all

inclusive monthly income of Rs. 250,000/= in place of current ceiling of Rs.

125,000/= per month for all public and private sector employees with effect

from 1st January 2020.

(ix) Withholding Tax on interest income to be removed for those monthly interest

income less than Rs. 250,000/=.

(x) Monthly income in excess of Rs. 250,000/- in any source of income will be

liable to pay personal income tax at progressive weights of 6 per cent, 12 per

cent, 18 per cent for every Rs. 250,000/= tax slabs.

(xi) Sri Lankans providing professional services for the receipt of foreign currency,

the foreign currency earnings to be exempted from income tax with effect from

1st December 2019.

(xii) IT and enabling services to be made tax free from all taxes.

(xiii) Telecommunication Levy to be reduced by 25 per cent.

It is possible that the proposed measures will have some reduction in revenue.

However, potential benefits from re-engineering the tax system will eventually revive

revenue.

141

As it will take some time to recoup Government revenue, it is necessary to go-slow on

public spending in order to manage fiscal imbalances. I urge the line Ministries and

agencies to curtail all non-essential and non-priority expenditure including those

spent on vehicles, travel, building, facilities etc. The Government expenditure

including those incurred by semi-Government agencies and SOEs should also

decline as taxes on goods and services are to be lower.

Therefore, I request the Minister of Finance, Economy & Policy Development to take

appropriate action to implement this programme.”

[emphasis added]

At the Cabinet meeting held on the 27th of November, 2019, the Cabinet Paper

No.19/3337/201/001 and a Note to the Cabinet dated 26th of November, 2019, by the former

President on "An Economic Revival Initiative" were considered, along with the

“desirability of the immediate impact on the economy and the well-being of the people” in

the country. After discussion, the Cabinet of Ministers decided, inter alia;

“1) to grant approval-

(a) to implement the proposals as stated in the above Note by the

President;

(b) for the implementation of the proposals to cut taxes pending

Parliamentary approval;

2) to instruct the Legal Draftsman to draft amending legislation for the respective

laws and legislation for new laws to implement the said proposals in the above

Note;

3) to direct the Secretary, Ministry of Finance, Economy and Policy Development

(i) to take expeditious action for the implementation of the decision,

(ii) to submit the draft legislation prepared by the Legal Draftsman together

with the clearance of the Attorney General for the same, to the Cabinet

through the Minister for consideration, and

142

(iii) to issue circular instructions to all Secretaries to Ministries and other

relevant authorities, to curtail all non-essential and non-priority

expenditure.”

On the 4th of December, 2019, the former Minister of Finance, the 2nd respondent, submitted a

Memorandum to the Cabinet of Ministers with the heading “National Policy Framework of the

Government: A Reconstructed Country with a Future Vistas of Prosperity and

Splendour”.

In the said Memorandum, it was stated that the former President “took office as the 7th Executive

President of the Republic on the 18th of November, 2019”. In his manifesto, it was stated;

"Gotabaya Presents to you a Reconstructed Country with a Future, Vistas of

Prosperity and Splendour."

It was further stated that “the President's objective was to convert the above manifesto into a

reality and achieve the outcome forthwith. Hence, it was imperative for all Ministries,

Departments, Public Institutions, Provincial Councils and Local Authorities etc. to accept the

above manifesto as the national policy framework of the government in their functions and

duties and take maximum effort to make it a reality”.

Having considered the said Memorandum, the Cabinet of Ministers granted approval to

accept “A Reconstructed Country with a Future-Vistas of Prosperity and Splendour” as the

national policy framework of the government.

Thereafter, on the instructions of the Minister of Finance, the Commissioner General of Inland

Revenue published notices in the newspapers informing the public of the reduction of taxes and

the new taxes that were to be implemented, subject to the approval of Parliament.

It is pertinent to note that, at the time of the implementation of the said taxes, Parliament had not

enacted the necessary legislation to implement the newly introduced taxes.

Thereafter, the General Election was held on the 5th of August, 2020 to elect the members of

Parliament. At the said election, Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP) won the majority seats in

143

Parliament and formed a government. At the inaugural meeting of the ninth (9th) Parliament held

on the 9th of August, 2020, the former President stated in his Policy Statement, inter alia;

“To develop the country, the right vision and plans are needed. The Policy

statement, “Vistas of Prosperity and Splendour”, placed before the people at the

Presidential Election by me contains a national programme that was crafted

during a period of nearly four years by incorporating my vision with the ideas

and recommendations of national organisations such as Viyathmaga, the findings

of the “Conversation with the Village” programme conducted by the Sri Lanka

Podujana Peramuna, the discussions held with other political parties, and the

ideas contributed by the general public.

In accordance with that programme, we have already taken several steps

including the easing of taxes that were unduly burdening the public,

introducing a high degree of transparency and efficiency to the Government

administration, and curtailing unnecessary Government expenditure.

After we assumed office, we provided tax concessions targeting local

entrepreneurs. Interest rates were brought down to encourage businesses.

Competitive imports were restricted in order to protect local entrepreneurs and

industrialists.”

[emphasis added]

Further, such reductions were detailed by the 2nd respondent during the Budget Speech made on

the 17th of November, 2020, for the year 2021. At the aforementioned Budget Speech, the 2nd

respondent stated as follows;

“(a) As stated in "Vistas of Prosperity and Splendour", the government simplified

the tax policy with effect from January 2020 in order to better facilitate tax

payers and to make the tax administration more efficient;

(b) I propose to maintain the VAT unchanged at 8 percent, for businesses with a

turnover of more than Rs. 25 million per month engaged in the import and

144

manufacture of goods or provision of services, except in the case of banking,

financial and insurance sectors;

Personal Income Tax will apply on earnings from employment, rent, interest,

dividends or any other source only if it exceeds Rs.250,000 per month.

Withholding tax on rent, interest or dividends and the PAYE tax (Pay As You

Earn) and taxes on interest have been abolished;”

Furthermore, the 2nd respondent proposed to effect further reductions in taxes in the

aforementioned Budget Speech, in the following manner;

“

(a) Individuals and companies engaged in farming, including agriculture,

fisheries and livestock farming will be exempted from taxes in the next 5

years. Earnings from both domestic and foreign sources by those engaged in

businesses in Information Technology and enabling services and also their

earnings when made while being resident or non-resident will also be

exempted from income taxes,

(b) So as to promote the listing of local companies with the Colombo Stock

Exchange, I propose to provide a 50 percent tax concession for the years

2021/2022 for such companies that are listed before 31 December 2021 and

to maintain a corporate tax rate of 14 percent for the subsequent three years,

(c) I propose to simplify the Taxes on Capital Gains, where such taxes will be

calculated based on the sale price of a property or the assessed value of a

property whichever is higher. I propose to exempt the tax on dividends of

foreign companies for three years if such dividends are reinvested on

expansion of their businesses or in the money or stock market or in Sri Lanka

International sovereign bonds,

145

(d) In order to promote the Colombo and Hambanthota ports as commodity

trading hubs in international trading, and to encourage investments in

bonded warehouses and warehouses related to offshore business I propose to

exempt such investments from all taxes."

Moreover, the new government took steps to enact new legislation with retrospective effect in

respect of the tax cuts introduced after the said Presidential election.

Accordingly, the approval of the Cabinet of Ministers was obtained to enact the said legislation,

and the Legal Draftsman drafted the necessary Bills.

On the 12th of March, 2021, the Minister of Finance presented to the Cabinet of Ministers a

Cabinet Paper No.21/0475/304/033-1 under the heading "Implementation of New Tax

Proposals", which was considered by the Cabinet of Ministers along with Cabinet decisions

dated 26th of August and 27th of November, 2019 and the certificates issued by the Attorney

General inferring Article 77(1) of the Constitution with regard to the constitutionality of the draft

Bills.

After discussion, the Cabinet of Ministers decided to grant approval to publish the

necessary Bills in the government Gazettes, subject to the amendments proposed by the

Attorney General, and to place them in Parliament in order to enact the necessary fiscal

legislation to reduce taxes. Accordingly, the said Bills were published in the government

Gazettes and tabled in Parliament.

It is pertinent to note that after the said Bills were tabled in Parliament, the Value Added Tax

Bill and the Inland Revenue (Amendment) Bill were challenged in the Supreme Court under

Article 121(1) of the Constitution. After the hearing, the Supreme Court determined that the said

Bills can be passed in Parliament, subject to the amendments suggested by the court.

Paragraph 2.9.2 of the Auditor General’s Report stated;

“The following matters are included in the Road map 2020 delivered by the Governor of

the Central Bank, Prof. W D Lakshman on 06 January 2020.

146

a) Recent tax reform initiatives constitute a much needed transformation of

country's tax system towards greater simplicity. The already announced tax

relief measures are expected to stimulate the economy while actively

contributing to improve business confidence. Any revenue shortfall due to the

changes in taxes announced recently is expected to be largely offset by action

taken to eliminate unproductive current expenditures and to priorities capital

expenditure.

b) It is expected that the fiscal consolidation path remains intact and level of

public debt stock remains sustainable.

c) The central Bank will continue to allow greater flexibility in determining the

exchange rate based on market forces and will allow the exchange rate to

act as shock absorber in the envisaged monetary policy framework.

Accordingly, Central Bank's intervention in the domestic foreign exchange

market will be limited only to curtail any excessive volatility in the exchange

rate.

d) The continuation of the EFF program with the IMF is likely to be

instrumental in supporting external sector stability in the medium term. A

sustained improvement in the external sector requires policies aimed at

promoting domestic production and exports of goods and services and

inflows of the non-debt creating types.

e) External borrowing contributes to widen the deficit in the external current

account further. In addition, the increased foreign debt service payments

drain the country's international reserves, which serve as a buffer for

external shocks. Therefore, while fiscal consolidation efforts continue, it is

important to maintain the current account deficit in the balance of payments

at sustainable levels by strengthening the trade sector.”

147

Fiscal Policy

Fiscal policy consists of the government’s income and spending, which influence economic

conditions, especially macroeconomic conditions such as demand for goods and services,

employment, inflation, and economic growth. Further, fiscal policy is decided by the

government. During a recession, governments may lower tax rates or increase spending to

encourage demand and increase economic activity. Tax cuts boost demand by increasing

disposable income and by encouraging businesses to hire and invest more. In contrast, tax

increases do the reverse. Thus, to combat inflation, governments raise taxes or cut government

spending to stabilise the economy.

Economic activity reflects a balance between what people, businesses, and governments want to

buy and what they want to sell. When the economy is weak, governments try to boost consumer

and business demand by cutting interest rates or purchasing financial securities. Further, such

demand is boosted by increasing spending and cutting taxes. Tax cuts increase household

demand by increasing workers' take-home pay. Moreover, it can boost business demand by

increasing the after-tax cash flow of business enterprises, which can be used to pay dividends,

expand activity, recruit new employees, expand investments, etc.

The effect of tax cuts depends on the sensitivity of households and businesses. Further,

households divide increased income between consumption and saving, and businesses choose to

hire and invest more. Tax cuts are expected to free up disposable income and the circulation of

money in the economy and push positive growth values in the medium and long term.

Furthermore, reducing taxes improves the economy by boosting spending. Moreover, a corporate

income tax cut leads to a sustained increase in Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and productivity.

Tax cuts also increase funding available for businesses and may increase production and

investment.

Moreover, high taxes discourage work and investment. Taxes create a “wedge” between what

the employer pays and what the employee receives, so some jobs are not created. High marginal

148

tax rates also discourage people from working overtime or from making new investments.

However, tax cuts reduce government revenue and lead to budget deficits or growth in

government debt.

In his first address to the Congress on the 28th of February, 2001, George W. Bush said, “To

create economic growth and opportunity, we must put money back into the hands of the people

who buy goods and create jobs.”

Do courts interfere with the fiscal policy of the government?

The petitioners alleged that the reduction of taxes by the government was a contributing factor to

the economic crisis. In particular, the petitioners complained of the following three acts and/or

inactions related to taxation, i.e.,

(i) arbitrary tax reductions based on the election manifesto without adequate

consideration as to the consequences of such reductions,

(ii) failure to make and/or recommend timely changes to tax policy despite clear

evidence as to the failure of the said policy and of the negative effects of such tax

policy, and

(iii) arbitrary financial decisions without obtaining or giving effect to the advice of

the Central Bank and without adequate plans or forecasts as to the result of the

said decisions.

Article 148 of the Constitution reads as follows;

“Parliament shall have full control over public finance. No tax, rate or any

other levy shall be imposed by any local authority or any other public authority

except by or under the authority of a law passed by Parliament or of any existing

law.”

[emphasis added]

149

Hence, it is clear that the taxes which fall within the scope of public finance comes within the

purview of Parliament. A similar view was expressed in the determination of the Value Added

Tax (Amendment) Bill (2016) S.C. (S.D.) No. 30/2016 to S.C. (S.D.) No. 33/2016, where it was

observed;

“Article 148 makes it mandatory that no tax, rate or any other levy shall be

imposed by any local authority or any other public authority, except by or under

the authority of a law passed by Parliament or of any existing law.

Accordingly, Article 152 is a special provision dealing with the manner in which

a Bill affecting public revenue shall be introduced in Parliament.”

[emphasis added]

The laws passed by Parliament to reduce taxes were as follows;

Date Certified

by the Speaker

Name of the Act

31st October, 2019 Removing of Carbon Tax

Finance Act, No. 21 of 2019

12th October, 2020 Removing NBT (Nation Building Tax)

NBT (Amendment) Act, No. 03 of 2020

12th October, 2020 Removing economic service charge

Economic Service Charge (Amendment) Act, No. 4 of 2020

150

12th October, 2020 Debt Repayment Levy removed.

Finance (Amendment) Act, No. 2 of 2020

13th May, 2021 Reducing VAT (Value Added Tax) rate to 8% from 15%

Threshold for registration of Value Added Tax increased to Rs. 300

million per annum from Rs. 12 million per annum and Information

Technology and enabling services exempted from Value Added

Tax.

Value Added Tax (Amendment) Act, No. 9 of 2021

13th May, 2021 WHT (Withholding tax) on any payments made to any resident

person removed except for:

- WHT at a rate of 14% on the amounts paid as winning from

lottery, reward, betting or gambling.

- WHT at the rate of 2.5% on sale of any gem at an auction

conducted by the National Gem and Jewellery Authority.

- WHT on payments made to non-resident persons.

PAYE (Pay As You Earn) tax on any employment receipts to any

resident or non-resident person was removed. Accordingly, such

employment receipts are subject to personal income tax rates of

6%, 12% and 18%.

Personal income tax revised to 6%, 12% and 18% from 4%, 8%,

16%, 20% and 24%.

Tax free threshold increased to 3 million per annum on any

income from 1.2 million per annum from employment income

151

and 500,000 from personal income.

Income tax slabs increased to 3 million per annum from 600,000

per annum.

Corporate income tax reduced.

Standard corporate income tax rate reduced to 24% from 28%.

For construction reduced to 14% from 28%.

For manufacturing revised to 18%

Inland Revenue (Amendment) Act, No. 10 of 2021

8th of April, 2022 Surcharge tax was introduced

Surcharge Tax Act, No. 14 of 2022

Further, the Telecommunication Levy was reduced from 15% to 11.25% by a Gazette

Notification with effect from the 1st of December, 2019. Moreover, on or about the 6th of

December, 2019, concessionary rates and exemptions were granted for the importation of some

items.

Thus, it is evident that the said fiscal legislation was passed in Parliament under Article 148 of

the Constitution with retrospective effect.

Legislative Power of Parliament

Enacting legislation is the function of Parliament in terms of and under Chapters X and XI of the

Constitution.

Article 1 of the Constitution states that Sri Lanka is a Free, Sovereign, Independent and

Democratic Socialist Republic. Further, Article 3 states that the sovereignty is in the People and

is inalienable. Article 4 states how the said sovereignty of the People is exercised and enjoyed.

152

Accordingly, the legislative power is exercised by Parliament and by the People at a

Referendum, the executive power, including the defence of the Republic, is exercised by the

President, and the judicial power is exercised by Parliament through courts, tribunals, and

institutions created and established, or recognised, by the Constitution or created and established

by law, except in regard to matters relating to the privileges, immunities, and powers of

Parliament and of its Members, wherein the judicial power of the People may be exercised

directly by Parliament according to law.

A critical analysis of the Constitution shows that there is a separation of powers between the

legislature, executive and the judiciary. Therefore, the aforementioned three organs act

independently from each other in their own sphere. Hence, none of the said organs of the State

have authority to supervise or interfere with the other organs except as permitted by law.

It is pertinent to note that while Article 118 of the Constitution deals with the general

constitutional jurisdiction of the Supreme Court, Articles 120, 121 and 122 refer to the ordinary

and special exercise of the constitutional jurisdiction in respect of parliamentary Bills. Further,

Article 123 has conferred jurisdiction on the Supreme Court to determine any question as to

whether any Bill or any provision thereof is inconsistent with the Constitution. In addition to the

aforementioned powers, Article 124 of the Constitution has conferred jurisdiction on the

Supreme Court to determine the legislative process in respect of Bills.

Post legislative review and the jurisdiction of courts

Article 80(3) of the Constitution reads as follows;

“Where a Bill becomes law upon the certificate of the President or the Speaker,

as the case may be, being endorsed thereon, no court or tribunal shall inquire

into, pronounce upon or in any manner call in question, the validity of such Act

on any ground whatsoever.”

[emphasis added]

153

Accordingly, Article 80(3) of the Constitution has ousted the jurisdiction of courts and tribunals

in considering the validity of the Acts passed by Parliament once they are certified by the

President of the Republic or the Speaker of Parliament.

Legislative Process

Our Constitution and the Standing Orders of Parliament provides to present two types of Bills in

Parliament. Namely, Private Member’s Bills and government Bills. (Only government Bills are

discussed in this judgment) A government Bill is initiated by the line Ministry, and the Minister

in charge of the subject presenting a Memorandum to the Cabinet of Ministers setting out the

policy and the justification to enact legislation and seeking approval from the Cabinet of

Ministers to enact the necessary legislation, and to request the Legal Draftsman to draft the Bill.

If the Cabinet of Ministers consents to the enacting of the law, they will authorise the line

Ministry to request the Legal Draftsman to draft the necessary legislation.

Once the Legal Draftsman prepares the Bill, it will be sent to the Attorney General to consider

the constitutionality of the Bill. Thereafter, the said Minister will present the draft Bill to the

Cabinet of Ministers along with the ‘certificate’ issued by the Attorney General in terms of

Article 77(1) of the Constitution and seek the approval to publish the Bill in the government

Gazette and to table it in Parliament.

However, the Constitution sets out certain steps that are required to be followed by the Cabinet

of Ministers and also before a Bill is placed on the Order Paper in Parliament. Particularly, in

respect of fiscal matters, urgent Bills and Bills that are applicable to the subjects in the 9th

Schedule to the Constitution.

Further, Article 124 of the Constitution states;

“Save as otherwise provided in Articles 120, 121 and 122, no court or tribunal

created and established for the administration of justice, or other institution,

person or body of persons shall in relation to any Bill, have power or jurisdiction

to inquire into, or pronounce upon, the constitutionality of such Bill or its due

compliance with the legislative process, on any ground whatsoever.”

[emphasis added]

154

A careful consideration of the phrase ‘its due compliance with the legislative process’ in Article

124 shows that the Supreme Court has the jurisdiction to consider the legislative process

applicable to Bills subject to Articles 120, 121 and 122 of the Constitution. As stated above, in

terms of Article 4(a) of the Constitution, the legislative power of the People is exercised by

Parliament and by the People at a Referendum. Further, another instance where people exercise

legislative power is when a Bill is considered by the Supreme Court in terms of and under the

aforementioned Articles in the Constitution. This was discussed in the determination in the

Municipal Councils (Amendment) Bill, Urban Councils (Amendment) Bill, and Pradeshiya

Sabha (Amendment) Bill S.C. (S.D.) Nos. 25-33, 36-41, 43-52, 54, 56/ 2023.

Thus, when the constitutional jurisdiction of the Supreme Court is invoked under Articles 120,

121 and 122 in respect of a Bill, the Supreme Court will consider not only the constitutionality

of the Bill but also its due compliance with the legislative process.

Similar views were expressed in the Divineguma Bill S.C. (S.D.) No. 04/2012 to S.C. (S.D.)

No. 14/2012, where the Supreme Court observed;

“… In such circumstances, we determine that the Supreme Court has the sole and

exclusive jurisdiction to inquire into or pronounce upon, the Constitutionality of a

Bill and its procedural compliance, before such Bill is placed on the Order

Paper of Parliament.”

[emphasis added]

Further, the Water Services Reform Bill S.C. (S.D.) Nos. 24 and 25/2023 considered the

requirement to comply with Article 154G of the Constitution and observed;

“For the reasons set out above we make a determination in terms of Article 120

read with Article 123 and 154G of the Constitution that the Bill is in respect of a

matter set out in the Provincial Council List and shall not become law unless it

has been referred by the President to every Provincial Council as required by

Article 154G(3)G of the Constitution. Since the Bill has been placed on the Order

Paper of Parliament without compliance with provisions of Article 154G(3) we

155

would not at this stage make a determination as to the other two grounds of

challenge referred to above.”

[emphasis added]

Moreover, in the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill S.C. (S.D.) No. 30/2016 to S.C. (S.D.)

No. 33/2016 the Supreme Court observed;

“… Thus, in the same way Article 148 had to be complied with, Article 152 too

should be strictly complied with and the Court can’t brush aside the words used

in Article 152 as being inappropriate or surplus.

Since the due process had not been complied with in terms of Article 78 (2) and

152 of the Constitution before the Bill was introduced in Parliament, we make a

determination in terms of Articles 120 and 121 read with Article 123 and 152 of

the Constitution that no determination would be made at this stage on the other

grounds of challenge raised by the Petitioners.”

[emphasis added]

Further, in urgent Bills, the Supreme Court will inquire into whether there was a decision of the

Cabinet of Ministers to consider the Bill as an urgent Bill.

In the Nominations Commission Bill S.C. (S.D.) No. 1/91, it was observed;

“A Bill titled “An Act to establish a Nominations Commission; and to provide for

matters connected therewith or incidental thereto” [“the Nominations

Commission Act, No. of 1990”] was referred to this Court by His Excellency the

President, in terms of Article 122(1)(b) of the Constitution, for the special

determination of this Court whether the Bill or any provision thereof is

inconsistent with the Constitution. The Bill contains a certificate to the effect that

in view of the Cabinet of Minister the Bill is urgent in the national interest.”

Thus, it shows that though the legislative power is vested with Parliament in terms of Article 4(a)

of the Constitution and the said power begins with a Member of Parliament presenting a Bill to

156

Parliament, the legislative process commences with a Minister submitting a Cabinet

Memorandum to the Cabinet of Ministers setting out the policy and the justification for the

need to enact legislation in respect of a particular matter.

Further, matters of finance, initiation and administration are within the purview of the executive,

while control is vested with Parliament. A similar observation was made in the Appropriation

Bill (1986) 29;

“The machinery of national finance is based on the fundamental distinction

between the functions of initiation and administration which are vested in the

Executive, and of control which is vested in Parliament. To keep intact the

principle of the financial initiate of the Executive there developed the restrictions

on the power of amendment…”

[emphasis added]

Hence, I am also of the opinion that the legislative process commences not from the time a Bill

is placed on the Order Paper in Parliament but from the time a Cabinet Memorandum is

submitted to the Cabinet of Ministers seeking approval to commence drafting the Bill.

In the circumstances, once a Bill becomes a law upon the certification of the President or the

Speaker, in terms of Article 80(3) of the Constitution, no court or tribunal can inquire into,

pronounce upon or call into question the validity of such Act or its due compliance with the

legislative process on any ground whatsoever.

Further, the scope of Article 124 of the Constitution was discussed by a full bench of the

Supreme Court in Wijewickrema v. Attorney General (1982) 2 SLR 775 where it was held;

“On the alleged ground that 144 members of Parliament had signed and

delivered undated letters resigning their office to His Excellency the President,

the plaintiff contends that “the said 144 members of Parliament were incapable

of voting according to the law and the Constitution for the Fourth Amendment to

the Constitution on the 4th November, 1982, and that notwithstanding the

purported certification of the Speaker of the Parliament that the Fourth

Amendment to the Constitution has been duly passed by a two-thirds majority of

157

Parliament, the Fourth Amendment to the Constitution is not a Bill that has been

duly passed by the Parliament at all and cannot therefore be submitted to the

People at a Referendum.

…

…

The fundamental question involved in this action is whether Article 124 of the

Constitution bars the jurisdiction of any Court to decide the constitutional issue

raised by plaintiff.

In our view the plaintiff’s action involves basically the question whether the

Fourth Amendment to the Constitution has been validly voted upon as a Bill for

the amendment of the Constitution. Our unanimous decision in this basic question

is that the Court is barred by the provisions of Article 124 of the Constitution

which provides:

“Save as otherwise provided in Article 120, 121 and 122 no Court ……shall

in relation to any Bill, have power or jurisdiction to inquire into, or

pronounce upon, the constitutionality of such Bill or its due compliance

with the legislative process, on any ground whatsoever.”

from inquiring into or pronouncing upon the validity of the Bill for the

amendment of the Constitution, referred to in the plaint.”

A careful consideration of Articles 80(3) and 124 of the Constitution show that Article 80(3) is

applicable to the Bills passed by Parliament, and the certificate is issued by the President of the

Republic or the Speaker. On the converse, Article 124 applies to, inter alia, the legislative

process which takes place prior to a Bill being presented to Parliament by a Member of

Parliament.

In the circumstances, I am of the view that the policy decision taken by the Cabinet of Ministers

to enact legislation with retrospective effect to reduce taxes cannot be challenged in courts now

158

as the said decision forms part of the legislative process in enacting the Acts that are under

reference.

Further, though at the time of introducing the tax cuts there was no legislation in place,

subsequently the legislation was enacted with retrospective effect to cover the said period.

Hence, this court lacks jurisdiction to review the policy of the government to reduce taxes prior

to the enactment of legislation applicable to the said period.

However, the issues with policy or its appropriateness are not matters for consideration by the

judicial branch of government. In the Nation Building Tax (Amendment) Bill S.C. (S.D.) No.

34/2016 it was observed;

“As Warrington L.J. in Short Vs. Poole Corp (1926) C.H. Division 60(91) stated

that “With the question whether a particular policy is wise or foolish the Court

is not concerned; it can only interfere if to pursue it is beyond the powers of the

authority.”

[emphasis added]

Further in the Fiscal Management (Responsibility) (Amendment) Bill S.C. (S.D.) No. 28/2016

and S.C. (S.D.) No. 29/2016 this court observed;

“Thus, it becomes the policy decision of the Government to increase the

Government guarantee limit from 7 percent to 10 percent. The Court cannot

strike down a policy decision taken by the Government merely because it feels

another policy decision would be wiser or logical. The Courts is not expected to

express its opinion as to whether at a particular situation any such policy

should have been adopted or not. It is best left to the Government to decide on

such matters which affects the interests of the economic progress and fiscal

management of the country.”

[emphasis added]

The reviewability of policy was also adverted to in the Special Goods and Service Tax Bill S.C.

(S.D.) Nos. 1-9/2022 where it was observed;

159

“Following on with the comment made by the Supreme Court in the Nation

Building Tax (Amendment) Bill, [SC SD 34/2016], it is necessary for this Court to

observe that this Court is devoid of jurisdiction to comment on the prudence or

otherwise of a particular policy formulated by the Executive and sought to be

converted into legislation by the enactment of a law by Parliament. Thus, this

Court will refrain from doing so, even in instances where there appears to be

compelling public and national interest considerations which may warrant an

adverse comment being made.”

[emphasis added]

However, if an Act requires the executive to promulgate subordinate legislation and the

executive fails and/or neglects to do so, courts have the power to compel the executive to

promulgate the necessary subordinate legislation that are required to be made under the Act.

A careful consideration of the reduced taxes, the Note to the Cabinet dated 26th of November,

2019 under the title “An Economic Revival Initiative” shows that the sole purpose of the

reduction of taxes was to resurrect the economy that was adversely affected by the Easter Sunday

bombings in the year, 2019. Moreover, the said policy to reduce taxes benefited the workforce in

this country, business enterprises and the public in general. Thus, it is apparent that the policy of

the then government to reduce taxes was mainly a people-centric move and in line with one of

the accepted economic policies of the world in addressing recession.

Does the court have jurisdiction to pronounce on the failure to enact legislation by the

executive?

As stated above, the legislative process commences by a Minister submitting a Memorandum to

the Cabinet of Ministers seeking approval to enact legislation. However, in terms of Article 4(a)

of the Constitution, the legislative power of the people shall be exercised by the Parliament.

Thus, enacting legislation fairly and squarely falls within the purview of Parliament and not

within the powers of the executive.

160

Erskine May Parliamentary Practice (Twenty-fourth edition) at page 183 states;

“The authority of Parliament over all matters and persons within its jurisdiction

was formally unlimited. A law might be unjust or contrary to sound principles of

government; but Parliament was not controlled its discretion, and when it erred,

its errors could be corrected only by itself.”

[emphasis added]

Hence, in view of the separation of powers enshrined in the Constitution, the courts cannot

compel either the executive, the Cabinet of Ministers, or Parliament to enact legislation or to

pronounce on the failure to enact legislation by any of the said organs of the State.

In any event, even if (in a hypothetical situation) the courts were to direct the executive to enact

legislation, Parliament is not bound to give effect to such a direction. Hence, no purpose could

be achieved by such a direction or observation issued by court. It is pertinent to note that Sri

Lanka has experienced two instances where the court granted directions to Parliament and on

both occasions, Parliament refused to comply with the same, citing separation of powers set out

in Article 4 of the Constitution.

Further, enacting, amending or repealing laws falls within the scope of the legislature, and

therefore, even the executive cannot compel Parliament to enact legislation.

Furthermore, any pronouncement by the courts with regard to the legislative procedure in respect

of an Act passed by Parliament is a collateral attack on the said Act, which is excluded from the

jurisdiction of court by Article 80(3) of the Constitution.

Hence, I am of the view that the respondents cannot be held responsible for the introduction of

tax cuts and not enacting, repealing or amending the legislation brought to reduce taxes.

Moreover, any pronouncement of the legislative process or the failure to repeal or amend an Act

by court would violate Article 80(3) of the Constitution as it would be a collateral attack on the

existing Act.

161

In any event, it is evident from the Cabinet Memorandum dated 3rd of January, 2022 and the

Note to the Cabinet dated 6th of March, 2022, the government had taken steps to introduce fiscal

legislation in respect of Surcharge Tax and to increase Value Added Tax.

Was There A Delay In Seeking Assistance From The International Monetary Fund?

Events leading to the decision of the Cabinet of Ministers not to seek the assistance of the

IMF

The IMF was created in the wake of World War II to manage the global regime of exchange

rates and international payments. Since the collapse of fixed exchange rates in the year 1973,

the fund has taken on a more active role. The IMF assists member nations in different

capacities. Its most important function is the ability to provide loans to member nations in need

of bailouts. Further, if a country has a deficit in its balance of payments, the IMF can step in to

fill the gap. However, borrowing governments must adhere to the conditions attached to these

loans by the IMF, including prescribing economic and fiscal policies.

Moreover, such conditions may cause severe hardships to the general public of the country that

seeks assistance from the IMF. Hence, some countries are reluctant to seek the assistance of the

IMF. Furthermore, there are instances where countries seek the assistance of the IMF as a last

resort and may give up the IMF programmes without completing them due to their inability to

comply with the stringent conditions imposed by the IMF. In fact, on several occasions, Sri

Lanka has discontinued IMF programmes due to its inability to comply with the conditions laid

down by the IMF.

The staff of the IMF visited Sri Lanka from 29th of January, 2020 to 7th of February, 2020.

Afterwards, the press release issued by them on the 7th of February, 2020 stated, inter alia, that

the economy is gradually recovering from the terrorist attacks, the recovery is supported by a

solid performance of the manufacturing sector and a rebound in tourism and related services in

the second half of the year, high frequency indicators continue to improve, and growth is

projected to rebound to 3.7 percent in 2020 as a result of the recovery in tourism, and inflation is

projected to remain at 4.5 percent in line with the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, etc.

162

The IMF-Sri Lanka Staff Report for the 2021 Article IV Consultation dated 10th of February,

2022, categorised, for the first time, the sovereign debt of Sri Lanka as "unsustainable” in

general and the external debt portfolio in particular.

Further, after the Executive Board of the IMF concluded the Article IV consultation with Sri

Lanka on the 25th of February, 2022, it released a press release on the 2nd of March, 2022.

Policy decision of the Cabinet of Ministers in respect of seeking IMF assistance

Memorandum

It is pertinent to note that when the Central Bank and the government became aware of the

financial and economic difficulties that the government had to face, particularly in repayment of

local and international loans obtained by Sri Lanka, the Minister of Finance submitted a Cabinet

Memorandum dated 2nd of January, 2022 under the heading “Economy 2022 and the way

forward” to the Cabinet of Ministers and stated, inter alia, “while the budget for 2022 has been

approved, the external outlook remains a matter of concern and requires careful analysis”.

Moreover, the said Memorandum stated that the expected outflows of the country are;

• “Total debt servicing payments in 2022, inclusive of debt stock of Sri Lanka

Development Bonds and Foreign Currency Banking Units, approximately is USD

6.9 billion. Further, it includes international sovereign bonds maturing in

January, amounting to USD 500 million international sovereign bonds maturing

in July, amounting to USD 1,000 million.

• USD 1,300 million is needed in January, 2022 itself for foreign debt servicing

payments with USD 3,100 million being required for foreign debt servicing

payments during the first quarter of 2022.

• Goods imports expected to be approximately USD 22 billion.”

•

163

Further, expected inflows to the country during 2022 are;

“Approximately USD 32 billion is expected as total foreign currency inflows from goods

and services exports. i.e.,

• Exports of goods that are expected to reach around USD 20.7 billion, while

export income from services are expected to yield USD 7 billion. Export income

from apparels alone is expected to reach around USD 6.8 billion. In the case of

services IT and related services are expected to yield an income of around USD

2.3 billion.

• Tourism is showing signs of returning to normalcy and inflows from tourism is

expected to be around USD 1.8 billion. While all effort should be taken to ensure

that number of tourists exceed 2 million, and it is important that new regulations,

insurance schemes that discourages such influx of tourist not be pursued.

• During 2020, around $3,000 had pursued employment opportunities overseas

while in 2021, it had been around 116,000. It is expected to increase to 300,000,

broaden job opportunities, that is, by new jobs with higher salaries and focus on

new job markets to increase foreign remittance to USD 7.5 billion level.

• Foreign Direct Investment should increase up to USD 1 billion.”

[emphasis added]

Furthermore, in the said Cabinet Memorandum, it was stated that the short and medium-term

proposals are;

“The Budget 2022 outlined clearly the state of the economy since independence,

including the issues that have arisen due to foreign commercial borrowings, the

highly bureaucratic and outdated systems that have been inimical not only in

attracting foreign investments but also in encouraging local entrepreneurs to

operate, and the impact of the non-implementation of reforms compared to peer

164

countries in the Asian region. It is apparent that although the short term issues could

be resolved, there is a significant requirement to engage in long term strategies and

reforms in all sectors that address the structural issues in the economy to create a

more sustainable path.

(i) In this context, a package which addresses the liquidity issues and provides direct

support for import was discussed during my visit to India. Annual imports from

India is approximately USD 3,000 million on average and includes about 70% of

country's requirement of imported medicine and food items. Postponement of

payments on imports from India facilitates easy financing of other imports.

(ii) Government has also been supported by China with the extension of a SWAP

facility amounting to USD 1,500 million has had a significant impact in helping to

strengthen the CBSL reserve position by the end of 2021.

(iii) It is required to engage with both China and Japan is negotiating a package

similar to India given that 20% of the outstanding foreign debt of the government

is attributable to both China and Japan. At the same time given the imports from

both countries exceed the exports, i.e., the Terms of Trade with both China and

Japan are not favourable to Sri Lanka, the government should engage with China

and Japan to create a facility that supports trade and repayment of their debt.

Such support will further enhance the liquidity position. As such, it was proposed

to appoint Members of the Cabinet of Ministers to engage discussion with China

and Japan to engage in discussion as noted.

(iv) Apart from the inflows from export of goods and services, remittances and FDI's,

during 2022 if the high end real estate and lands identified by the Urban

Development Authority (UDA) could be given on long term lease, another USD 1-

1.5 billion could be raised.

(v) In this regard, a sustainable strategy will have to be implemented to address the

issues emanating from the debt stock exceeding the GDP where the ISB's are

165

expected to mature every year until 2029 at around USD 1,000- 1,500 million per

annum. The government will work with Multilateral and Bilateral Agencies and

investment Banks to exploit the green financing market to raise debt at a lower

interest rate and create the space to manage the stock of debt leveraging on the

interest rate differential.

(vi) The space available to finance large infrastructure financed by debt is limited. As

such, infrastructure requirements with in particular with commercial value

specially in the electricity and energy sectors, the port sector requires to attract

investments into such sectors. This requires the government to be in possession of

such investment attracting strategies.

(vii) The renewable energy sector in particular has seen significant number of inquiries

from top credible investors and it is regrettable that in the last 24 months only 15

MW of renewable energy had been added to the main grid. It is therefore clear that

the line Ministry nor the CEB is yet in possession of a cohesive strategy to attract

investments. The Budget 2020 required idle land belonging to the government and

Mahaweli was to be given to the investors to engage in agriculture and other

activities. It appears that this process has not been implemented as expected.

Hence, the entire government machinery needs to turn around their operations to

facilitate a more efficient and effective investment climate.”

Moreover, it stated;

“

(I) To provide Public Servants with a monthly allowance of Rs. 5,000 from January.

From January employees in corporates and boards will also be entitled to this. Given

that there are 1,450,450 employees currently in the public sector, such payment of

allowance will result in the incurring of an additional expenditure of Rs. 87 billion.

(II) To provide to the pensioners a monthly allowance of Rs. 5,000. Given that 666,480

pensioners are already in the system, the Government will incur an additional cost of

Rs. 40 billion.

166

(III) To request the Hon. Minister of Labour to engage in discussion with the required

parties to extend the aforementioned benefits to the employees in the private sector

as well.

(IV) To provide an extra monthly allowance of Rs. 1,000 to Samurdhi beneficiaries

receiving Rs. 3,500 per month. This extra allowance will also be made available to

other Samurdhi beneficiaries as appropriate.

(V) To secure the incomes or to mitigate any loss of income that may occur due to a

decline in harvest of rice farmers, the government will provide an additional Rs. 25

per kilogramme in addition to the Rs. 50 per kilogramme i.e., the guaranteed price.

It is expected that such assistance to farmers will have no impact on the retail prices

paid by the consumer.

(VI) Conduct a home gardening program to encourage growing of vegetables and fruits

for self-consumption. To support such programme which includes the preparation of

land, obtaining seeds, and other inputs required home gardens up to 20 perches will

be provided with of Rs. 5,000 while those between 20 perches and less than 1 acre

will be provided Rs. 10,000. The total cost to the government will be around Rs. 31

billion.

(VII) Flour Subsidy- It is decided to provide 15Kg wheat flour monthly at Rs. 80 to

plantation worker families. It is further expected that such support will be provided

to those plantation workers already registered with the Employees Provident Fund

(EPF).

(VIII) The import taxes on potatoes and big onions have been reduced by Rs.30/Kg with

effect from January 2022.

(IX) To completely exempt import of essential food and medicines taxes. These taxes will

be revised only in instances where it is necessary to protect the local farmer and

producer.”

167

Further, it stated;

“interest costs, wages and salaries of public servants, and transfers to the

vulnerable, including Samurdhi and pensions for the elderly, account for the

recurrent expenditures, which will be difficult to curtail. As such, it would require

capital expenditures to be curtailed. This would mean that to accommodate the

direct costs, as noted alone, around 30% of the capital expenditure will have to be

reduced. The impact of the course would be that the government's envisaged

growth and development objectives will not be met.”

[emphasis added]

Moreover, it stated;

“import of consumer goods which include food, wheat and maize, medicines, sugar,

pulses, etc and fuel, coal, fertilizer accounts for almost 40% of the total imports or

around USD 8 billion in a year. This would mean, that around an extra Rs. 240

billion will have to be spent on imports, which will also mean that on average, the

cost of food stuff will have to increase at the minimum by 20% or so. e.g.;

• Price of Dhal which has no tax except a Special Commodity Levy (SCL) of Rs 25

cents will see an increase in the prices to almost Rs. 350- 400 a Kilogramme from

the existing Rs. 280 a Kilogramme.

• The impact on fuel prices will be such that the cost reflective price of Diesel will

mean that diesel prices will increase by around Rs.25 per litre to Rs. 146 per litre.

The impact on the entire economy will be enormous. It is also important to take into

account the fact that Sri Lanka, like many other countries, is faced with supply side

disruptions, which are also likely to continue into 2022 as well. The impact of such

disruptions will further push the price of staples and essentials and increase the cost

of living at a faster rate than experienced now, and inflation on food items alone will

remain at elevated levels.

168

The direct beneficiaries of a currency depreciation will be the exporters and the

overseas workers remitting foreign funds into the country. While exports of primary

products such as tea in bulk form will experience an increase in their income in local

currency, the bulk of the other exporters, including exporters of value-added tea,

apparels will have a sizable import content, cost of which could increase with a

depreciation of the currency, resulting in redactions in profit margins. Local

exporters, especially those with significant import components will find that their

competitiveness is somewhat compromised.”

The said Cabinet Memorandum further stated;

“The impact of an increase in taxes, especially the indirect taxes such as VAT, will be

instantaneous and will immediately have an impact on the cost of goods and services

to the end consumer. An increase in VAT, since it is a final tax on the retail

consumer, will see the retail consumers being subjected to a price increase in excess

of 10%. At the same time, apart from the revision in fuel prices as noted above,

electricity tariff revisions will also have to be affected. This requires the average

revenue per unit of electricity to increase to Rs. 25 per unit from the existing Rs. 16

per unit. Water tariffs too will have to be revised on average by at least Rs. 10 per

unit.

While it is ideal to have cost reflective prices, it should also be complemented by a

mechanism to buffer the impact of such increased prices on the vulnerable in society

through a direct, targeted transfer of assistance. But we have still not been able to

put in place the electronic Identity card system (e-ID) that would have supported the

identification of the most vulnerable and the most deserved, although it was

envisaged to be there by at least December 2021. The absence of such a mechanism

to enable the Government to provide assistance in a targeted manner to the most

vulnerable will compromise the effectiveness of such targeted support.

It would not be incorrect to state that an IMF programme will require the country

to accept conditions that will further disrupt the social fabric of the country. While

it is acknowledged that an IMF programme will enable the country to access the

169

capital markets with better ease, it is our experience that none of the IMF

programmes since the late 60's, have resulted in any lasting reforms being

implemented in the country.

In fact, it would be pertinent to note that the economic challenges of today are due to

two key decisions of the Yahapalana Government, which are;

• The aggressive borrowing in the International Bond markets resulted in the

country borrowing USD 12 billion dollars during 2015-2019 with USD 6.9

billion being borrowed during a 14 months period of April 2018 to May 2019. As

a result, the country's foreign currency debt stock reached almost 50% of the

total debt stock at the end of 2019 with the stock of ISB's at wound USD 15

billion. This has now reduced to USD 13 billion.

• Reduction in the price of Petrol and Diesel in 2015, without any thought to

recouping the losses of Ceylon Petroleum Corporation (CPC) or the Ceylon

Electricity Board (CEB) or to the possibility of an increase in global oil prices.

• It is noted that of the USD 12 billion so raised only around USD 2 billion had

been utilized to settle ISBs, while the bulk seems to have been utilized to finance

the imports, especially cars and other passenger vehicles. In fact consumption of

fuel which had decreased by end 2014 has increased surpassing the previous

consumption volumes, although economic growth saw a steady decline. The

shortsighted decisions taken for political expediency and the failure of the

Yahapalana government to aggressively implement a renewable and a clean

energy strategy to use solar and wind in particular as sources of energy together

with LNG, complemented by a robust mechanism to support the exporters

country’s has resulted in the country facing the liquidity crunch that is faced with

at present.”

[emphasis added]

170

In the circumstances, the said Cabinet Memorandum invited the “Cabinet of Ministers to

deliberate on the aforementioned, bearing in mind that the Government has the capacity to

implement a home-grown solution to the issues that the country is faced with”.

The Cabinet of Ministers considered the said Cabinet Memorandum, the clarifications made by

the Minister of Finance on the matters stated in the Memorandum, the views expressed by the

Minister of Industries stating that the appropriateness of exploring the possibility of obtaining a

Credit Line for the importation of essential raw materials required for industries after negotiating

with the countries from where such raw materials are imported, the views expressed by the

Minister of Trade stating the appropriateness of introducing a mechanism whereby Sri Lankans

serving in foreign countries could remit a certain amount of foreign currency monthly to their

foreign currency accounts maintained in Sri Lanka and also introducing a special loan scheme

either for the construction of a house or for the purchase of other property based on the savings

in the account, with a view to encouraging such account holders; and the views expressed by

several other Members of the Cabinet pertaining to the course of action proposed in the

Memorandum.

Decision of the Cabinet of Ministers

Thereafter, on the 3rd of January, 2022 the Cabinet of Ministers decided, inter alia;

“(i) to grant the concurrence of the Cabinet-

(a) to take the necessary action in implement the proposals in the Memorandum

with immediate effect;

(b) to take the necessary action on the short term and medium term proposals

referred to in the Memorandum;

(c) to implement a home grown solution for the economic issues currently

encountered by Sri Lanka, taking into consideration the matters stated in

the Memorandum;

171

and, “to request the Secretary to the President to take necessary action to nominate

Ministers in consultation with H.E. the President, to negotiate with the relevant countries

as proposed in the Memorandum”.

[emphasis added]

Accordingly, it is clear that the Cabinet of Ministers took a policy decision not to seek the

assistance of the IMF but to implement a home-grown plan to address the issues that the country

was facing. Similarly, as stated above, the Cabinet of Ministers took a policy decision to reduce

the taxes referred to above. Thus, in terms of Article 43(1) of the Constitution, all members of

the Cabinet of Ministers are collectively responsible for the said decisions and are answerable to

Parliament.

Should policy decisions of the government be disturbed or

interfered with unless they are found to be grossly arbitrary or

irrational?

As stated above, our Constitution is based on the principle of separation of powers, though there

are some overlapping Articles in the Constitution with regard to executive and legislative

powers. In terms of the Constitution, the three branches of the State are: the legislature, the

executive and the judiciary. Separation of powers enshrined in the Constitution was discussed in

detail in the judgment delivered in Hadabima Authority v. Jathika Seveka Sangamaya (SC

Appeal 15/2013) (SC Minutes dated 26th of February, 2015). Further, each branch of the State

has the power to act in its own sphere of activity. The legislature is entrusted with the power to

make laws, the executive is to make policies and implement them, and the judiciary is to apply

laws, including Fundamental Rights, and interpret laws.

Therefore, making policies and executing them fall within the sphere of activities of the

executive and are not within the power of the legislature or the judiciary. Moreover, other than

the executive, the other two organs do not have the expertise and knowledge required to make

policies. On the other hand, the executive has experts, professionals, administrators, advisors,

172

etc., in a given field and has the expertise to make policies after taking into consideration all

aspects of a matter. Hence, the court would leave policy matters for those who are qualified to

address the issues, unless the policy or action is inconsistent with the Constitution and laws,

grossly arbitrary or irrational.

A similar view was expressed in Film Festivals & Ors. v Gaurav Ashwin Jain & Ors. (2007) 4

SCC 737, where the court held;

“The scope of judicial review of governmental policy is now well defined. Courts

do not and cannot act as Appellate Authorities examining the correctness,

suitability and appropriateness of a policy. Nor are courts Advisors to the

executive on matters of policy which the executive is entitled to formulate. The

scope of judicial review when examining a policy of the Government is to check

whether it violates the fundamental rights of the citizens or is opposed to the

provisions of the Constitution, or opposed to any statutory provision or manifestly

arbitrary. Courts cannot interfere with policy either on the ground that it is

erroneous or on the ground that a better, fairer or wiser alternative is available.

Legality of the policy, and not the wisdom or soundness of the policy, is the

subject of judicial review.”

[emphasis added]

Further, in State of Punjab & Ors. Vs Ram Lubhaya Bagga & Ors. (1998) 4 SCC 117, it was

held;

“........When Government forms its policy, it is based on number of circumstances

on facts, law including constraints based on its resources. It is also based on

expert opinion. It would be dangerous if court is asked to test the utility,

beneficial effect of the policy or its appraisal based on facts set out on

affidavits. The Court would dissuade itself from entering into this realm which

belongs to the executive.”

[emphasis added]

173

Furthermore, the courts cannot express their opinion as to whether, at a particular point in time or

in a particular situation, any such policy should have been introduced or not, or repealed,

particularly when a policy is accepted by Parliament either at reading of the budget or in any

other instances. Hence, it should be left to the discretion of the government.

A similar view was expressed in Delhi Science Forum v. Union of India (AIR 1996 SC 1356)

at 1359, where it was held;

“What has been said in respect of legislations is applicable even in respect

of policies which have been adopted by the Parliament. They cannot be tested

in Court of Law. The courts cannot express their opinion as to whether at a

particular juncture or under a particular situation prevailing in the country

any such national policy should have been adopted or not .... Courts have their

limitations - because these issues rest with the policy makers for the nation. No

direction can be given or is expected from the courts unless while implementing

such policies, there is violation or infringement of any of the Constitutional or

statutory provision... This Court cannot review and examine as to whether said

policy should have been adopted. Of course, whether there is any legal or

Constitutional bar in adopting such policy can certainly be examined by the

court.”

[emphasis added]

Further, the power of judicial review would not extend to determining the correctness of a policy

or to indulge in the exercise of finding out whether there could be more appropriate or better

alternatives. As policymaking is within the domain of the executive, the courts, under the garb of

judicial review, cannot usurp the jurisdiction of the decision-maker and make the decision itself.

Neither can it act as an appellate authority.

Moreover, complex executive decisions in economic matters may be empirical or based on

experimentation. Its validity cannot be tested on rigid principles or the application of any

straitjacket formula. In such matters, even experts may seriously or doubtlessly differ. Courts

cannot be expected to decide them, even with the aid of experts.

174

Thus, the courts do not interfere with policy matters or economic decisions, as such matters are

highly technical and even experts in that field hold different opinions on the same point. Similar

views were expressed in the following judgments.

In M/s. Prag Ice & Oil Mills and Another v. Union of India (AIR 1978 SC 1296) at 1305 the

Indian Supreme Court held;

“We do not think that it is the function of this Court or of any Court to sit in

judgment over such matters of economic policy as must necessarily be left to

the Government of the day to decide. Many of them, as a measure of price

fixation must necessarily be, are matters of prediction of ultimate results on

which even experts can seriously err and doubtlessly differ. Courts can certainly

not be expected to decide them without even the aid of experts.”

[emphasis added]

Moreover, in Shri Sitaram Sugar Company Limited v. Union of India (AIR 1990 SC 1277) at

1299, it was held;

“Judicial review is not concerned with matters of economic policy. The Court

does not substitute its judgment for that of the legislature or its agents as to

matters within the province of either. The Court does not supplant the "feel of the

experts" by its own views. When the legislature acts within the sphere of its

authority and delegates power to an agent, it may empower the agent to make

findings of fact which are conclusive provided such findings satisfy the test of

reasonableness... and whether such findings are consistent with the laws of the

land.”

[emphasis added]

Further, in Sujeewa Arjune Senasinghe v. Ajith Nivard Cabraal and others (SC/FR/457/2012)

(SC Minutes dated 18th of September, 2014) it was held;

“We must not forget that in complex economic policy matters every decision is

necessarily empiric and therefore its validity cannot be tested on any rigid formula

175

or strict consideration. The Court while adjudicating the constitutional validity of

the decision of the Governor or Members of the Monetary Board must grant a

certain measure of freedom considering the complexity of the economic activities.

The Court cannot strike down a decision merely because it feels another policy

decision would have been fairer or wiser or more scientific or logical. The Court

is not expected to express its opinion as to whether at a particular point of time

or in a particular situation any such decision should have been adopted or not.

It is best left to the discretion of the authority concerned.”

[emphasis added]

It is pertinent to note that the aforementioned two IMF press releases did not recommend or

advise the government to seek its assistance to address possible financial and economic issues.

The aforementioned IMF findings were reproduced in the Auditor General’s Report furnished to

court. It stated;

“2.7.6 IMF Staff had concluded its visit to Sri Lanka during January 29 to

February 7, 2020 to meet with the new administration and discuss its policy

agenda. The press release No. 20/42 including statements of IMF staff

teams that convey preliminary findings after a visit to a country had been

issued on 07 February 2020. Highlights of the preliminary findings of the

visit are as follows.

a) The economy is gradually recovering from the terrorist attacks last

April. Real GDP growth is estimated at 2.6 percent in 2019.

b) The recovery is supported by a solid performance of the

manufacturing sector and a rebound in tourism and related services in

the second half of the year.

c) High frequency indicators continue to improve and growth is

projected to rebound to 3.7 percent in 2020, on the back of the recovery

in tourism, and assuming that the Novel Coronavirus will have only

limited negative effect on tourism arrivals and other economic activities.

176

d) Inflation is projected to remain at around 4½ percent, in line with the

Central Bank of Sri Lanka (CBSL) target. After a sharp import

contraction in 2019, the current account deficit is expected to widen to

nearly 3 percent of GDP in 2020.

e) Preliminary data indicate that the primary surplus target under the

program supported by the Extended Fund Facility (EFF) was missed by

a sizable margin in 2019 with a recorded deficit of 0.3 percent of GDP,

due to weak revenue performance and expenditure overruns.

f) Under current policies, as discussed with the authorities during the

visit, the primary deficit could widen further to 1.9 percent of GDP in

2020, due to newly implemented tax cuts and exemptions, clearance of

domestic arrears, and backloaded capital spending from 2019.

g) Given risks to debt sustainability and large refinancing needs over the

medium term, renewed efforts to advance fiscal consolidation will be

essential for macroeconomic stability.

h) Measures to improve efficiency in the public administration and

strengthen revenue mobilization can help reduce the high public debt,

while preserving space for critical social and investment needs.

Advancing relevant legislation to strengthen fiscal rules would anchor

policy commitments, restore confidence, and safeguard sustainability

over the medium term.

i) The CBSL should continue to follow a prudent and data-dependent

monetary policy and stand ready to adjust rates to evolving

macroeconomic conditions.

j) Net International Reserves fell short of the end-December target

under the EFF supported program in 2019 by about $100 million

amid market pressures after the Presidential elections and announced

tax cuts. However, conditions have since stabilized. Renewed efforts

are needed to rebuild reserve buffers to safeguard resilience to shocks,

under a flexible exchange rate.

177

k) Approval of the new Central Bank Law in line with international best

practices is a critical step to further strengthen the independence and

governance of the CBSL and support the adoption of flexible inflation

targeting.

2.7.7 The Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded

the Article IV consultation with Sri Lanka on 25 February 2022. The press

release No. 22/54 in this regard had been issued on 02 March 2022.

Highlights of the press release are as follows.

a) Sri Lanka has been hit hard by COVID-19. On the eve of the

pandemic, the country was highly vulnerable to external shocks owing

to inadequate external buffers and high risks to public debt

sustainability, exacerbated by the Easter Sunday terrorist attacks in

2019 and major policy changes including large tax cuts at late 2019.

Real GDP contracted by 3.6 percent in 2020, due to a loss of tourism

receipts and necessary lockdown measures. Sri Lanka lost access to

international sovereign bond market at the onset of the pandemic.

b) The authorities deployed a prompt and broad-based set of relief

measures to cope with the impact of the pandemic, including

macroeconomic policy stimulus, an increase in social safety net

spending, and loan repayment moratoria for affected businesses.

These measures were complemented by a strong vaccination drive.

GDP growth is projected to have recovered to 3.6 percent in 2021, with

mobility indicators largely back to their pre-pandemic levels and

tourist arrivals starting to recover in late 2021.

c) Nonetheless, annual fiscal deficits exceeded 10 percent of GDP in 2020

and 2021, due to the pre-pandemic tax cuts, weak revenue performance

in the wake of the pandemic, and expenditure measures to combat the

pandemic. Limited availability of external financing for the government

has resulted in a large amount of central bank direct financing of the

budget. Public debt is projected to have risen from 94 percent of GDP in

178

2019 to 119 percent of GDP in 2021. Large foreign exchange (FX) debt

service payments by the government and a wider current account deficit

have led to a significant FX shortage in the economy. The official

exchange rate has been effectively pegged to the U.S. dollar since April

2021.

d) The economic outlook is constrained by Sri Lanka’s debt overhang as

well as persistently large fiscal and balance-of-payments financing

needs. GDP growth is projected to be negatively affected by the impact

of the FX shortage and macroeconomic imbalances on economic

activities and business confidence. Inflation recently accelerated to 14

percent (y/y) in January 2022 and is projected

to remain double-digit in the coming quarters, exceeding the target

band of 4–6 percent, as strong inflationary pressures have built up from

both supply and demand sides sincemid‑ 2021. Under current policies

and the authorities’ commitment to preserve the tax cuts, fiscal deficit is

projected to remain large over 2022–26, raising public debt further

over the medium term. Due to persistent external debt service burden,

international reserves would remain inadequate, despite the authorities’

ongoing efforts to secure FX financing from external sources.

e) The outlook is subject to large uncertainties with risks tilted to the

downside. Unless the fiscal and balance-of-payments financing needs

are met, the country could experience significant contractions in imports

and private credit growth, or monetary instability in case of further

central bank financing of fiscal deficits. Additional downside risks

include a COVID-19 resurgence, rising commodity prices, worse-than-

expected agricultural production, a potential deterioration in banks’

asset quality, and extreme weather events. Upside risks include a faster

than-expected tourism recovery and stronger-than-projected FDI

inflows.

f) Executive Directors commended the Sri Lankan authorities for the

prompt policy response and successful vaccination drive, which have

179

cushioned the impact of the pandemic. Despite the ongoing economic

recovery, Directors noted that the country faces mounting challenges,

including public debt that has risen to unsustainable levels, low

international reserves, and persistently large financing needs in the

coming years. Against this backdrop, they stressed the urgency of

implementing a credible and coherent strategy to restore

macroeconomic stability and debt sustainability, while protecting

vulnerable groups and reducing poverty through strengthened, well-

targeted social safety nets.

g) Directors emphasized the need for an ambitious fiscal consolidation that

is based on high-quality revenue measures. Noting Sri Lanka’s low tax-

to-GDP ratio, they saw scope for raising income tax and VAT rates and

minimizing exemptions, complemented with revenue administration

reform. Directors encouraged continued improvements to expenditure

rationalization, budget formulation and execution, and the fiscal rule.

They also encouraged the authorities to reform state-owned enterprises

and adopt cost-recovery energy pricing.

h) Directors agreed that a tighter monetary policy stance is needed to

contain rising inflationary pressures, while phasing out the central

bank’s direct financing of budget deficits. They also recommended a

gradual return to a market-determined and flexible exchange rate to

facilitate external adjustment and rebuild international reserves.

Directors called on the authorities to gradually unwind capital flow

management measures as conditions permit.

i) Directors welcomed the policy actions that helped mitigate the impact

of the pandemic on the financial sector. Noting financial stability risks

from the public debt overhang and sovereign-bank nexus, they

recommended close monitoring of underlying asset quality and

identifying vulnerabilities through stress testing. Directors welcomed

ongoing legislative reforms to strengthen the regulatory, supervisory,

and resolution frameworks.

180

j) Directors called for renewed efforts on growth-enhancing structural

reforms. They stressed the importance of increasing female labor force

participation and reducing youth unemployment. Further efforts are

needed to diversify the economy, phase out import restrictions, and

improve the business and investment climate in general. Directors also

called for a prudent management of the Colombo Port City project, and

continued efforts to strengthen governance and fight corruption. They

noted the country’s vulnerability to climate change and welcomed

efforts to increase resilience.”

[emphasis added]

Conclusion of the Auditor General

Further, the Auditor General’s Report states (page 439);

“3.4 ඉහත 3.1, 3.2 සහ 3.3 හි සඳහන් කරුණු එකක් හහෝ කීපයක් හහේතුහෙන් ශ්‍රී ලංකා

මහබ ංකුෙට යම් අලාභයකට හහේතු වී තිහේද යන්න පිළිබඳ නිරීක්ෂණ

(අ) අධිකරණ නියයෝගය ප්‍රකාරව, ප්‍රශ්තුත කරුණු එකක් ය ෝ ඊට වැඩි ගණනක් ය ේතුයවන්

ශ්‍රී ලංකා ම බැංකුවට යම් අලාභයක් සිදු වී තියේද යන්න පිළිබඳව නිරීක්ෂණ ඉදිරිපත්

කරන යලස සඳ න් කර තිබුණි. එයසේ වුවද, මා විසින් යමහිදී අධිකරණ නියයෝගයක් පරිදි

සිය විගණන කාර්යය සිදුකලද යමවැනි සිද්ධීන් ය ේතුයවන් යම් අලාභයක් සිදුවි තියේද

යන්න නිගමනය කිරීමට ප ත තත්වයන් ය ේතුයවන් යනො ැකි වී ඇත.

i. විෂයගත කරුණු තුනම රජයේ ප්‍රතිපත්තිමය තීරණ යලස බැලු බැල්මට විදයාමාන වන

ය යින් රජහේ/මහබ ංකුහේ ප්‍රතිපත්තිමය තීරණ හහේතුහෙන් සිදුෙන යහපත් හහෝ අයපහත්

හලස විවිධාකාරහයන් විවිධ පාර්ශෙ විසින් අර්ථ ද ක්විය හ කි ප්‍රතිඵලයන්හේ හිතකර හහෝ

අහිතකර මුලය ප්‍රති විපාක මා විසින් ගණනය කිරීම අභිහයෝගයට ලක් කිරීමට හ කි වීම.

ii. විෂයගත කරුණු තුන ක්‍රියාත්මක කළ කාලය ා ඒවායේ ප්‍රතිඵලයන් අයේක්ෂා කළ ැකි

කාලය තුළ එකී කරුණු තුනට අමතරව රයේ සමස්ථ ආර්ථික ක්‍රියාවලියට බලපෑම් ඇති කළ

වසංගත තත්වයක් දිවයින තුළ පැවතීම ා යගෝලීය වශයයන්ද පැවති එම වසංගත තත්වය

181

ස ඒවායේ ය පත් ස ය ෝ අයප ත් ප්‍රතිඵල යද්ශීය ආර්ථිකයට ද බලපෑම් කිරීම

ය ේතුයවන් විෂයගත කරුණු තුන ය ේතුයවන් පමණක්ම ම බැංකුවට සිදුවු මූලයමය

බලපෑම නිෂ්චිතව ගණනය කල යනො ැකි වීම.

iii. සීමිත විහේශ සංචිත උපහයෝගී කරහගන ගත යුතු වූ ප්‍රශස්ථම තීරණය කුමක්ද යන්න මා හට

හට නිර්ණය කළ හනොහ කිවීම සහ විවිධ ෙෘත්තිමය හා සමාජීය තත්ෙයන් යටහත් එම

තීරණය සමපාත වියයුතු යයි නිගමනය කළ හනොහ කි වීම.

(ආ) හකහසේ හෙතත්, හමම කරුණු එකක් හහෝ කිහිපයක් හහේතුහකොටහගන ශ්‍රී ලංකා

මහබ ංකුෙට යම් අලාභයක් සිදු වී තිහේද යන්න සම්බන්ධ නිශ්චිත නිරීක්ෂණ හමම

ොර්තාහේ අන්තර්ගත හනොවුනද ප්‍රශ්නගත එකිහනක කරුණු සිදු වී ඇති පසුබිම සහ එම

ඒකිහනක කරුණු අහනකුත් කරුණුෙලට ඍජුෙ හහෝ සහ ෙක්‍රෙ බලපා ඇති ආකාරය

හමම ොර්තාෙ පරිශීලනහේ දී නිරීක්ෂණය ෙනු ඇත.”

[emphasis added]

Accordingly, the Auditor General stated that he is unable to decide whether there is any loss to

the Central Bank of Sri Lanka. However, though the said report stated there are delays in taking

decisions by the Monetary Board and the government, it does not set out any specific violations

of the law by the respondents. Hence, I am of the view that there is no expert evidence before

this court to decide on the economic and fiscal issues raised in the said two applications.

Moreover, it is pertinent to note that the effects of COVID-19 were similar or more adverse to

the effects that were caused during the ‘Great Depression’ economic crisis in 1929. It adversely

affected our export income, which brought forex to the country. Similarly, the said pandemic

reduced foreign employment opportunities and thereby adversely affected one of Sri Lanka’s

main foreign earnings.

In fact, the effects of the Easter Sunday bombings and the adverse effects of COVID-19,

particularly, the unexpectedly large expenditure incurred for island-wide vaccination

programmes and quarantine centres, long periods of lockdowns, island-wide curfews, political

uncertainty and rivalry, public protests against implementing the economic policies of the

government, specifically with regard to privatisation, litigation challenging the privatisation of

State entites and geopolitical issues, disturbed the implementation of the policies of the

182

government. Further, such matters adversely affected the income from tourism and witnessed the

withdrawal of overseas and local investors from Sri Lanka. Hence, all such unexpected

intervening factors immensely contributed to the economic and financial collapse in Sri Lanka.

Conclusion

In the circumstances, I am of the view that the petitioners have not established that the policy

decision of the government not to go to the IMF was grossly arbitrary or irrational. On the

contrary, the Auditor General’s Report tendered to court, and the material filed by the

respondents, particularly the aforementioned Cabinet Memoranda and the decisions of the

Cabinet of Ministers, show that the government has considered the pros and cons of going to the

IMF, the past experiences with the IMF, the effects of obtaining assistance from the IMF will

have on the economy and the people, and thereafter taken the policy decision not to go to the

IMF. Moreover, the Cabinet of Ministers and the Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri

Lanka had taken all possible steps to address economic and fiscal matters to avert a possible

crisis. Further, it is common ground that the impugned decisions are policy decisions of the

government, except the decision of the Monetary Board. However, the petitioners did not

establish that any of those policy decisions violated the law or were grossly arbitrary.

Furthermore, as stated in the Auditor General’s Report, such decisions were based on various

economic theories applicable to macroeconomics. Hence, it is not possible to come to a finding

in respect of the issues referred to him by the court.

Did the government take steps to manage the economy without going to the IMF?

Decisions taken by the Cabinet of Ministers under Article 43 of the Constitution to improve

the fiscal and economic status of the country

The former Minister of Finance presented Cabinet Memorandum No.20/0804/204/078, on

“Foreign Resource Mobilization 2020-2025”, dated 13th of May, 2020, to the Cabinet of

Ministers, seeking approval for the following proposals;

183

“

1. The proposed external resource mobilization strategy and

recommendations,

2. Authorize Secretary to the Treasury to appoint a Project Evaluation

Committee headed by Dr Lalithasiri Gunaruwan,

3. Authorize Secretary Power and Energy, Chairman BOI, and Chainman

CEB to ensure the implementation of construction of fourth unit of 300 MW

coal power plant as an extension of the Lakvijaya Power Plant as a joint

investment by a Chinese investor and Ceylon Electricity Board (CEB) as a

foreign investment project under which the equity contribution of CEB is

also arranged by the investing Company,

4. Authorize Chairman BOI and Secretary to the Ministry of Highways to

finalize the investment proposal received on Construction of Elevated

Expressway from Athurigiriya Interchange of Outer Circular Expressway

to New Kelaniya Bridge via Rajagiriya to be done as a foreign investment

project to be structured by the BOI, RDA and UDA on a BOT basis,

5. Authorize Secretary to the Treasury and Secretary Ministry of Highways to

conduct contract negotiation on Central Expressway Section 3 and Section

4 as hundred percent foreign funded Turnkey projects with at least two

local contractors’ involvement in such projects and report to the Cabinet,

6. Any deviation from this policy framework requires prior Cabinet

approval.”

Further, the background and reasonings for these proposals were stated in detail in the said

Memorandum.

It was stated that “at present about forty percent of the public investment expenditure is financed

through external financing”. In this background, it was encouraged that foreign direct

184

investment and sustainable financial arrangements should be implemented to reduce pressure on

public investment. Moreover, the need to repay foreign debt service obligations was also

stressed upon.

Furthermore, the impact of the "forced global shut down" due to COVID-19 was referred to in

the said Memorandum. It was pointed out that it resulted in a significant impact on all countries,

especially countries such as Sri Lanka, which experienced a substantial dip in foreign currency

inflows due to the reduction of tourism, exports, and remittances. In fact, preliminary estimates

indicated a decline in both exports and remittances by almost 50 percent. It was stated that it

would create significant pressure on the foreign currency reserves, which at the time stood at

only around US$ 7.1 billion.

In view of the above, it was pointed out that further accumulation of foreign debt would have

serious ramifications on the country's capacity to service and repay such loans, with rating

agencies taking a less positive outlook on the country.

In this background, with the impact of COVID-19 and with fiscal space being limited and

government revenues being almost 25-30 percent less than expected in normal situations, the

increase in foreign currency debt needed to be managed prudently. The new foreign currency

borrowings that the country can accommodate per annum will have to be limited to less than

US$ 2.5 billion per annum, out of which US$ 1 billion for project loans, bearing in mind that if

programme loans are not forthcoming in large quantities, then commercial borrowings will have

to be accommodated at least for refinancing arrangements. There were almost another US$ 9

billion of loans with committed undisbursed amounts yet to be disbursed within the next 5-6

years, and the project pipeline worth US$ 8 billion must be revisited to ensure these projects are

well within the priorities of the government's policy after the outbreak of COVID-19.

The said Memorandum further stated that the government should shift to a long-term maturity

structure for commercial foreign loans while focusing on efficiency in resource utilisation with

selected projects and programmes. Furthermore, the government would explore other liability

management options as well as the cost of borrowing and incorporate reasonable grace periods.

In the meantime, the government should take further steps to diversify its external debt portfolio

to accommodate a sizable portion of Asian currencies and maintain an evenly distributed risk

185

profile. It would be prudent to invite Asian-based rating agencies to the country for a better and

more balanced risk assessment.

Moreover, the public investment strategy of the country should be governed by a debt reduction

investment approach with an increase in foreign investments in commercial projects. The rate of

domestic savings and investment supplemented with foreign direct investment will be the most

pertinent determinants to achieve sustained economic growth. Hence, it is imperative to increase

domestic savings and attract higher amounts of foreign investments in commercial infrastructure

development projects such as ports, airports, refineries, power generation, etc., which can

generate substantial economic value addition to the nation to achieve the desired growth rate.

Thus, by adopting such a strategy, the national budget has the space to accommodate non-

commercial financing from multilateral and bilateral sources for economic sectors such as

health, education, skill development, agriculture, rural infrastructure, etc.

Further, other topics that were discussed included foreign funding for development, the project

pipeline for foreign financing for the forthcoming three years, and how financing modality could

be implemented.

After discussion, the Cabinet of Ministers granted approval to those proposals and authorised the

Secretary to the Cabinet of Ministers to convey the decision to the relevant authorities to carry

out the necessary actions accordingly.

Furthermore, the Minister of Finance, Economic, and Policy Development chaired a meeting on

the 22nd of July, 2021 to discuss the Credit Ratings of the country, the possible impacts of the

downgrade on the credit ratings given by the rating agencies, ways of managing such impacts

and how it could be addressed. The Ministers, Members of Parliament, the Central Bank of Sri

Lanka, the Ministry of Finance, and other organisations, including the Presidential Task Force

for Economic Revival and Poverty Alleviation, participated at the said meeting.

Moreover, at the said meeting, the Central Bank of Sri Lanka made a presentation on “Recent

Development Sovereign Ratings and its Macroeconomic Challenges” and stated, inter alia;

186

“There had been 124 downgrades across the globe in 2020 and 16 downgrades in

2021.

Major factors considered for a downgrade were;

a. Low and declining foreign exchange reserves adequacy

b. Limited and narrow external financing options

c. Extremely weak debt affordability

d. Unavailability of a credible and sustainable debt servicing plan in the

medium term

The following will be the immediate challenges of a downgrade;

- Withdrawing of portfolio investment by investors

- Further constraining of market access

- Challenges to financial institutions in terms of mobilizing funds from abroad

- Requests to repay the existing debt obligations prematurely

- Spillover to other sectors including exchange rate

For ratings to be improved, it is required to

- Improve the fiscal outlook (through sustainable debt practices, reducing the

burden on public finance from business ventures and correlating public

investments with private capital or new revenue possibilities).

- Gradual build-up of reserves in the light of short-term obligations

- Near-term plan of external financing options and realizing sizable volume

inflows/financing in the immediate term

- Adhering and effectively implementing Medium Term Debt Management Strategy

(MTDS)”

187

Further, at the said meeting;

(a) The Governor of CBSL highlighted key steps undertaken to mitigate the negative effects

to the economy including;

i) “The foreign reserves can be fortified through the SWAP agreements (USD 600

million) and SDR facility of the IMF (around USD 700-800 million)

ii) Foreign exposure of debt has been contained to 40 percent”

(b) “Steps to be taken to avoid a downgrade”,

(c) “the impact of economic variables on the economy;

i) Vaccination programme will ease the pressures on the economy with the

reduction of risk of the disease.

ii) There needs to be a detailed plan for financing the budget deficit 2022.

iii) Foreign debt accounts for about USD 35 billion. DG/ERD will submit a detailed

list of foreign funded projects.

iv) The perception that the Sri Lanka is in a position to honour all its debt obligations

should be upheld.”

Once again on the 17th of August, 2021, the Minister of Finance submitted a Note to the Cabinet

of Ministers with the title of “Short Term Macro Economic Policy Initiatives” and requested

the Cabinet of Ministers to consider it and take an appropriate decision. The said Cabinet

Memorandum, inter alia, stated;

“The Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, submitting a report as required

under Section 64 and 68 of the Monetary Law Act has brought to my notice some of

the important economic challenges the country is currently facing, including the

following;

• Continuously increasing debt service payments due to rolling over of large

external debt of the country and the increasing dependence in external debt

creating sources on financing the budget deficit over the past several decades.

• Vulnerabilities stemming from COVID 19 pandemic; loss of earning from

tourism as well as some moderation of exports, limited foreign investment

188

inflows and intensified portfolio outflows, particularly foreign investment to the

government securities market.

• Country's access to international financial markets remains restricted with the

severing credit rating downgrading.

• Declining of gross official reserves and challenges relating to defending the

Exchange Rate

In this context, I would like to highlight that the Government is in a critical juncture

since the country is confronted with the COVID 19, 3rd wave having implications on

all aspects of socio economic life. The Government has devoted its attention and

resources to undertake an intensified vaccination programme which envisages to

vaccinate 100% of the target group by end of 2021, enabling the country to operate

in the "new normal" environment.”

It further stated;

“The Government has already taken steps to avoid external debt creating financing

for development activities and relying on investments as well as expanding foreign

earning avenues. In this regard, the Government has taken serious measures

including the following to increase Capital inflow through Foreign Direct

Investment.

1. Treasury is on a constant dialog with the Chinese Authorities to get them to

expeditiously disburse the loan of RMB 2,000 million (USD 350 Million) from

China Development Bank towards end august 2021.

2. Foreign investment agreement for West Coast Power Project is been finalized. The

investment agreement for West Terminal of Colombo port and the Athurugiriya

Expressway have been executed to raise USD 1500 FDI over next three years.

3. The Colombo Port City Economic Commission Act was enacted paving way to

create an impetus of FDIs within the special Economic zone - Colombo Port City.

4. Tax/Foreign Exchange Amnesty Bill and the Special Goods and Services Tax

legislation are expected to take up in Parliament.

189

5. Actions have taken to curtail non-priority public spending and costly Capital

Projects.

6. Several legislation including emigration and immigration laws to relax restrictions

to attract foreign inflows and legislative changes to improve doing business have

been lined up to place before Parliament.

7. Steps have been taken to regain tourism based on bubble concept applicable for

hotels above 3 stars category.”

Moreover, it will prevent speculations that have created a situation where exporters are not

converting their export proceeds and importers are engaged in panic buying and selling as well

as piling stocks.

Further, it stated;

“In this background, it was suggested that the following measures would be

necessary to be initiated by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, to signal market to move

on to a stabilization path.

1. Release total of USD 250 Mn immediately to all Commercial Banks, enabling all

cargo currently at the ports to be cleared. This should be subject to the CBSL

instructing that selling rate of each Commercial Bank shall not exceed LKR 202

per USD. A further USD 250 Mn be released in early September 2021, to meet

petroleum and LP gas financing.

2. Increase the present policy rate by 50 basis points to raise the prevailing Central

Bank deposit rate and lending rate from 4.5% and 5.5% to 5.5% and 6%

respectively.

3. Conduct open market operations aggressively to reduce its Treasury Bills

holdings while allowing the maximum Treasury Bill rate to increase by 75-100

basis points.

4. Increase the interest rate on local overdraft and term loan facility of BOI

Companies from domestic Banking Systems to encourage the inflow of foreign

remittance and prevent interest rate arbitrage.

190

5. Impose and interest rate celling on interest payable on Forex Deposits by

Commercial Banks.

6. Introduce letters of credit as a mandatory requirement for all imports (in place of

imports being made under various trade instruments) till 31 December 2021 and

impose a 2% tax on LC's other than medicine, essential food items and raw

materials.

7. Increase the statutory reserve ratio by 2 percentage points to 4 percent and

earmark such funds (approximately LKR 250 Bn) to set up a "Green Finance

facility" (GFF) to lend through Commercial Banks at 4% for organic fertilizer

manufacturing, renewable energy projects, forestry and organic agricultural

development.

8. Increase the limit of inward cash declaration at customs from USD 10,000 to

USD 25,000 for visiting travellers and Sri Lankan arriving the country from

overseas travel.

9. The Ministry of Finance will request all major import companies to organize

USD 15 Mn to 250 Mn medium term Credit Lines from the respective countries

that they import, so that heavy import payments will not exert pressure on the

FOREX market.”

Moreover, on the 23rd of November, 2021, the Minister of Finance presented to the Cabinet of

Ministers a Cabinet Memorandum seeking approval to proceed with the “Proposed Senior

Secured Revolving Credit Facility Offered by the Bank of China Limited to the Central Bank

of Sri Lanka”.

The said Cabinet Memorandum, inter alia, stated;

“1. Bank of China Limited (BoCL) has submitted a proposal of a Senior Secured

Revolving Credit facility to the Central Bank of Sri Lanka (CBSL) up to 02 billion

Chinese yuan (CNY), also known as renminbi (RMB), (equivalent to USD 300

million approximately), with the possibility of increasing in the event of an over

subscription depending on the syndication demand.

191

2. Following multiple rounds of discussions and negotiations, BoCL agreed that the

full amount (equivalent to USD 300 million approximately) can be drawn on the

day the facility is available for the CBSL and maintain in a nostro account

opened in BoCL Mainland China.

…

…

Hence, those funds will be considered as a part of the CBSL foreign reserves

from the date of withdrawal.”

As the earlier decision of the Cabinet of Ministers to sell shares to the Chinese Company did not

materialise, the Minister of Finance submitted a Cabinet Memorandum dated 23rd of November,

2021 to the Cabinet of Ministers with the title “Investments into the West Coast Power (Private)

Limited (WCPL), to reduce the cost of Electricity Generation” to sell shares of the said

company to a company based in the United States.

Having considered the said Memorandum and the decision by the Cabinet of Ministers dated 6th

of September, 2021, the Cabinet of Ministers approved the said Memorandum and authorised the

Secretary to the Treasury to enter into a Share Sale and Purchase Agreement (SSPA) with New

Fortress Energy Limited (NFE) with the clearance of the Attorney General.

Once again, on the 4th of December, 2021, another Cabinet Memorandum was submitted by the

Minister of Finance to the Cabinet of Ministers, seeking their approval to obtain the “Approval

of Parliament to issue an Order to extend the validity period of the Order issued under section

22 of Foreign Exchange Act No. 12 of 2017 on Restriction of Foreign Exchange Outflows”.

In the said Cabinet Memorandum, it was stated, inter alia;

“As the Order in force is to be expired on January 01, 2022, the Central Bank of Sri

Lanka is of the view that regulatory measures to limit / restrict outward remittance of

foreign exchange are continued to be implemented in order to minimize the potential

risks in the foreign exchange market. Some of the potential risks appeared in the

foreign exchange market are;

192

• Pressure on exchange rate and foreign exchange reserves emerged with negative

impact on tourism and exports due to continuation of the COVID-19 pandemic.

• Several foreign debt payments due during the rest of the year while significant

foreign debt service requirements falling due in 2022.

• Continuous demand for foreign exchange, arising from repayments of foreign

currency debt and payments on imports of essential goods.

• Such risks may ultimately be transmitted to the financial system causing threats

to the financial system, thereby overall economic stability as well.”

Further, it stated;

“Approval of the Cabinet of Ministers is sought to place the Resolution before the

Parliament for its approval to make an Order in terms of section 22 (3) of the FEA to

extend the validity of the Order issued under section 22 of the FEA published in the

Gazette No. 2234/49 of 2nd July, 2021, for a period of six months from January 01,

2022.”

Accordingly, with the approval of the Cabinet of Ministers, the said Gazette was placed before

Parliament for approval.

Moreover, on the 5th of December, 2021, the Minister of Finance submitted a Note to the

Cabinet of Ministers titled “Official Visit to India”, stating that they discussed four pillars for

short and medium-term corporation in this regard;

1. “Ensure the Food and health security it was agreed to extend a line of credit

facilities for food, medicine and other essential items import from India.

2. Energy security package that would include a line of credit to cover import of oil

from India and early modernization Trincomalee Oil tank farm

3. Offer of a currency Swap to help Sri Lanka address the currant balance of

payment issues.

4. Facilitating India investments in different sectors in Sri Lanka that would

contribute to growth & explained employment.”

193

Furthermore, as stated above, the Cabinet Paper No. 22/0009/304/002, dated 3rd of January,

2022, was presented to the Cabinet of Ministers by the Minister of Finance regarding "Economy

2022 and the Way Forward” and the Cabinet of Ministers took a policy decision not to seek

the advice of the IMF.

Once again, on the 24th of January, 2022, the Minister of Finance presented a Cabinet

Memorandum titled “Surcharge Tax Bill” to the Cabinet of Ministers, seeking approval to

publish the said Bill in the government Gazette to present it to Parliament.

“Budget 2022 introduced a number of proposals to strengthen the fiscal position of

the country and help regain the economic activities that were affected by the COVID-

19 pandemic. As such, a onetime surcharge tax of 25 percent on taxable income is

proposed to be imposed on persons or companies with taxable income over Rs. 2,000

million for the year of assessment 2020/2021.”

Further, the said Memorandum stated;

“The approval of the Cabinet of Ministers is sought to:

(I) Publish the Draft Surcharge Tax Bill prepared by the Legal Draftsman

attached to this Memorandum as Annexure I in the Government Gazette, and

(II) Submit the said Bill for the approval of Parliament.”

Moreover, after the Cabinet of Ministers approved the said Memorandum, the government took

steps to enact the Surcharge Tax Act, No. 14 of 2022, which was certified by the Speaker on the

8th of April, 2022.

Furthermore, the Minister of Finance submitted to the Cabinet of Ministers, a Cabinet

Memorandum dated 31st of January, 2022, titled “Prudent Control of Public Expenditure”.

194

In the said Cabinet Memorandum, it was stated;

“I wish to point out the need of paying close attention towards minimizing public

expenditure as a country in the way most countries in the world follow for speedy

results.

I have imposed certain orders to control expenditure by budget proposals 2022, the

budget circular No. 03/2021 dated 21.12.2021 issued providing guidelines to incur

expenditure and Public Finance Circular 01/2020(1) dated 12.01.2022.”

Further, in said Cabinet Memorandum, it was stated;

“As a considerable cost has to be incurred for the implementation of the proposals

made by me providing relief to minimize the economic difficulties that the public is

faced with due to the above circumstances and the rising prices at present, all

ministers are requested to direct their Secretaries to Ministries to thoroughly follow

the below mentioned activities to restrict expenditure that have been already

introduced.

1. Implementing the following instructions on the public expenditure management set

out in the Budget Circular No. 03/2021 dated 21.12.2021 with strict supervision.

i. Expenditure should be managed within the limits of the Appropriation Act

for the year 2022 and requests for additional allocations should not be

made.

ii. Reduce the fuel allowance provided to Hon. Ministers/Members of

Parliament and all Government officers who are paid fuel allowance

through the Consolidated Fund by 5 litres or an equivalent amount in cash

per month.

iii. Prepare methods to reduce electricity cost by 10 percent

195

iv. Suspend the construction of new office buildings except the buildings which

are being constructed for a period of two years as proposed by budget

proposals.

v. Suspend the purchasing of vehicles for Government institutions during the

year 2022.

vi. Suspend the recruitment of new staff for institutions for which expenditure

is incurred by the Consolidated Fund except to fill vacancies required for

the wellbeing of the institution.

vii. New buildings should not be obtained on rent and additional allocations will

not be provided to pay rents for buildings which are obtained without

provisions

viii. Foreign study tours should not be organized by using local funds and

officers should not be encouraged to participate in seminars/workshops etc.

by using local funds unless any official/ Government participation is

required on behalf of Sri Lanka.

ix. Various allowances should not be paid upon internal instructions issued at

ministerial or institutional level without a proper authority.

x. New projects should not be commenced without allocating provisions for the

settlement of bills in hand or unsettled bills regarding ongoing projects

xi. State institution of the commercial nature which are not financed through

the annual budget should take every possible step to cover their expenditure

and provisions should not be requested from the Treasury considering the

deficit of revenue. State institutions financed through the budget should

manage commitments upon the limits of provisions provided to them. Action

should be taken to obtain prior approval for capital expenditure without

delay.

196

2. Controlling telephone expenditure through implementation of the Public Finance

Circular 01/2020(1) dated 12.01.2022.”

[emphasis added]

Moreover, on the 11th of February, 2022, the Minister of Finance submitted a Note to the Cabinet

of Ministers on “Economy 2022 and Way Forward” to supplement the Cabinet Memorandum

dated 3rd of January, 2022. The following documents were furnished to the Cabinet of Ministers

along with the said Note;

1. Foreign Currency Outflows

2. Distribution of responsibility on Foreign Currency Inflow

Once again, a Cabinet Memorandum was presented to the Cabinet of Ministers by the Minister

of Finance, dated 19th of February, 2022 regarding the “Indian Credit Line for Importation of

Essential Commodities”. It stated, inter alia;

“The Government of India has agreed to provide its assistance import essential food

commodities, medicinal drugs, fuel oils, Portland cement and industrial raw

materials under an Indian Credit Line as a result of discussions had with the Indian

authorities during my recent visit to India.

Indian Credit Line

The Government of India has agreed to grant a loan of US $1 billion under a Credit

Line to import identified essential food commodities including the aforementioned

food items, medicinal drugs, fuel oils, Portland cement and industrial raw materials

and the Department of External Resources will negotiate with the Indian Authorities

on the loan conditions to make the repayment in three 3 years.

…

…

To get the approval of the Government of Sri Lanka to obtain the loan amount of US$

1 billion from India under the Indian Credit Line towards importation of essential

197

food commodities, medicinal drugs, fuel oils, Portland cement and industrial raw

materials.

To finalize the loan conditions pertaining to repayment of the said loan amount of

US$ one billion in 3 years with the Indian Authorities by the Department of External

Resources.”

Moreover, on the 28th of February, 2022, the Minister of Finance submitted a Cabinet

Memorandum to the Cabinet of Ministers, seeking the “Withdrawal of the Bill for the

Imposition of the Special Goods and Services Tax and Committee Stage Amendments to the

Bill to amend Value Added Tax Act, No. 14 of 2002”. In the said Memorandum it was stated;

“The Budgets 2021 and 2022 proposed an online-managed single Special Goods and

Services Tax (SGST) in place of multiple taxes and levies imposed under several

legal statutes on (i) Liquor, (ii) Cigarette, (iii) Telecommunication, (iv) Betting and

Gaming and (v) Vehicles to improve the efficiency of tax collection.”

Further, on the 4th of March, 2022, the Minister of Labour submitted a Cabinet Memorandum to

the Cabinet of Ministers seeking approval for “Granting Incentives for the Promotion of

Remittances from Migrant Workers”. In the said Memorandum it was stated;

“Approximately 7 to 8 billion United State of America (US) dollars is remitted

annually to this country by the foreign employment sector, which is a major sector

through which Sri Lanka receives foreign exchange. At a time when Sri Lanka had

faced a severe foreign exchange crisis due to setbacks in the apparel and other

export sectors and the collapse of tourism due to restrictions imposed on movement

and air navigation faced because of the COVID-19 global pandemic that prevailed

during the last two years, the contribution made by the remittances by migrant

workers towards strengthening the economy of this country to an extent was

immense.

Therefore, steps have been taken to send a large number of Sri Lankan workers to

foreign jobs following various strategies with the full intervention by the Sri Lanka

198

Bureau of Foreign Employment in collaboration with the Ministry of Labour, the

Central Bank of Sri Lanka, the Ministry of Sports and Youth, the State Ministry of

Foreign Employment Promotion and Market Diversification and the State Ministry

of Skills Development, Vocational Education, Research and New Inventions for the

purpose of promoting the foreign employment sector and thereby enhancing

remittances by migrant workers.

…

…

I expect the foreign exchange remitted to this country could be increased by

increasing the incentive given for each dollar from Rs.10/- at present to Rs. 38/- in

order to encourage and appreciate remitting to this country the foreign exchange

earned by migrant workers who shoulder the strengthening of this country's economy

by shedding their sweat and hard work and ensure more economic benefits to

dependents and family members of migrant workers during this coming New Year

Season. In addition, I observe that some support will be given to minimize the dollar

crisis which prevails in the country at present by giving this concession for remitting

foreign exchange received by foreign employment agents of this country as broker

charges from employers in foreign countries.

Further, this kind of processes will also enable us to minimize foreign exchange

frauds that are illegally committed.

…

…

Therefore, banking all the above-mentioned facts into consideration, I wish to

propose to the Cabinet of Ministers that it is suitable to increase the incentive given

for remittances from the present rate of Rs. 10 per dollar to Rs. 38/- per dollar when

remitting

a. foreign exchange earned by engaging in migrant work and

b. foreign exchange received by foreign employment agents as broker fees

from employers in oversees to this country.”

199

Having considered the said Memorandum, the Cabinet of Ministers approved the same.

Moreover, the Ministry of Finance, ERD – ME & SA Division on the 4th of March, 2022

presented to the Cabinet of Ministers, a Cabinet Memorandum with the title “USD 1000 Million

Credit Line Facility Agreement between the Government of Sri Lanka and State Bank of India

for Import of Essential Goods from India”.

Thereafter, on the 5th of March, 2022, the Minister of Finance submitted a Cabinet Memorandum

titled “Importation of Essential Commodities for year 2022 under Indian Credit Facility”, to

the Cabinet of Ministers.

It stated, inter alia;

“Indian Credit Line for Importation of Essential Commodities” and the decision of

the Cabinet of Ministers dated 21st February, 2022. Accordingly, the GOSL has

decided to obtain a USD 1 billion loan facility from the Government of India for the

importation of essential commodities for the year 2022.

This will enable registered importers to import essential food items, essential

pharmaceuticals and raw materials for local production based etc. on monthly

requirement, and Government will take steps to implement a proper program to

ensure the market consumer needs without shortage, even during the festive season.

The credit facility will be beneficial in terms of meeting the external resource gap for

the time being until the foreign currency inflows to the country become favorable

during the recovery process.

Accordingly, approval of the Cabinet of Ministers is sought to authorize the

Secretary Ministry of Finance to sign the Credit Facility Agreement according to the

format attached as Annex-1 with State Bank of India to borrow USD 1,000 million

for importation of essential commodities.”

After deliberating the said Memorandum, the Cabinet of Ministers has authorised the Secretary

to the Ministry of Finance to sign the said agreement.

200

Moreover, a Cabinet Memorandum was submitted to the Cabinet of Ministers by the Minister of

Finance on the 5th of March, 2022 seeking the “Implementation of an Incentive Scheme based

on Progress of Export”.

The said Memorandum stated;

“Cabinet Meeting held on 14.02.2022 regarding the Note to the Cabinet Paper

No.22/0228/301/002 dated 11.02.2022 submitted by His Excellency the President

under the title “2022 Economic and the way Forward” and the Cabinet Paper No.

22/0231/304/002-IV dated 11.02.2022 submitted by the Hon. Minister of Finance

under the title “2022 Economic and the way Forward.

I propose to implement an incentive scheme though Sri Lanka Export Development

Board for development and promotion of exports to achieve the expected foreign

exchange inflow of the Sri Lanka Export Development Board and the Department of

Commerce which comes under the Ministry of Trade were also entrusted

responsibilities as mentioned in Annexure I to the Cabinet Paper No.

22/0231/304/002-IV dated 11.022022.”

The said Memorandum was also approved by the Cabinet of Ministers.

Further, on the 6th of March, 2022 the Minister of Finance submitted a Note titled “Economy

2022 and Way Forward” to the Cabinet of Ministers. The said Note, inter alia, stated;

“The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic was largely felt by all sectors of the

economy and affected the lives of the people particularly during the year of 2020.

However, the country is on its path to recovery with economic growth expected to

be above 4 percent in 2021 with the committed aggressive vaccination drive of the

Government. Exports have risen significantly considerably recording over USD 1

billion continuously since June 2021 up to February 2022. The economy is poised

to take off with a growth over 5 percent in 2022.

201

However, the external sector suffered due to setbacks in the tourism sector, the

drop in workers’ remittances and the decline in foreign direct investments. In

addition, inflation as per the Colombo Consumer Price Index (CCPI) has risen

15.1 percent in February due to both supply and demand side shocks emanating

from the increase in fuel and world commodity prices, supply chain disruptions

and increased demand.

…

A monthly allowance of Rs. 5,000 has been granted to public servants, employees

in public corporations and pensioners since January 2022. The increase in

Samurdhi payments and provision of allowances to incentivize home gardening

will be implemented in due course.

With regard to strengthening the external sector, the Government aims to facilitate

non-debt foreign currency inflows through facilitating foreign investments, raising

tourism to pre-pandemic levels, increasing workers” remittances through

additional foreign employment opportunities and through promotion of exports in

potential sectors such as port and shipping and boat manufacturing and

establishment of pharmaceutical [Sir, this sentence seems incomplete]

Tourism sector

…

…

The following policy decisions have been taken to attract more tourists to visit the

country.

- Providing on arrival and on-line visa

- Extending of Initial Electronic Travel Authorization (ETA) from one month to

six months for which Cabinet has granted approval.

- Introducing a Digital Tourism Visa (digital nomad) for a period of one year

at a cost of USD 600.

202

- Initiating several global tourism promotion campaign programmes by the

Ministry of Tourism targeting major markets – UK, Germany, India, China,

Russia, Middle East, USA, Australia, Japan, Korea, Spain and Scandinavia

(International media campaigns through BBC, CNN, Al-Jazeera and CNBC;

Publication in international journals – Lonely Planet, Conde Nast traveler;

wellness tourism promotion in selected European countries and Joint

marketing).

- Conducting joint promotions by Tour Operators and Airlines for which

approval of the Cabinet of Ministers has been obtained.

…

…

Workers’ Remittances

As the largest single source of foreign exchange inflow in Sri Lanka of over the past

decades, workers’ remittances play a vital role by contributing to offset BOP deficits,

improved liquidity conditions in the domestic foreign exchange market, augment the

international reserve levels and thereby improving the country’s credit worthiness,

poverty reduction and promotion of savings and investments.

Amidst the pandemic, workers’ remittances which stood at USD 6.7 billion in 2019,

increased by 5.75 percent to USD 7.1 billion in 2020. However, the number of

departures for foreign employment has declined heavily 73 percent to 38,875 in 2020

from 203,075 in 2019. In 2021, although the number of departures increased to

122,263 showing signs of recovery, the workers’ remittances declined by 22 percent

to USD 5.5 billion in 2021 in comparison to 2020 mainly due to foreign currency

being remitted via informal channels.

By facilitating foreign employment opportunities, it is expected to send over 300,000

employees for foreign employment in 2022 and 35,892 departures for foreign

employment have been recorded up to mid-February. Accordingly, it is expected to

earn up to USD 7.5 billion in workers’ remittances in 2022.

203

In order to maximize the positive effects of remittances on economic growth and

development, the Government is in the process of implementing the following policy

initiatives in this regard.

…

…

Pharmaceutical Production

The pharmaceutical zones are established with the view of expanding the local

manufacturing of pharmaceuticals and facilitating investments therein with the

ultimate objective of reducing pharmaceutical imports and promote exports in the

long run, while also contributing the economy through job creation.

…

…

Port and Shipping Services

Earnings from sea transport services, recorded as USD 318 Mn in 2020 from Sri

Lanka Ports Authority (5LPA), South Asia Gateway Terminals (SAGT), Colombo

International Container Terminals (CICT) and other maritime services, declined

marginally to 315 USD Mn in 2021. Earnings from ports and shipping services

expect to Increase up to USD 350 Mn in 2022.

Earnings from Ports and Shipping is further expected to increase with the following

policy measures:

- Development of East Container Terminal (ECT) second Phase expected to be

completed by 2024 with

- 12 giant cranes and 40 normal cranes. West Container Terminal (WCT)-

Cabinet of Ministers has granted approval to develop the WCT with Public

Private Partnership (PPP) arrangement and Agreement has been signed

between SLPA, Adani Group of India and John Keels Holdings PLC.

204

- Development of Kakesanthurai Port-Feasibility study completed

- Trincomalee-Approval of Cabinet of Ministers has been granted and

Expression of Interest (EOI) is being developed.

- Galle-EOS/Request for Proposals (RFPs) are called

Non-debt creating inflows such as earnings from tourism, workers’ remittances,

import substitutive industries such as pharmaceuticals, earnings from sources

including ports and shipping together with the details on strategic interventions to

increase foreign currency inflows and to reduce foreign currency outflows aimed at

improving the external sector outlook of the country, are submitted for the

information of the Cabinet of Ministers.

Accordingly, the approval of the Cabinet of Ministers was sought;

• To provide public servants with monthly allowance of Rs. 5,000/- from January.

• To provide to the pensioners a monthly allowance of Rs. 5,000/-.

• To provide extra monthly allowance of Rs. 1,000/- to Samurdhi beneficiaries.

• To support the programme that to conduct home gardening programme to

encourage growing of vegetables and fruits for self-consumptions.

• Flour Subsidy – To provide 15Kg wheat flour monthly at Rs. 80 to plantation worker

families.

• To completely exempt import of essential food and medicines taxes.”

The Cabinet of Ministers approved the said Memorandum having considered the hardships faced

by the general public in this country.

Thereafter, the Minister of Finance, on the 6th of March, 2022 submitted a Note to the Cabinet of

Ministers, detailing the “Staff Report Recommendations for the 2021 Article IV Consultation

of the International Monetary Fund (IMF)”. The said report stated;

“Usually every year, under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF

holds bilateral discussions with member countries including Sri Lanka. A staff team

visits the member country, gathers economic and financial data, and discusses the

205

country’s economic developments and policies with authorities. On return to

headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussions by

the Executive Board. Accordingly, the 2021 Article IV discussions with Sri Lankan

authorities took place in Colombo during December 7-20, 2021.”

[emphasis added]

Summary of Key Recommendations as per the Press Release on the 2nd of March, 2022, by the

staff of the IMF stated;

“

i. Urgently implementing a credible and coherent strategy to restore

macroeconomic stability and debt sustainability, while protecting vulnerable

groups and reducing poverty through strengthened, well-targeted social

safety nets.

ii. Fiscal consolidation based on high-quality revenue measures through raising

income tax and VAT rates, minimizing exemptions together with revenue

administration reforms.

iii. Continuously improving expenditure rationalization, budget formulation, and

execution and the fiscal rule.

iv. Reforming State-Owned Enterprises and adopting cost-recovery energy

pricing,

v. Implementing a tighter monetary policy stance to contain rising inflationary

pressures and phasing out Central Bank’s direct financing of budget deficits.

vi. Gradually returning to a market-determined and flexible exchange rate to

facilitate external adjustment and rebuild international reserves.

vii. Gradually unwinding capital flow management measures as conditions

permit.

206

viii. Closely monitoring of underlying asset quality and identifying vulnerabilities

through stress testing to mitigate financial stability risks while strengthening

the regulatory, supervision and resolution frameworks.

ix. Renewed efforts on growth-enhancing structural reforms such as increasing

female labour force participation and reducing youth unemployment.

x. Diversifying the economy, phasing out import restrictions, and improving the

business and investment climate in general.

xi. Prudent management of the Colombo Port City project, and continued efforts

to strengthen governance and fight corruption.

xii. Increase climate resilience.”

[emphasis added]

Further, the Note included the following observations made by the Minister of Finance;

“The Sri Lankan economy was not in a healthy position when the COVID-19

pandemic hit the country. The economy was crippled by the Easter Sunday Attacks

which adversely affected tourism and investor confidence. The improvement in

business sentiments following the Presidential elections held in November 2019

and the implementation of the new policy agenda of the Government were

disturbed by the pandemic and the required containment and remedial measures.

The Government embarked on a reform agenda to strengthen non-debt foreign

exchange inflows such as exports, remittances and foreign direct investments and

to absorb a part of such inflows towards rebuilding foreign exchange reserves.

Exports recorded a historic high in 2021 and surpassed over USD 1 Billion exports

consecutively since June 2021 upto February 2022 with an ongoing rebound in

tourism.

The government remains committed to ensuring medium term fiscal consolidation.

Efforts are underway to recoup revenue losses observed during the pandemic,

207

particularly through a one-time surcharge tax, social security contribution levy

and increasing the Value Added Tax (VAT) on financial services while

strengthening the tax administration in line with digitalization drive of the

Government. Expenditure management has been strengthened by the introduction

of quarterly commitment ceilings in the Budget 2022. Ongoing digitalization of the

economy including in delivery public services is expected to support both revenue

enhancement and expenditure management.

Reforms to State Owned Enterprises (SOEs) are also being carried out, albeit

under difficult circumstances caused by rising energy prices and other pandemic

related effects on key SOES. Revision of domestic petroleum prices in June and

December 2021 helped improve the balance sheet of Ceylon Petroleum

Corporation (CPC), and the Government stands ready to revise prices to reflect

international market trends while minimizing the adverse effect of such revision

on the economy.

A gradual reduction In the Government's external debt exposure is already

observed, and the exposure to the International Sovereign Debt market is expected

to decline from US$ 14.55 billion at end 2019 to US 11.55 by end 2022. Sri Lanka

commits to maintaining its impeccable track record of debt servicing.

I acknowledge that the recent rise in inflation, driven mainly by food inflation

(latest at 25 percent), rising petroleum prices, and supply chain disruptions,

remains a major concern. The Government has taken measures to mitigate the

impact of rising cost of living on the general public, while the Central Bank has

tightened monetary policy to dampen demand driven pressures on inflation.

The Sri Lankan economy is going through one of the most difficult episodes in its

long history, and I am confident that Sri Lanka will rebound, as it has done in the

past, as the effects of the pandemic subside, aided by policies that are being put in

place to strengthen its resilience and uplift the lives of our people on a sustainable

208

basis.” (It is pertinent to note that these observations are similar to the views

expressed by the IMF team in the year 2020.)

…

…

I wish to inform the Cabinet of Ministers the key recommendations made by the

Executive Board of the IMF concluded the Article IV consultation with Sri Lanka on

February 25, 2022 and my observations.

[emphasis added]

The Cabinet Paper No.22/0404/304/028 dated 14th of March, 2022 and the Note presented to the

Cabinet of Ministers dated 6th of March, 2022 by the Minister of Finance on "Staff Report

Recommendations for the 2021 Article IV Consultation of the International Monetary Fund

(IMF)” were considered by the Cabinet of Ministers along with further clarifications made by

the Minister of Finance. After discussion, the Cabinet of Ministers decided to authorise the

Minister of Finance to take the necessary steps to obtain technical advice and the assistance of

the IMF to resolve the current situation encountered by the Sri Lankan economy.

Thereafter, the Minister of Finance on the 7th of March, 2022 submitted a Cabinet Memorandum

seeking the approval of the Cabinet of Ministers, for the “Allocation of the required budgetary

provisions for fulfilment of the Energy requirement”. It was stated, inter alia;

“The Covid-19 pandemic has affected not only the Sri Lankan economy but economy

of the entire world which has led to a highest crude oil prices during the last ten

years which severely affected the economy of the country and lead to severe fuel

crises. However, the Government has taken some control measures without shifting

entire burden to the general public.

…

…

209

Furthermore, due to the above fuel crises, the Government of Sri Lanka has made

arrangement to obtain a loan facility USD 500 million through the Exim Bank of

India for fuel supply.”

Accordingly, the approval of Cabinet of Ministers was sought for the following;

“To obtain the covering approval for Rs. 15 billion which has been provided by

General Treasury to the CPC as CEB equity infusion.

To grant the authority to the General Treasury for the allocation of Rs. 86.7 billion

including Rs. 15 billion as a capital infusion to meet the financial requirements of the

CEB and empower the Director General of the Department of National Budget to

provide necessary additional allocation for this purpose and authority to collect

through Treasury Bills issued by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka.”

The said Memorandum was also approved by the Cabinet of Ministers.

Further, the Minister of Finance submitted a Note to the Cabinet of Ministers dated 10th of

March, 2022, with the title “General Direction to Accept Bona - Fide Investment of Non-

Resident Companies by Resident Companies”. The said Note stated, inter alia;

“Accordingly, approval has been granted as recommended by the Monetary Board of

the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, to issue a direction under Section 7 (10) of the

Foreign Exchange Act No. 12 of 2017 as follows:

(a) Grant permission on case by case basis to the request of Resident Companies to

issue shares to Non-Resident investors, who have remitted funds directly to the

account of such resident companies instead of remitting through the Inward

Investment account of such Non-Resident Investors”

(b) “Grant permission to the relevant dealers to credit any income and capital proceeds

of the shares to be issued by Resident Companies to Non- Resident Investors under

the permission granted by the Monetary Board”

210

On the 11th of March, 2022 the Minister of Finance submitted another Cabinet Memorandum to

the Cabinet of Ministers to consider implementing decisions regarding “Managing Foreign

Exchange Inflows through Banks and Registered Financial Institutions”.

The said Memorandum stated, inter alia;

“Due to Covid-19 pandemic, Sri Lanka faced a severe foreign exchange crisis due to

the collapse in the tourism sector and the downturn of foreign employment sector,

which is a main source of foreign exchange earnings of Sri Lanka. This foreign

exchange crisis in the country further intensified with the migrant workers and

exporters, in particular, resorted to using illegal money transfer methods to get a

higher rupee value for foreign exchange and delaying the remittances into the

country in the hope that the United State Dollar (USD) would appreciate further

against the rupee.

Taking these factors into consideration, the Central Bank of Sri Lanka has allowed

the exchange rate to be determined on the market forces with effect from 07.03.2022.

Since it is guaranteed to provide greater economic returns on the foreign exchange

earned by migrant workers, who are committed to strengthening the economy of Sri

Lanka, through this decision, there is no need to further implement the Government's

incentive programme to promote migrant workers' remittances at a cost of over Rs.

20 billion per month. Also, foreign exchange earnings of exporters also have high

economic benefits through determining exchange rates based on market mechanisms,

they are no longer encourage to delay the remittances of foreign exchange assuming

the dollar continues to appreciate or to exchange foreign earnings through risky

illegal means. Therefore, there is no need to further implement the incentive scheme

to bring in the foreign exchange earned by exporters.

In view of the above, this Cabinet Memorandum is submitted to reconsider whether

the following decisions taken on the Cabinet Memorandum referred in paragraphs

1.2 and above need to be implemented with the relaxation of the Foreign Exchange

Policy.

211

(a) to provide incentives to encourage remittances of migrant workers and brokerage

fees receive to foreign employment agents as foreign currencies, and

(b) to implement an incentive scheme based on export progress to encourage short-term

repatriation of foreign exchange earned by exporters.”

Thereafter, the said incentive programme was discontinued with the approval of the Cabinet of

Ministers.

Moreover, the Minister of Finance submitted to the Cabinet of Ministers on the 18th of March,

2022, a Cabinet Memorandum seeking “Approval for Promulgation of Regulation to extend

the Validity Period to open Special Deposit Accounts introduced under the Foreign Exchange

Act No. 12 of 2017”. It was, inter alia, stated;

“Purpose of this Cabinet Memorandum is to obtain approval of the Cabinet of

Ministers to promulgate Regulations to further extend the validity period of the

"Special Deposit Accounts" introduced under the Foreign Exchange Act, No. 12 of

2017.

…

…

Given the above, it is proposed to promulgate Regulations made under Section 7 (1)

of Foreign Exchange Act, No. 12 of 2017 as described in the Annexure II, to extend

the validly period for opening and maintaining of Special Deposit Accounts for

another year, which will be recorded as 36 months from April 08, 2020.”

Accordingly, the approval of the Cabinet of Ministers was sought to;

“

(a) Promulgate Regulations under Section 7 (1) of Foreign Exchange Act, No. 12 of

2017

(b) Submit the Regulations for approval of Parliament”

212

Once again, on the 21st of March, 2022, a Cabinet Memorandum seeking approval to issue

“Foreign Exchange Regulations to facilitate Investments in the Colombo Port City” was

submitted to the Cabinet of Ministers by the Minister of Finance. It stated, inter alia;

“The purpose of this Cabinet Memorandum is to obtain approval of the Cabinet of

Ministers to issue Regulations under the Foreign Exchange Act. No. 12 of 2017 in

respect of foreign exchange transactions relating to the investments in the area of

authority of the Colombo Port City Economic Commission.

Colombo Port City Economic Commission (the Commission) and M/s CHEC Port

City Colombo (Pvt.) Ltd (the Company) have made a request to the Central Bank of

Sri Lanka (Central Bank) to issue Regulations and Directions under the provisions of

the Foreign Exchange Act (the Act), as an interim measure until the necessary Rules

and Regulations are issued/promulgated by the Commission.

Given the above, approval of the Cabinet of Ministers is sought to:

(a) Promulgate Regulations under Section 7(1) of the Foreign Exchange Act No. 12 of

2017, as largely set out in the Annexure I and Annexure II as described in the

Paragraph No. 4 above.

(b) Submit the Regulations referred in (a) above for approval of Parliament”

Furthermore, on the 25th of March, 2022, the Minister of Finance submitted to the Cabinet of

Ministers, a Cabinet Memorandum titled “Rapid Action Plan for Economic Revival”. The said

Memorandum, inter alia, stated;

“As approved by the Cabinet of Ministers by their decision dated 21st March, 2022

and as noted under proposal 2 (1) of the Cabinet Memorandum titled "Rapid Action

Plan for Economic Revival"; a Technical Committee comprising of officers from the

Central Bank of Sri Lanka and the General Treasury, was appointed to engage with

the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and this Committee comprises of the

following members. (Annexure 01)”

The above Memorandum was considered by the Cabinet of Ministers and approved the same.

213

On the 26th of March, 2022, another Cabinet Memorandum was submitted to the Cabinet of

Ministers by the Minister of Finance seeking approval for the “Submission of the 2021 Article

IV Report of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to the Parliament”. The said

Memorandum stated, inter alia;

“Accordingly, the 2021 Article IV discussions with Sri Lankan authorities took place

in Colombo during December 7-20, 2021.

…

…

The key recommendations include revenue-based fiscal consolidation, restoring debt

sustainability, near-term monetary policy tightening, restoring market-determined

and flexible exchange rate and strengthening social safety net programmes. My

observations on the commendations have already been informed to the Cabinet of

Ministers through Note to the Cabinet bearing No. 22/0404/304/028 dated March 06,

2022, which has been noted by the Cabinet of Ministers as per the Cabinet Decision

dated March 14, 2022.

…

…

Approval of the Cabinet of Ministers is sought to submit the 2021 Article IV report

prepared by the International Monetary Fund (Annexure) to the Parliament for

information.”

On the 28th of March, 2022, after the discussion regarding the Cabinet Memorandum was

submitted to the Cabinet of Ministers by the Minister of Finance on the 26th of March, 2022, “it

was decided to grant approval to submit the 2021 Article IV report prepared by the

International Monetary Fund in respect of Sri Lanka, attached to the Memorandum, to

Parliament”.

214

Further, the Cabinet Memorandum dated 26th of March, 2022, submitted by the Minister of

Finance on "Expeditious Measures for Economic Revival" was considered by the Cabinet of

Ministers.

After discussion, the Cabinet noted the measures taken by the Minister of Finance for the

appointment of the Technical Committee comprising of Officials of the Central Bank of Sri

Lanka and the General Treasury to arrange the programme to engage with the IMF and for the

appointment of the Committee for Sustainable Management of Public Debt, as per the Cabinet

decision dated 21st of March, 2022 on CP No. 22/0477/304/036. Hence, it was decided to

authorise the Secretary to the Cabinet of Ministers to convey the said decision immediately to

the relevant authorities for necessary action.

On the 3rd of April, 2022 the Minister of Finance submitted a Cabinet Memorandum to the

Cabinet of Ministers, detailing the “Proposed Emergency Crisis Response Package to be

funded by World Bank”. He stated, inter alia;

“I will be having discussions with the World Bank on 11 April 2022 on strengthening

social protection system in Sri Lanka and also the liquidity crisis faced by the

country. I expect to provide emergency support for households affected by the

pandemic situation in the country and to help them cope with the effects of the

economic crisis and also for laying the ground for the strengthening of the country's

social protection system for increased future resilience.

…

…

Proposed Financing Arrangement

The total estimated financing envelope of the proposed Emergency Crisis Response

Package is USS 340 million, of which;

(i) USS 40 million would be secured through the repurposing from the existing loans

and

215

(ii) US$ 300 million would be obtained as a new IBRD loan to implement the proposed,

Emergency Social Safety Net Project (ESSNP).”

In the above context, the approval of the Cabinet of Ministers was sought to;

“

1. Make necessary arrangements to repurpose US$ 40 million from the identified

ongoing Projects in the World Bank portfolio;

2. Initiate discussion with the World Bank to formulate and negotiate Emergency

Social Safety Net Project (ESSNP) and borrow US$ 300 million from the IBRD.

3. Authorize Secretary, Ministry of Finance to enter into a loan agreement, once the

discussions are concluded with the World Bank, to borrow USS 300 million from

the 18RO to implement the proposed Emergency Social Safety Net Project

(ESSNP)”

Some of the steps that were taken by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka and the Ministry of

Finance to improve the economy of the country -

The Auditor General’s Report stated thus;

“Table No. 30 - Instructions on the repatriation of worker remittances

Date Type of

Instruction

Description

22.12.2020 Operating

Instructions

(OIs)

Operating instructions were issued to pay Rs. 2 per dollar

above the normal exchange rate for the foreign exchange

remittances sent by foreign workers to banks in Sri Lanka

01.01.2021 OIs Foreign currency earned through an employment by a Sri

216

Lankan national who is working has worked abroad or Sri

Lankan national who resides in Sri Lanka and earns foreign

currency through rendering services in nature of employment

abroad will qualify to receive an additional LKR 2.00 per US

dollar with effect from 28.12.2020.

27.01.2021 OIs All LBs are required to sell to the CBSL 10% of the Inward

worker remittances which are converted to LKR, in USD with

immediate effect.

17.03.2021 OI The requirement of LBs to sell 10% of inward worker

remittances to the CBSL is suspended in respect of conversion

of worker remittances which have taken place from

17.03.2021 onwards.

28.05.2021 OIs All LBs are required to sell to the CBSL 10% of the Inward

worker remittances which are converted to LKR, in USD with

effect from 28.05.2021 on weekly basis.

01.12.2021 OIs MB decided to pay an additional Rs. 8 per dollar for workers'

remittances from 01.12.2021 to 31.12.2021. (Total incentive

Rs.10). This was extended till 31.01.2022 by OIs dated

27.12.2021. Extended until further notice by OIs dated

31.01.2022 This was discontinued with effect from

09.03.2022

27.12.2021 OIs All LBs are required to sell to the CBSL 25% of the Inward

worker remittances which are converted to LKR, in USD with

effect from 27.12.2021 on weekly basis. This was continued

by OIs issued on 08.03.2022.

22.03.2022 OIs All LBs are required to sell to the CBSL 50% of the Inward

worker remittances which are converted to LKR, in USD from

217

week commencing from 21.03 2022-until the week ending on

29.07 2022 on weekly basis

11.04.2022 OIs All LBs are required to sell to the CBSL 25% of the Inward

worker remittances which are converted to LKR. in USD from

week commencing from 11.04.2022 until the week ending on

29.07.2022 on weekly basis.

2.8.16 Instructions issued by the CBSL during the period from 18 February 2021 to 11

April 2022 in relation to repatriation, conversion and mandatory sale of export

proceeds are summarised in the following table.

Table No. 31 - Instructions on the repatriation, conversion and mandatory sale of export proceeds

Date Type of

Instruction

Description

18.02.2021 Gazette No.

2215/39

Every exporter of goods shall receive the export

proceeds in Sri Lanka in respect of all goods exported

within 180 days from the date of shipment.

Gazette No.

2215/39

Ever exporter of goods shall, immediately upon the

receipt of such export proceeds into Sri Lanka, convert

25% from and out of the total export proceeds received

in Sri Lanka into Sri Lankan Rupees through a Licensed

bank (Gazette- No. 2215/39 dated 18.02.2021.

218

18.02.2021 OIs All Licensed Banks are required to sell 50% of the

export proceeds in various currencies purchased from

exporters of goods, to CBSL in US dollars with

immediate effect.

09.03.2021 Gazette No.

2218/38

Every exporter of goods shall, within fourteen (14) days

upon the receipt of such export proceeds into Sri Lanka

as required under Rule 3 above, convert Twenty-five per

centum (25%) from and out of the total of the said

exports proceeds received in Sri Lanka into Sri Lanka

Rupees through a licensed bank.

17.03.2021 OIs The requirement to sell 50% of the conversions of

export proceeds received as from 17.03.2021 onwards is

suspended with immediate effect

09.04.2021 Gazette No.

2222/6

Every exporter of goods shall, within thirty (30) days

upon the receipt of such export proceeds into Sri Lanka

as required under Rule 3 above, convert Ten per centum

(10%) from and out of the total of the said exports

proceeds received in Sri Lanka into Sri Lanka Rupees

through a licensed bank.

28.05.2021 Gazette No.

2229/9

Every exporter of goods shall, within thirty (30) days

upon the receipt of such export proceeds into Sri Lanka

as required under Rule 3 above, convert not less than

Twenty- five per centum (25%) from and out of the total

of the said export proceeds received in Sri Lanka, into

Sri Lanka Rupees, through a licensed bank.

The Monetary Board may however determine the

specific export sectors or industries or individual

219

exporters, who or which may be permitted to convert

less than 25% of the total of the export proceeds

received in Sri Lanka, if the Monetary Board is satisfied,

in its discretion, that the export goods and processes of

such export sector, industry or exporter, utilize a very

high percentage of imported goods that cannot be

sourced domestically.

Provided however, that in no instance, shall any such

partial exemption that the Monetary Board may grant in

its discretion, as referred to immediately above, be

below ten per centum (10% of the total export proceeds"

28.05.2021 OIs All LBS are required to sell 10% from and out of the

25% export proceeds so converted into LKR, to the

CBSL on weekly basis with effect from 28.05.2021.

28.10.2021 Gazette No.

2251/42

Every exporter of pods and services who receives export

proceeds in Sri Lanka, in terms of Rule 3 above, shift

mandatorily convert residual of the export proceeds

received in Sri Lanka, into Sri Lanka Rupees upon

utilizing such proceeds only in respect of the below

mentioned authorized payments, on or before the

seventh (7th) day of the following month

Previous Gazettes were repealed.

01.11.2021 OIs All LBs are required to sell 10% of such residual of the

export proceeds which are mandatorily converted into

LKR to the CBSL in USD on a weekly basis with effect

from 01.11.2021

27.12.2021 OIs All LBs are required to sell 25% of such residual of the

220

export proceeds which are mandatorily converted into

LKR. to the CBSL in USD on a weekly basis with effect

from 27.12.2021

22.03.2022 OIs All LBs are required to sell to the CBSL 50% of the

residual of export proceeds which are converted to LKR,

in USD from week commencing from 21.03.2022 until

the week ending on 29.07.2022 on weekly basis.

11.04.2022 OIs All LBs are required to sell to the CBSL 25% of the

residual of export proceeds which are converted to LKR,

in USD from week commencing from 11.04.2022 on

weekly basis.

2.8.17 Import restrictions imposed by the Minister of Finance, Economic and Policy

Development during the period from 16 April 2020 to 09 March 2022 are

summarised in the following table.

Gazette No and Date

Name Person Who promulgate

Effective Date

Regulations

2171/5 2020.04.16

Imports Exports (Control) and Regulations No. 02 of 2020

Minister Finance, of Economic and Policy Development

From April 16, 2020 to July 15, 2020

Temporarily suspended importation of list of goods and to impose minimum of 30-day credit facility on importation of another list of goods. 2126/19 2020.05.22

Imports Exports (Control) Regulations No. 02 of 2020

Minister Finance, of Economic and Policy Development

2020.05.22 Extended the validity period of Extraordinary Gazette Notification No. 2171/5 by three months to introduce a list of exceptions and other regulatory and Administrative measures

221

2182/10 2020.06.30

Imports Exports (Control) Regulations No. 3 of 2020

Minister Finance, of Economic and Policy Development

2020.06.30 Updated the Extraordinary Gazette Notification No. 2176/19 22.05.2020.

2184/21 2020.07.16

Imports Exports (Control) Regulations No. 04 of 2020

Minister Finance, of Economic and Policy Development

2020.07.17 Repealed Imports and Exports Control Regulations No. 02 and 03. Issued updated lists of goods for temporary suspension and importing only under a mandatory credit facility provided by foreign supplier. Issued list of exemptions and other regulatory and administrative measures. 2189/4 2020.08 17

Imports Exports (Control) Regulations No. 05 of 2020

Minister of Finance

2020.08.18 Issued an unspecified validity period suspending the list of goods specified in the gazette that require import licenses. 2189/5 2020.08.17

Imports Exports (Control) Regulations No. 06 of 2020

Minister of Finance

2020.08.18 Amended the lists of goods those are under import restrictions as specified by Imports and Exports (Control) Regulations No. 04 of 2020. 2193/9 2020.09.15

Imports Exports (Control) Regulations No. 07 of 2020

Minister of Finance

2020.09.16 Amended the lists of goods those are under import restrictions as specified by Imports and Exports (Control) Regulations No. 04 of 2020. 2198/2 2020.10.19

Imports Exports (Control) Regulations No. 08 of 2020

Minister of Finance

2020.10.19 Amended the lists of goods those are under import restrictions as specified by Imports and Exports (Control) Regulations No. 04 of 2020. 2206/5 Imports Exports Minister of 2020.12.15 Amended the lists of

222

2020.12.14

(Control) Regulations No.10 of 2020

Finance goods those are under import restrictions as specified by Imports and Exports (Control) Regulations No. 04 of 2020. 2207/15 2020.12.24

Imports Exports (Control) Regulations No. 11 of 2020

Minister of Finance

2020.12.15 Amended the lists of goods those are under import restrictions as specified by Imports and Exports (Control) Regulations No. 04 of 2020. 2209/18 2021.01.05

Imports Exports (Control) Regulations No. 01 of 2021

Minister of Finance

2021.01.05 Amended the lists of goods those are under import restrictions as specified by Imports and Exports (Control) Regulations No. 04 of 2020. 2214/56 2021.02.11

Imports Exports (Control) Regulations No. 03 of 2021

Minister of Finance

2021.02.11 Amended the lists of goods those are under import restrictions as specified by Imports and Exports (Control) Regulations No. 04 of 2020. 2222/31 2021.04.06

Imports Exports (Control) Regulations No. 04 of 2021

Minister of Finance

2021.04.07 Regulate the importation of palm oil

2224/43 2021.04.23

Imports Exports (Control) Regulations No. 05 of 2021

Minister of Finance

2021.04.23 Impose requirement of Import Control License (ICL) for mobile workshops.

2224/44 2021.04.23

Imports Exports (Control) Regulations No. 06 of 2021

Minister of Finance

2021.04.23 Temporary suspended the importation of brand-new mobile workshops.

2226/48 2021.05.06

Imports Exports (Control) Regulations No. 07 of 2021

Minister of Finance

2021.05.06 Control Importation of Chemical fertilizers, pesticides & herbicides.

223

2231/16 2021.06.11

Imports Exports (Control) Regulations No. 08 of 2021

Minister of Finance

2021.06.11 Imposed requirement of ICL importation of facemasks, gold ani metal

2231/17 2021.06.11

Imports Exports (Control) Regulations No. 09 of 2021

Minister of Finance

2021.06.11 Empower the recommendation to National Medicines Regulatory Authority to exports the good specified in the Schedule I including oxygen 2231/18 2021.06.11

Imports Exports (Control) Regulations No. 10 of 2021

Minister of Finance

2021.06.10 Temporary suspended the lists of goods in Schedule I that are under import restrictions as specified by Imports and Exports (Control) Regulations No. 04 of 2020. 2238/45 2021.07.31

Imports Exports (Control) Regulations No. 11 of 2021

Minister of Finance

2021.07.31 Impose requirement of ICL for mineral or chemical fertilizers.

2247/12 2021.09.29

Imports Exports (Control) Regulations No. 12 of 2021

Minister of Finance

2021.09.29 Eliminated requirement of ICL on white crystalline sugar.

2252/30 2021.11.03

Imports Exports (Control) Regulations No. 14 of 2021

Minister of Finance

2021.11.03 Removed temporary suspension importation of rice.

2256/23 2021.11.30

Imports Exports (Control) Regulations No. 15 of 2021

Minister of Finance

2021.11.30 Removed restrictions on importation of chemical fertilizers, pesticides & herbicides. Imposed requirement of ICL on radio navigational aid apparatus. Banned importation of Glyphosate

224

2262/17 2022.01.11

Imports Exports (Control) Regulations No. 02 of 2022

Minister of Finance

2022.01.12 Amendments to the Schedule 1 of the Special Import License Regulations, published in the Gazette Extraordinary No. 2044/40 dated 09th November 2017. 2262/18 2022.01.11

Imports Exports (Control) Regulations No. 03 of 2022

Minister of Finance

2022.01.12 Removed temporary suspension on long grain rice. Continue restrictions on fish fillet as per new Hs codes. 2270/18 2022.03.09

Imports Exports (Control) Regulations No. 05 of 2022

Minister of Finance

2022.03.10 Impose requirement of ICL on selected items.

The Auditor General’s Report states;

“2.9.8 Secretary to the President, Dr. P B Jayasundera had sent a letter on 08 April

2020 to the Managing Director of IMF, Ms.Kristalina Georgieva requesting a

Rapid Financing Instrument – RFI. A summary of the content of the said letter

is as follows.

a) The Sri Lanka economy is experiencing the devastating impact of the novel

coronavirus (covid -19) pandemic.

b) Lower tourist arrivals due to international travel bans have reduced

economic activities in hotel, restaurant, trade, transport, and other sectors,

with large impact on growth, employment, and income.

c) The disruption in global supply chain have affected our exports and

imports, reducing our foreign exchange receipts and fiscal revenues.

d) The slowdown in major overseas employment markets for Sri Lankan

workers and disruption to remit their funds have substantially lowered our

remittance inflows.

225

e) Our preliminary estimates suggests that sharp decline in our economic

growth, fiscal revenues, and foreign exchange receipts would create large

and urgent fiscal and balance of payment needs.

f) Against this background, we would like to request emergency financing

from the IMF under the Rapid Financing Instrument (RFI). At this stage, we

would like to replace the current Extended Fund Facility (EFF)

arrangement with RFI, but we are open to your suggestion.

g) We are also requesting additional support from other development partners,

particularly Japan, the Peoples’ Republic of China, the world Bank and

Asian Development Bank (ADB).”

Moreover, the Auditor General in the Audit Report produced marked as ‘Z’ has evaluated the

three issues on which he was directed to report to this court. In his report, he has stated that it is

not possible to determine whether a loss had been caused to the Central Bank. Further, he has

not specified any violations with regard to any of the matters that were referred to him by

the court.

Therefore, I am further of the opinion that the petitioners did not establish any violations of the

laws by the respondents. Hence, it is not possible to hold that the respondents have violated the

Fundamental Rights of the petitioners guaranteed by the Constitution as pleaded in the two

petitions. A similar view was expressed in Wijesinghe v. Attorney General and Others (1978-

79-80) 1 SLR 102 at 106 where it was held;

“Every wrong decision or breach of the law does not attract the constitutional

remedies relating to fundamental rights. Where a transgression of the law takes

place, due to some corruption, negligence or error of judgment, I do not think a

person can be allowed to come under Article 126 and allege that there has been a

violation of constitutional guarantees. There may also be other instances where

mistakes or wrongful acts are done in the course of proceedings for which

ordinarily there are built-in safe-guards or adequate procedures for obtaining

relief.”

[emphasis added]

226

Time Bar Objection

As stated above, some of the respondents pleaded that the two applications were not filed within

the period of one month stipulated in Article 126(2) of the Constitution.

Article 17 of the Constitution states;

“Every person shall be entitled to apply to the Supreme Court, as provided by

Article 126, in respect of the infringement or imminent infringement, by

executive or administrative action, of a fundamental right to which such person is

entitled under the provisions of this Chapter.”

[emphasis added]

Further, Article 126 (1) and (2) of the Constitution states;

“(1) The Supreme Court shall have sole and executive jurisdiction to hear and

determine any question relating to the infringement or imminent

infringement by executive or administrative action of any fundamental right

or language right declared and recognized by Chapter III or Chapter IV.

(2) Where any person alleges that any such fundamental right or language right

relating to such person has been infringed or is about to be infringement by

executive or administrative action, he may himself or by an attorney-at-law

on his behalf, within one month thereof, in accordance with such rules or

court as may be in force, apply to the Supreme Court by way of petition in

writing addressed to such Court praying for relief or redress in respect of

such infringement. Such application my be proceeded with only with leave to

proceed first had and obtained from the Supreme Court, which leave may be

granted or refused, as the case may be, by not less than two judges.”

[emphasis added]

227

Moreover, Supreme Court Rule 44 states:

“44. (1) Where any person applies to the Supreme Court by a petition in writing,

under and in terms of Article 126 (2) of the Constitution, for relief or

redress in respect of an infringement or an imminent infringement, of

any fundamental right or language right, by executive or administrative

action, he shall –

(a) set out in his petition a plain and concise statement of the facts and

circumstances relating to such right and the infringement or

imminent infringement thereof, including particulars of the executive

or administrative action whereby such right has been, or is about to be,

infringed; where more than one right has been, or is about to be,

infringed, the facts and circumstances relating to each such right and

the infringement, or imminent infringement thereof shall be clearly

and distinctly set out. He shall, also refer to the specific provisions of

the Constitution under which any such right is claimed.”

[emphasis added]

A careful consideration of the two petitions show that the petitioners allege different

infringements in each of those petitions, though some are identical. Further, both petitions do not

specifically set out the dates on which each of the alleged infringements occurred. Thus, it is

necessary to consider the averments in the two petitions to ascertain the alleged dates of the

infringements in order to decide on the objection on time bar.

SC/FR Application No. 195/2022

Averments relating to alleged infringements SC/FR Application No. 195/2022

Paragraphs 15, 16, 22, 23, 36, 40, 45, 76 and 77 of the petition filed in the aforementioned

application states;

“15. The Petitioners state that to upon promising to effect several tax reductions

in "Vistas of Prosperity and Splendour", the Government of the Republic as

228

directed by His Excellency the President caused the taxes payable by the

general citizenry of the Republic to reduce.

16. Such reductions were detailed by the 2nd Respondent during the budget

speech made thereby for the year 2021.

A true copy of the budget speech for the year 2021 made by the 2nd Respondent

is annexed hereto marked as P4 and is pleaded as part and parcel hereof.

….

…

High Levels of Inflation

22. The Petitioners state that the citizenry of the Republic at present is facing

unprecedent economic hardship, with extreme levels inflation causing the

price essential goods and services to increase at extreme rates. In particular,

the Petitioners state that as at April 2022, the price of essential goods had

increased from the previous year in the following extents:

(a) The price of Petrol had increased by 85%;

(b) The price of Diesel had increased by 69%;

(c) The price of a cylinder of Liquid Petroleum Gas had increased by 84%;

(d) The price of Turmeric had increased by 443%,

(e) The price of Bread had increased by 433%;

(f) The price of Rice had increased by 93%;

(g) The price of Dhal had increased by 171%

23. The Petitioners further state that since such article was published, the price of

several and/or all of the aforementioned goods has further increased, to wit:

(b) On the 27th of April 2022, the price of Gas Cylinders was further

increased, causing a 12.5kg cylinder of Liquid Petroleum Gas to cost

Rs. 4,860/-;

229

(c) On the 19th of May 2022, the price of a loaf of bread was increased by

Rs. 30/-, to Rs. 170/

(d) On the 2nd of May 2022, the Consumer Affairs Authority impose a

Maximum Retail Price on certain varieties of rice, setting the maximum

price at which a kilogram of "Red Nadu Rice", "Red and White Samba"

and "Keen Samba" could be sold at Rs. 220/-, Rs. 230/, and Rs. 260/-

respectively;

(e) On the 19th of April 2022, the Ceylon Petroleum Corporation increased

the price of Petrol (92 Octane) to Rs. 338 per liter

True copies of article published in the Island Online dated 23rd May 2022.

NewsFirst.lk dated 19th May 2022, NewsFirst.lk dated 3rd May 2022, and Outlook

India dated 23rd May 2022 are annexed hereto marked as P6(a), P6(b), P6(c), and

P6(d), respectively and are pleaded as part and parcel hereof.

…

…

36. The Petitioners further state that the overall rate of inflation as measured by the

National Consumer Price Index on a year on year basis is 33.8% in April 2022,

which is the highest recorded in the history of the Republic, and the South Asian

Region.

37. However, the Petitioners state that since 2019, the foreign currency reserves

available to the Republic were intentionally depleted by the 28th Respondent, to

wit, the value of the usable Foreign Exchange reserves maintained by the

Republic:

(a) As at February 2022 amounted to USD 2,300,000,000/-;

(b) As at March 2022 amounted to USD 1,930,000,000/-;

(c) As at May 2022 amounted to a sum below USD 50,000,000/-;”

….

230

…

40. Furthermore, the Petitioners state that at the COPE Committee Meeting held on

25.05.2022, Dr. Nandalal Weerasinghe, the Governor of the Central Bank of Sri

Lanka and member of the 28th Respondent stated that the Republic does not

possess any and/ or sufficient liquid foreign currency reserves to pay its foreign

debts or to purchase necessary imported goods, and the assistance of the

International Monetary Fund and foreign nations is required to assist the

Republic in this regard (vide P20(a) and P20(b) below).

45. The Petitioners state that the views expressed by the Hon. 2B Respondent have

further been reiterated by the officials of the International Monetary Fund

(hereinafter referred to as the "IMF") who have been liaising with the Republic

for the purpose of alleviating the present economic crisis faced thereby.

Specifically, the Managing Director of the IMF, Mrs. Kristalina Georgieva when

speaking to NDTV stated as follows:

"It is breaking my heart to watch the pictures of what is happening in the

country that was once quite prosperous. It is a result of mismanagement and

therefore the most important thing to be done is to put the country back on a

sound microeconomic footing"

A true copy of the article published on the Daily FT on 27.05.2022 is annexed hereto

marked as P15, and is pleaded as part and parcel hereof.”

….

….

INVOCATION OF THE JURISDICTION OF YOUR LORDSHIPS' COURT

76. In the circumstances aforesaid, the Petitioners state that the actions and decision

of His Excellency the President, and/or the 2nd to 27th Respondents, and/or the

28th to the 32nd Respondents and/or the 33rd Respondent (in his representative

capacity) and/or any one or more of them in mismanaging the economy of the

Republic in the manner morefully set out above, and failing to abide by the

mandatory provisions of the Monetary Law Act has violated and /or imminently

231

violates and/or continuously violates the Fundamental Right to Equality and

Equal Protection of the Law guaranteed to the Petitioner and to the citizens of the

Republic under Article 12(1) of the Constitution and further violates the

Fundamental Right to the freedom to engage by himself or in association with

others in any lawful occupation, profession, trade, business or enterprise

guaranteed to the citizens of the Republic under Article 14(1)(g) of the

Constitution, in as much as:

(a) The mismanagement of the economy of the Republic and the acts of the 2nd,

2A, 29th to 32nd Respondents, and 38th Respondents set out above have caused

high levels of inflation to arise, preventing and/ or hindering the performance

of lawful trade and occupation inasmuch as the citizens of the Republic may

not be able to afford the essential raw materials used for such business/trade;

(b) The scarcity of essential imported items including petrol and diesel has

prevented and/or hindered the ability of citizens of the Republic to attend to

their business and/or trade, inasmuch as the same are prevented and/ or

hindered from travelling thereto,

(c) The sharp rise in the cost of living caused by the high levels of inflation

referred to above has rendered several businesses commercially unviable,

and/or have caused the said businesses/trades to be rendered insolvent and/or

approach insolvency,

(d) The citizens of the Republic are vulnerable to succumbing to illness and/ or

are denied access to effective healthcare due and owing the inability of the

Republic to import vital medicines which are used to healthcare professionals

and hospitals when treating patients;

(e) The 28th, 29th, 30th, 31st and 32nd Respondents and/ or any one or more of them

have failed and / or neglected to abide by the mandatory provisions contained

in Section 66 of the Monetary Law Act, and have by willful default and/or by

misconduct have caused loss and damage to the Central Bank of Sri Lanka

and consequently to the citizens at large, by failing to maintain any exchange

232

arrangements as are consistent with the underlying trends in the country, by

artificially causing the exchange rate of the rupee to be held at arbitrary

values;

(f) The 28th, 29th, 30th, 31st and 32nd Respondents and/or any one or more of them

have failed and/or neglected to abide by the mandatory provisions contained

in Section 68 of the Monetary Law Act, and have by willful default and/or by

misconduct have caused loss and damage to the Central Bank of Sri Lanka

and consequently to the citizens at large, by settling and /or failing to prevent

the settlement of the International Sovereign Bond payment due in January

2022 notwithstanding the lack of foreign exchange reserves with the 28th

Respondent;

(g) The 28th Respondent has failed to take any necessary steps to recover any

loss and/or damage suffered by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka consequent to

the decisions made by the 29th, 30th, 31st and 32nd Respondent, and has

therefore allowed any losses sustained thereby to remain;

(h) His Excellency the President, and the 1st to 27th Respondents and/or any one

or more of them have acted arbitrarily in reducing the tax revenue available

to the Republic by reducing the levels of taxation imposed on the citizens;

(i) The lack of essential imports, high levels of inflation, and depletion of foreign

currency reserves was caused by the arbitrary and misconceived acts of the 1st

to 32nd Respondents and the 38th Respondent and/or any one or more of them;

(j) His Excellency the President, and the 1st to 27th Respondents and the 38th

Respondent and/or any one or more of them have taken into account

irrelevant considerations and failed to take into account relevant

considerations inter alia by effecting reductions in tax on the sole premise of

the election promise made by His Excellency the President,

233

(k) His Excellency the President, and the 1st to 27th Respondents, and the 38th

Respondent and/or any one or more of them are in beach of the principles of

natural justice and fairness;

(l) The said the 1st to 27th Respondents and the 38th Respondent and / or any one

or more of them have acted in breach of public trust and confidence reposed

in them.

77. In all the aforesaid circumstances, the Petitioner states that the conduct of His

Excellency the President, and the 1st to 32nd Respondents and any one or more of

them are thus and otherwise ultra vires, illegal, irrational, unjustifiable, ad hoc,

arbitrary and capricious. The aforesaid conduct offends the principles of natural

justice, rule of law, transparency, and good governance.”

Prayer to the petition in SC/FR/Application No. 195/2022

“WHEREFORE THE PETITIONERS PLEAD THAT YOUR LORDSHIPS BE

PLEASED TO:

(a) Grant Leave to Proceed with this Application;

(b) Declare that the Fundamental Right guaranteed to the petitioners under Article 12(1)

of the Constitution is being imminently infringed and/or has been infringed and/or

is continuously being infringed by the 1st to 32nd Respondents (save and except for

the 2B Respondent) and/or the 33rd Respondent (in his representative capacity)

and/or any one or more of the Respondents;

(c) Declare that the Fundamental Right guaranteed to the Petitioner under Article

14(1)(g) of the Constitution is being imminently infringed and/or has been infringed

and/or is continuously being infringed by the 1st to 32nd Respondents (save and

except for the 2B Respondent) and/or the 33rd Respondent (in his representative

capacity and/or any one or more of the Respondents;

(d) Declare that the Fundamental Right guaranteed to the Petitioner under Article

14(1)(g) of the Constitution is being imminently infringed and/or has been infringed

234

and/or is continuously being infringed by the 28th, 29th, 31st and 32nd Respondent by

causing the Republic to settle the International Sovereign Bond in January 2022 as

evinced by P21(a);

(e) Make Order directing the 28th Respondent to recover and / or take steps to recover

all losses and damages occasioned onto the Central Bank of Sri Lanka by officers of

the 28th Respondent and/or former officers of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka,

including the 29th to the 32nd Respondents and/or any one or more of them,

consequent to the decision made to set the value of the Sri Lankan Rupee at a value

of and / or around Rs. 203/-, which may be uncovered by an audit prayed for

hereinunder and/or otherwise;

(f) Make Order directing the 28th Respondent to recover all losses and damages

occasioned onto the Central Bank of Sri Lanka by officers of the 28th Respondent

and / or former officers of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, including the 29th to the

32nd Respondents and/or any one or more of them, consequent to the decision made

to settle the payment referred to in P21(a), which may be uncovered by an audit

prayed for hereinunder and/or otherwise;

(g) Grant an Interim Order directing, the 35th to 37th Respondents to expeditiously look

into the matters contained in the Application (P22) and submit its observations to

Your Lordships’ Court within 3 months, or such other time which Your Lordships’

Court may deem reasonable;

(h) Grant an Interim Order directing the 34th respondent to conduct an audit into the

affairs of the 28th Respondent, and determine the loss caused to the Central Bark of

Sri Lanka by

i the decision made to set the value of the Sri Lankan Rupee at a value

of and/or around Rs. 203/- in a manner contrary to Section 66 of the

Monetary Law Act, and further determine;

ii the delay in obtaining facilities from the IMF by the Republic

consequent to the decisions made by the 29th Respondent.”

235

(i) Grant an Interim Order preventing the 29th and/or the 30th and / or the 31st and / or

the 32nd Respondents from alienating any assets belonging thereto which are situated

in the Republic pending the hearing and determination of this application by Your

Lordships' Court;

(j) Grant an Interim Order preventing the 2nd and/or the 2A and / or the 38th

Respondents from alienating any assets belonging thereto which are situated in the

Republic pending the hearing and determination of this application by Your

Lordships' Court;

(k) Grant an Interim Order directing the 28th Respondent to produce to Your Lordships

Court the documents made reference to by Mr. Jayawardena PC and Dr. Ranee

Jayamaha at the Committee On Public Enterprise meeting held on 25.05.2022

wherein it was suggested that the Republic should seek relief and /or other financial

assistance from the International Monetary Fund;

(l) Grant an Interim Order directing the 28th Respondent to produce to Your Lordships'

Court the documents made reference to by Mr. Jayawardena PC and Dr. Ranee

Jayamaha at the Committee On Public Enterprise meeting held on 25.05.2022

wherein it is recorded that the appointed members of the 28th Respondent objected to

and/ or otherwise disagreed with the artificial maintenance exchange rate of the Sri

Lanka Rupee at and/or at a level below Rs. 203/-;

(m) Grant an Interim Order directing the 39th Respondent to produce to Your Lordships'

Court, the minutes of the Committee On Public Enterprise meeting held on

25.05.2022;

(mm) Grant an Interim Order preventing the 2nd Respondent and/or the 2A Respondent

and / or the 32A Respondent, and/ or any one or more of the 29th to the 32nd

Respondents and / or the 38th Respondent from leaving the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka without obtaining the prior permission of Your Lordships

Court;

236

(mmm) Grant an Interim Order preventing the 32A Respondent from alienating any

assets belonging thereto which are situated in the Republic pending the hearing

and determination of this application by Your Lordships Court:

(n) Costs;

(o) Such other and further relief as Your Lordships Court shall seem meet.”

[emphasis added]

SC/FR Application No. 212/2022

Averments relating to the alleged infringements in SC/FR Application No. 212/2022

The following averments in the petition of the said application stated;

“8. The Petitioners state that the 1(b) Respondent and the 2nd, 3rd, 6th, 7th, 9th and 10th

Respondents made a series of irrational, arbitrary, patently illegal, wrongful

decisions, in complete dereliction of their statutory duties and fiduciary

responsibility, for collateral and extraneous purposes, during the years 2019 to

2022, which has resulted in the Petitioners and the public of Sri Lanka being

denied their right to equality, equal protection of the law and their right to life as

guaranteed by the Constitution of Sri Lanka.

9. (a) The Petitioners state that the aforesaid series of irrational, arbitrary, patently

illegal, and wrongful acts on the part of the 1(b) Respondent and the 2nd, 3rd, 6th,

7th, 9th and 10th Respondents, has resulted in catastrophic long-term and short-

term ramifications to the economy, and caused the country to default on the

repayment of foreign debts, for the first time in its history, and has relegated Sri

Lanka to a state of bankruptcy / insolvency, as will be morefully elaborated in this

Application.

….

….

10. (a)The Petitioners state that, as morefully set out in this Application, the said

actions / inaction and gross mismanagement of the economy by the 1(b)

237

Respondent and the 2nd, 3rd, 6th, 7th, 9th and 10th Respondents, have resulted in an

unprecedented economic crisis driven by debt unsustainability, which has

garnered the attention of the world at large

(b) The Petitioners state that the International Monetary Fund (hereinafter referred

to as the "IMF") by its IMF-Sri Lanka Staff Report for the 2021 Article IV

Consultation dated 10/02/2022, categorized, for the first time the sovereign debt

of Sri Lanka as "unsustainable" thereby bringing into effect a cascade of inimical

repercussions to the economy of Sri Lanka in general and the external debt

portfolio in particular, and thereby leading the State to issue a Notice of Default

dated 12/04/2022 (P-2(a)), whereby the State of Sri Lanka informed all its

creditors that all foreign debt repayment would be suspended, which debt

repayments included the following categories of debt:

b. All outstanding series of bonds issued in international capital markets

c. Certain bilateral (government to government) credits

d. All foreign currency denominated loan agreements or credit facilities with

commercial banks or institutional lenders, including those owned by

foreign governments

e. All amounts payable following a call during the said interim period upon

a guarantee issued in respect of a debt of a third party.

A true copy of the IMF Country Report No.22/91 (2021 Article IV consultation Press

Release: Staff Report and Statement by the Executive Director for Sri Lanka) is

annexed to the original Petition filed in this Application dated 16 June 2022, marked

as "P-3" and is pleaded as part and parcel hereof.

11. The Petitioner states that thereafter, on or around the 19th of May 2022, Sri

Lanka defaulted on loans that fell due and has now been downgraded by rating

agencies as a defaulting nation, as will be morefully elaborated on in this

Application.

12. The Petitioners state that the Petitioners are invoking the fundamental rights

jurisdiction of Your Lordships' Court on the basis that the 1(b) Respondent and

238

the 2nd, 3rd, 6th, 7th, 9th and 10th Respondents by a series of actions, commencing in

2019 and continuing to date, (as morefully set out hereinafter) including acts that

have necessitated the defaulting of Sovereign debt, have infringed and/or violates

and continue to infringe and/or violate the fundamental rights of the Petitioners

and of all citizens of Sri Lanka, as made abundantly clear at the recent meeting of

the Committee on Public Enterprises (COPE) on or about 25% May 2020, where

it transpired that the actions of the said Respondents in respect of inter alia, the

RFI facility (Rapid Financing Instrument) of the IME and the management of the

rupee, had engendered the present crisis, as will be morefully elaborated in this

Application.

…

…

13. The Petitioners state that such actions and/or inactions of the 1(b) Respondent and

the 2nd, 3rd, 6th, 7th, 9th and 10th Respondents, are broadly categorized as follows:

(i) the illegal, arbitrary and unreasonable abolition, removal and/or

reduction of taxes effected in the year 2019 and the consequent

reduction in government revenue,

(ii) the refusal to change the aforesaid illegal, irrational and arbitrary

decisions to reduce taxes despite the consequent downgrading of Sri

Lanka's credit rating and the emergence of the COVID-19 Pandemic,

(iii) the failures and/or omissions to take remedial measures subsequent to

rating downgrade caused, inter alia, by the illegal, arbitrary and

unlawful actions of the 2nd, 3rd, 6th, 7th, 9th and 10th respondents,

(iv) the refusal and failure of the 2nd, 3rd, 6th, 7th, 9th and 10th respondents to

ensure conditions were met in a manner that would permit Sri Lanka to

avail itself of the sum of money agreed to be given to Sri Lanka by the

IMF in terms of the Extended Fund Facility agreement as set out

hereinafter,

239

(v) the failure to obtain available aid to combat the economic hardships

faced as a consequence of COVID-19, especially in the face of a lack of

government revenue,

(vi) the failure to act in terms of the Monetary Law of Sri Lanka, to

maintain international reserves and the international stability of the

rupee,

(vii) the failure to devalue the Sri Lankan rupee in a timely, orderly and

appropriate manner, despite widespread calls and demands to do so,

(viii) the failure and / or omissions to appropriately devalue the rupee which

resulted in fluctuations in worker remittances, and subsequently, the

country's foreign reserves and Sri Lanka's balance of payment,

(ix) the decision to continue to service Sovereign debt without any

restructuring, despite the futility and grievous prejudice in doing so,

(x) the continued refusal to seek the assistance of the IMF, despite

widespread calls and demands to do so,

(xi) the subsequent admission by the former President of the Republic that the

aforementioned refusal to seek the assistance of the IMF was wrong and

misconceived, and

(xii) the unreasonable, arbitrary actions and / or omissions which resulted in a

default of the country's foreign debt.

16. The Petitioners state that in or around November/December 2019, the

Commissioner General of Inland Revenue issued a number of notices on the

instructions of the 2nd Respondent which sought to reduce a number of taxes

[hereinafter referred to as 'tax revisions'] by inter alia:

a. Removing/abolishing the Taxes set out by Parliament under the Nation Building Tax Act,

No. 9 of 2009 as last amended by Act, No. 20 of 2019

240

b. Removing/ abolishing the Taxes set out Parliament under the Economic Service Charge

Act, No. 13 of 2006

c. Removing/Abolishing the Debt Repayment Levy

d. Reducing the threshold for payment for Value Added Tax from 12%- 8%

e. Increasing the VAT registration threshold from LKR 12,000,000 million- LKR

300,000,000

f. Increasing the rate of Taxable Income on Personal Income Tax from LKR 500,000 to LKR

3,000,000.00

g. Reducing the Top Marginal Tax Rate on Personal Income tax from 245-18%

h. Abolishing the mandatory withholding tax for most employees

i. Reducing the Standard Corporate Income Tax from 28%-24%”

…

…

a) “Notice dated 18th February, 2020 issued by the Commissioner General of Inland

Revenue as instructed by the Ministry of Finance on the 31.2020- Implementation

of proposed changes to Inland Revenue Act No. 24 of 2017

(Pending Parliamentary Approval)

b) Notice issued by the Commissioner General of Inland Revenue as instructed by

the Ministry of Finance - Implementation of New Tax Proposals on Value

Added Tax and Nation Building Tax.

c)Notice issued by the Commissioner General of Inland Revenue as instructed by

the Ministry of Finance - Removal of Economic Service Charge (ESC)

d)Notice dated 5th February 2020 issued by the Commissioner General of Inland

Revenue as instructed by the Ministry of Finance - Instruction on Withholding

Tax (WHT) - (Pending formal amendment to the Inland Revenue Act 24 of

2017)

e) Notice issued by the Commissioner General of Inland Revenue as instructed by

the Ministry of Finance - Guideline for Deduction of PAYE Tax, Period from

241

01.01.2020 to 31.03.2020, (subject to formal amendment to the Inland Revenue

Act, No. 24 of 2017, to be passed in Parliament).

f) Notice issued by the Commissioner General of Inland Revenue as instructed by

the Ministry of Finance-Change of Nation Building Tax (NBI), pending

parliamentary approval for amendment to the Nation Building Tax Act, No. 9

of 2009.

g) Notice issued by the Commissioner General of Inland Revenue as instructed by

the Ministry of Finance - Exemption of Value Added Tax (VAT) on supply of

Residential Accommodation

h) Notice dated 20th of January, 2020 issued by the Commissioner General of

Inland Revenue as instructed by the Ministry of Finance - Removal of Debt

Repayment Levy (DRL) pending parliamentary approval for amendment to the

Finance Act, No. 35 of 2018.”

(c) “The revenue from VAT declined from Rs. 443,877 million in 2019 to 233,786 million

in 2019, which is a reduction of 47.3%.”

….

…

24. “The Petitioners state that the said notices issued by the Commissioner General of

Inland Revenue on the instructions of the Executive was patently illegal at the time it was

made, as it sought to amend an Act of Parliament by administrative action, and reduced

the revenue of the State in a manner contrary to that set out in Article 148 of the

Constitution and to thereby remove and reduce the very basic constitutional protections

by which Parliament has been given full control over Public Finance.”

…

…

“The downgrading of Sri Lanka's credit ratings as a consequence of, inter alia, the tax

revisions made in 2019, the refusal to change these taxes and the emergence of the

Covid-19 Pandemic

242

39. The Petitioners state that as a result of, inter alia, the aforementioned tax revisions

implemented by the 2nd Respondent, Sri Lanka began to experience a sharp decline in

its credit ratings in the latter portion of 2019 onwards, with its Long- Term Foreign-

Currency Issuer Default Rating (IDR) stipulated by Fitch Rating (hereinafter referred to

as 'Fitch’) falling to ‘C’ in the year 2022 from B1. The Petitioners state that as

repeatedly stated by Fitch, the said downgrading was due to inter alia, "Sri Lanka's

worsening external liquidity position."

A true copy of the Fitch Ratings reports for Sri Lanka dated 25th October 2019, 2nd July

2021 and 4th January 2022 and the Fitch Rating Action Commentary dated 13th April

2022, is annexed to the original Petition filed in this Application dated 16th June 2022

marked P-14(a), P14(b), P14 (c) and P14(d), and are pleaded as part and parcel

hereof.”

….

…

54. “The Petitioner states that subsequent to a public outcry against the mishandling of

the economy, the 3rd Respondent resigned from his post as Finance Minister in April

2022. No members of the 9th Respondent have however resigned or taken responsibility

for their complicity in the actions that resulted in a serious downturn of the economy of

Sri Lanka. In these circumstances the Petitioners state that it is necessary to ascertain

whether the Monetary Board had fulfilled their duties in terms of section 65, 66 and 68

of the Monetary Law.

The failure by the 3rd, 7th, 9th and 10th Respondents to devalue the Sri Lankan Rupee in

a timely and appropriate manner, despite widespread calls and demands to do so.”

…

…

56. “The Petitioners state that the rupee to USD exchange rate depreciated sharply

from Rs 185 in September 2020, to approximately Rs.200 by May 2021. Since May, it

243

remained relatively stable until it depreciated to approximately Rs. 256 in March

2022.”

…

…

97. “The Petitioners state that the 1(b) Respondent, as the Head of the Executive, as well

as any one or more of the Respondents abovenamed, have, most conspicuously, failed to

manage the critical fiscal needs of the country, and in doing so, have grievously violated

the fundamental rights of the public, as will be morefully elaborated hereinbelow.”

….

…

98. “The Petitioners state that the actions and / or failures and/ or omissions on the part

of the 1(b) Respondent, as well as the 2nd, 3rd, 6th, 7th, 9th and 10th Respondents, constituted

grievous mismanagement of the economy, and which were a series of illegal, arbitrary

and unreasonable actions and inactions, which necessitated the present decision to default

on repayment of foreign loans. The Petitioners further state that in the totality of the

foregoing, it is patently clear that the fundamental rights guaranteed to the citizens of Sri

Lanka, under Articles 12 (1), 14(1)(g) and 14A have been violated most grievously.”

Prayer to the petition in SC/FR/Application No. 212/2022

“Wherefore the Petitioners pray that Your Lordships’ Court be pleased to:

1. Grant the petitioners, Leave to Proceed;

2. Declare that the Fundamental Rights of the Petitioners and / or the citizens of Sri

Lanka to Equality and Equal Protection of the Law, as guaranteed by Article 12 (1),

14(1)(g) and 14A of the Constitution, have been infringed by the 1(b) Respondent and

the 2nd, 3rd, 6th, 7th, 9th and 10th Respondents, and/or their servants or their agents, and

that there is a continuing violation of their said rights;

244

3. Declare that the Fundamental Rights of the Petitioners and/ or the citizens of Sri

Lanka to Equality and Equal Protection of the Law, as guaranteed by Articles 12(1),

14(1)(g) and 14A of the Constitution are in imminent danger of infringement by the

actions and/or inactions of the State including the actions/ inactions of the 1(b)

Respondent and the 2nd, 3rd, 6th, 7th, 9th and 10th respondents;

4. Grant and issue the following interim reliefs/orders:

a. Make Order in terms of Article 126(4) of the Constitution, and call for and

examine the following record, including, but not limited to:

i. All records pertaining to communications and recommendations

received by and / or given to the 2nd, 3rd, 6th, 7th, 9th and 10th

Respondents by the Central Bank;

ii. All communications between the 1(b) Respondent and the 2nd, 3rd, 6th,

7th, 9th and 10th respondents in respect of the decisions taken with

regard to the matters impugned in this Application;

iii. The fiscal records, all reports published and or given to the 2nd, 3rd

and /or 9th respondents of and by the 9th Respondent Board under

and in terms of Sections 64 and 68 of the Monetary Law Act, No. 37

of 1974;

iv. Relevant Cabinet decisions in respect of the Ministry of Finance and

the 2nd and 3rd Respondents, as well as decisions and Regulations by

the 2nd and 3rd Respondents with regard to the matters impugned in

this Application;

v. A transcript of the proceedings of the Committee on Public Enterprises

(COPE) held on or about 25th May 2022.

b. Direct the appointment of a committee under the auspices of Your Lordships'

Court to investigate the causes, steps taken by the aforementioned

Respondents, and compile a report on the financial irregularities and

mismanagement of the economy in relation to the specific instances enunciated

in the present Application;

245

c. Restrain the 2nd, 3rd, 6th, 7th and 10th Respondents, from overseas travel without

the prior approval of the Supreme Court, pending the investigation by the

aforementioned Committee;

5. Upon the submission of a report by the said Committee (appointed under the

auspices of Your Lordships' Court) to direct the Hon. Attorney General or any other

appropriate authorities or officers of the State to consider initiation of investigations

and prosecutions against any persons (as necessary) based on the findings from the

said report.

6. Make such further and other just and equitable orders as Your Lordship's Court

shall seem fit in the circumstances of this Application, under and in terms of

Article 126(4) of the Constitution;

7. Grant Costs;

8. Grant further and such other relief as Your Lordships Court may seem meet.”

Facts relevant to the time bar objection

As stated above, after the former President assumed duties as the President of the Republic in

November 2019, the government reduced the taxes payable by the people of the country. The

petitioners stated that the former President, together with the 2nd respondent, reduced the taxes

for the sole purpose of delivering the election promises made. Hence, it was submitted that the

decision to reduce taxes was purely politically motivated. Further, due to the said reduction in

taxation, the Republic suffered enormous and unprecedented economic damage.

The petitioners further stated that at the time the instant application was filed, the people of the

Republic were facing unprecedented economic hardships, with extreme levels of inflation

causing the price of essential goods and services to increase at extreme rates. Thus, people were

unable to buy basic commodities. Moreover, because of the high levels of inflation, a large

portion of the public staged protests throughout the country.

Furthermore, the severity of the Republic's intentional depletion of foreign currency reserves

under the watch of the 28th to the 32nd respondents, the 2nd and the 2A respondents and/or

246

one or more of them is evident by default in servicing foreign debt. Accordingly, the

petitioners stated that the aforementioned circumstances effecting the economic situation

can be attributed to the wilful mismanagement of the economy by the 38th, 2nd, 2A, and the

29th to the 32nd respondents, who were in control of the 28th respondent at the time material

to the instant application.

Dates of filling the Fundamental Rights Applications

The SC/FR Application No. 195/2022 was filed in the Supreme Court on the 3rd of June, 2022

and the amended petition was filed on the 18th of July, 2022. Further, the SC/FR Application No.

212/2022 was filed in the Supreme Court on the 17th of June, 2022. Thereafter, an amended

petition was filed on the 15th of July, 2022.

As stated above, the petitioners in their petitions stated that the taxes were reduced with effect

from November, 2019 and the tax cuts were informed to the general public by the Commissioner

General of the Inland Revenue Department by public notice in the same month. Further, the

petitioners alleged that their Fundamental Rights guaranteed by Articles 12(1) and 14(1)(g) of

the Constitution were infringed by the respondents reducing taxes when the financial status of

the country was not stable.

Moreover, it was stated that as soon as the tax cuts were introduced, the rating agencies

downgraded Sri Lanka on the basis that the country would not be able to honour its liabilities to

the creditors. Further, at the Committee on Public Enterprises (COPE) meeting held on or about

the 25th of May, 2022, it transpired that the actions of the said respondents, inter alia, the RFI

facility (Rapid Financing Instrument) of the IMF and the management of the rupee, had led to

the present crisis.

The petitioners stated that the former President and the 2nd, 3rd, 6th, 7th, 9th and 10th respondents

(in SC/FR/212/2022) made a series of irrational, arbitrary, patently illegal and wrongful

decisions in complete dereliction of their statutory duties and fiduciary responsibility, for

collateral and extraneous purposes, during the years 2019 to 2022, which has resulted in the

247

petitioners and the public being denied of their right to equality, equal protection of the law,

and their right to life as guaranteed by the Constitution.

Moreover, the petitioners stated that the aforementioned respondents are directly responsible,

inter alia, for the unsustainability of Sri Lanka's foreign debt, its default on foreign loan

repayments, and the current state of the economy of Sri Lanka at the time of filing the two

applications, and must be held accountable for the illegal, arbitrary, and unreasonable acts

and/or omissions that culminated in the above.

Further, the petitioners stated that they became aware of the real economic situation of the

country only after the Finance Minister, 2nd respondent, made a statement in Parliament on the

4th of May, 2022 and when the facts were revealed at the COPE meeting on the 25th of May,

2022.

Thus, it was stated that the respondents have violated the Fundamental Rights guaranteed to the

citizens of Sri Lanka under Articles 12(1) and 14(1)(g) of the Constitution.

The learned President’s Counsel for the 2nd respondent and 2A respondent in SC/FR/195/22 (and

3rd respondent in SC/FR/212/2022) submitted that the 2nd respondent ceased to hold office as the

Minister of Finance on the 8th of July, 2021 and the 2A respondent ceased to hold office as the

Minister of Finance on the 4th of April, 2022. Thus, as the 2nd respondent and the 2A respondent

resigned from their portfolios of Minister of Finance more than one month prior to the filing of

the instant applications, the applications are out of time and ought to be dismissed in limine in

terms of Article 126(2) of the Constitution. It was also submitted that, in any event, the aforesaid

alleged events took place prior to one month from the date of filing the two applications in this

court.

The learned Additional Solicitor General submitted the following table, which contains

significant dates and events involved in the instant applications based on the petitions and the

Auditor General’s report furnished to court.

248

Date Event

2016.06.03 Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF)

approved a 36-month extended arrangement under the Extended

Fund Facility with Sri Lanka for an amount equivalent to USD 1.5

Billion to support economic reform.

2019.10.31 Finance (Amendment) Act No. 21 of 2019 (abolished carbon tax)

2019.11.01 Start of period audited by Auditor General in Z

Date on which IMF approved release of seventh and final

instalment under the Extended Fund Facility approved by the IMF

on 2016.06.03.

2019.11.18 1(b)/32A respondent was elected and took oaths as President of

the Republic.

2019.11.20 Mahinda Rajapakse (2nd respondent) appointed as the Prime

Minister and Minister of Finance.

2019.11.26 By note to Cabinet the President (1(b)/32A respondent) stated that

at the recently concluded Presidential election he had promised

simplification of taxes and recommended implementation of

certain measure revising taxes pending Parliamentary approval.

2019.11.27 Cabinet approval granted for priority measures mentioned in note

to Cabinet by President.

249

November-January

2019

Commissioner General of Inland Revenue issued notices to

taxpayers on instructions of the 2nd respondent which sought to

reduce number of taxes (tax revisions).

2020 Decline of Government revenue, as per the petitioners due to

effect of tax revisions and COVID 19 pandemic.

2020.04.08 Rapid Financing Instrument requested by letter written by

Secretary to the President (38th respondent in SC/FR/195/2022) to

the IMF

2020.08.05 General Election

2020.10.12 Finance (Amendment) Act No. 2 of 2020

Nation Building Tax Amendment No. 3 of 2020

Economic Service Charge Amendment Act No. 4 of 2020

2021.04.09 Speaker informs Parliament regarding Supreme Court Special

Determination on the Inland Revenue (Amendment) Bill 2021.

2021.05.13 Value Added Tax Amendment Act No. 9 of 2021

Inland Revenue Amendment Act No. 10 of 2021

2021.12.10 2A/3rd respondent states in Parliament that Sri Lanka should

not seek the support of the IMF.

May, 2021 Rupee depreciates to Rs. 200 against the dollar from Rs. 185 in

September 2020.

2021.09.06 Fixing of an upper limit of the exchange rate.

250

2021 Gross official reserves fallen to USD 3.1 Billion from USD 5.6

Billion in 2020 and USD 7.6 Billion in 2019.

2022.02.10 IMF stated that the sovereign debt of SL is unsustainable.

March, 2022 Rupee depreciates to Rs. 256 against the dollar from Rs. 200 in

May 2021

2022.03.18 End of period audited by Auditor General in Z1.

Date on which former President 1(b)/32A respondent decides to

officially begin talks with the IMF according to Monetary Board

paper MB/DG(S)/9/30/2022.

2022.04.12 Sri Lanka issued a Notice of Default informing all creditors

that all foreign debt repayments would be suspended.

2022.04.07 2(b)/4th respondent states in Parliament that the country should

have sought IMF assistance long ago.

2022.05.19 Sri Lanka defaulted on loans that fell due.

2022.06.03 Petition filed by the petitioners (SC/FR/195/2022)

2022.06.16 Petition filed by the petitioners (SC/FR/212/2022)

2022.07.15 Amended petition of the petitioners (SC/FR/212/2022)

2022.07.18 Amended petition of the petitioners (SC/FR/195/2022)

[emphasis added]

251

Further, the Auditor General’s report produced the names of the Ministers of Finance, Secretary

to the President, Governors of the Central Bank, and Members of the Monetary Board holding

office during the period applicable to the Audit Report filed in court, as Table No.” 33. It stated;

Table No. 33 – Names of the Finance Ministers and officers

Name Position Period Mr. Mahinda Rajapaksa Minister of Finance 2019.11.22 to 2021.07.08 Mr. Basil Rajapaksa Minister of Finance 2021.07.08 to 2022.04.04 M.U.M. Ali Sabry (PC) Minister of Finance 2022.04.04 to 2022.05.09 Dr. P.B Jayasundara Secretary to the President 2019.11.19 to 2022.01.14 Mr. Gamini Sedara Senarath Secretary to the President 2022.01.19 to 2022,07 21 Dr. Indrajit Coomaraswamy Governor 2016.07.02 to 2019.12.20 Prof. W D Lakshman Governor 2019.11.19 to 2022.01.14 Mr. Ajith Nivard Cabraal Governor 2021.09.15 to 2022.04.04 Dr. P Nandalal Weerasinghe Governor 2022.04.08 up to now Dr. RHS Samaratunga Official Member- Secretary to the Ministry of Finance

2018.12.31 to 2019.11.19

Mr. S R Attygalle

Official Member- Secretary to the Ministry of Finance

2020.11.20 to 2022.04.07

Mr.K M M Siriwardena Official Member- Secretary to the Ministry of Finance

2022.04.08 up to now

Mrs. M Ramanathan Appointed Member 2013.07.18 to 2019.07.17 Mr. CPR Perera Appointed Member 2015.06.26 to 2020.01.20 Mr. A N Fonseka Appointed Member 2016.07.27 to 2020.05.31 2022.07.27 up to now Ms. Dushni Weerakoon Appointed Member 2019.07.29 to 2020.05.31 Sanjeewa Jayawardena (PC) Appointed Member 2020.02.26 up to now Dr. Ranee Jayamaha Appointed Member 2020.02.29 up to now Mr. Samantha Kumarasinghe

Appointed Member 2020.02.29 to 2022.03.31

(a) the introduction of tax cuts and the failure to reverse them

According to the Auditor General’s Report filed in court, the downgrading of the sovereign

credit ratings of Sri Lanka by the credit rating agencies commenced on the 18th of December,

2019 and thereafter continued to downgrade the sovereign credit rating of Sri Lanka.

252

In terms of Article 126(2) of the Constitution, where a person alleges that his Fundamental

Rights have been infringed or are about to be infringed by an executive or administrative action,

he must invoke the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court within one month from such infringement

or such an application may be made to court within one month of the petitioner becoming aware

of the act of the infringement alleged by him.

A similar view was expressed in Siriwardena v. Brigadier J. Rodrigo (1986) 1 SLR 384 at 387

where it was held;

“The period of one month specified in Sub-Article (2) of Article 126 of the

Constitution would ordinarily begin to run from the very date the executive or

administrative act, which is said to constitute the infringement, or the imminent

infringement as the case may be, of the Fundamental Right relied on, was in fact

committed. Where, however, a petitioner establishes that he became aware of

such infringement, or the imminent infringement, not on the very day the act

complained of was so committed, but only subsequently on a later date, then, in

such a case, the said period of one month will be computed only from the date

on which such petitioner did in fact become aware of such infringement and

was in a position to take effective steps to come before this Court …”

[emphasis added]

It is paramount to adhere to the time limit stipulated in the aforesaid Article because the more

time that passes after an event occurs, the more difficult it is to ascertain the truth and come to a

clear and correct decision about what did and did not happen. Moreover, documents or other

essential evidence might not be available with certain parties to an application. Further, people's

memories of events fade away, and therefore, the court will not be able to deliver a ‘just and

equitable’ judgment in the case.

However, our courts have entertained applications filed after 30 days from the alleged violation

if there is material to satisfy court that there was an inability to invoke the jurisdiction of the

Supreme Court due to reasons beyond the control of the person invoking the jurisdiction court

and it is ‘just and equitable’ to entertain such an application due to the facts and circumstances of

253

the application. This view was expressed in Namasivayam v. Gunawardena (1989) 1 SLR 394

where the court held;

“The one month prescribed by Article 126(2) for making an application for relief

by a person for infraction of his fundamental right applies to the case of the

applicant having free access to his lawyer and to the Supreme Court. Hence, if

the Petitioner was obstructed by reason of his detention from having access to his

lawyer and to the Supreme Court and thus prevented from making his application

within the one month of the infraction complained of his delayed application for

relief under Article 126 should not be ruled out, if he made his application as

soon as he was free from that constraint to make the application.”

On the contrary, it is not possible to exercise such discretion in litigation other than in a

Fundamental Rights Application, as such matters are not decided on a ‘just and equitable’ basis.

In Fundamental Rights Applications, the court is required to consider not only the rights of the

petitioner but also the rights of the respondent when making an order granting ‘just and

equitable’ relief. This is particularly difficult if the facts are not straightforward and are

interwoven with each other.

Further, when the alleged infringement was published in notice boards, newspapers, regulations,

circulations, etc., the petitioners cannot plead ignorance of such publications. The sole purpose

of such publications is to inform the general public of an administrative decision. Hence, the

computation of time should be considered from the date of such publications.

Furthermore, there was a significant disclosure of information by the government on the state of

the economy. In fact, the Parliament was informed by the Minister of Finance on the 10th of

December, 2021 that Sri Lanka will not be seeking the assistance of the IMF. Moreover, section

35 of the Monetary Law Act provides for the publication of the annual report of the Central

Bank within four months after the end of each financial year. Thus, this information was made

available to the public.

Further, according to the petitioners, the rating agencies downgraded Sri Lanka immediately

after the tax cuts were announced. Hence, according to the petitioners own showing, the alleged

254

infringement took place on the day that the Commissioner General of the Inland Revenue

published the public notices informing the tax cuts in the years 2019 and 2020.

As stated earlier, in this judgment. the tax reductions referred to in the two petitions were

implemented pursuant to a policy decision taken by the Cabinet of Ministers, which, in turn,

has been enacted into law in terms of the Inland Revenue Act of 2021, the Value Added Tax Act

of 2021, the Economic Service Charge Act of 2021 and the Nation Building Tax Act of 2021,

etc., by Parliament, by virtue of the power vested in Parliament in terms of Chapters X and XVII

of the Constitution. Moreover, the petitioners stated that, in this regard, it is pertinent to note that

some of the Bills relating to fiscal legislation were challenged in the Supreme Court.

However, the petitioners did not challenge any of the said legislation during the legislative

process, though the Inland Revenue (Amendment) Bill 2021 was challenged in the Supreme

Court. Hence, they are now estopped from challenging the legislative process. In any event,

anyone who sleeps over their rights is not entitled to challenge any decisions after the stipulated

time period imposed by law.

(b) Delay in going to the IMF

Similarly, as evident from the Cabinet Memorandum dated 2nd of January, 2022 and the decision

of the Cabinet of Ministers dated 3rd of January, 2022, it shows that the Cabinet of Ministers has

taken a decision not to get the assistance of the IMF. Instead, it was decided to have a home-

grown solution to the fiscal and economic issues that were faced by the country at the time.

Moreover, the said decision had been informed to the Parliament on the 10th of December,

2021 by the 2A (3rd) respondent.

Furthermore, the IMF, in its IMF-Sri Lanka Staff Report for the 2021 Article IV Consultation

dated 10th of February, 2022, stated that the sovereign debt of Sri Lanka was unsustainable.

Thereafter, on the 12th of April, 2022 the government of Sri Lanka issued an official notice

informing all its creditors that all repayment of loans would be suspended until all debts are

restructured and the notice was published in local and foreign media. Thereafter, Sri Lanka

defaulted on its payment of the Sovereign Bond on the 19th of May, 2022.

255

Hence, when the government informed the Parliament that it will not be seeking the assistance of

the IMF on the 10th of December, 2022, the alleged violation had taken place on the said date.

Furthermore, according to the Auditor General’s Report filed in court, the Central Bank floated

the rupee on the 8th of March, 2022. The details of its effects are stated in paragraph 56 of the

petition filed in SC/FR Application No. 212/2022.

Moreover, the Central Bank of Sri Lanka honoured the payment of International Sovereign Bond

of US $ 500 million on the 18th of January, 2022.

A close scrutiny of the materials filed by all the parties and the Auditor General’s Report filed in

court relating to the said events shows that the reduction of taxes, the decision of the Monetary

Board not to float the rupee, and thereafter, floating of the same, payment of International

Sovereign Bonds and the delay in seeking assistance from the IMF are separate and distinct

decisions. Particularly, the decision not to go to the IMF had been taken by the Cabinet of

Ministers in terms of and under Article 43 of the Constitution, which was later informed to

Parliament. Further, according to the Auditor General’s Report, the decision to float the rupee

was taken by the Monetary Board, and later, it was informed to the Cabinet of Ministers on the

11th of March, 2022 by the Minister of Finance that the decision to pay the International

Sovereign Bond was taken by the government to prevent a hard default of International

Sovereign Bonds and the secretary to the Ministry informed it to the Governor of the Central

Bank, and the decision to reduce taxes was taken consequent to a Cabinet Memorandum

submitted by the former President.

Furthermore, the dates and events referred to above in this judgment show that the said events

took place long before the two Fundamental Rights Applications were filed in court.

Was there a continuing violation of the Fundamental Rights enshrined in the Constitution?

In addition to the prayer that the petitioner’s Fundamental Rights were infringed by the

respondents, the petitioners pleaded that there were continuing violations of their Fundamental

Rights at the time the two applications were filed in court. Hence, it is necessary to ascertain -

256

(a) whether there was a continuing violation at the time the two applications were filed in

this court,

(b) whether the alleged continuing violations ceased within one month from the filling of the

two applications, or

(c) whether the alleged continuing violation ceased one month prior to filling the two

applications.

Wharton’s Concise Law Dictionary (Fifteenth Edition, 2009 – Reprint 2010) defines a

‘Continuing wrong’ as;

“If a duty continues from day to day, the non-performance from day to day, the

non-performance of that duty from day to day is a continuing wrong.”

A continuing violation consists of multiple wrongful acts, failures to act, or taking wrongful

decisions contrary to law. However, a continuing violation ceases either when the alleged

violation is rectified or the alleged violation ceases or the alleged violator is no longer in a

position to continue with the violation.

The ‘Continuing Violation Doctrine’ may extend beyond the one-month time limitation if it can

be shown that the acts complained of are sufficiently linked to an unlawful act within the

limitation period.

The said doctrine also requires a showing of –

(1) the acts occurring within the limitations period is similar,

(2) the conduct was frequent, and

(3) the alleged conduct is continuing even at the time the jurisdiction of court is

invoked.

Hence, if an aggrieved party fails to challenge the violation when and where it occurs, it is not

possible to seek the benefit of the ‘doctrine of continuing violation/infringement’.

As pointed out by the learned Additional Solicitor General and the Auditor General in his Report

filed in this court, some of the alleged wrongdoers named as respondents in both petitions have

ceased to hold office one month prior to invoking the jurisdiction of this court under Article

126(2) of the Constitution. Thus, the said respondents were not holding any positions that can

257

reverse the alleged ‘continuing violations’. In any event, it is the Cabinet of Ministers who are

empowered to take decisions on behalf of the government in terms of and under Article 43(1) of

the Constitution, other than the decision taken by the Monetary Board of Sri Lanka prior to the

institution of both applications.

In the circumstances, I hold that there was no ‘continuing infringement’ of the alleged violations

referred to in the petitions within the meaning of Article 126 of the Constitution.

Reliefs that can be granted by court in a Fundamental Rights Application

(a) Just and equitable remedy

Article 126(4) of the Constitution states;

“The Supreme Court shall have power to grant such relief or make such

directions as it may deem just and equitable in the circumstance in respect of

any petition or reference referred to in paragraphs (2) and (3) of this Article or

refer the matter back to the Court of Appeal if in its opinion there is no

infringement of a fundamental right or language right.”

[emphasis added]

The phrase ‘just and equitable’ allows the court to consider relevant factors connected with the

averments in the petition and the prayer to the petition. The word ‘just’ denotes fairness and

reasonableness, and not arbitrariness. The word ‘equitable’ has the meaning of ‘just’. The phrase

‘just and equitable’ falls within the branch of civil law that is connected with fairness and

justness. It ensures that the law will not impose unnecessary or unintended harsh outcomes

which unfairly prejudice some of the parties in a case. Further, it provides to grant reliefs that are

not strict orders of the law but comply with the principles of justice. Accordingly, as stated

above, ‘just and equitable’ reliefs referred to in Article 126(4) of the Constitution should not

apply only to the petitioners but also to the respondents.

Further, due process and the applicable law should be followed in granting ‘just and equitable’

reliefs. Any reliefs that have not been pleaded in the petition filed in a Fundamental Rights

258

Application cannot be granted as it violates the principles of natural justice, which is contrary to

the ‘doctrine of just and equitable remedy’. In this regard, the court is mindful of the need to

follow due process and fair play in granting relief in Fundamental Right Applications.

A similar view was expressed in Dayaratne v. National Savings Bank (2002) 3 SLR 116 at 132

to 133;

“In the alternative, the petitioners have prayed for quashing, not of all, but only

the promotions of the 7th, 12th, 16th, 19th, 20th, 21st, 23rd, 25th, 27th, 40th, 41st, 42nd,

and 46th respondents – on the basis that there were all junior to the petitioners.

While the entire process was flawed, I do not consider it just and equitable to

quash the other promotions, as the petitioners have not sought that relief. The

petitioners have also asked for an order directing the 1st respondent to promote

them to Grade III-II. However, the circumstances do not justify such an order.”

[emphasis added]

When making a just and equitable order, the court is required to follow the principles of natural

justice too. Thus, in making a just and equitable order, the court should take the following into

consideration;

i. No amount of evidence can be looked into which was never put forward in the pleadings

filed in court. A question which did not arise from the pleadings cannot be decided by the

court.

ii. The court cannot make out a case not pleaded by the parties. The court should confine its

decision to the pleadings and the prayer.

iii. The court cannot grant the relief which is not pleaded in the prayer to the petition.

iv. Parties shall not be allowed to change the scope of the application after the pleadings are

completed. Particularly, at the time of hearing of an application.

Further, the object and purpose of filing pleadings in court are to ensure that litigants come to

court after identifying the case put forward by the opposing party. Furthermore, it gives an

indication that the orders will be made by the court at the end of the hearing.

259

Moreover, when there is no prayer for a particular relief, the court will not grant any reliefs that

have not been prayed for, as it will lead to a miscarriage of justice. Thus, no amount of evidence

will justify granting relief that has not been prayed for in the petition. Further, granting any relief

that has not been prayed for would be contrary to the doctrine of ‘just and equitable’ enshrined

in Article 126(4) of the Constitution. Similarly, if a petitioner fails to prove the alleged

infringement by adducing evidence before the court, the court cannot grant any relief to the

petitioner.

A careful consideration of the two petitions, particularly the specific time period applicable to

the subject matter of the said applications, shows that the petitioners are focusing on a particular

period where the respondents were in office, as disclosed in the Auditor General’s Report filed

in court. The IMF country reports and the Cabinet Memorandums filed in court show that the

fiscal and economic issues that arose in the year 2022 were partly as a result of accumulated

debts that have taken place for several decades. Thus, it is not ‘just and equitable’ to hold the

respondents responsible for violations of Fundamental Rights only by considering limited

materials filed in court for the period commencing from 2019. Hence, the court could have

granted a ‘just and equitable relief’ if all the materials were available to consider the economic

situation in the country prior to 2019.

(b) Prayer to the petition in a Fundamental Rights Application

As stated above, Fundamental Rights Applications fall within the realm of civil law. As held in

the case of Dayaratne v. National Savings Bank (supra), it is settled law that the courts cannot

grant reliefs not prayed for in the pleadings or in excess of what is being sought by the

petitioner. The due process considerations require the judgments to conform to the pleadings

filed in court and the evidence presented in court.

Further, the word “relief” in the phrase “to grant such relief or make such directions as it may

deem just and equitable in the circumstances in respect of any petition…” in Article 126(4) of

the Constitution refers to the word “relief” in the phrase “praying for relief or redress in respect

of such infringement …” in Articles 126(1) of the Constitution.

260

Thus, the court cannot grant any relief that has not been prayed for in the petition filed in court.

A similar provision is found in section 40(e) of the Civil Procedure Code where it states;

“A demand of the relief which the plaintiff claims;”

Moreover, it is necessary to give reasons in the judgment for the reliefs granted by court.

Furthermore, unlike in the Indian Constitution, the Supreme Court of Sri Lanka is not conferred

with the powers to supervise the implementation of its orders or judgments. Hence, it is not

possible to make orders directing the parties to comply with the orders or judgments pronounced

by the Supreme Court and report back to the Supreme Court. The finality of the judgments

delivered by the Supreme Court was discussed in the judgment delivered in Jeyaraj

Fernandopulle v. Premachandra de Silva (1996) 1 SLR 70. However, non-compliance with

the orders or judgments of the Supreme Court would give rise to a charge of contempt of court.

Moreover, the due process considerations shall not exceed the scope of the reliefs sought in the

prayer. Further, granting reliefs that have not been prayed for in the prayer violates the principles

of natural justice, which requires all the parties to be given an opportunity to be heard prior to

granting reliefs against a party.

Furthermore, in SC/FR Application No. 195/2022, the petitioners have prayed, inter alia, for

“Such other and further relief as Your Lordships Court shall seem meet”. Further, in SC/FR

Application 212/2022, the petitioners have prayed, inter alia, to “Grant further and such other

relief as Your Lordships Court may seem meet”.

The aforementioned prayers are similar to the prayer set out in Form No. 14 of the Civil

Procedure Code, which sets out the formal parts of the plaint. It states “and for such further or

other relief as to the court shall seem meet”. However, the courts have held that the said prayer

does not confer jurisdiction on the courts to grant reliefs that have not been specifically prayed

for in the “prayer” to the petition or plaint filed in court.

261

In Sirinivasa Thero v. Sudassi Thero 63 NLR 31 at 33 it was held;

“Since the decree was on in respect of which, under the Code, the judgment-

creditor could not ask for, and the Court had not power to issue, a writ of

possession, it seems to me that the Court was acting without jurisdiction in

issuing such a writ. The foundation of a writ of possession is a decree for

possession, and a writ of possession which is not founded on such a decree is a

nullity, because in issuing it the Court acts in excess of its jurisdiction. Where a

Court make an order without jurisdiction, as in this case, it has inherent power to

set it aside; and the person affected by the order is entitled ex debito justitiae to

have it set aside. It is not necessary to appeal from such an order, which is a

nullity: see the judgment of the Privy Council in Kofi Forfie v Seifah.”

[emphasis added]

Further, in Surangi v. Rodrigo (2003) 3 SLR 35 at 38 it was held;

“No court is entitled or has jurisdiction to grant reliefs to a party which are not

prayed for in the prayer to the plaint.”

[emphasis added]

Moreover, in Pathmawathie v. Jayasekare (1997) 1 SLR 248 at 250 it was held;

“It must always be remembered by judges that the systems of Civil Law that

prevail in our country is confrontational and therefore the jurisdiction of the

judge is circumscribed and limited to the dispute presented to him for

adjudication by the contesting parties. For example, the plaintiff presents to

Court a dispute and prays for adjudication and the defendant or party from whom

a relief is sought denies or opposes the claim of the plaintiff. The adjudicator or

judge thereafter proceeds to determine the issues in conflict. After deciding as to

who should prove what is asserted he proceeds to receive evidence viva voce

and/or documentary and thereafter evaluate the evidence of facts and law and

proceeds to give his finding. In that situation our Civil Law does not in any way

permit the adjudicator or judge the freedom of the wild ass to go on a voyage of

discovery and make as he pleases may be on what he thinks is right or wrong,

262

moral or immoral or what should be the correct situation. The adjudicator or

judge is duty bound to determine the dispute presented to his and his

jurisdiction is circumscribed by that dispute and no more.”

[emphasis added]

(c) The need to support the prayer by evidence

The petitioners in SC/FR Application No. 212/2022 pleaded, inter alia, as follows;

“5. Upon the submission of a report by the said Committee (appointed under the

auspices of Your Lordships' Court) to direct the Hon. Attorney General or any

other appropriate authorities or officers of the State to consider initiation of

investigations and prosecutions against any persons (as necessary) based on the

findings from the said report.

6. Make such further and other just and equitable orders as Your Lordship's Court

shall seem fit in the circumstances of this Application, under and in terms of

Article 126(4) of the Constitution;”

However, there is no iota of evidence to warrant institution of criminal proceedings against the

respondents. Further, the said matter was not argued by the parties at the time of the hearing.

Hence, the question of directing either the Attorney General or any other authority to institute

criminal proceedings will not arise.

As stated above, this court cannot grant any relief other than the reliefs specifically pleaded in

the prayer under Article 126(4) of the Constitution. The aforementioned prayer is too vague and

not borne out by the averments in the petition.

Furthermore, as Fundamental Rights Applications fall within the realm of civil law, it is not ‘just

and equitable’ to grant relief or make orders that are available in criminal law and the criminal

procedure or other remedies available in other laws, such as in the Companies Act No. 7 of

2007, etc. Moreover, no petitioner is entitled to obtain the remedies that are available in civil law

or criminal law in a Fundamental Rights Application. For instance, a party who is entitled in law

to claim damages for losses from a respondent is not entitled to obtain such damages in a

Fundamental Rights Application. Hence, the Supreme Court will only grant a relief which is

263

‘just and equitable’ taking into consideration the facts and circumstances of each case.

Accordingly, it could not be ‘just and equitable’ to award a relief or interim relief that should be

obtained by a civil or criminal court in a Fundamental Rights Application.

Appointment of a Select Committee to investigate the economic setback

The Parliament has appointed a Select Committee to investigate the economic setbacks and

report to Parliament, and submit its proposals and recommendations in that regard. Hence, the

learned President’s Counsel appearing for the 2 and 2A respondents in SC/FR Application No.

195/2022 submitted that this court has no jurisdiction to entertain the two applications under

consideration as Parliament is vested with full control over public finance and the said Select

Committee was looking into the same issues that have been urged by the petitioners before this

court.

However, in view of the findings already made in this judgment, it is not necessary to consider

the aforementioned objections placed by the learned President’s Counsel.

Conclusion

It is pertinent to note that;

(a) in January 2022, India pledged a total of US$2.415 billion to overcome dire financial

constraints caused by external debt payments and a lack of US dollars in Sri Lanka for

business. Under SAARC currency swap arrangement, India extended a $400 million and

also deferred an Asian Clearing Union settlement of around $500 million. India granted a

new line of credit worth $500 million for the purchase of petroleum products.

(b) in March 2022, spontaneous and organised protests by political parties and non-partisan

groups over the government's mishandling of the economy were reported from several

areas in the country. Several protests were staged by the opposition demanding the then

administration to solve the financial crisis and to immediately resign in wake of the

economic crisis.

(c) on the 17th of March, 2022, Sri Lanka received a $1 billion credit line as a lifeline from

India in order to buy urgently needed essential items such as food and medicine. The

264

credit line was activated after India and Sri Lanka formally entered into a credit

agreement during the 2A respondent’s (in SC/FR/195/2022) visit to New Delhi.

(d) on the 22nd of March, 2022, the government posted soldiers at various gas and fuel filling

stations to curb the tensions among people who line up in queues and to ease the fuel

distribution. Power cuts were seen throughout March, 2022.

(e) on the 6th of April, 2022 the Sri Lankan Rupee plunged to a record low to become the

worst performing currency in the world with US$1 trading at Rs. 355/-.

(f) on the 12th of April, 2022 the Government of Sri Lanka declared that it has taken a

decision to default all of its debts in order to avoid the hard default.

(g) Fuel queues continued even till the 23rd of May, 2022.

In addition to the above, I have considered all the materials filed in court along with the Auditor

General’s Report and particularly, the two applications filed in court, and I am unable to agree

with the said position of the petitioners that they became aware of the alleged infringement of

their rights on the 4th of May, 2022, when the former Minister of Finance, the 2B respondent,

made the statement in Parliament and also when the Governor of the Central Bank made the

statement before COPE on the 25th of May, 2022. It is pertinent to note that on their own

showing, the petitioners stated that they came to know that the reduction of taxes were

implemented in November, 2019 and the alleged adverse effects took place immediately after the

rating agencies downgraded Sri Lanka on the 19th of May, 2022.

Further, the country had to undergo unprecedented hardships during the years 2019 to 2022 due

to a lack of essential items and the escalation of fuel and gas prices. However, the petitioners

filed SC/FR Application No. 195/2022 and SC/FR Application No. 212/2022 on the 3rd of June,

2022 and 17th of June, 2022, respectively.

Article 126(2) of the Constitution states that a person should invoke the jurisdiction of the

Supreme Court within one month from the date of the infringement of the Fundamental Rights.

A careful consideration of the two applications and the materials filed in court show that the

alleged infringements took place on the dates specified in the aforementioned two charts

furnished to court by the Auditor General and the learned Additional Solicitor General.

265

Moreover, as stated above, all the facts and circumstances show that the alleged infringements

are not continuing infringements. On the contrary, they are specific decisions and acts, either

taken or implemented by the Cabinet of Ministers or by the Monetary Board of Sri Lanka.

Furthermore, a critical analysis of the averments in both petitions shows that the petitioners did

not invoke the jurisdiction of this court within one month of the alleged violations that have been

pleaded in the two petitions. Hence, I am of the opinion that in light of the aforementioned

overwhelming evidence with regard to the public awareness of the fiscal and economic crisis in

Sri Lanka, it would not be ‘just and equitable’ to hold that the petitioners became aware of the

said infringements within 30 days of the filing of the two applications in court or that there were

continuing infringements of the Fundamental Rights of the petitioners at the time the two

applications were filed in court. Hence, I hold that the parties have not invoked the jurisdiction of

this court within one month of the alleged infringements as required by Article 126(2) of the

Constitution.

Further, I am of the view that the petitioners have not established on a balance of probability that

the respondents have infringed the Fundamental Rights of the petitioners guaranteed by Article

12(1) and 14(1) (g) of the Constitution. Hence, I dismiss the SC/FR/Application No. 195/2022

and SC/FR/Application/212/2022.

I order no costs.

Priyantha Jayawardena, PC.

Judge of the Supreme Court