IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

1. Senaratne Mudiyanselage Subaneris

Appuhamy alias Subaneris Senaratne,

Paddawala, Kirindiwela.

1st Defendant (since deceased)

1B. Kalidasage Kanchana Dilruksha

Wijewardena,

225/1, Bogahawatte, Kirindiwela.

Substituted 1B Defendant-Appellant-

Appellant

Vs.

SC/APPEAL/95/2021

CA/381/2000(F)

DC PUGODA 81/L

1. Danee Kadinappuli Piyasiri

Manawasinghe,

43, Walpola Road, Kirindiwela.

2. Robert Kadinappuli Rathnasiri

Manawasinghe,

43, Walpola Road, Kirindiwela.

(since deceased)

2A. Wijitha Surendra Manawasinghe,

43/2, Ihalagama, Kirindiwela.

3. Muthugala Pedige Premadasa,

Sri Kanthi Saloon, Nittambuwa Road,

Kirindiwela. (since deceased)

2

SC/APPEAL/95/2021

3A. Ranthilakage Kamalawathie alias

Ranthilakalage Kamalawathie,

3B. Muthugala Pathiranage Vajira

Priyadarshana Mutugala,

3C. Muthugala Pathiranage Indika

Priyadarshana Mutugala,

3D. Muthugala Pathiranage Nirosha

Priyadarshani Mutugala,

All of 41/F, Udumillawatta,

Kirindiwela.

Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondents

2. Sammandapperuma Mohotti

Appuhamilage Don Jemis Wijewardena

Jayasekera Bandara,

Obawatte Walawwa, Radawana.

(since deceased)

2A. Sammandapperuma Mohotti

Appuhamilage Burty Jayasekera,

Obawatte Walawwa, Radawana.

(since deceased)

2B. Aruna Wijesinghe Kannangara,

2C. Sammandapperuma Mohottilage

Padmaranjani Jayasekera,

2D. Sammandapperuma Mohottilage

Leelakanthi Wijewardena Jayasekera,

2E. Sammandapperuma Ramani

Wijewardena Jayasekera,

2F. Sammandapperuma Mohottilage

Wijayanthimala Wijewardena Jayasekera,

3

SC/APPEAL/95/2021

All of No. 172, Obawatte Walawwa,

Radawana.

Substituted 2B-2F Defendant-

Respondent-Respondents

Before: Hon. Chief Justice Murdu N.B. Fernando, P.C.

Hon. Justice A. L. Shiran Gooneratne

Hon. Justice Mahinda Samayawardhena

Counsel: Dr. Sunil Coorey with Sudarshani Coorey for the 1B

Defendant-Appellant-Appellant.

Romesh Samarakkody for the Plaintiff-Respondent-

Respondents.

Argued on: 18.10.2024

Post-Argument Written Submissions on:

By the Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondents on 19.11.2024

By the 1B Defendant-Appellant-Appellant on 07.01.2025

Decided on: 14.03.2025

Samayawardhena, J.

The three plaintiffs filed this action in the District Court of Gampaha on

05.12.1980 against the 1st and 2nd defendants, seeking a declaration of

title to the land described in the schedule to the plaint, the ejectment of

the 1st defendant therefrom, and damages. The 1st defendant passed

away after the institution of the action, and his daughter was thereafter

substituted in his place as the 1(a) defendant. The 1(a) defendant filed

answer seeking a dismissal of the action. After trial, the District Court

held in favour of the plaintiffs. On appeal, the Court of Appeal affirmed

the judgment of the District Court. In the meantime, the 1(a) defendant

4

SC/APPEAL/95/2021

also passed away. This appeal by the 1(b) defendant, with leave obtained

from this Court, is against the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

There is no dispute that the land in suit is Lot in Plan No. 1075,

which was marked as X at the trial.

The case for the plaintiffs is that the 2nd defendant was the owner of the

land by virtue of Partition Deed ( ) No. 3965 dated

02.05.1928 marked P3 and he sold it to the plaintiffs by Deed No. 1974

dated 04.01.1980 marked P4. The position of the plaintiffs was that at

the time of purchase, the land was unoccupied, and the 1st defendant

forcibly took possession of the land on 29.01.1980vide issue No. 3

raised by the plaintiffs.

The position of the 1st defendant, Subaneris, was that he was the owner

of the land by prescriptive possession.

At the trial, the 2nd defendant, who sold the land to the plaintiffs, testified

as a witness for the plaintiffs. He was 83 years old at the time he gave

evidence in 1984. In his evidence-in-chief, the 2nd defendant stated that

the 1st defendant had been employed as a servant by his family and had

looked after the land on their behalf as a licensee. However, I must note

that although this assertion goes to the root of the plaintiffs case, the

plaintiffs neither pleaded nor raised it as an issue at the trial.

However, during cross-examination, the 2nd defendant resiled from his

earlier position and admitted that the 1st defendants grandfather was the

brother of his mother. He further conceded that the 1st defendant had

been in possession of the land for as long as he could remember and that

he was unaware of how the 1st defendant initially came into possession

of the land. The 1st defendant was residing on the land at the time Deed

P4 was executed in favour of the plaintiffs. The 2nd defendant also

acknowledged that he had never paid any rates to the local authority for

5

SC/APPEAL/95/2021

the land and that the 1st defendant had constructed a new house on the

land, which he had leased to various individuals. Given the crucial nature

of the 2nd defendants testimony in determining this appeal, and in light

of the fact that both lower Courts held against the 1st defendant, I shall

reproduce the entirety of the 2nd defendants cross-examination for a

better understanding of the plaintiffs case.

: 18404 ? : . : ? : . . . : 8 ? : . : . ? : . : . ? : . : ? : . : ? : 2 . . : ? : . : ? : 15 . . : ? : .

6

SC/APPEAL/95/2021

: ? : . . : ? : . . . : ? : . : ? : 15 . : ? : 2 . 13 . . : ? : . . : ? : . : ? : . . . . : ? : . : ? : . . . : ? : . : ? : . : ?

7

SC/APPEAL/95/2021

: . : 1980 , , ? : . : ? : . : ? : . . . : 1 ? : . : , , ? : . : ? : . . . . : ? : . . . : , ? : . . . . . . : ? : . : . . ? : . : ? : .

8

SC/APPEAL/95/2021

: ? : . : ? ? : . : ? : . . . 4 5 . : ? : . . : ? : . . : ? ? : . : ? : . : 1 ? : . . . . : ? : , .

One-time Gammuladani () of the area, Ukku Banda, was called

by the 1st defendant to give evidence. He was 75 years old at the time of

giving evidence in 1985. He stated that the 1st defendant had been in

possession of the land since around 1915 and the 1st defendant passed

away in the house located on the land. The 1st defendant had also been

enjoying the plantation. According to the death certificate marked V15,

the 1st defendant passed away at the age of 96. This witness further

stated that the 1st defendants father, Julias, had also lived on the land

and had passed away there.

9

SC/APPEAL/95/2021

According to the Plans marked P1 and X at the trial and the reports

thereto, there are two houses in the landone very old and uninhabitable

and the other a recent construction. At the time of the survey in 1982,

according to the report to P1, the old house was approximately 50 years

old, while the new house was about one year old. It was the evidence of

the 1(a) defendant that her grandfather, Julias, and her father, the

deceased 1st defendant, lived in the old house. The land also contained

an old plantation with coconut, jak, mango, cashew and jak fruit trees,

estimated to be around 30 years old.

The documents relating to payment of rates by the 1st defendant and the

lessees were collectively marked as V10 and V11 through an officer of the

local authority. V13 dated 01.03.1975 is a document which goes to show

that the 1st defendant allowed one Saranadasa to occupy the house. V14

dated 01.04.1970 is a notarially executed lease agreement by which the

1st defendant leased out the land for three years to one Kulasena

Wickramasinghe. This Deed had been registered in the Land Registry. In

his evidence, the 2nd defendant admitted that the land had been rented

out to Kulasekara Wickramasinghe. The 1(a) defendant in her evidence

stated that at one point the house was leased out to one David. The fact

that the land and/or the constructions were leased out to third parties

by the 1st defendant without any consent from either the 2nd defendant

or the plaintiffs is beyond question.

P8 dated 15.05.1969 is a notarially executed Deed of Gift by which the

1st defendant gifted the land in suit to his daughter, the 1(a) defendant.

In this deed the 1st defendant claims that he had been in possession of

the land for more than 30 years. This deed was not executed to meet the

plaintiffs case, as it predates the plaintiffs deed by more than a decade.

It was duly registered in the Land Registry.

10

SC/APPEAL/95/2021

On the face of the plaintiffs deed marked P4, the plaintiffs had not done

a search at the Land Registry prior to the purchase of the land as the

notary has made an endorsement on the deed search dispensed with.

Had the plaintiffs done a search in the Land Registry prior to the

purchase of the land, they would have easily realised that there is another

party claiming ownership to the land.

In the face of overwhelming evidence in favour of the 1st defendant on

long possession, what led the Court of Appeal to hold against him? The

Court of Appeal considered P11 and P12 as decisive documents. Had it

not been for the interpretation given to P11 and P12, the Court of Appeal

would have arrived at a different conclusion.

P11 and P12 are assumed to have been marked during cross-

examination of the 1(a) defendant. I read the entire evidence led at the

trial before the District Court by both parties, particularly, the evidence

of the 1(a) defendant on P11 and P12. It is not clear from the proceedings

how they were marked. The witness was confused by being shown various

documents. The witness has accepted the signature of her deceased

father on P9 and V14. Amidst the confusion, P12 was marked. In the

recorded evidence, there is no reference to P11. (vide pages 178-179 of

the appeal brief) In my view, the 1(a) defendant had been forced to admit

the signature on those documents or one of them as that of her father.

However, she explicitly stated that she was unaware of these documents,

which were shown to her for the first time during cross-examination.

Let me briefly digress to emphasise another important aspect in

conducting trials. Just before these documents were shown to her, it was

repeatedly suggested that her deceased father, Subanaris, was an

illegitimate child born to a domestic servant named Nonchihamy. She

repeatedly stated that she was unaware of her grandparents conduct.

That, however, was irrelevant to the issue before the District Judge. In

11

SC/APPEAL/95/2021

my view, this suggestion was made to demoralise and ridicule her in the

witness box before the general public, which should not have been

permitted by the District Judge. The importance of preservation of

human dignity is underscored in the Preamble to our Constitution and

in all major international instruments including the Universal

Declaration of Human Rights. Indecent and scandalous questions

intended to insult or annoy witnesses are prohibited. It is the duty of the

trial Judge to control the proceedings and ensure that the trial is

conducted in accordance with the law, while maintaining the dignity and

decorum of the court.

Section 151 of the Evidence Ordinance and section 176 of the Civil

Procedure Code read as follows:

The court may forbid any questions or inquiries which it regards as

indecent or scandalous, although such questions or inquiries may

have some bearing on the questions before the court, unless they

relate to facts in issue, or to matters necessary to be known in order

to determine whether or not the facts in issue existed.

Section 152 of the Evidence Ordinance and section 177 of the Civil

Procedure Code read as follows:

The court shall forbid any question which appears to it to be intended

to insult or annoy, or which, though proper in itself, appears to the

court needlessly offensive in form.

It is erroneous to assume that any question can be asked during cross-

examination. Questions cannot be put to injure the character of the

witness without reasonable grounds. Section 150 of the Evidence

Ordinance states:

12

SC/APPEAL/95/2021

If the court is of opinion that any such question was asked without

reasonable grounds, it may, if it was asked by any attorney-at-law,

report the circumstances of the case to the Supreme Court or other

authority to which such attorney-at-law is subject in the exercise of

his profession.

P11 and P12 are handwritten letters, but their connection to the land in

suit is unclear. Notably, both documents contain identical content but in

different handwriting, distinct from the handwriting of the signatures.

The reason for preparing two identical documents in different

handwriting is unexplained, adding to their questionable nature. The 1(a)

defendant never accepted that those documents refer to the land in suit.

The plaintiffs have provided no clarification on these issues. Let me

reproduce these two identical letters.

,

,

22/4/67

. . . .

[2nd defendant]

.

Let us assume this was signed by the 1st defendant. This letter has been

addressed to the 2nd defendant. Then this should have been produced

through the 2nd defendant who gave evidence. It was not done. It was

forcefully marked through the 1(a) defendant who was not aware of those

letters. In these letters the 1st defendant does not say that

Kahatagahawatta entirely belongs to the 2nd defendant and he has no

13

SC/APPEAL/95/2021

objection to the 1st defendant dealing with entire Kahatagahawatta in the

way he wants. The letters merely state that the 1st defendant had no

objection to the 2nd defendant dealing with portions of Kahatagahawatta

that belonged to the 2nd defendant. They do not suggest that the 1st

defendant relinquished any claim over the entire Kahatagahawatta.

Kahatagahawatta is not confined to the land in suit but appears to be a

larger land. There was a previous partition action, No. 18404, concerning

another portion of Kahatagahawatta, in which both the 1st defendant and

the 2nd defendant were parties. The documents related to that partition

action were marked in evidence. However, it remains unclear which

portion of Kahatagahawatta is referred to in P11 and P12.

P11 and P12 are dated 22.04.1967. This action was filed in 1980. The

Court of Appeal states:

However, as I observed earlier, the 1st defendant has signed and

accepted the ownership and/or title of the 2nd defendant by P11 and

P12. Therefore, if the 1st defendant prescribed to the disputed land,

he should have done it after the signing of these documents in 1967.

(.) However, the evidence of the 1(a) substituted defendant doesnt

reveal any overt act by which her predecessor (i.e. the 1st defendant)

started holding the disputed land adversely to his principal (i.e. the

2nd defendant) after 1967.

I am unable to agree with this analysis of evidence and the findings

reached thereon. P11 and P12 do not establish that (a) the 1st defendant

accepted that the 2nd defendant was the owner of the land in suit and (b)

the 2nd defendant is the principal of 1st defendant. Hence the finding of

the Court of Appeal that the 1st defendant did not prove an overt act to

commence adverse possession after signing P11 and P12 is untenable.

14

SC/APPEAL/95/2021

The 1st defendant had been in continuous possession of the land in suit

from around 1915 until his death in 1981. He constructed buildings on

the land and leased them out, constituting overt acts indicative of the

commencement of prescriptive possession. The Deed of Gift marked P8,

executed in 1969, and the lease agreement marked V14, executed in

1970, serve as further evidence of such overt acts following P11 and P12.

Notably, more than ten years had elapsed between the execution of P8

and V14 and the institution of this action in December 1980.

Although registration of deeds taken in isolation may not constitute overt

acts, on the facts and circumstances of this case, where the 2nd defendant

himself in his evidence admitted leasing out buildings or land to third

parties by the 1st defendant, one cannot say that execution of deeds is a

secret act.

There is no evidence whatsoever that the plaintiffs or their predecessor

in title (the 2nd defendant) ever occupied, possessed or enjoyed the land

or its plantation. Nor is there any evidence to establish that the 1st

defendant possessed the land as a licensee of the 2nd defendant.

Even assuming, without conceding, that no overt act was proved to have

been committed by the 1st defendant, the Full Bench of the Supreme

Court in Tillekeratne v. Bastian (1918) 21 NLR 12 held, in the context of

prescription among co-owners, that a court may infer that possession,

initially that of a co-owner, has subsequently become adverse against

other co-owners, based on the lapse of time and the circumstances of the

case. Bertram C.J. succinctly articulated this principle at page 24 as

follows:

It is, in short, a question of fact, wherever long-continued exclusive

possession by one co-owner is proved to have existed, whether it is

not just and reasonable in all the circumstances of the case that the

15

SC/APPEAL/95/2021

parties should be treated as though it had been proved that that

separate and exclusive possession had become adverse at some

date more than ten years before action brought.

Bertram C.J. explained at pages 20-21 the artificiality of insisting on an

overt act when possession goes back for a period as far as reasonable

memory reaches in the following manner:

If it is found that one co-owner and his predecessors in interest have

been in possession of the whole property for a period as far back as

reasonable memory reaches; that he and they have done nothing to

recognize the claims of the other co-owners; that he and they have

taken the whole produce of the property for themselves; and that

these co-owners have never done anything to assert a claim to any

share of the produce, it is artificial in the highest degree to say that

such a person and his predecessors in interest must be presumed to

be possessing all this time in the capacity of co-owners, and that

they can never be regarded as having possessed adversely, simply

because no definite positive act can be pointed to as originating or

demonstrating the adverse possession. Where it is found that

presumptions of law lead to such an artificial result, it will generally

be found that the law itself provides a remedy for such a situation

by means of counter-presumptions. If such a thing were not possible,

law would in many cases become out of harmony with justice and

good sense.

This principle applies with even greater force in cases where no co-

ownership exists, as in the present case. Given the facts and

circumstances, the 1st defendants exclusive possession of the land

without paying rent or acknowledging the title of any other partyfor

over 40 years prior to the institution of the action entitles him to claim

prescriptive title to the land.

16

SC/APPEAL/95/2021

The questions of law on which leave to appeal was granted and the

answers thereto are as follows:

Q. Did the Court of Appeal err in accepting P11 and P12 to the

exclusion of all other valid evidence adduced by the 1st

defendant?

A. Yes.

Q. Did the Court of Appeal err in failing to appreciate that long

uninterrupted possession of the land in dispute and

constructing buildings by a stranger is an overt act?

A. Yes.

Q. Did the Court of Appeal err in holding that the 1(a) defendant

had not proved prescriptive title to the land?

A. Yes.

I set aside the judgments of the District Court and the Court of Appeal

and allow the appeal of the 1(a) defendant. The plaintiffs action of the

District Court shall stand dismissed. I make no order as to costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Murdu N.B. Fernando, P.C., C.J.

I agree.

Chief Justice

Shiran Gooneratne J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court