==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for Appeal

under and in terms of Article 128 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka read with Section 5C of

the High Court of the Provinces (Special

Provisions) Act No. 54 of 2006, against

Judgment of the Provincial High Court of

Western Province dated 08.02.2021 in Case

No. WP/HCCA/GPH/23/2020 (LA); D.C.

Gampaha Case No 3499/L

IN THE DISTRICT COURT

Galle Arachchige Amaradasa, of No. 174,

Temple Road, Bangalawatte, Kottawa

Plaintiff

SC/APPEAL/155/2022

SC/HCCA/LA/No.135/21

WP/HCCA/GPH/23/2020 (LA)

D.C. Gampaha Case No. 3499/L

V.

1. Paththapperuma Arachchige Neville

Arunasiri Paththaperuma

No.198, Ihala Yagoda

Gampaha

2

2. Gallage Anil Chandradasa

No. 56/1, Raenagala Road

Imbulgoda

Defendants

AND BETWEEN IN THE HIGH COURT

1. Paththapperuma Arachchige Neville

Arunasiri Paththaperuma,

No. 198, Ihala Yagoda,

Gampaha.

2. Gallage Anil Chandradasa,

No. 56/1, Raenagala Road,

Imbulgoda.

Defendant – Petitioners

V.

1. Galle Acharige Amaradasa

No. 174, Temple Road

Bangalawatte

Kottawa

Plaintiff – Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN IN THE SUPREME COURT

2. Gallage Anil Chandradasa

No. 56/1, Raenagala Road

Imbulgoda

2nd Defendant-Petitioner-Appellant

V.

3

Galle Acharige Amaradasa

No. 174, Temple Road

Bangalawatte

Kottawa

Plaintiff – Respondent- Respondent

1 a) Sankapala Acharige Greta, of No. 174,

Temple Road, Bangalawatte, Kottawa

1 b) Gallege Chandrika Amaradasa, of No.

210, Olympus, Millenium City, Oruwela,

Athurugiriya

1 c) Gallage Senpathi Ameradasa

1 d) Gallage Dulipa Shyamali Ameradasa

1 e) Gallege Yasala Rangani Ameradasa

All of No.174, Temple Road, Bangalawatte,

Kottawa

Substituted 1a), 1b), 1c), 1d), 1e) Plaintiff-

Respondent-Respondents

1. Paththaperuma Arachchilage Neville

Arunasiri Paththaperuma

No. 198, Ihala Yagoda

Gampaha

1st Defendant Petitioner-Respondent

Before : Achala Wengappuli J.

K. Priyantha Fernando, J.

Sobhitha Rajakaruna, J.

4

Counsel : Sudarshani Cooray instructed by Diana Stephanie

Rodrigo for the 2nd Defendant-Petitioner-Appellant

S.A.D.S Suraweera with Ashnika Perera instructed

by S.R. Weerasinghe for the Plaintiff-Respondent-

Respondent

Argued on : 17.09.2025

Decided on : 17.10.2025

K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J

1. The 2nd Defendant-Petitioner-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

as 2nd Defendant- Appellant), appealed to this Court seeking to, inter

alia, set aside the judgment dated 08.02.2021 of the Provincial High

Court of Western Province holden in Gampaha and the order dated

24.07.2020 by the District Court of Gampaha.

The Facts

2. The Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as

Plaintiff - Respondent) by his plaint dated 27.04.2018 instituted action

in the District Court against the 1st and 2nd Defendants to eject the

Defendants and all those holding under them from the premises in suit,

alongside the payment of arrears of rent, damages, continuing

damages, for an enjoining order and an interim injunction preventing

the defendants from carrying out constructions on the land.

3. Plaintiff- Respondent stated that he became the owner of land described

in the 1st schedule to the plaint under the final decree of Case No.

5

19457/P, and that the 2nd Defendant – Appellant became the owner of

the land described in the 2nd schedule.

4. The 1st Defendant – Appellant – Respondent (hereinafter referred to as

1st Defendant - Respondent) has entered into a lease agreement with

the Plaintiff – Respondent in 2013 in respect of the land described in

the 1st schedule subject to the conditions in the agreement. The Plaintiff

– Respondent has alleged that the 1st Defendant – Respondent was in

breach of some conditions and had acted in collusion with the 2nd

Defendant – Appellant in attempting constructions on the land in suit.

For these reasons the Plaintiff – Respondent has informed the 1st

Defendant – Respondent to vacate the premises and handover the

possession to Plaintiff – Respondent, which the 1st Defendant –

Respondent had refused to do whereby cause for action has arisen.

5. Both the 1st and 2nd Defendants then filed their answers. The 1st

Defendant - Respondent denied most averments, stating that the

Plaintiff had no valid cause of action, and that the Plaint was not in line

with Section 46 of the Civil Procedure Code. The 1st Defendant -

Respondent has further claimed the Plaintiff – Respondent fraudulently

induced him to enter into the lease agreement over land that he had no

rights to, which also had no access road. The 1st Defendant –

Respondent has also sought a refund of his advance payment but the

Plaintiff – Respondent had failed to return it.

6. The 1st Defendant - Respondent also stated that the 2nd Defendant owns

the amalgamated land described in the 3rd schedule to the plaint that

he has allegedly acquired prescriptive rights over. The 1st Defendant -

Respondent, states that he has been operating a spare parts business

in the land described in the 3rd schedule as a tenant under the 2nd

Defendant- Appellant. The 1st Defendant – Respondent has alleged that

the Plaintiff – Respondent breached the terms of the lease agreement,

causing him a financial loss of about Rs. 200,000. Therefore, as a cross-

6

claim, the 1st Defendant - Respondent has sought a declaration of lawful

leasehold rights for the land described in the 3rd schedule to the plaint

under the 2nd Defendant, recovery of Rs. 200,000 in damages, and Rs.

36,000 already paid to the Plaintiff - Respondent. He has further prayed

that the causes of action be heard together under Section 35 of the Civil

Procedure Code.

7. The 2nd Defendant – Appellant has filed a separate answer denying most

of the averments in the plaint, further stating that as per the final

decree in Case No. 19457/P in 1995, the 2nd Defendant – Appellant

became entitled to the lands described in the 1st and 2nd schedules to

the plaint which the 2nd Defendant – Appellant has later amalgamated

into one land which is described in the 3rd schedule to the plaint. He

has also claimed to have acquired prescriptive rights over the said land.

8. The 2nd Defendant – Appellant, denying that any damage had been

caused to the Plaintiff – Respondent claimed Rs. 100,000 for

maliciously instituting this action. Further he claimed a declaration of

title in respect of the land described in the 2nd schedule to the answer,

declaration that the 1st Defendant – Respondent holds leasehold rights

under the 2nd Defendant – Appellant, for damages and for a commission

to survey and prepare a plan regarding the land described in the 3rd

schedule.

9. Thereafter, the Plaintiff – Respondent by motion dated 29.08.2019 has

filed a draft amended plaint whereby the 2nd Defendant – Appellant

states that major changes to the plaint were made. He states that it

changed the nature and character of the action and sought certain

reliefs such as a declaration of title to the land described in the 1st

schedule to the amended plaint.

7

10. Defendants have objected to the amendments stating the

Plaintiff – Respondent is guilty of laches and attempting to change the

nature of the action to a rei vindicatio action. This matter has then been

fixed for inquiry. The learned District Judge by order dated 24.07.2020

allowed the amended plaint as both plaints sought for the ejection of

the Defendants and as it did not change the nature of the action. It was

further held that Court was entitled to exercise the discretion granted

by section 93 (1) of the Civil Procedure Code and that the Defendants

too were able to amend their answers if necessary.

11. Being aggrieved by the aforementioned order dated 24.07.2020,

the 2nd Defendant – Appellant has filed a Leave to Appeal application to

the High Court which was taken for support for leave on 08.02.2020

and was dismissed on the same day with costs.

12. Being aggrieved by the decision of the High Court, the 2nd

Defendant- Appellant preferred the instant appeal to this Court. This

Court granted leave to appeal on the questions of law set out in

subparagraphs (a) and (d) of paragraph 15 of the petition dated

18.03.2021.

Questions of Law

“(a) Did the Learned High Court Judges of the High Court had erred in

failing to appreciate that the Original Plaint is in the nature of an action

which only seeks ejectment of the 1st and 2nd Defendants and does not

seek any declaration in respect of the rights for the land and the

Amended Plaint seeks to change the nature of the action to a rei vindicatio

action;

(d) did the Learned High Court Judges of the High Court err in failing to

appreciate that grave prejudice would be caused to the 1st and 2nd

Defendants in the event the proposed amendments are allowed and the

8

plaint will be back dated with the amendments and the 2nd Defendant’s

plea of prescription would be at disadvantage”

13. Given the nature of the grievances of the 2nd Defendant in the

instant case, I am of the opinion that both questions of law mentioned

above ultimately lead to the question of whether amending the plaint

could cause any prejudice to the 2nd Defendant - Appellant’s plea of

prescription and whether it changes the nature of the action as claimed

by the 2nd Defendant – Appellant.

14. Notwithstanding the above, concerning the question of law raised

in subparagraph a), I must first note that the original plaint and the

amended plaint both sought to eject the defendants and all their agents

from the land in suit whereby I do not see sufficient reason to conclude

that a change of the nature of action has occurred by the amendment.

15. Section 3 of the Prescription Ordinance of 1871 (as amended),

a plea of prescription requires merely ten years of uninterrupted and

undisturbed possession:

“ Proof of the undisturbed and uninterrupted possession by a

defendant in any action, or by those under whom he claims, of lands

or immovable property, by a title adverse to or independent of that of

the claimant or plaintiff in such action (that is to say, a possession

unaccompanied by payment of rent or produce, or performance of service

or duty, or by any other act by the possessor, from which an

acknowledgment of a right existing in another person would fairly and

naturally be inferred) for ten years previous to the bringing of such

action, shall entitle the defendant to a decree in his favour with costs...”

(emphasis mine)

9

16. In the instant matter, in the answer filed in the District Court

dated 17.01.2019 the 2nd Defendant - Appellant has stated that he has

held uninterrupted and undisturbed possession of the land described

in the 3rd Schedule since 1995 whereby he has prescriptive rights to the

same. In these circumstances, his alleged claim of prescription would

be successful by the year 2005 and any added duration of possession

would have no significant legal bearing unless his possession was to

start any time after 1995 contrary to his answer in the District Court.

The plaint was filed in 2018 (23 years from 1995) and amended in the

year 2019 whereby I am unable to see any reasonable basis to hold that

the 2nd Defendant – Appellant was prejudiced by the amendments, in

seeking prescriptive titles as the required ten-year period is well over.

17. I must note that the learned Counsel for the 2nd Defendant –

Appellant submits the case of Pathirana v. Jayasundara [1956] NLR

169 to further their position, where it was held at page 172 that:

“…Upon the question of amendment of pleadings generally, Withers J.

said in Ratwatte v Owen —“ After the plaint has once been accepted, I

think as a general rule that it should not be amended till after the issue

has been settled. The office of an amendment will generally be at that

stage to square the plaint with the issue, if necessary ” , thus indicating

that the discretionary power to permit an amendment of the plaint should

not be exercised unless firstly, a particular issue does arise upon the

original plaint and secondly, further pleadings are necessary in order

to explain or clarify matters relevant to the particular issue. Subsequent

decisions show that the general rule as so stated is not to be regarded

as inflexible and that relaxation is permissible in order to secure the more

expeditious termination of disputes. But no such relaxation is proper if it

would be prejudicial to a plea of prescription available to a Defendant.”

18. However, the facts of Pathirana v. Jayasundara [1956] NLR

169 are materially different to the case at hand, Pathirana v

10

Jayasundara concerned a situation where there was an overholding

lease between the Plaintiff and the Defendant. The Defendant, the

tenant, in that case has in his answer claimed both title and

prescriptive rights on his behalf, whereas in the case at hand, the 2nd

Defendant is a third party that was never a party to the original contract

of leasehold between the Plaintiff- Respondent and the 1st Defendant –

Respondent. While the 2nd Defendant - Appellant has claimed

ownership both by way of declaration of title and prescriptive rights,

there appears to be no such claim of title by the original leaseholder,

the 1st Defendant – Respondent in the case at hand. I am of the opinion

that the motive in disallowing the amendments in Pathirana v

Jayasundara is to ensure that a tenant overholding should not lose the

protection of prescriptive title by surprise. In a situation where a third

party comes in and claims ownership by title or prescription, status quo

alters significantly and concerns different to those raised in Pathirana

v Jayasundara arise whereby the same position cannot be maintained.

19. Further, as the learned District Judge has correctly decided, the

Courts could exercise their discretion as per S. 93 of the Civil

Procedure Code Act No. 53 of 1980 in deciding on allowing the

amendments. Further, the Defendants had the liberty to amend their

answer had they found such was necessary and as stated above, the

High Court has affirmed the stance of the learned District Judge.

20. However, I must note that this position is taken giving due regard

to the particular circumstances of the case at hand. As per the recent

decision in Rajapaksha Appuhamilage Lionel Ranjith v. Suraweera

Arachchige Dona Leelawathi and others [SC/Appeal/100/2020

S.C. Minutes of 14.05.2025] no amendment is to be allowed unless

the Court is satisfied that grave and irremediable injustice will be

caused if such amendment is not permitted and there will be no laches

caused by such amendment.

11

21. Therefore, I am of the opinion that the learned Judges of the

District Court and High Court were correct, and that the nature of the

action hasn’t changed nor has any prejudice occurred to the claim of

prescription by 2nd Defendant – Appellant whereby both questions of

law noted in subparagraphs (a) and (d) of paragraph 15 of the petition

dated 18.03.2021 are answered in the negative. Therefore, the appeal

is dismissed subject to costs.

22. The Registrar is directed to forward the case record to the District

Court of Gampaha to proceed with the merits of the initial case.

Appeal is Dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

JUSTICE ACHALA WENGAPPULI

I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

JUSTICE SOBHITHA RAJAKARUNA

I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT