1 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application under Articles 17 and 126 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

1. JPC Trade Company Ltd

East Lower Block World Trade Centre, Colombo 01 2. R. Lahiru Rakshitha,

Country Manager, JPC Trade Company Ltd East Lower Block World Trade Centre, Colombo 01 Petitioners SC FR Application 290/2014 Vs,

1. Mr. Jagath P. Wijeweera,

Director General of Customs, Sri Lanka Customs, No. 40, Main Street, Colombo 11. 1(a).Mr. Chulananda Perera, Director General of Customs,

Sri Lanka Customs, No. 40, Main Street, Colombo 11. 1(b).Mrs. P.S.M. Charles, Director General of Customs,

Sri Lanka Customs, No. 40, Main Street, Colombo 11.

2

2. Mr. M. Paskaran,

Director of Customs (Social Protection Directorate) Sri Lanka Customs, No. 40, Main Street, Colombo 11. 2(a). Mr. Athula Lankadewa,

Director of Customs (Social Protection Directorate) Sri Lanka Customs, No. 40, Main Street, Colombo 11. 3. Mr. P. Gallage,

Superintendent of Customs, Sri Lanka Customs, No. 40, Main Street, Colombo 11.

4. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12. Respondents

Before: Justice Buwaneka P. Aluwihare PC

Justice Prasanna Jayawardena PC

Justice Vijith K. Malalgoda PC

Counsel: Rasika Dissanayake for the Petitioners

Sumathi Dharmawardena Senior Deputy Solicitor General for the 4th Respondent

Argued on: 17.07.2018

Judgment on: 28.09.2018

3 Justice Vijith K. Malalgoda PC

The two Petitioners namely J.P.C. Trade Company Ltd. and R. Lahiru Rakshitha had come before

this court alleging the violation of the Fundamental Rights guaranteed under Article 12 (1),

13 (1) and 13 (4) of the Constitution.

As submitted by the Petitioners, the 1st Petitioner is a duly incorporated company in Japan and

it is registered with the Registrar General of Companies in Sri Lanka as an overseas company

under the provisions of the Companies Act No 07 of 2007, and the 2nd Petitioner who is a citizen

of Sri Lanka, is employed as the country manager of the 1st Petitioner company. The 1st

Petitioner is an exporter of Motor Vehicles from Japan to Sri Lanka and was not allowed or

permitted by the Laws of Sri Lanka to import Motor Vehicles into the Country.

The Petitioners have alleged the involvement of some custom officers in conducting an

investigation against the 1st and the 2nd Petitioners with regard to 63 vehicles the 1st Petitioner

had exported under the provisions of the Customs Ordinance and other Laws of the country.

In this regard a team of custom officers had visited the 1st Petitioner’s office and inspected the

documents pertaining to the said 63 vehicles and later the Petitioners were made to

understand that an inquiry was commenced for alleged violation of sections 129 and 163 of the

Customs Ordinance for importation of undervalued vehicles into Sri Lanka.

The Petitioners have challenged the authority of the 1st to the 3rd Respondents or any employee

of the Department of Customs to conduct such inquiry against the Petitioners under section

129 of the Customs Ordnance, since the 1st Petitioner was not involved in importing any goods

into the country. In this regard the Petitioners have brought to the notice of this court the

provisions of section 129 of the Customs Ordinance which reads as follows;

4 Section 129;

“Every person who shall be concerned in importing or bringing into Sri Lanka any

prohibited goods, or any goods the importation of which is restricted, contrary to such

prohibition or restriction, and whether the same be unshipped or not, and every person

who shall unship or assist, or be otherwise concerned in the unshipping of any goods

which are prohibited, or of any goods which are restricted and imported contrary to

such restriction, or of any goods liable to duty the duties for which have not been paid

or secured, or who shall knowingly harbour, keep, or conceal, or shall knowingly permit,

or suffer, or cause, or procure to be harboured, kept, or concealed, any such goods, or

any goods which have been illegally removed without payment of duty from any

warehouse or place of security in which they may have been deposited, or into whose

hands and possession any such goods shall knowingly come, or who shall assist or be

concerned in the illegal removal of any goods from any warehouse or place of security in

which they shall have been deposited as aforesaid, or who shall be in any way knowingly

concerned in conveying, removing, depositing, concealing, or in any manner dealing

with any goods liable to duties of customs with intend to defraud the revenue of such

duties or any part thereof, or who shall be in any way knowingly concerned in any

fraudulent evasion or attempt at evasion of such duties or any part thereof, shall in each

and every of the foregoing cases forfeit either treble the value of the goods, or be liable

to a penalty of one hundred thousand rupees, at the election of the Director General.”

The Petitioners complaint before this court refers to 16 vehicles said to have imported by the

Peoples Leasing Company a subsidiary company of the People’s Bank and had further

submitted that, the 1st Petitioner being the exporter had no reason to undervalue the said

5 vehicles exported, as it gain no benefit whatsoever. Therefore it is the importer that should be

liable as per section 129 of the Customs Ordinance since the importer has a duty to declare the

value of the imported goods and also to pay taxes as required under such ordinance or any

other law.

As submitted by the Petitioners, at the conclusion of the Customs Inquiry where the 2nd

Petitioner faced charges for abetment for importation, the 2nd Petitioner was imposed a

forfeiture, which was conveyed to him by P-20 which reads as follows,

Order,

“I impose a mitigated forfeiture of Rupees six million (LKR 6,000,000/-) on Mr. R. Lahiru

Rakshitha, Country Manager representing M/S JPC Trade Company Ltd. East Lower

Block, World Trade Centre, Colombo in terms of sections 129 and 163 of the Customs

Ordinance”

However the Petitioners have submitted that the offender, the People’s Leasing Company the

importer of the said 16 vehicles have been exonerated with an ulterior motive of punishing the

Petitioners irrespective of the fact that if at all only the said People’s Leasing Company was

liable to pay any such custom duties or penalties to Sri Lanka Customs.

The Respondents have filed comprehensive objections before this court including the

statements recorded from, Lahiru Rakshitha Ranthatige (the 2nd Petitioner) and from one Akbar

Mohamed Ilham during the Customs Inquiry held against several persons, marked 1R1 and 1R2

respectively.

6 The 1st Respondent, Director General of Sri Lanka Customs in his affidavit filed before this court

had taken up the position that;

a) During the course of audit control, the Port Control Branch of the Customs

suspected that there had been a loss of revenue due to undervaluation of vehicles

imported into Sri Lanka

b) In this regard, investigations were carried out with regard to several imports into Sri

Lanka by Japanese exporters including the following suppliers,

i. M/S J.P.C. Trade Company Ltd. (the 1st Petitioner)

ii. My Direct Cars (Pvt) Ltd

iii. Asho Cars Japan (Pvt) Ltd.

c) The said investigations revealed that declaration on the vehicles imported reflected

the transaction price as much lower than the actual price

d) It was further revealed that most of the pro forma invoices with regard to the said

vehicle imports were issued by the local office of the said companies for establishing

the letters of credit

e) The remaining component of the transaction price had been paid under the

description of “Local Handling Charges”, “Warranty Fee” and “Advanced Payments”

f) By using this method the vehicle importers with the help of the exporter had

defrauded the customs and the tax base had been considerably and unlawfully

reduced, resulting in the under payment of the applicable customs duties and other

levies for the vehicles so imported

g) One A.A.M Ilham making a statement to Sri Lanka Customs had admitted that he

allowed the 1st Petitioner company to make use of his Bank Account at Sampath

7

Bank, Pettah branch to collect the balance component of the transaction price (real

value of the vehicle) from the prospective buyers, and the money so collected was

subsequently deposited to the Japanese Account of the 1st Petitioner with the help

of another friend of Ilham who lives in Japan. According to Ilham, he was paid a

commission by the 1st Petitioner for transferring these monies to Japan

h) According to the statement of Ilham, it is the 2nd Petitioner who contacted him,

when such transactions took place and on the instructions received from the 2nd

Petitioner, monies were deposited in the Japanese Account with the help of his

friend who lives in Japan.

Even though the Petitioners were silent on their involvement in defrauding Sri Lanka Customs

by using the above method, the second Petitioner whilst making a statement to Sri Lanka

Customs during the said investigation (1R1) had admitted undervaluing vehicles exported by his

company and sending the balance money to Japan through their local agent Ilham. According to

2nd Petitioner, when Ilham deposited the money in 1st Petitioner’s Japan account, a picture of

the deposit slip is sent to him in order to prove the transaction. Several such photographs were

collected during the investigation carried out by the custom officials and those photographs

were produced before this court marking them under 1R5.

In addition to the photographs referred to above, several e-mails exchanged between the

prospective buyers and the 1st Petitioner Company either through the 2nd Petitioner or some

other sales co-ordinators of the 1st Petitioner, giving bank details of Ilham as, A.A.M. Ilham,

Sampath Bank, Account No. 004250027791, Main street branch, Mobile No. 0777 3888717 for

the purpose of depositing the balance money, were also produced under 1R5 by the

Respondents before this court.

8 When going through the material placed on behalf of the Respondents it is clear that the above

conduct of the Petitioners have resulted in a loss to Sri Lanka Customs when the importers used

the per-forma invoices issued by the Petitioners to the undervalued price in order to open

letters of credit. It is further observed that the Petitioners whilst issuing a per-forma invoice to

an undervalued price for the importer to avoid a major part of the tax component, had

collected the full value of the vehicle using another illegal method of transferring the money

outside the country.

With all these illegal and defrauding activities, being carried out, the Petitioners have come

before this court complaining that the Petitioners were treated differently by the 1st to 4th

Respondents and thereby the Petitioners are entitled for a declaration that the Respondents

have violated their fundamental right for equal protection guaranteed under Article 12 (1) of

the Constitution.

The Petitioners have further prayed to quash and/or annual the decision of forfeiture by the 3rd

Respondent contained in his letter dated 18.02.2014 marked P-20.

The Petitioners complaint of discrimination has taken place as against the People’s Leasing

Company a subsidiary of the People’s Bank. The Petitioners complaint refers to 16 vehicles said

to have imported by the said People’s Leasing Company on per-forma invoices issued by the 1st

Petitioner at an undervalued price. Petitioners have collected the balance amount i.e. the

difference between the actual price and the undervalued price through the account of one

Ilham, directly from the person who got down the vehicle through People’s Leasing Company.

The material already discussed clearly shows that, the Petitioners have aided and abetted the

importers of the vehicles referred to in this application to import such vehicles at an

9 undervalued price. If not for the Petitioners per-forma invoices at an undervalued price, the

said importer would not be able to open the letters of credit to get down those vehicles for the

price referred to in the per-forma invoice.

When a Petitioner allege that his Fundamental Rights has been infringed by any party, the

powers of this court to grant such relief is discussed in Article 126 (4) of the Constitution, which

reads as follows;

126 (4) “The Supreme Court shall have power to grant such relief or make such

directions as it may deem just and equitable in the circumstances in respect of

any petition or reference referred to in paragraphs (2) and (3) of this Article or

refer the matter back to Court of Appeal if in its opinion there is no infringement

of a fundamental right or language right.”

Is it just and equitable for this court to make an order to quash and/or annual the decision of

forfeiture by the 3rd Respondent in the circumstances referred to by me in this judgment?

In the case of C.W. Mackie and Company V. Hugh Molagoda Commissioner General of Inland

Revenue and others 1986 1 Sri LR pages 300 at 308, 309 the Supreme Court had considered a

similar situation with regard to the payment of turnover tax by the Petitioner and observed

that;

“It is not disputed that the sum of Rs. 2,109,001. 43 claimed by the Petitioner does not

represent any turnover tax paid in excess of the amount with which he was properly

chargeable. The said sum was what was lawfully due from it as turnover tax for the

period in question and was lawfully paid by the Petitioner in the discharge of its legal

liability. If the Petitioner’s prayer is that the Commissioner General of Inland Revenue

10

should be directed by this court to make a refund of this Rs. 2,109,001. 43 paid by the

Petitioner as turnover tax on rubber up to 31. 12. 1982, we have to look for justification

outside the Act to make the refund. Counsel for Petitioner invoked the jurisdiction of

this court under Article 126 (4) of the Constitution to make such directions as it may

deem just and equitable in respect of the petition preferred under Article 126 (2) to

warrant the refund set off against future taxes.

The power of this court to issue such directions stems from proof of the infringement of

a fundamental right. It is only on such an infringement that this court will have the

power to grant such relief or make such directions as it may deem just and equitable in

the circumstances. This preliminary fact has to be established by the Petitioner to

warrant the invocation of this equitable jurisdiction. In the instant case, the Petitioner

pleads breach of its right to equality as the basis of its application. Article 12 (1) of the

Constitution provides “all persons are equal before the law and are entitled to the equal

protection of the law.” The essence of the right of equality guaranteed by Article 12 (1)

and the evil which the article seeks to guard against is the avoidance of designed and

intentional hostile treatment or discrimination on the part of those entrusted with

administering the law. In order to sustain the plea of discrimination based upon Article

12 (1) a party will have to satisfy the court about two things, namely 1. That he has been

treated differently from others, and 2. That he has been differently treated from

persons similarly circumstanced without any reasonable basis.

But the equal treatment guaranteed by Article 12 is equal treatment in the performance

of a lawful act. Via Article 12, one cannot seek the execution of any illegal or invalid act.

Fundamental to this postulate of equal treatment is that it should be referable to the

11

exercise of a valid right, founded in law in contradistinction to an illegal right which is

invalid in law. I respectfully agree with what the court said in Venkata Subbiah Setty V.

Bangalore Municipality (1)”

“Article 14 (corresponding to our Article 12) cannot be understood as requiring the

authorities to act illegally in one case, because they have acted illegally in other cases.

In Ram Prasad Vs. Union of India (2) the latter court quoted with approval the above

statement of the law in Venkata Subbiah Setty V. Bangalore Municipality (supra) and

added-

That the guaranteed under Article 14 cannot be understood as requiring the authorities

to act illegally in one case because, they have acted illegally in other cases. No one can

contend that wrong must be extended to him as well in order to satisfy the provisions of

Article 14.”

From the facts I have already discussed in this judgment, it is clear that the Petitioners were

involved in submitting undervalued pro-forma invoices for the purpose of importing vehicles in

to the country and abetted the importer to defraud the customs. The 2nd Petitioner in his

statement to Sri Lanka Customs had admitted this position. In the said circumstances the

Petitioners are not entitled to allege, the violation of Article 12-1 of the Constitution.

When the Petitioners came before this court alleging the violation of their fundamental rights

guaranteed under Article 12 (1) of the Constitution, they were silent on their conduct in

submitting undervalued pro-forma invoices and in paragraph 15 of the petition filed before this

court had taken up the position that,

12

“The Petitioners state that thereafter the 2nd Respondent took, a statement on 16th

September in which the 2nd Petitioner stated that the 1st Petitioner being the exporter

had no reason to undervalue the vehicles exported as it gains no benefit what so

ever…..”

However in his statement made to Sri Lanka Customs (1R1) the 2nd Petitioner had taken up the

following position with regard to the undervaluing of vehicles,

“I accept that most of the vehicles we handled to ship from Japan to Sri Lanka is

undervalued. I undertake to give this undervaluation figure of vehicles which I can find

out.”

When considering the position the Petitioners have taken, when coming before this court and

the material revealed thereafter, it appears that the Petitioners have deliberately suppressed

their involvement in submitting pro-forma invoices to undervalued amounts. By suppressing

the said fact from this court, the Petitioners have presented a completely distorted version

before this court.

In this regard I am mindful of the decision in Alponso Appuhamy Vs. Hettiarachchi 1973 NLR

131 where Pathirana J had observed as follows;

“The necessity of a full and fair disclosure of all the material facts to be placed before

the court when an application for a writ or injunction is made and the process of the

court is invoked is laid down in the case of The King V. The General Commissioners for

the purpose of the Income Tax Acts for the District of Kensington-Ex-parte Princess

Edmond de Poignac - (1917) Kings Bench Division 486. Although this case deals with a

writ of Prohibition the principles enunciated are applicable to all cases of writs or

13

injunctions. In this case a Divisional Court without dealing with the merits of the case

discharged the rule on the ground that the applicant had suppressed or misrepresented

the facts material to her application. The Court of Appeal affirmed the decision of the

Divisional Court that there had been a suppression of material facts by the applicant in

her affidavit and therefore it was justified in refusing a writ of Prohibition without going

into the merits of the case. In other words, so rigorous is the necessity for a full and

truthful disclosure of all material facts that the court would not go into the merits of the

application, but will dismiss it without further examination.”

Even though the said case referred to Writ Application filed before court, I am of the view that

the said principle extends to Fundamental Rights applications as well, when the Petitioners

alleged that their fundamental rights guaranteed under the Constitution had been violated by

the conduct of the Respondents. A Petitioner who comes before the Supreme Court alleging

the violation of his fundamental right is bound to a fair disclosure of all material facts.

In the said circumstance I further observe that the Petitioners have suppressed material facts

from this court, when they allege violation of Article 12 (1) of the Constitution.

The Petitioners have further alleged the violation of Articles 13 (1) and 13 (4) of the

Constitution but I see no merit in the said allegations, since the Respondents before this court

are bound to act under the provisions of the Customs Ordinance and the other relevant legal

provisions in order to implement the lawful findings reached by an inquiry proceeded under the

provisions of the Customs Ordinance.

In the said circumstances I hold that the Petitioners have failed to establish, that their

fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 12 (1), 13 (1) and 13 (4) of the Constitution have

14 been infringed by the Respondents. I therefore dismiss this application with costs fixed at Rs.

1,000,000/-.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Justice Buwaneka P. Aluwihare PC

I agree,

Judge of the Supreme Court

Justice Prasanna Jayawardena PC

I agree,

Judge of the Supreme Court