==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 10

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCTRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal against the

judgment dated 31st May 2024

pronounced in Case No.

WP/HCCA/COL/16/2021(LA) under

and in terms of section 5(c)(1) of the High

Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions)

Act No. 19 of 1990 as amended by the

High Court of the Provisions (Special

Provisions) (Amendment) Act No. 54 of

2006.

SC HCCA LA: Chamila Dilanthi Ranasinghe,

247/2024 No. 29, Jambugasmulla Road,

Nugegoda.

WP/HCCA/COL: PLAINTIFF

16/2021(LA) Vs.

D.C. Colombo Case No: 1. Peoples Bank,

DSP/37/2017 No. 75, Sir Chittampalam A Gardiner

Mawatha,

Colombo 02.

2. Mutu Hennadige Saman Wijesekara,

No. 190/3, Peter De Perera Mawatha,

Dutugemunu Street,

Kohuwala.

DEFENDANTS

AND BETWEEN

Page 2 of 10

Chamila Dilanthi Ranasinghe,

No. 29, Jambugasmulla Road,

Nugegoda.

PLAINTIFF-APPELLANT

Vs.

1. Peoples Bank,

No. 75, Sir Chittampalam A Gardiner

Mawatha,

Colombo 02.

2. Mutu Hennadige Saman Wijesekara,

No. 190/3, Peter De Perera Mawatha,

Dutugemunu Street,

Kohuwala.

DEFENDANT-RESPONDENTS

AND NOW BETWEEN

Peoples Bank,

No. 75, Sir Chittampalam A Gardiner

Mawatha,

Colombo 02.

1st DEFENDANT-RESPONDENT-

PETITIONER

Vs.

Page 3 of 10

Chamila Dilanthi Ranasinghe,

No. 29, Jambugasmulla Road,

Nugegoda.

PLAINTIFF-PETITIONER-

RESPONDENT

Mutu Hennadige Saman Wijesekara,

No. 190/3, Peter De Perera Mawatha,

Dutugemunu Street,

Kohuwala.

2nd DEFENDANT-RESPONDENT-

RESPONDENT

Before : Achala Wengappuli, J.

: Menaka Wijesundera, J.

: Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

Counsel : Kaushalya Nawaratne, P.C. with Neranjan

Vitharana instructed by Ms. Sandamali Nisansala

for the 1st Defendant-Respondent-Petitioner.

: Upul Jayasuriya, P.C. for the Plaintiff-Appellant-

Respondent.

: Suren Fernando instructed by Ishara

Gunawardena for the 2nd Defendant-Respondent-

Respondent.

Considered on : 03-12-2025

Written Submissions : 10-12-2025 (By the 2nd Defendant-Respondent-

Respondent)

Page 4 of 10

: 14-12-2025 (By the 1st Defendant-Respondent-

Petitioner)

Order on : 12-05-2026

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

The 1st defendant-respondent-petitioner (hereinafter referred to as the 1st

defendant) filed this application seeking leave to appeal to challenge the

judgment pronounced on 31-05-2024 by the Provincial High Court of the

Western Province holden in Colombo while exercising its civil appellate

jurisdiction.

From the impugned judgment, the High Court, having considered an appeal

preferred by the plaintiff in District Court of Colombo Case No. DSP/37/2017

challenging the order made by the District Court of Colombo on 05-03-2021,

allowed the said appeal. The High Court, having set aside the order dated 05-

03-2021 where the action of the said plaintiff was dismissed on a preliminary

objection raised as to the maintainability of the action before the District

Court, ordered the District Court to proceed with the trial from the point

where the issues were settled. The High Court also ordered the plaintiff-

appellant to pay a cost of Rs. 52,500/- to the 1st defendant of the District

Court action, namely the 1st defendant-respondent-petitioner.

When this application was taken up for the purpose of granting leave to

appeal, the learned President’s Counsel who represented the plaintiff-

appellant-respondent raised a preliminary objection as to the maintainability

of the 1st defendant’s application for leave to appeal. It was his position that

the impugned judgment of the High Court is a judgment pronounced on 31-

05-2024 and the petition seeking leave to appeal from the said judgment has

been filed by the 1st defendant on 12-07-2025, which was the last day

permitted to file an application of this nature for a dissatisfied party from an

appellate judgment.

Page 5 of 10

He pointed out that although the relevant petition had been filed naming

several Attorneys-at-Law as the Attorneys-at-Law of the 1st defendant, no

proxy in order to give power to any such Attorney-at-Law to represent the 1st

defendant has been filed along with the petition. He contended that the

relevant proxy has been filed only on 15-07-2024, and hence, the 1st

defendant had no locus standi to maintain this application at the time of filing

the petition, which was in violation of the relevant Supreme Court Rules.

Accordingly, it was his submission that the application for leave to appeal

should be dismissed in limine.

When this objection was taken up before this Court for consideration on 03-

12-2025, this Court heard the oral submissions of the learned President’s

Counsel in relation to his objection and also the submissions of the learned

President’s Counsel who represented the 1st defendant, where it was argued

that this is an objection highly technical in nature, and therefore, the Court

should proceed to consider the merits of the application rather than deciding

the matter on a preliminary objection which has no justification.

Having considered the submissions of the parties, this Court allowed both

sides to file their respective written submissions in relation to the stand taken

up by them for the consideration of the Court. Accordingly, this Court had the

opportunity of considering the respective written submissions as well for the

purpose of determining this preliminary objection.

There cannot be any dispute as to the facts relating to the objection raised by

the learned President’s Counsel on behalf of the plaintiff.

The 1st defendant, who is a licensed bank, has filed the relevant application

by way of a petition on 12-07-2024, where the 1st defendant is seeking to

challenge a judgment pronounced by the High Court on 31-05-2024. The said

petition bears several names stating that the 1st defendant is appearing

through them as its registered Attorneys-at-Law. Although the petition says

so, there is no dispute that the 1st defendant has failed to tender a proxy as

required by law, giving power to an Attorney-at-Law to represent the 1st

defendant as the Registered Attorney. Admittedly, the proxy nominating a

Page 6 of 10

Registered Attorney on behalf of the 1st defendant has been filed on 15-07-

2024 and not along with the petition seeking leave to appeal.

It was the submission of the learned President’s Counsel on behalf of the

plaintiff that the 1st defendant has filed the application seeking leave to appeal

on the final day such an application should have been filed in terms of Rule

7 of the Supreme Court Rules of 1990, where such an application should be

made within 6 weeks of the judgment or order sought to be challenged. It was

his view that since the 1st defendant has failed to attach a duly signed proxy,

although it has claimed that it is appearing through Registered Attorneys-at-

Law, the said petition has no validity before the law. It was his position that

a proxy tendered on 15-07-2024 cannot cure the aforesaid defect for the

reason that at the time of filing of the petition, there was no Registered

Attorney-at-Law and the proxy had been tendered out of time; therefore, the

application before the Court is time barred.

The learned President’s Counsel cited several judgments to stress his point

that the petition should be dismissed in limine, since the 1st defendant has

failed to follow mandatory provisions of the Supreme Court Rules, which

entitles the 1st defendant to support this application for leave to appeal.

The learned President’s Counsel conceded that a defective proxy can be cured

subsequently. However, it was his position that this is not a situation of such

nature but a situation where the 1st defendant has failed to file a proxy at all,

which means it has not given any authority to an Attorney-at-Law to appear

on behalf of the 1st defendant.

On the contrary, submission of the learned President’s Counsel on behalf of

the 1st defendant was that our Superior Court, time and again, have

determined that an irregularity in appointment of a Registered Attorney-at-

Law can be cured subsequently and it should not be a reason to dismiss an

application without considering its merits. He too cited several judgments of

our Superior Courts to substantiate his arguments and also was of the view

that mere technicalities should not fetter the authority of the Courts to decide

on a matter, depriving a party before a Court of law of a due hearing.

Page 7 of 10

Having considered the facts in relation to this preliminary objection and the

respective stands taken by the parties, it is my view that this is a matter where

the relevant Supreme Court Appellate Procedure Rules should be interpreted

having in mind the ratio decidendi of the views expressed by our Superior

Courts in considering objections of this nature, and also having in mind that

it is the justice that should be served. The 1st defendant is a bank. It is

common knowledge that banks have a separate legal department staffed by

several Attorneys-at-Law. It is safe to presume that by naming several

Attorneys-at-Law in the petition as the 1st defendant’s Attorneys-at-Law and

giving the address and the contact telephone number of the instructing

Attorney-at-Law as the 1st defendant bank’s address and telephone number,

it had referred to the Attorneys-at-Law employed by the bank as the registered

Attorney-at-Law, although it had failed to tender the relevant proxy as such

together with the petition.

It is not a disputed fact that the 1st defendant has tendered a proxy

nominating an Attorney-at-Law as the Registered Attorney on 15-07-2024,

which appears to be the next available working day of the Court after the filing

of the petition. There is nothing to suggest from the case record that any step

in relation to this application has been taken by the Court from the date of

filing of the petition and up to the date of submitting the proxy 3 days after

such filing.

Hence, it is my view that no prejudice has been caused to any party to the

action because of the obvious lapse as to the procedure of filing a leave to

appeal application without a proxy being tendered. I am in agreement with

the submissions of the learned President’s Counsel that although a proxy was

not submitted at the time of filing the petition, the Attorney-at-Law who later

filed the proxy had the full authority from the 1st defendant-respondent-

petitioner bank to act on its behalf as the facts and the circumstances of the

case clearly suggest.

Page 8 of 10

The case of S.P. Gunatilake Vs. S.P. Sunil Ekanayake (2010) 2 SLR 192

was a case where the Attorney-at-Law who represented the substituted

plaintiff before the District Court failed to file a proxy. When the judgment of

the learned District Judge in the case was challenged by way of a final appeal

before the Civil Appellate High Court, a preliminary objection was taken that

there was no proxy filed on behalf of the substituted plaintiff in the District

Court and there was no proper application before the Court to substitute the

substituted plaintiff or even to represent him by an Attorney-at-Law. Although

the Civil Appellate High Court allowed the appeal determining that the

judgment of the learned District Judge is null and void because there was no

valid proxy, setting aside the said appellate judgment, the Supreme Court

held;

1. Even when an Attorney is incapable of appearing or making

applications due to the total failure to file proxy such default should

not in any way affect the validity of the proceedings.

Per J.A.N. de Silva, C.J.

“The aforementioned facts in my opinion provides a sufficiently

strong indication that the substituted plaintiff had at the material

times granted Mr. Iddawela the authority to appear and make

applications on behalf of him despite the substituted plaintiff not

filing a proxy as an overt manifestation of the granting of such

authority.”

2. The substituted plaintiff by virtue of filing a proxy belatedly had

succeeded in ratifying the appearances and applications of the

registered Attorney and thereby supplying all such acts with legal

validity.

Page 9 of 10

The above view was reiterated by the Supreme Court in the case of Auriya

Vinothini Yogaraja nee Poopalarathnam Vs. Riyal Mohommed Rizwan

and Others SC/Appeal/33/2020 decided on 02-12-2024 where it was

stated:

“Chief Justice J.A.N. de Silva in Gunatilake Vs. Sunil Ekanayake

(2010) 2 SLR 191 removed all doubts when he held (with agreement of

Siripawan, J. and Ekanayake, J.) at page 202 that “even in the case of

an Attorney when he is incapable of appearing or making application due

to the total failure to file the proxy, such default should not in any way

affect the validity of the proceedings”, if the Attorney had in fact the

authority of his client to do what he did without a proxy. In Gunatilake’s

case there was no proxy at all, nor that the proxy was defective, although

the Attorney appeared for the client nonetheless. The Supreme Court

clarified that a proxy could be filed subsequently to rectify prior actions

taken.”

Having considered the above pronouncements, it is my considered view that

the question whether proceedings in a civil case should stand null and void

due to a defective proxy or in a situation where no proxy has been filed should

be determined based on the facts and circumstances of each case. If the

proceedings before the Court clearly establish the fact that even though there

was no valid proxy, the Attorney-at-Law who acted on behalf of his client had

the full authority to act during the relevant period, such a defect can be cured

by filing a proxy subsequently, as has happened in the instant action.

As I have considered earlier, there is no doubt the Attorney-at-Law has the

full authority of the 1st defendant-respondent-petitioner bank to file the leave

to appeal application before the Supreme Court when it was filed on 12-07-

2024. Since no steps had been taken by the Court in relation to the

application by 15-07-2024, the date upon which the proxy was filed, no

prejudice has been caused to any party by the said procedural defect.

I do not find merit in the argument of the learned President’s Counsel that

since the proxy has been filed only on the 15-07-2024 validating the appeal

Page 10 of 10

filed on 12-07-2024, which was the last legally available date to file the leave

to appeal petition, the application is time barred. I am of the view that the

petitioner has filed the application within the stipulated time allowed to file

such an application although it may be the last possible day. The proxy filed

subsequently has only corrected a procedural defect, and therefore, it cannot

be concluded that the petition is time-barred.

For the reasons as considered above, I find no basis to agree with the

preliminary objection raised by the learned President’s Counsel on behalf of

the plaintiff-appellant-respondent. Accordingly, the preliminary objection is

dismissed. The matter is set for the consideration of granting leave to appeal

from the impugned order pronounced by the High Court of Civil Appeal on

31-05-2024.

There will be no costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Achala Wengappuli, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Menaka Wijesundera, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court