1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA In the matter of an appeal against the judgment of the Court of Appeal in CA Appeal No. 1063/98(F) dated 27.9.2012 Nuwarapakshage Neelakanthi alias Baby Wanduradeniya, Damunupla Plaintiff SC Appeal 129/2013 SC/SPL/LA/247/2012 CA 1063/98 (F) DC Kegalle 4629/L Vs

Nuwarapakshage Balasuriya Wanduradeniya, Damunupla

Defendant AND Nuwarapakshage Balasuriya Wanduradeniya, Damunupla

Defendant-Appellant

Vs Nuwarapakshage Neelakanthi alias Baby Wanduradeniya, Damunupla Plaintiff-Respondent

And Now Between

2

Nuwarapakshage Balasuriya Wanduradeniya, Damunupla Defendant-Appellant-Petitioner-Appellant

Vs Nuwarapakshage Neelakanthi alias Baby Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent-Respondent Before : Sisira J De Abrew J Priyantha Jaywardena PC J Nalin Perera J Counsel : Gamini Hettiarchchi for the Defendant-Appellant-Petirtioner-Appellant Priyantha Alagiyawanna with Isuru Weerasuriya for the Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent-Respondent Argued on : 8.3.2017 Written Submission tendered on : By the Appellant on 27.3.2014 By the Respondent on 8.1.2014 Decided on : 30.6.2017 Sisira J De Abrew

This is an appeal filed by the Defendant-Appellant-Petitioner-Appellant

(hereinafter referred to as the Defendant-Appellant) against the judgment of the

Court of Appeal wherein it affirmed the judgment of the learned District Judge

who held in favour of the Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent-Respondent

(hereinafter referred to as the Plaintiff-Respondent). This court by its order dated

20.9.2013 granted leave to appeal on the following questions of law.

3

1. Whether the Judge of the Court of Appeal and the learned trial Judge have

failed to properly evaluate the legal principle that in a rei vindicatio action

the burden is on the Plaintiff to prove his title?

2. Whether the Judge of the Court of Appeal and the learned trial Judge have

failed to properly analyze the fact that and thereby erred in law as the

Petitioner (the Defendant-Appellant) has proved his prescriptive possession

and title by cogent and independent evidence?

3. Is the Plaintiff-Respondent who had proved for declaration of title to the

entire property entitled to a declaration of title to eject a trespasser on

admission of the fact that he is entitled to 5/6 of the property?

The 1st and the 2nd question of law were raised by the Defendant-Appellant whilst

the 3rd question of law by the Plaintiff-Respondent.

The Defendant-Appellant, in his evidence, claimed prescriptive title. One of

the important questions that must be decided in this case is whether the Defendant-

Appellant acquired prescriptive title to the property described in the plaint or not. I

now advert to this question. It is an undisputed fact that the original owner of the

property was Baalaya. The Defendant-Appellant admitted in evidence that his

father Siriya came to occupy the property in 1970 with leave and licence of

Baalaya; that he too came to this property with his father; and that after his

father’s death in 1974 he continued to possess the land and constructed a house in

the land. If his evidence is accepted, it has to be presumed that act of continuation

of possession of the property by him and construction of the house was on the basis

of earlier permission granted to his father by Baalaya. Learned counsel for the

Defendant-Appellant admitted at the hearing before us that Baalaya, the original

owner, died in 1987. The Defendant-Appellant claims that after the death of his

4

father he continued his occupation in the property. His evidence shows that he

continued to occupy the property on the permission granted to his father by

Baalaya (pages 129 and 132 of the brief). Thus when the above evidence is

considered, it can be concluded that the Defendant-Appellant continued his

occupation in the property with leave and license of the original owner Baalaya.

Baalaya leased the property to the Plaintiff-Respondent for a period commencing

from 14.10.1971 to 11.10.1978 (vide P11 and P11a).

Baalaya’s children by deed No.5017 dated 27.10.1990 attested by Chandra

Aryaratne sold 5/6th share of the property to the Plaintiff-Respondent. The case was

filed in the District Court in March 1991. Thus even if his evidence is considered

to be true, his possession in the property (after the Plaintiff-Respondent became the

owner) is only for a period of 1 ½ years. Learned counsel for the Defendant-

Appellant contended that leasing out of property by Baalaya to the Plaintiff-

Respondent could be considered as commencement of adverse possession by the

Defendant-Appellant against Baalaya and the Plaintiff-Respondent. When Baalaya

leased out the land he was the owner. Even at this time the Defendant-Appellant

was a licensee of Baalaya. Thus how could the Defendant-Appellant commence

adverse possession against Baalaya. In my view there is no merit to be considered

in the above contention.

In the present case, the Defendant-Appellant and his father had commenced

possession of the property with leave and license of the original owner. Now he

claims prescription. If a person commenced his possession in a property with leave

and licence of the owner can he claim prescriptive title against the owner and/or

his children? In finding an answer to this question I would like to consider certain

judicial decisions.

5

In the case of De Soysa Vs Fonseka 58 NLR 501 this court held as follows.

“When a user o f immovable property commences with leave and

licence the presumption is that its continuance rests on the permission

originally granted. Clear and unmistakable evidence o f the

commencement o f an adverse user thereafter for the prescriptive period

is necessary to entitle the licensee to claim a servitude in respect o f the

premises.”

In the case of Siyaneris Vs Jayasinghe Udenis de Silva 52 NLR 289 Privy

Council held as follows. “If a person gets into possession of land as an agent for

another, prescription does not begin to run until he has made it manifest that he is

holding adversely to his principal.”

In Reginald Fernando Vs Pabalinahamy and Others [2005] 1SLR 31 this court

observed the following facts.

“The plaintiff-appellant (“the plaintiff”) instituted action against the

original defendant (“the defendant”) for ejectment from a cadjan shed

where the defendant and his father had resided for four decades. The

evidence proved that the defendant‟s father J was the carter under the

plaintiff's father. After the death of J the defendant continued to reside in the

shed as a licensee. On 22.03.1981 the plaintiff had the land surveyed by

a surveyor ;and on 06.01.1987 sent a letter to the defendant through

an attorney-at-law calling upon the defendant to hand over the vacant

possession of the shed which as per the said letter the defendant had

been occupying as a licensee. The defendant failed to reply that letter

without good reason for the default. The defendant also falsely claimed

not to have been aware of the survey of the land. In the meantime the

6

plaintiff had been regularly collecting the produce of the land. The

defendant claimed prescriptive title to the land. The District Judge gave

judgment for the plaintiff. This was reversed by the Court of Appeal.”

This Court held as follows.

“Where the plaintiff (licensor) established that the defendant was a

licensee, the plaintiff is entitled to take steps for ejectment of the defendant

whether or not the plaintiff was the owner of the land. „The Court of Appeal

erred in holding that the District Court had entered judgment in favour of

the plaintiff in the absence of sufficient evidence to prove that the plaintiff

was either the owner or that the defendant, was his licensee”

Applying the principles laid down in the above judicial decisions, I hold that

when a person starts possessing an immovable property with leave and licence of

the owner, the presumption is that he continues to possess the immovable property

on the permission originally granted and such a person or his agents or heirs cannot

claim prescriptive title against the owner or his heirs on the basis of the period he

possessed the property. If such a person (licensee) wants to claim prescription, he

must place clear and unmistakable evidence regarding the commencement of an

adverse possession against the owner or his heirs. The period that he occupied as a

licensee cannot be considered to prove his alleged prescription. The above

principle applies to the heirs of the licensee too. For the above reasons, I hold that

the Defendant-Appellant in this case is not entitled to claim prescriptive title. For

the above reasons, I answer the 2nd question of law in the negative.

Learned counsel for the Defendant-Appellant submitted that the Plaintiff-

Respondent by Deed No.5017 attested by Chandra Aryaratne on 27.10.1990 had

purchased 5/6th share of the property from the children of Baalaya and that

7

therefore the Plaintiff-Respondent is not the owner of the entire property. He

therefore contended that the Plaintiff-Respondent cannot ask for a declaration of

title to the entire property. I now advert to this contention. In finding an answer to

the above question, I would like to consider a passage of the judgment of

Dr.Justice Bandaranayake in Attanayake Vs Ramyawathi [2003] 1SLR 401 which

reads as follows.

“I am of the firm view that, if an appellant had asked for a greater relief that

he is entitled to, the mere claim for a greater share in the land should not

prevent him, having a judgment in his favour for a lesser share in the land.

A claim for a greater relief than entitled to should not prevent an appellant

from getting a lesser relief.”

In Premaratne Menike Vs Indra Irangani Kumari SC Appeal131/2009-

decided on 12.7.2011 Justice Thilakawardene held as follows.

“The fact that the appellant has asked for greater relief than he is entitled to

should not prevent him from getting the lesser relief which he is entitled to

especially as he has discharged his burden of proving co-ownership of the

allotment of land.”

In my view when a plaintiff who has asked for a bigger share proves by

evidence that is entitled only to a lesser share the court should make an order

allocating the lesser share to him. His claim for a bigger share should not operate

as a bar for him to get a lesser share because he has, by evidence, proved his

entitlement to the lesser share. In the present case, according to the evidence led at

the trial, the Plaintiff-Respondent is only entitled to 5/6th share of the land but has

asked for declaration of title to the entire land. For the above reasons, I hold that

8

the Plaintiff-Respondent is entitled to get a declaration for 5/6th share of the land.

For the above reasons, I reject the above contention of learned counsel for the

Defendant-Appellant.

Now I consider the 3rd question of law which reads as follows.

“Is the Plaintiff-Respondent who had proved for declaration of title to the entire

property entitled to a declaration of title to eject a trespasser on admission of the

fact that he is entitled to 5/6 of the property?”

I have earlier held that the Plaintiff-Respondent is entitled to get a declaration

for 5/6th share of the land thus it is clear that the Plaintiff-Respondent is a co-owner

of this land. Earlier I have held that the Defendant-Appellant was not entitled to the

prescriptive title. The Defendant-Appellant who occupies the land has challenged

the title of the Plaintiff-Respondent. When Defendant-Appellant who is not entitled

to prescriptive title challenges the title of the Plaintiff-Respondent, he becomes an

unauthorized occupier of the land and gains the status of a trespasser. Now the

question that must be considered is whether a co-owner is entitled to eject a

trespasser. In finding an answer to this question I would like to consider the

judgment of this court in Harriette Vs Pathmasiri [1996] 1SLR 258 wherein this

court held as follows.

“Our law recognizes the right of a co-owner to sue a trespasser to have his

title to an undivided share declared and for ejectment of the trespasser from

the whole land because the owner of an undivided share has an interest in

every part and portion of the entire land.”

It is a commonsense principle that a co-owner has an interest in every part of

the entire land. Thus, when a trespasser enjoys the fruits of the property the co-

owner’s rights are affected and he becomes entitled to eject the trespasser.

9

When I consider the above legal literature, I hold that a co-owner of a land is

entitled to eject a trespasser from the land. For the above reasons, I answer the 3rd

question of law as follows. The Plaintiff-Respondent who had prayed for a

declaration of title to the entire property is entitled to a declaration to eject a

trespasser on admission of the fact that he is entitled to 5/6th share of the property.

In view of the conclusion reached above, the 1st question of law does not arise

for consideration.

For the above reasons I affirm the judgment of the Court of Appeal and dismiss

this appeal with costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Priyantha Jayawardena PC J

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Nalin Perera J

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court