==== BLOCKS ==== 

SC Appeal 138/19 JUDGMENT Page 1 of 15

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application in terms of

Article 128 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

1. The Director General,

Commission to Investigate Allegations

of Bribery or Corruption,

No.36, Malalasekara Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

COMPLAINANT

-Vs-

1. D. B. Sugath Gnanasiri

Kohelanwala,

Madawela,

Ulpatha, Matale.

ACCUSED

AND BETWEEN

1. D. B. Sugath Gnanasiri

Kohelanwala,

Madawela,

Ulpatha, Matale.

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Case No. SC Appeal

No.138/19

Leave to Appeal No. SC(SPL)

LA 132/2017

Court of Appeal Case No. CA

277/2007

Colombo High Court Case

No. HC B 1384/2002

SC Appeal 138/19 JUDGMENT Page 2 of 15

Vs.

1. The Director General,

Commission to Investigate Allegations

of Bribery or Corruption,

No.36, Malalasekara Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. The Director General,

Commission to Investigate Allegations

of Bribery or Corruption,

No.36, Malalasekara Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT-

APPELLANT

Vs.

1. D. B. Sugath Gnanasiri

Kohelanwala,

Madawela,

Ulpatha, Matale.

ACCUSED-APPELLANT-

RESPONDENT

SC Appeal 138/19 JUDGMENT Page 3 of 15

BEFORE: S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

KUMUDINI WICKREMASINGHE, J. AND

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

COUNSEL: Azard Navavi, SDSG (now appointed Additional Solicitor General and

President’s Counsel) for the Complainant-Respondent-Appellant.

Rienzie Arsecularatne, PC with Chamindri Arsecularatne, Thilina

Punchihewa, Udara Muhandiramge and Pasindu Gamage for the

Accused-Appellant-Respondent.

WRITTEN

SUBMISSIONS:

Complainant-Respondent-Appellant on 02nd August 2019

Accused-Appellant-Respondent on 5th September 2023

Complainant-Respondent-Appellant on 11th July 2025

ARGUED ON: 30th August 2024

DECIDED ON: 22nd January 2026

THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

1. The instant case is an appeal from the judgment of the Court of Appeal dated 05th May

2017, whereby the judgment of the High Court of Colombo, dated 12th September 2012,

which found the Accused-Appellant-Respondent guilty of several charges under the

Bribery Act No. 2 of 1965, was set aside.

FACTUAL MATRIX

2. The Complainant-Respondent-Appellant in the instant case, the Director General of the

Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption (hereinafter the

“Appellant”), filed an indictment containing eight charges in the High Court of Colombo

SC Appeal 138/19 JUDGMENT Page 4 of 15

against D.B. Sugath Gnanasiri, the Accused-Appellant-Respondent (hereinafter the

“Respondent”).

3. The Respondent was the Grama Niladari of No.155A, Sirisangabo Grama Niladari

Division at the material time—a post which falls within the meaning of the “public

servant” in terms of Section 90 of the Bribery Act.

4. Pursuant to a complaint made by the Virtual Complainant—who was also the 1st

prosecution witness in the High Court case (hereinafter PW1)—the Appellant had

conducted a successful raid and arrested the Respondent for soliciting and accepting

gratification from the said Virtual Complainant to issue a recommendation report for the

purpose of an application to register a business name. Three officers attached to the

Bribery Commission had participated in the said raid, whilst one of them acted as the

decoy with PW1. It was following this arrest that the Respondent had been indicted

before the High Court, as forementioned.

5. The charges contained in the said indictment against the Respondent are as follows:

i. That on the 06th January 1998, in Polonnaruwa, he, being a public servant, namely

a Grama Niladhari, solicited a gratification of Rs. 5,000/- from Keerakotuwe Gedara

Rohan Wijenayake for giving a recommendation report for an application for

registration of a business name, an offence punishable under Section 19(b) of the

Bribery Act.

ii. That at the same time, place and in the course of the same transaction, he, being a

public servant, namely a Grama Niladhari, solicited a gratification of Rs. 5,000/- from

Keerakotuwe Gedara Rohan Wijenayake for giving a recommendation report for an

application for registration of a business name, an offence punishable under Section

19(c) of the Bribery Act.

SC Appeal 138/19 JUDGMENT Page 5 of 15

iii. That at the same time, place, and in the course of the same transaction, he, being a

public servant, namely a Grama Niladhari, accepted a gratification of sum of Rs.

3,000 from Keerakotuwe Gedara Rohan Wijenayake for giving a recommendation

report to an application for registration of a business name, an offence punishable

under Section 19(b) of the Bribery Act.

iv. That at the same time, place, and in the course of the same transaction, he, being a

public servant, namely a Grama Niladhari, accepted a gratification of Rs. 3,000 from

Keerakotuwe Gedara Rohan Wijenayake for giving a recommendation report to an

application for registration of a business name, an offence punishable under Section

19(c) of the Bribery Act.

v. That during the period from 06th January 1998 to 18th February 1998, at

Polonnaruwa, he, being a public servant, namely a Grama Niladhari, accepted a

gratification of Rs. 1,000 from Keerakotuwe Gedara Rohan Wijenayake for giving a

recommendation report for an application for registration of a business name, an

offence punishable under Section 19(b) of the Bribery Act.

vi. That during the same time period referred to in the 5th count, at Polonnaruwa, he,

being a public servant, namely a Grama Niladhari, accepted a gratification of sum

of Rs. 1,000/- from Keerakotuwe Gedara Rohan Wijenayake for giving a

recommendation report to an application for registration of a business name, an

offence punishable under Section 19(c) of the Bribery Act.

vii. That on or around 18th February 1998 at Polonnaruwa, he being a public servant

namely a Grama Niladhari accepted a gratification of sum of Rs. 1,000/- from

Keerakotuwe Gedara Rohan Wijenayake for giving a recommendation report to an

application for registration of a business name, an offence punishable under Section

19(b) of the Bribery Act.

SC Appeal 138/19 JUDGMENT Page 6 of 15

viii. That during the same period referred to in the 7th count, at Polonnaruwa, he being a

public servant namely a Grama Niladhari accepted a gratification of sum of Rs.

1,000/- from Keerakotuwe Gedara Rohan Wijenayake for giving a recommendation

report to an application for registration of a business name, an offence punishable

under Section 19(c) of the Bribery Act.

6. The Respondent pleaded “not guilty” following the arraignment of charges, and the case

was accordingly fixed for trial. During the trial, the prosecution led 6 witnesses, and the

Respondent made a dock statement.

7. Subsequent to the trial, the learned High Court Judge convicted the Respondent on 1st,

3rd, 5th, and 7th counts and sentenced him to four years of rigorous imprisonment for

each count to serve concurrently and ordered a fine of Rs. 2500/- for each count with a

default sentence of one year imprisonment. The learned judge further ordered to recover

the bribe received by the Respondent, Rs. 5000/-, as a fine with a default sentence of six

months imprisonment.

8. Being aggrieved by the above decision, the Respondent appealed to the Court of Appeal.

The Court of Appeal considered, inter alia, the following arguments, canvassed on behalf

of the Respondent:

a. That the learned High Court Judge has failed to evaluate or take into consideration

the infirmities of the case for the prosecution; and

b. That the learned High Court Judge has failed to consider the major contradictions

that existed between the evidence of PW1, the Virtual Complainant, and the

officers of the Bribery Commission who participated in the raid.

SC Appeal 138/19 JUDGMENT Page 7 of 15

9. While holding that the High Court had erred in its finding that the case for the

prosecution was proven beyond reasonable doubt, the Court of Appeal has further found

the following, among other things:

a) That there are major contradictions between the prosecution witnesses;

b) That the said contradictions were substantial and affect the credibility of the

prosecution witnesses;

c) That the said contradictions shake the very foundation of the prosecution's case as

it raises questions as to the way the raid has been conducted; and

d) That the learned trial Judge has failed to address his mind on the effect of said

contradictions.

10. Accordingly, the appeal was allowed, and the Respondent was acquitted of all counts by

the Court of Appeal.

11. The Appellant then preferred the instant appeal before this Court by Petition of Appeal

dated 14th June 2017, and leave to appeal was granted on the following questions of law.

a. Did the Court of Appeal err in acquitting the Accused-Appellant-Respondent from

counts 1, 3, and 5 of the indictment by failing to consider the evidence led in support

of those counts?

b. Did the Court of Appeal fail to consider that the Accused-Appellant-Respondent in

his dock statement admitted the physical acceptance of Rs. 1000/-?

12. The Appellant argues that said contradictions are not of a substantial nature and that

PW1’s testimony cannot be rejected in its entirety on that basis. Accordingly, the

contention of the Appellant in the instant appeal was that the contradictions highlighted

by the Court of Appeal did not affect the case for the prosecution.

SC Appeal 138/19 JUDGMENT Page 8 of 15

13. The Respondent’s contention throughout had been that the Appellant carried out the

raid on false information provided by the PW1 in bad faith and that he never solicited or

accepted any gratification from the PW1. The Respondent further contends that the

aforementioned contradictions are fatal to the prosecution’s case and that the

prosecution has accordingly failed to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt.

ANALYSIS

14. In the instant case, as previously noted, the Respondent had been arrested during a raid

conducted by a team of three officers attached to the Bribery Commission pursuant to a

complaint by PW1.

15. The Prosecution relied on the testimony of PW1 and the testimonies of W. M. W.

Munasinghe, the Divisional Secretary of Thamankaduwa (PW4), Ruwan Prasanna

Fernando, the Assistant Manager of Seylan Bank-Polonnaruwa (PW5) and W. H. M.

Ashoka Malani Jayasinghe, the Clerk of the Divisional Secretariat of Polonnaruwa (PW6),

to establish the 1st to 4th charges.

16. In addition to the above, in order to establish the 5th to 8th charges, the Prosecution relied

upon the testimonies of two officers who participated in the raid (PW2 and PW3) to

corroborate the testimony of PW1, the Virtual Complainant.

17. During the trial, while the Prosecution witnesses testified that the Respondent accepted

money during the raid,1 their statements as to where the other officers participating in

the raid were positioned at the Virtual Complainant residence are, in fact, contradictory

inter se to a certain degree.2

1 Marked “X2” pg 57,58 attached to the Petition dated 17th June 2017

2 Marked “X2” pg 86 attached to the Petition dated 17th June 2017

SC Appeal 138/19 JUDGMENT Page 9 of 15

Did the Court of Appeal err in acquitting the Respondent of Counts 1, 3, and 5 of

the Indictment?

18. As stated above, the 1st to 4th counts were established by the Prosecution relying solely

on the testimonies of PW1, PW4, PW5, and PW6. The testimonies of the officers of the

Bribery Commission were not relied upon to establish the said charges.

19. As contended by the Complainant-Respondent-Appellant in their written submissions

dated 11th July 2025, the above counts have no direct connection to the raid conducted.

20. The Court of Appeal, however, has found that the contradictions inter se the Virtual

Complainant (PW1) and the raiding officers (PW2, PW3) shed light upon the credibility

of the testimony of the Virtual Complainant (PW1), resulting in the finding that the said

witness cannot be considered a credible witness.

21. In Fraad v. Brown & Company Limited,3 the Privy Council stated that,

“It is rare that a decision of a Judge so express, so explicit, upon a point of fact purely,

is over-ruled by a Court of Appeal, because the Courts of Appeal recognize the

priceless advantage which a judge of first instance has in matters of that kind, as

contrasted with any Judge of a Court of Appeal, who can only learn from paper or

from narrative of those who were present. It is very rare that, in questions of veracity

so direct and so specific as these, a Court of Appeal will over-rule a Judge of first

instance.”

22. As opined by Sisira de Abrew, J. for the Court of Appeal (as His Lordship was then) in the

case of Dharmasiri v. Republic of Sri Lanka,4

3 20 NLR 282, at p. 283

4 [2010] 2 Sri L.R. 241, at p. 246

SC Appeal 138/19 JUDGMENT Page 10 of 15

“Credibility of a witness is mainly a matter for the trial Judge. Court of appeal will

not lightly disturb the findings of trial Judge with regard to the credibility of a witness

unless such findings are manifestly wrong. This is because the trial Judge has the

advantage of seeing the demeanour and deportment of the witness...”

23. As observed in Alwis v. Piyasena Fernando,5 “[i]t is well established that findings of

primary facts by a trial Judge who hears and sees witnesses are not to be lightly disturbed

on appeal..."

24. As held in Renuka Subasinghe v. Attorney-General,6

“It is well established that findings of primary facts by a trial judge who hears and

sees witnesses are not to be lightly disturbed on appeal. The findings of this case are

based largely on credibility of witnesses. An appellate court can and should interfere

even on questions of facts although those findings cannot be branded as "perverse”

unless the issue is one of credibility of witnesses keeping in mind that the trial Judge

is better equipped to adjudicate on facts as the trial judge is the one who has the

priceless advantage and the privilege of observing the demeanour and the

deportment of the witnesses.”

25. In State of Uttar Pradesh v. Anthony7, D.A. Desai, J. opined that,

"While appreciating the evidence of a witness, the approach must be whether

the evidence of the witness read as a whole appears to have a ring of truth.

Once that impression is formed, it is undoubtedly necessary for the court to

5 [1993] 1 Sri L. R. 119, at p. 122

6 [2007] 1 Sri L.R. 224, at p. 231- 232 (CA)

7 1985 AIR 48 (SC) [10]

SC Appeal 138/19 JUDGMENT Page 11 of 15

scrutinise the evidence more particularly keeping in view the deficiencies,

draw-backs and infirmities pointed out in the evidence as a whole and

evaluate them to find out whether it is against the general tenor of the

evidence given by the witness and whether the earlier evaluation of the

evidence is shaken as to render it unworthy of belief…”

26. The above position, often cited by courts sitting in appeal, I must observe, is a generally

sound proposition of law in spite of whether the matter is of civil or criminal in nature.

However, needless to explain, in criminal matters, it is a principle that applies with some

vigour, as any conviction or acquittal is generally dependent upon the credibility of

witnesses.

27. In the instant case, the contradictory statements referred to by the Court of Appeal relate

to the placement of the raiding officers who participated in the raid. As per the Virtual

Complainant (PW1), IP Liyanarachchi (PW3) and the other raiding officer took positions

inside the Virtual Complainant’s house. In contrast, as per PW2 and PW3, the said officers

were positioned outside the Virtual Complainant’s house and only entered the said house

after the decoy (PW2) signalled them to arrest the Respondent.

28. However, the learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General contends that the said discrepancy

on the placement of the raiding officers at the time of the raid has no impact on the 1st,

3rd, and 5th counts, and, moreover, he contends that this contradiction is not one that

discredits the entirety of the Virtual Complainant’s (PW1) testimony with regards to the

said counts.

29. As this Court has constantly held, an appellate court should not interfere with the Trial

Judge’s findings, with regard to the credibility of the witnesses, unless it transpires a

manifest lack of credibility of the witnesses or if the finding of the Trial Judge is so clearly

SC Appeal 138/19 JUDGMENT Page 12 of 15

perverse. Where it becomes necessary to consider the credibility of witnesses, especially

with reference to purported contradictions, omissions or the like, the court must do so

pragmatically, keeping in mind that it is in the human nature to forget, misspeak and err,

particularly with the passage of time.

30. As P.R.P. Perera, J. observed in Samaraweera v. The Attorney-General,8 with reference

to the maxim falsus in uno falsus in omnibus [he who speaks falsely on one thing will

speak falsely upon all],

"Where however the maxim set out above is applicable it must be borne in mind that

all falsehood is not deliberate. Errors of memory, faulty observation or lack of skill in

observation upon any point or points, exaggeration or mere embroidery or

embellishment must be distinguished from deliberate falsehood. Nor does it apply to

cases of testimony on the same point between different witneses. (Vide The Queen v.

Julis (1) C. C. A .).

In any event this maxim is not an absolute rule which has to be applied without

exception in every case where a witness is shown to have given false evidence on a

material point. When such evidence is given by a witness the question whether other

portions of his evidence can be accepted as true may not be resolved in his favour

unless there is some compelling reason for doing so.

As contended for by Counsel, even if this maxim is applicable in the present case, I

am unable to agree with the contention that credibility of witnesses could not be

treated as divisible and accepted against one and rejected against another.”

31. As held by F. N. D. Jayasuriya , J., in Wickremasuriya v. Dedoleena and Others,9

8 [1990] 1 Sri L.R. 256, at p. 260-261 (CA)

9 [1996] 2 Sri L.R. 95, at p. 107 (CA)

SC Appeal 138/19 JUDGMENT Page 13 of 15

“…After a considerable lapse of time, as has resulted on this application, it is

customary to come across contradictions in the testimony of witnesses. This is a

characteristic feature of human testimony which is full of infirmities and weaknesses

especially when proceedings are held long after the events spoken to by witnesses; a

judge must expect such contradictions to exist in the testimony. The issue is whether

the contradiction or inconsistency goes to the root of the case or relates to the core

of a party's case. If the contradiction is not of that character, the court ought to accept

the evidence of witnesses whose evidence is otherwise cogent, having regard to the

Test of Probability and Improbability and having regard to the demeanour and

deportment manifested by witnesses. Trivial contradictions which do not touch the

core of a party’s case should not be given much significance, specially when the

‘probabilities factor’ echoes in favour of the version narrated by an applicant...”

32. Clearly, our law assesses the credibility of witnesses very practically. However, it is by no

means a feature only known to our law.

33. The case of Bharwada Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai v. State of Gujarat,10 held that,

“Discrepancies which do not go to the root of the matter and shake the basic version of the

witnesses cannot be given too much importance.”

34. In State of Uttar Pradesh v. M. K. Anthony11 it was held that,

“Minor discrepancies on trivial matters not touching the core of the case, hyper-

technical approach by taking sentences torn out of context here or there from the

evidence, attaching importance to some technical error committed by the

investigating officer not going to the root of the matter would not ordinarily permit

10 AIR 1983 SC 753

11 AIR 1985 SC 48

SC Appeal 138/19 JUDGMENT Page 14 of 15

rejection of the evidence as a whole. … Even honest and truthful witnesses may differ

in some details unrelated to the main incident because power of observation,

retention and reproduction differ with individuals...”

35. Considering the aforementioned authorities, I am in agreement with the contention of

the learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General that the said contradictions considered by

the Court of Appeal are insufficient to completely refute the credibility of PW1.

36. In the circumstances where the material fact to be proven was the acceptance of the

money offered, for which all the witnesses maintained a consistent position, the said

contradiction is only a trivial fact which by no means shakes the case for the prosecution.

Accordingly, I take the view that the decision of the Court of Appeal to interfere with the

findings of the Trial Judge with regard to the 1st and 3rd charges was unwarranted.

Accordingly, I answer the first question of law in the affirmative.

Did the Court of Appeal fail to consider that the Respondent in his dock statement

admitted the physical acceptance of Rs. 1000/-?

37. Upon careful perusal of the Respondent’s dock statement, it is apparent that although

he does not admit to accepting a ‘bribe’, he does acknowledge having received the

money offered by the Virtual Complainant.

38. It is my considered view that a public officer should not accept any amount of money in

respect of a duty performed within his official capacity, unless duly authorised to do so.

39. As was discussed in detail above, whereas the charges against the Respondent have been

established through the Prosecution Witnesses beyond reasonable doubt, I see no merit

in dealing with the second question of law in detail at this juncture.

40. Hence, I answer the second question of law in the affirmative.

SC Appeal 138/19 JUDGMENT Page 15 of 15

CONCLUSION

41. Considering the foregoing reasons and the answers given above to the two questions of

law, the Appeal is allowed. The Judgment of the Court of Appeal is set aside, and the

conviction of the Respondent by the High Court on the 1st, 3rd and 5th counts are affirmed.

42. The sentence by the High Court is accordingly reinstated with respect to the above

counts. The Accused-Appellant-Respondent is hereby sentenced to four years of

rigorous imprisonment for each count, the 1st 3rd and 5th to serve concurrently and is

ordered to pay a fine of Rs. 2500/- for each count, with a sentence of one-year rigorous

imprisonment in the event of default.

43. The bribe of Rs. 5000/- received by the Accused-Appellant-Respondent shall also be

recovered as a fine, with sentence of six months' rigorous imprisonment in the event of

default.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

KUMUDINI WICKREMASINGHE, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT