==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 16

THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application under and in terms of Articles 17 and 126 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

1. Alankara Mudiyanselage

Chandrathilaka Bandara 153/5, Kirulapona Mawatha, Colombo 05

2. Wijesinghe Mudiyanselge Kumara

Rathnasiri Malalasekara 425 C, Manakada Road, Kadawatha. 3. Polgollegedara Bandula Kumara

Wikramasinghe 130, Paolayaya, Raththota.

4. Sinha Aracchilage Nirmali Menaka

Seneviratne 163/3, "Sandasiri", Mawathawatta, Kadawatha. (DISCHARGED FROM PROCEEDINGS)

5. Jayasinghe Deveyala Susantha

NevilDepawansha 125, Arampolwatta, Mawathagama.

6. Herath Mudiyanselage Thushara

Manthriratne 30/3, Peellagama Watte, Sumangala Mawatha, Polgahawela.

7. Liyanage Don Jagath Mahinda

276, Gonagaldeniya, Waharake.

SC/ FRA/394/2007

Page 2 of 16

8. Sinhala Pedige Gamini Dharadasa

Medagedara, Parabawila, Pothuhera.

9. Ratnayaka Mudiyanselage Amara

Divakara Ratnayake 'Ratnashram ‘E Walpola, Gokaralla.

10. Sanadasiri Pathirannahalage

Chithra Chandani Sandagiri 103 A 1, Walpola, Rukgahawila.

11. Kuranage Jeewa Subashini Kuranage

4/3/2, Kottalanda, Nungamuwa. 12. Palagamage Gedara Jayathilake

92/7, Urapola Road, Pilimathalawa.

13. Samarasinghe Mudiyanselage Sarath

Hemapala Samarasingha 47, Sri Wajiragnana Mawatha, Colombo 09.

14. Edirimuni Rodrigo Sujith Bhathiya

Ediriweera 528 b, Bodhirja Mawatha, Thalawathugoda.

15. Rupahin Gangoda Anurarathna

179/2, Polhena, Madapatha, Piliyandala. 16. Mapa Appuhamilage Padmasiri

Ariyaratne, 146, Bulathweldeniya, Nikahetikand. 17. Mirisage Priyantha Ranjith

Washinton Gunawardena Mawatha, Dummaladuriya. (DISCHARGED FROM PROCEEDINGS)

Page 3 of 16

18. Serasinghe Thotagamuwage Saman

Keerthi Serasinghe 1/9, Gamunu Mawatha, Kotuwegoda, Rajagiriya.

19. Nanda Sanjeewa Weerathunga,

‘Ajantha’, Sapugoda, Kamburupitiya.

PETITIONERS

Vs.

1. Director General of Customs,

Department of Sri Lanka Customs, PO Box 618, Bristol Street, Colombo 01. 2. Duminda Jayaratna

Director, Customs (Personnel) Department of Sri Lanka Customs, PO Box 618, Bristol Street, Colombo 01. 3. Dr. R.H.S. Samaratunga,

Secretary, Ministry of Finance and Planning, The Secretariat, Colombo 01. 4. S. B. Divaratne,

Former Deputy Secretary, Ministry of Finance and Planning, The Secretariat, Colombo 01. 5. P.B. Abeykoon

Secretary to His Excellency the President,

Page 4 of 16

Presidential Secretariat, Colombo 01.

6(a). K.L.L. Wijeratne

Chairman,

National Salaries and Cadre Commission, Room 2-116, BMICH, Bauddhaloka Mawatha, Colombo

7(a). Asoka Jayasekara Secretary, National Salaries and Cadre Commission.

8(a). Nimal Bandara Member, National Salaries and Cadre Commission.

8(b). Dayananda Vidanagamachchi Member, National Salaries and Cadre Commission.

8(c). J. Charitha Rathwaththa Member, National Salaries and Cadre Commission.

8(d). Prof. Kithsiri Madapatha Liyanage Member, National Salaries and Cadre Commission.

8(e). Leslie Shelton Devendra Member, National Salaries and Cadre Commission.

8(f). Suresh Shah, Member, National Salaries and Cadre

Page 5 of 16

Commission. 8(g). Sanath Jayantha Ediriweera Member, National Salaries and Cadre Commission.

8(h). V. Regunathan Member, National Salaries and Cadre Commission.

8(i). Kamal Mustapha Member, National Salaries and Cadre Commission.

8(j). Prof. Gunapala Nanayakkara Member, National Salaries and Cadre Commission. 8(k). Sujatha Cooray Member, National Salaries and Cadre Commission. 8(l). Gerry Jayawardena Member, National Salaries and Cadre Commission. 8(m). S. Thillainadarajah

Member, National Salaries and Cadre Commission. 8(n). Dr. Anura Ekanayake Member, National Salaries and Cadre Commission.

8(o). Sembakuttige Swarnajothi Member,

Page 6 of 16

National Salaries and Cadre Commission. 8(p). P.K.U. Nilantha Piyaratne Member, National Salaries and Cadre Commission. 8(q). N.H. Pathirana Member, National Salaries and Cadre Commission. 8(r). H.T. Dayananda Member, National Salaries and Cadre Commission. 8(s). T.B. Maduwegedera Member, National Salaries and Cadre Commission. 8(t). Dr. Wimal Karandagoda, Member, National Salaries and Cadre Commission.

9. Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12.

10(a). Dharmasena Dissanayake

Chairman, Public Service Commission, No.177, Nawala Road, Narahenpita, Colombo 05. 11(a). Salam Abdul Waid

Member, Public Service Commission. 12(a). Shirantha Wijayatilaka

Member, Public Service Commission.

Page 7 of 16

13(a). Dr. Prathap Ramanujam

Member, Public Service Commission. 14(a). V. Jegarasasingam Member,

Public Service Commission.

15(a). Santi Nihal Seneviratne Member, Public Service Commission.

16(a). S. Ranugge Member, Public Service Commission.

17(a). D. L. Mendis Member, Public Service Commission.

18(a). Sarath Jayathilaka Member, Public Service Commission

19(a). H.M.G. Senevirathne Member, Public Service Commission.

RESPONDENTS

20. Vipula Minuwanpitiya

148 A, Oruthota, Gampaha. 21. Geekiyanage Jayamini Sarath

Fernando 4/18, Singhapura Road, Chilaw.

Page 8 of 16

22. Mallikage Don Shamini Avantha

No. 25/47, Hospital Road, Mathugama.

ADDED RESPONDENTS

Before: Achala Wengappuli, J

Dr. Sobhitha Rajakaruna, J

M. Sampath K.B. Wijeratne, J

Counsel:

Kalinga Indatissa, PC with Harin Saddhasena, Shavinda Herath and Ovini Hattotuwa

for the Petitioner

Rajitha Perera, DSG instructed by Nimalika Wickramasinghe, SA for the 1st and 9th

Respondents

Manohara De Silva, PC with Harithriya Kumarage for the Intervenient Respondents

Written Submissions:

Petitioners : 27 November 2025

1st and 9th Respondents : 13 June 2025, 09 December 2025

Added Respondents : 17 January 2023, 01 December 2025

Argued on: 13 October 2025

Decided on: 21 May 2026

Page 9 of 16

Dr. Sobhitha Rajakaruna, J

Summary of Petitioners’ Submissions

The Petitioners claim that they are Excise Tax Officers attached to the Excise Special

Provisions Unit of the Department of Sri Lanka Customs. They are responsible for the

collection of excise duties and levies on articles produced or manufactured in, or imported

into, Sri Lanka, in terms of the Excise- Special Provisions- Act No. 13 of 1989 as amended

by Act No. 40 of 1990 (‘Act’).

According to the Petitioners, prior to 1993, the powers and functions under the said Act

were exercised by the Department of Excise under the Commissioner General of Excise.

In 1993, following a Cabinet Memorandum presented by the then Minister of Finance,

the Cabinet of Ministers approved the transfer of those powers and duties to the Director

General of Customs and the officers of the Department of Customs. Consequently, the

Petitioners state that they were appointed as Excise Tax Officers in the newly established

Excise Special Provisions Unit of the Customs Department.

The Petitioners state that their appointments were made in accordance with the

recruitment scheme (‘P5’) formulated by the Ministry of Public Administration , and that

they satisfied the prescribed qualifications. They aver that the threshold qualifications

required for appointment as Excise Tax Officers are identical to those applicable to

Assistant Superintendents of Customs Grade II. However, unlike the Assistant

Superintendent of Customs (‘ASC’) cadre, the recruitment scheme for Excise Tax Officers

contains no provisions for promotion or career progression.

The appointments of the Petitioners were confirmed by the Public Service Commission

upon completion of the three-year probationary period. Over the years, the Petitioners

submit that there has been a significant reduction in their workload, resulting in

professional stagnation. Having remained in the recruitment grade without any

promotional prospects for approximately ten years, they made representations to the

relevant authorities seeking redress.

In July 2005, a Cabinet Memorandum (a draft is marked as ‘P10’) was initiated proposing

the absorption of the Petitioners into the Customs Service as Assistant Superintendents of

Customs. The proposal specifically intended to seek approval to absorb the 20 Excise Tax

Page 10 of 16

Officers into the ASC cadre and to place them at the lower end of the seniority list of

Assistant Superintendents of Customs so as not to affect the seniority of existing officers.

However, the very next day, the Assistant Superintendents of Customs Union commenced

trade union action opposing the absorption, and the implementation of the proposal was

halted.

The Petitioners further rely on the recommendation of the Deputy Secretary to the

Treasury that they be absorbed into the ASC posts after an internal examination and

placed at the bottom of the seniority list (‘P11a’ - letter from the Deputy Secretary to the

Treasury annexing an unsigned report and ‘P11b’ - the minutes of a meeting held between

officials of the Ministry of Finance and the Treasury concerning the implementation of the

absorption proposal). They state that they were agreeable to this arrangement.

The Petitioners also refer to acknowledgements of their grievances by the Presidential

Secretariat and by the 6th Respondent, Co-Chairman of the National Salaries and Cadre

Commission. Despite these recommendations and despite performing duties and

functions similar to those of Assistant Superintendents of Customs, and being placed on

the same salary scale (‘MN 5’) with the requirement to sit for the same efficiency bar

examinations, no steps have been taken by the 1st to 3rd Respondents to absorb the

Petitioners into the ASC cadre or to formulate a scheme of promotion for them.

The Alleged Infringement of Fundamental Rights

The Petitioners contend that the failure and/or refusal of the 1st to 3rd Respondents to

implement the proposed absorption or to provide any career progression, despite repeated

recommendations and directives (including letter ‘P14’ dated 15 October 2007 purportedly

from the Presidential Secretariat-5th Respondent), is arbitrary, unreasonable, irrational

and discriminatory.

The Petitioners further submit that there was an imminent infringement of their rights, as

appointments to the post of ASC Grade II were due to be made with effect from 15th

November 2007. In essence, the Petitioners seek judicial intervention to redress the long-

standing stagnation in their service and the alleged discriminatory treatment that has

Page 11 of 16

denied them promotional prospects and career advancement available to other officers

performing purported comparable functions.

The Petitioners further urge this Court to determine and declare that the relevant

Respondents have infringed the Petitioners’ fundamental rights guaranteed under Article

12(1) of the Constitution by failing to implement the recommendations set out in the

documents marked ‘P10’ (the aforesaid Cabinet Memorandum), ‘P11a’, and ‘P12’

appended to the Petition, or by failing to implement the proposed schemes relating to the

salary scale and promotions of the Petitioners.

Submissions of the 1st and 9th Respondents

The 1st and 9th Respondents contend that, in the absence of a policy decision by the

Cabinet of Ministers on the draft Cabinet Memorandum (‘P10’) in terms of Article 55(4)

of the Constitution (as applicable at the relevant time), neither the Director General of

Customs nor any other Government authority has the legal authority to make

appointments in the manner sought by the Petitioners. They assert that the 1st Respondent

has expressly stated his lack of authority to effect such appointments, as the existing

Scheme of Recruitment (‘1R1’) contains no provision permitting such action.

Accordingly, the Respondents maintain that the Petitioners’ application is misconceived

in law, that no violation of any fundamental rights has been established, and that the

instant Application ought to be dismissed.

The then Director General of Customs, swearing an affidavit on 10 March 2008, denied

that the Petitioners were originally within the Department of Customs, asserting that they

only received training from that Department, which did not amount to on-the-job training.

It was further contended that the educational qualifications for the posts of ASC and

Excise Tax Officers are not identical. He stated that no Cabinet decision was made

regarding the implementation of the said Cabinet Memorandum marked ‘P10’, and that

the Secretary to the Treasury had not recommended absorption but had merely forwarded

the document.

The document marked ‘P11a’ was said to be only a part of the relevant instrument, and

the said Act only provides for special incentives to Excise Tax Officers. The document

Page 12 of 16

marked P11b, according to the above deponent, was neither signed nor subsequently

confirmed by any party to the discussions. The National Salaries and Cadre Commission,

through document ‘P13’ (recommendation issued by the National Salaries and Cadres

Commission-6th Respondent), had not acknowledged that the Petitioners should be

absorbed as Assistant Superintendents of Customs. The only purported recommendation

for such absorption was the Cabinet Memorandum marked ‘P10’, signed by the relevant

Minister, which was never presented to the Cabinet. Finally, he maintained that apart

from document ‘P10’, none of the other documents contained any recommendation for

the absorption of the Petitioners.

The Contention of the 20th to 22nd Added Respondents

The Added Respondents, who are Assistant Superintendents of Customs, contend that no

Cabinet decision was ever made to implement the proposals in the Cabinet Memorandum

(‘P10’), and therefore no lawful basis exists for the recruitment sought by the Petitioners.

They argue that document P11a is merely an unsigned and incomplete report lacking any

directive force, while ‘P12’ (Minutes of a meeting convened by the Presidential Secretariat)

only records discussions among officials and does not amount to an official decision.

Accordingly, none of these documents imposes any obligation on the Respondents to

recruit the Petitioners.

They further submit that the applicable Scheme of Recruitment (‘X2’) strictly provides for

recruitment to the post of ASC through an open competitive examination (80%) and

internal promotions based on seniority (20%). Any alternative method of recruitment

would violate this scheme, create inconsistencies, and prejudice the seniority of existing

officers.

Alleged Legitimate Expectation

The Petitioners submitted that their legitimate expectations regarding career advancement

through promotions, placement in an appropriate salary scale, and appointment to the

post of “Deputy Excise Tax Superintendent of Customs” have been frustrated by the

conduct of the Respondents, including the State. They argued that the doctrine of

Page 13 of 16

legitimate expectation is a well-recognised legal principle preventing public authorities

from acting unfairly or inconsistently where an individual has a legitimate expectation of

a certain course of treatment. Such an expectation, they contended, may arise from a clear

promise, a consistent past practice, or a representation made by a public body. It was

further submitted that any departure from such an expectation is justiciable, as justice

requires that a public authority be precluded from frustrating an expectation it has itself

generated.

The Petitioners invoked two distinct types of legitimate expectation: (a). Procedural,

entailing a right to be heard or requiring the authority to follow a prescribed process; and

(b). Substantive, involving a claim against a public authority which, through its

representations or practices, has given rise to an expectation of a specific outcome or

benefit.

To the contrary, on the issue of legitimate expectation, the Added Respondents argue that

the Petitioners cannot rely on the Cabinet Memorandum, as it is a mere proposal without

legal effect unless approved by a formal Cabinet decision, which is absent and, in fact,

such Memorandum was withdrawn. Citing judicial authority, they maintain that even a

Cabinet decision alone does not give rise to a cause of action unless followed by an

implementing act or omission.

They further contend that no legitimate expectation can arise in the absence of a valid and

lawful representation by an authorised authority. Any representations in P11a and P12 are

said to be unauthorised and contrary to the established Scheme of Recruitment. Therefore,

the Petitioners cannot claim any enforceable expectation of being recruited to the

respective carder.

There is no doubt that the primary issues in the instant Application arise from the said

draft Cabinet Memorandum and from either its withdrawal or the non-implementation of

the proposals contained therein. The Petitioners contend that their alleged legitimate

grievance has remained unredressed for the past two decades, and that the repeated

recommendations concerning their promotions, placement, and salary have given rise to

a legitimate expectation on their part. As stated by the Petitioners, the reduction in

workload, the lack of promotional opportunities, and their placement at the lower level of

the National salary scale have resulted in the career stagnation of them. Nevertheless, the

Page 14 of 16

task at this stage is to determine whether the Petitioners have suffered any prejudice as a

result of the alleged legitimate expectation arising from the said draft Cabinet

Memorandum, ‘P10’, ‘P11a’ and ‘P12’.

In a scholarly exposition of the principle of legitimate expectation, supported by extensive

judicial authority, His Lordship Justice Yasantha Kodagoda PC, J. in Vavuniya Solar

Power (Private) Limited v Ceylon Electricity Board, SC FR 172 2017 SC Minutes of 20

September 2023, held:

“The rationale of the doctrine of legitimate expectations is also that if a public authority

has induced a person to rely upon its representations or practices on the premise that such

reliance was a real possibility and would bear fruit, it is under a fiduciary duty to act in

such a way that the reliance placed by such person will not result in detrimental outcomes

to such person, who in good faith had placed reliance on the representations of a public

authority and its practices. Public authorities must be required by law to honour

expectations created by their own representations and practice. If unable to do so, the

public authority concerned should compensate the person affected by having placed

reliance on such representations and practices”.

“Recognising the doctrine of legitimate expectations is also a means of ensuring

administrative fairness. It curtails the opportunity public authorities would otherwise have

to decide on matters subjectively, or in an arbitrary, capricious or unreasonable manner.

Therefore, the exercise of administrative discretion is required by law to be subject to the

legal duty cast on public authorities to honour legitimate expectations generated by it

through its own representations and practices”.

Conclusion

A proposal that has never received Cabinet approval cannot, as a matter of law, constitute

a clear and unambiguous representation that a benefit will be conferred. I see no evidence

that the said draft Cabinet Memorandum (‘P10’) had been placed before the Cabinet

through proper channels. At most, it reflects a preliminary policy intention. The

Government must retain the freedom to formulate, consider, and withdraw policy

Page 15 of 16

proposals without being exposed to legal claims whenever a proposal does not proceed to

formal adoption. To hold otherwise would unduly fetter executive decision-making.

In my view, all the other documents relied upon by the Petitioners, apart from the draft

Cabinet Memorandum itself, appear to be no more than attempts by the authorities to

address the Petitioners’ alleged grievances. Any bona fide attempt by the authorities to

provide redress is fundamentally different from a promise made by those authorities.

Therefore, such genuine attempts by officials who do not possess the final authority to

make a conclusive decision on the relevant proposals cannot be relied upon to establish a

legitimate expectation on the part of the aggrieved parties.

By analogy, an unapproved Cabinet Memorandum carries no binding force and cannot

give rise to a substantive legitimate expectation. The doctrine requires an expectation that

is legitimate in law, and not merely a hope or desire. A proposal that never secured Cabinet

approval cannot, absent exceptional circumstances, form the basis of a legitimate

expectation.

In the said Vavuniya Solar Power (Private) Limited, the Supreme Court explained the

doctrine of legitimate expectation as a principle grounded in fairness, accountability, and

good administration. The Court held that when a public authority, through its

representations or established practices, induces a person to reasonably rely on the

expectation of receiving a benefit, the authority assumes a duty to act fairly and avoid

causing detriment to that person. Public authorities are therefore expected to honour the

expectations they create, and where this is not possible, compensation may be warranted

for those adversely affected by their reliance. The judgment further emphasised that the

doctrine serves as a safeguard against arbitrary, capricious, or unreasonable administrative

action by ensuring that public authorities exercise their discretionary powers fairly and

consistently. The Supreme Court also observed that, in cases involving substantive

legitimate expectation, judicial review is not confined to the traditional test of Wednesbury

unreasonableness. Instead, courts must balance the claimant’s legitimate expectation and

personal interest against the public authority’s justification for changing its policy,

particularly where the authority asserts that such a change is required in the public interest.

Having carefully considered the judgment in Vavuniya Solar Power, I am unable to find

that the facts and circumstances of the present Application satisfy the criteria for the

Page 16 of 16

establishment of a legitimate expectation in favour of the Petitioners. Accordingly, the

Petitioners’ claim based on legitimate expectation fails.

In light of the foregoing, I hold that the fundamental rights guaranteed under Article 12(1)

of the Constitution have not been infringed by the alleged conduct of the Respondents as

set out in the Petition and the affidavits filed by the Petitioners. The Application is

accordingly dismissed.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Achala Wengappuli, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

M. Sampath K.B. Wijeratne, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Page 17 of 16