1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

S.C Appeal 110/2014 S.C Spl. LA No. 28/2014 C.A Appeal No.534/1995 (F) D.C Kalutara No. 3368/L

1. Abdul Hameed Marikkar Mohamed

Ismail 2. Mohamed Ismail Ummul Kadeeja

Both of No.185, Old Road, Beruwela. PLAINTIFFS Vs. Mohamed Sainadeen Mohamed Saleem Of No. 181/1, Old Road, Beruwela.

DEFENDANT AND Mohamed Sainadeen Mohamed Saleem Of No. 181/1, Old Road, Beruwela. (DECEASED)

DEFENDANT-APPELLANT

2

Mohamed Saleem Misriya No. 181/1, Old Road, Beruwela.

SUBSTITUED-DEFENDANT-APPELLANT Vs. 1. Abdul Hameed Marikar Mohamed Ismail

(DECEASED) 1ST PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT

2. Mohamed Ismail Ummul Kadeeja (DECEASED)

Both of No. 185, Old Road, Beruweala. SUBSTITUTED-1ST PLAINTIFF AND 2ND PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT

1. Mohamed Ismail Mohamed 2. Mohamed Ismail Ahamed Maood 3. Mohamed Ismail Abdul Rahuman 4. Mohamed Ismail Sulaiha Umma 5. Mohamed Ismail Ahamed Bari 6. Mohamed Ismail Abdul Cader

All of No. 185, Sheik Jamaldeen Road, Beruwala. 7. Abdul Raheema Umma Nafeema 8. Abdul Raheema Umma Aasiya 9. Abdul Raheema Umma Ameena

All of No. 181/1, Sheik Jamaldeen Road, Beruwala. SUBSTITUTED-PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENTS AND NOW BETWEEN 1. Mohamed Ismail Mohamed 2. Mohamed Ismail Ahamed Maood 3. Mohamed Ismail Abdul Rahuman

3

4. Mohamed Ismail Sulaiha Umma 5. Mohamed Ismail Ahamed Bari 6. Mohamed Ismail Abdul Cader

All of No. 185, Sheik Jamaldeen Road, Beruwala. 7. Abdul Raheem Umma Nafeema 8. Abdul Raheem Umma Aasiya 9. Abdul Raheem Umma Ameena

All of No. 181/1, Sheik Jamaldeen Beruwela. SUBSTITUTED-PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT-PETITIONERS Vs. Mohamed Saleem Misriya Of No. 181/1. Old Road, Beruwala.

SUBSTITUTED-DEFENDANT-APPELLANT-RESPONDENTS BEFORE: Sisira J. de Abrew J.

Anil Gooneratne J. &

Vijith K. Malalgoda P.C., J.

COUNSEL: H. Withanachchci with Shantha Jayawardena for the Substituted 1st Plaintiff-Respondent and 2nd Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant Kumaran Aziz with Ershan Ariyaratnam for the Substituted-Defendant-Appellant-Respondent WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS FILED ON: 15.08.2014 (By the Substituted-Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant) 08.06.2015 (By the Substituted-Defendant-Appellant-Respondent)

4

ARGUED ON: 02.11.2017 DECIDED ON: 22.11.2017 ANIL GOONERATNE J. This was an action filed in the District Court of Kalutara for a

declaration of title in favour of the Plaintiffs that the land depicted as lot ‘G’ in

plan 4344 together with the house formerly bearing Assessment No. 2464 and

presently Assessment No. 181 belongs to the Plaintiffs, and ejectment of the

Defendants with all those holding under the Defendants and delivery of

possession to the Plaintiffs. In brief the Plaintiff’s claim and trace title from their

predecessor in title who was one Omer Lebbe Marikar Mohamed Ismail. The

said O.L.M. Mohamed Ismail by virtue of a certificate of sale executed in D.C

Kalutara partition case No. 15312 became the owner of the land in dispute

described and “Kundagodawatta” alias ‘Kundagoda Tottam’ The said O.L.M.

Mohamed Ismail by Deed No. 4932 of 19.11.1953 conveyed to 1st Plaintiff his

rights to the land in dispute which he purchased from a sale relating to a

partition case, as aforesaid. The 1st Plaintiff by Deed No. 11845 dated 02.04.1973

conveyed 1/4th share of his rights and the entire rights of the house standing

thereon to the 2nd Plaintiff his daughter.

5

The Defendant on the other hand plead that his predecessors were

in possession of the land in dispute for generations and was never in possession

under the leave and licence of the Plaintiffs. Paragraphs 6 to 9 of the amended

answer shows the chain of title as to how the Defendant got ownership to the

land in dispute. The Defendants further plead that by uninterrupted long term

possession of the land in dispute along with the house standing thereon,

indicates that Plaintiffs have no title to the said land. Defendant also plead that

the final decree has not been entered in D.C. Kalutara Case No. 15312 and sale

as relied by the Plaintiffs has not taken place as pleaded in the amended plaint.

It was the position of the Defendant party that the Plaintiffs are not entitled to

the benefit of a certificate of sale in the absence of a Fiscal’s Conveyance which

the Plaintiffs do not have. Defendant relies on Section 289 of the Civil Procedure

Code which requires a Fiscal’s Conveyance subsequent to the sale of the

property in dispute and confirmation of the sale by court.

The District Judge gave Judgment in favour of the Plaintiffs, taking

into consideration the certificate of sale marked as me5 in the trial before the

District Court. However in the appeal by the Defendant, to the Court of Appeal,

the Court of Appeal set aside the Judgment of the learned District Judge mainly

on the ground of the provisions contained in Section 289 of the Civil Procedure

6

Code on the basis that there had not been a Fiscal’s Conveyance in favour of the

Plaintiffs. The action of the Plaintiffs was also dismissed.

The only point for decision in this case is whether the certificate of

sale confers valid title on the successful purchaser, at a sale held according to

the provisions of the Partition Law. At this point in this Judgement I have to

mention that prior to the present Partition Law of 1977, we had from earlier

times the Partition Ordinance No. 10 of 1863 and Partition Act No.16 of 1951.

The case in hand relates to an alienation of land under Partition Ordinance No.

10 of 1863. It is a certificate of sale issued under the hand of the District Judge.

The certificate of sale on which the Plaintiffs rely is contained at

Pgs. 249-256 of the brief. It is in favour of the purchaser O.L.M. Marikkar Ismail.

The certificate is dated 23.05.1938. It inter alia refer to the Case No. 15312. The

certificate of sale in its caption gives the names of the Plaintiffs and Defendants.

It states it is a sale in terms of Partition Ordinance No. 10 of 1863. It is further

stated that by the Decree of 22.09.1937entered in the said action it was ordered

that the land and premises be sold in 3 blocks as set out in the survey and

proceeds be distributed amongst the said parties. A commission was also issued

to one Mr. L.G. Abeysinghe Auctioneer. Land premises valued at Rs. 663/75 and

O.L.M. Mohamed Ismail became the purchaser. It is certified by the District

Judge and signed by the District Judge affixing the District Court Seal.

7

In the text on “The Law of Partition in Ceylon by D.A.St. V.

Jayawardena Pg. 187 – The certificate takes the place of a conveyance from the

former owner to the new owner. The certificate should

(1) Be singed by the Judge

(2) State that the property was sold on the Order of the Court

(3) Give the names of the purchaser; and

(4) State the purchase money has been duly paid.

At. Pg. 188 .... Sir Joseph Hutchinson, C.J in the case of Cathirihami Vs. Babahamy

11 NLR 20, where he said that the intention of the Partition Ordinance was to

give an indefeasible title to the purchaser to whom the land was sold when the

sale was affirmed and completed by the certificate of the Court under Section 8,

intended to say anything more than that the title of the purchaser was

indefeasible as regards the estate that passed to him under the Decree.

I observe, as the description given above on the relevant certificate

of sale and in comparison with the above authority refer to and demonstrate

that the certificate of sale would pass good title to the purchaser in this case the

said O.L.M. Mohamed Ismail the purchaser.

I will now consider Section 8 of the Partition Ordinance No. 10 of

1863. The said section deals with the Commission for sale issued by court to a

Commissioner to Survey and return the Commission. It also states the certificate

8

of court to be sufficient title. Section 9 of the said Ordinance states the Decree

for partition or sale gives as hereinbefore provided shall be good and conclusive

against all persons whomsoever, whatever right or title they have or claim to

have in the said property. To give more clarity I annex to this Judgement an

annexure of the said sections.

I do not think and nor can I agree with the Court of Appeal

Judgment, that states that provisions of Section 289 of the Civil Procedure Code

should be complied with and a certificate as aforesaid is not sufficient. It must

be kept in mind that the Plaintiff’s derive title from the above named purchaser

O.L.M. Mohamed Ismail. The said O.L.M. Mohamed Ismail had good and

valuable title from the purchase he made and the certificate of sale is conclusive

in terms of Section 8 & 9 of the said Partition Ordinance. The said purchaser who

got title from the certificate of sale sold by deed No. 4932 of 19.11.1953 the land

in dispute to the Plaintiff. As such the law relevant at the time of issuance of the

certificate of sale was the Partition Ordinance No. 10 of 1863. As such the

certificate of sale is final and conclusive and the necessity to have a further

conveyance like a Fiscal Conveyance is not acceptable in law (which prevalent at

that time). Certificate of sale operates as a final Decree. Section 8 of the said

Ordinance enacts that where a Decree for sale has been ordered like in the case

in hand, the procedure to be followed in a partition case where instead of

9

dividing the land among co-owners, court could issue a Commission for sale of

lands by public auction.

In the full Bench Judgment of Bandara Vs. Baba 18 NLR Pg.1,

Supreme Court settled the law, held: The Decree for sale to which a conclusive

effect is given by Section 9 of the Partition Ordinance of 1863 is the Decree

under Section 4 or the Final Judgment spoken of in Section 6 of that Ordinance.

It is the last step in the proceedings, namely, the issuance of the certificate of

the Court (At Pg. 3).

I would also refer to a more recent case, Cinemas Ltd. Vs. Ceylon

Theatres Ltd. 67 NLR 97. This deals with the Partition Act of 1951. This Act was

enacted to among other things to clarify certain issues the Act was intended to

give conclusive title to the land which a person buys under a Decree of Court.

Even the subsequent Partition Act of 1951 fortify the position of certificate of

sale.

Pg. 97.

On a proper construction of sections 46, 48 and other relevant provisions of the

Partition Act, it is clear that when, in pursuance of an order for the sale of a land, a certificate

of sale of the land is entered in terms of section 46 of the Partition Act, the title which the

certificate of sale confers on the purchaser of the land and buildings thereon is free from any

life interest or usufruct which may be declared in favour of a person in the interlocutory

decree entered under section 26, read with section 48 of the Act. The purchaser under a

decree for sale gets title free from all encumbrances except only the interests of the

10

proprietor of a nindagama and the interests which are specially preserved by section 54 of

the Act.

In the interlocutory decree entered in a partition action, the Court gave the 2nd

defendant life interest over one-third share of the land and building standing thereon and

ordered that the sale of the property should be subject to the life interest of the 2nd defendant

over the one-third share.

Held, that that part of the interlocutory decree which stated that “the said premises

will be put up for sale subject to the life interest of the 2nd defendant in respect of one-third

share of the soil and one-third share of the building” should be deleted and the following

words be substituted: “the said premises will be put up for sale”. The interests awarded to

the 2nd defendant should be valued and he should be paid the estimated value of his usufruct

out of the proceeds of the sale.

The Partition Act of 1977, as amended as well as the previous partition

laws which I mentioned above comprises both the substantive law and the

procedural law. There is no doubt that parties need not resort to the provisions

of the Civil Procedure Code, when the partition law itself provide for the

procedural law. In the case reported in 78 NLR 525, when execution proceedings

were initiated under Section 337of the Civil Procedure Code, for an order to put

the Appellant in possession of the lots, Supreme Court held that it is a wrong

procedure and under Section 53 of the Partition Act, he should ask for

possession by way of a motion.

In the same way I observe that the decree for sale and decree for

partition are two different decrees and whether the decree for sale is of a lesser

degree of recognition? It is not so. In Aserappa Vs. Jokino Jouse (1915) 1CWR

11

133, Shaw J. held “it is perhaps unfortunate that the ordinance gives no

discretion to the court to refuse partition or sale, in cases where it is clearly

detrimental to the interests of the majority of persons affected, but in my

opinion no such discretion is given and the right of an owner in common to

compel partition or sale is absolute. In the present Partition Law of 1977 also

there are provisions dealing with sale. In the 2nd schedule to the Act gives the

format of a certificate of sale under Section 46 which has to be signed by the

District Judge. It specifically state, in the final paragraph of the certificate of sale,

shall be conclusive evidence of the title.

In the circumstances I state that there is no necessity to resort to

the provisions of the Civil Procedure Code, especially Section 289 of the Code.

The certificate of sale, and the law applicable is clear as regards the case in hand.

The Ordinance No. 10 of 1863, the Partition Act of 1951 and the present

Partition Law of 1977 are all laws which recognise that the certificate of sale is

conclusive evidence of title.

In all the facts and circumstances of the case in hand I affirm the

Judgment of the District Court. Title of O.L.M. Mohamed Ismail is valid and

conclusive and one need not resort to any provisions of the Civil Procedure

Code. In these circumstances I set aside the Judgment of the Court of Appeal.

Supreme Court on 04.07.2014 granted Special Leave on question of law set out

12

in paragraphs 17(i), (iv) & (vi) of the petition dated 10.03.2014. I answer the said

question of law in favour of the Substituted-Plaintiff-Respondent-Petitioner in

the affirmative.

I also state in a partition action it is not necessary to execute a Fiscal

Conveyance consequent to a Decree of sale in order for title to effectively pass

to the purchaser, in the circumstances and in the context of the case in hand.

Relief granted as per subparagraphs (b) & (c) of the prayer to the Petition.

Appeal allowed as above with costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Sisira J. de Abrew J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Vijith K. Malalgoda P.C. J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

13