1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application in terms

of Article 126 read with Article17 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

SC FR Application

No. 54 / 2019

01 S M Halpe,

No 117/10,

Hendala Road,

Hendala,

Wattala.

02 D T Panduwawela,

No 4,

Chitra Lane,

Gampaha.

03 K P K Marapana,

No. 75/17,

2

Sirinanda Jotikarama Road,

Kalalgoda,

Pannipitiya.

PETITIONERS

-Vs-

01 Dr. Anil Jayasinghe,

Director General of Health Services,

Ministry of Health, Nutrition and

Indigenous Medicine,

Suwasiripaya,

No. 385,

Rev. Baddegama Wimalawansa Thero

Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

02 Director General of Health Services

(acting),

Ministry of Health, Nutrition and

Indigenous Medicine,

Suwasiripaya,

No. 385,

3

Rev. Baddegama Wimalawansa Thero Mawatha, Colombo 10.

03 Hon. Dr. Rajitha Senarathne,

Minister of Health, Nutrition and

Indigenous Medicine,

Ministry of Health, Nutrition and

Indigenous Medicine,

Suwasiripaya, No. 385, Rev. Baddegama Wimalawansa Thero

Mawatha,

Colombo 10. 04 Secretary to the Ministry of Health,

Nutrition and Indigenous Medicine,

Ministry of Health, Nutrition and

Indigenous Medicine,

Suwasiripaya, No. 385, Rev. Baddegama Wimalawansa Thero

Mawatha,

Colombo 10. 05 Sri Lanka Medical Council,

No. 31,

Norris Canal Road,

4

Colombo 10.

06 Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

Ten others who intervened as

respondents,

1ST TO 10TH ADDED RESPONDENTS

Fifty Seven others who intervened as

respondents,

11TH TO 68TH ADDED RESPONDENTS

Nine others who intervened as

respondents,

69TH TO 78TH ADDED RESPONDENTS

5

Before: Buwaneka Aluwihare PC J

L. T. B. Dehideniya J

P. Padman Surasena J

Counsel:

Upul Jayasuriya PC with Laknath Senevirathna, Chandana Perera instructed

by Sampath Wijebandara for the Petitioners.

Suren Gnanaraj SSC for the 1st - 4th and 6th Respondents.

Manohara de Silva PC for the 5th Respondents.

M U M Ali Sabry PC with Ruwantha Cooray and Noomiq Nafath for the 1st -

10th Added Respondents.

Sanjeewa Jayawardena PC for the 58th Added Petitioner.

Saliya Peiris PC with Thanuka Nandasiri instructed by Sivanantham

Associates for the 69th - 78th Added Respondents.

Ravindranath Dabare with M C S V Kumara instructed by Prabhani

Samaraweera for the Intervenient Party, Government Medical Officers

Association.

6

Argued on : 27-03-2019, 02-04-2019, 09-05-2019,. 28-05-2019.

Decided on: 30-07-2019

P Padman Surasena J

Petitioners are citizens of Sri Lanka and are medical graduates of the South

Asian Institute of Technology and Medicine of Sri Lanka (hereinafter referred

to as SAITM). They state that they belong to a group of 83 medical graduates

who have passed out from SAITM.

The Petitioners state that they have duly completed the requisite period of

study at the SAITM, sat for the requisite examinations and accordingly

obtained the MBBS degrees from SAITM.

After obtaining their MBBS degrees from SAITM the Petitioners have

tendered their applications for provisional registration as medical

practitioners with the 5th Respondent (Sri Lanka Medical Council, hereinafter

referred to as SLMC), in terms of section 29 of the Medical Ordinance.

It is the position of the Petitioners that the Court of Appeal in C A Writ

Application No. 187 / 2016, filed by a similarly circumstanced Medical

Graduate of the SAITM (namely Dhilmi Kasunda Malshani Suriyarachchi), has

issued a Writ of Mandamus compelling the 5th Respondent to provisionally

register (under section 29 of the Medical Ordinance), the Medical Graduate

Petitioner in that case. The Supreme Court in the appeal1 pertaining to the

1 SC Appeal No. 184/2017.

7

said judgment of the Court of Appeal,2 by its judgment dated 21-09-2018

has decided that the Petitioner in that case is entitled to provisional

registration as a medical practitioner, under section 29(2) of the Medical

Ordinance. It would suffice to reproduce the following two paragraphs from

the said judgment of the Supreme Court to demonstrate this decision.

“ …. In the light of the aforesaid facts and circumstances and the

determinations of the questions of law considered above, there is no doubt

that the petitioner was and is entitled to obtain provisional registration as a

medical practitioner under section 29 (2) of the Medical Ordinance and that

the SLMC has an imperative duty to provisionally register the petitioner under

section 29 (2). …. “3

“…As held earlier, under and in terms of and by operation of the provisions

of the Medical Ordinance and the Universities Act, the petitioner is entitled

to provisional registration as a medical practitioner under section 29(2) of

the Medical Ordinance and the SLMC is required, by the law, to forthwith

grant that provisional registration to the Petitioner. It follows that, thereafter,

the SLMC is obliged to accord to the petitioner, without restriction or delay,

all the rights which ordinarily flow from provisional registration as a medical

practitioner under section 29 (2) of the Medical Ordinance….” 4

The Petitioners complain that the 5th Respondent in gross and blatant

violation of the above judgment, has willfully refused to grant the Petitioners

2 C A writ Application No. 187 / 2016. 3 Last paragraph of page 52 of the judgment. 4 Second paragraph of page 54 (last page) of the judgment.

8

and the other 82 similarly circumstanced SAITM medical graduates, the said

provisional registration under section 29, despite the fact that the Petitioners

have fulfilled the criteria set out in law for the eligibility of the said provisional

registration.

Petitioners also complain that the 1st and / or 2nd Respondent has also

subsequently taken steps arbitrarily to exclude the Petitioners and other 82

similarly circumstanced medical graduates of SAITM from eligibility for the

provisional registration although they have satisfied the eligibility criteria, in

terms of the prevailing law.

It is on that footing that the Petitioners complain that the Respondents have

infringed the fundamental rights guaranteed to them by Article 12(1) of the

Constitution denying them the equal protection of law and also the

fundamental rights guaranteed by Article 14 of the Constitution denying

them their right to engage in any lawful occupation, profession, trade,

business or enterprise.

This Court having heard the submissions of the learned President’s Counsel

for the Petitioners, learned Senior State Counsel for the 1st to 4th and 6th

Respondents and the learned President’s Counsel for the 5th Respondent, by

its order dated 26-02-2019, has granted leave to proceed in respect of the

alleged violation of fundamental rights guaranteed by Article 12 (1) and 14

(1) (g) of the Constitution.

9

It is on that day that the learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioners

informed Court that he would be taking steps to file an amended petition

and to file additional documents. The Court has given the opportunity for the

Petitioners to file an amended petition and additional documents subject to

the objections of the Respondents.

The Petitioners thereafter has taken steps to file the amended petition dated

01-03-2019 to which the 5th Respondent has filed objections.

This Court having considered the objections of the 5th Respondent had made

order on 02-04-2019 accepting the amended petition filed by the Petitioners.

The arguments the Respondents have chosen to advance to counter the

claim of the Petitioners that they are entitled to provisional registration as

medical practitioners under section 29(2) of the Medical Ordinance could be

identified under three broad categories. They could be described as follows.

(i) The Petitioners cannot seek relief for the parties who are not before

Court.

(ii) The Petitioners’ application is time barred.

(iii) Petitioners have not established that their degrees are from a

recognized Degree Awarding Institute.

10

As I would deal with the first argument above at an appropriate later point

in this judgment, I shall now begin to consider the second argument of the

5th Respondent that the Petitioners’ application is out of time. The dates on

which the three Petitioners had submitted their first set of applications are

as follows.

(i) The 1st Petitioner had made the application on 21-10-2016 [P 5 (a)]

to the SLMC. The said application was rejected by the 5th Respondent

by letter dated 28-11-2016 with a refund of Rs. 4,000 deposited by the

1st Petitioner for provisional registration.

(ii) The 2nd Petitioner had made an application [P 5 (a)] to the SLMC on

25-10-2016. The said application was rejected by the 5th Respondent

by letter dated 28-11-2016 with a refund of Rs. 4,000 deposited by

the 1st Petitioner for provisional registration.

(iii) The 3rd Petitioner had made an application [P 5 (a)] to the SLMC on

21-10-2016. The said application was rejected by the 5th Respondent

by letter dated 28-11-2016 with a refund of Rs. 4,000 deposited by

the 1st Petitioner for provisional registration.

11

Accordingly the learned President’s Counsel for the 5th Respondent took up

the position that the Petitioners’ application which was filed on 14-02-2019

is out of the one month period stipulated in Article 126 (2) as the refusal to

grant provisional registration to the Petitioners which had given rise to the

alleged infringement of fundamental rights of the Petitioners had taken place

on 28-11-2016.

The 5th Respondent has also taken up the position that any subsequent

applications made by the Petitioners for provisional registration do not create

fresh violations and pursuing other remedies judicial or administrative do not

prevent or interrupt the running of the said one month time period specified

in Article 126 (2) of the Constitution.

In order to ascertain whether the Petitioners’ application is out of time, it

would be opportune at this juncture to apply the principles laid down in the

judgment of His Lordship Justice Prasanna Jayawardena PC in the case of

Demuni Sriyani de Zoysa and others Vs Chairman, Public Service Commission

12

and others. 5 (This case has also been adverted to, in the written

submissions6 filed on behalf of the 5th Respondent.)

When applying the aforesaid principles, one has to sequentially ask the

following questions:

(i) (a) When did the alleged infringement occur?; or, if Petitioners claim

they became aware of the alleged infringement only sometime after

it occurred, when did they become aware of it or when should they

have become aware if it?

(b) If the alleged infringement is in the nature of a continuing one

which the Petitioners were aware of, till when did it continue?;

(ii) If the application has been filed more than one month after the latest

date determined when considering (a) and (b) above, have the

Petitioners established that, they were unable to invoke the jurisdiction

of this Court due to circumstances, which were beyond their control

and that, there has been no lapse, fault or delay on their part?

5 SC FR 206 / 2008 decided on 09-12-2016. 6 Paragraph 28 & 33 of the written submissions filed by the 5th Respondent.

13

(iii) If so, have the Petitioners filed this application within one month of

any such disability ending?

As has been held in that judgment, ‘the date determined in answer to the

first subset of questions will determine the date on which the one month

period stipulated in Article 126 (2) commences to run. Quite obviously, if the

petition has been filed within one month of that date, it is within time’.

A similarly circumstanced student of the SAITM Dhilmi Kasunda Malshani

Suriyarachchi had challenged the refusal of her application dated 6th June

2016 submitted to SLMC for provisional registration by way of a writ

application filed in the Court of Appeal on 14-06-2016.7 After conclusion of

the argument in that case, the Court of Appeal by its judgment dated 31-01-

2017 had issued, as has been prayed for, by the Petitioner in that case,

(i) a writ of certiorari quashing the said decision of the SLMC refusing to

provisionally register the Petitioner in that case as a medical

practitioner.

7 The Supreme Court judgment (SC Appeal No. 184 / 2017) pertaining to the appeal of the said Court of Appeal case (C A Writ Appn No. 187 / 2016) produced by the 5th Respondent marked 5R 2.

14

(ii) a writ of Mandamus compelling the SLMC to provisionally register the

Petitioner in that case as a medical practitioner.

(iii) a writ of Prohibition preventing the SLMC from refusing to

provisionally register the Petitioner as a medical practitioner.

Being aggrieved by the said Court of Appeal judgment, the SLMC appealed

to the Supreme Court. Upon the conclusion of the said appeal, the Supreme

Court by its judgment dated 21-09-2018 dismissed the said appeal by the

SLMC and affirmed the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

It is the position of the Petitioners that although the SLMC had refused their

application for provisional registration as medical practitioners, with the

pronouncement of the judgment by the Supreme Court, they became

entitled as of a right, for provisional registration, as the Supreme Court had

conclusively decided that Dhilmi Kasunda Malshani Sooriyarachchi who is a

similarly circumstanced student of the SAITM is entitled for provisional

registration as a medical practitioner.

It is the position of the Petitioners that it was under those circumstances

that they had once again submitted their applications in the year 2017

together with a sum of Rs. 4,000 to SLMC to obtain provisional registration

15

on the strength of the Supreme Court judgment. The SLMC had neither

rejected nor refused this set of applications. It has also not so far refunded

the said sum of money, as opposed to the refunding of the deposit made by

the Petitioners when it rejected their applications submitted for provisional

registrations in 2016 as referred to earlier.

Thus, it can be seen that the Petitioners submitted the second set of

applications with a fresh hope that the SLMC would comply with the law at

least at this stage. It is worthwhile to reproduce the wording8 used by this

Court in its judgment,9 when it vindicated the right of the said Petitioner in

that case for provisional registration. i.e. “…there is no doubt that the

petitioner was and is10 entitled to obtain provisional registration as a medical

practitioner….”. This means that this Court has concluded in that judgment

that the said Petitioner’s right vindicated by this Court in that case is a

continuing right. The Petitioners of the instant case being similarly

circumstanced Medical Graduates of SAITM are therefore justified in claiming

a similar right on the basis that they are also similarly circumstanced. Thus,

8 In the previously quoted paragraph. 9 SC Appeal No. 184 / 2017. 10 Emphasis is mine.

16

it would be for justifiable reasons that they have entertained a fresh hope in

the backdrop of this Court’s above conclusions.

The SLMC has neither contested the fact that the said judgment has

vindicated that Petitioner’s right for provisional registration as medical

practitioners under section 29(2) of the Medical Ordinance nor contested the

fact that the Petitioners in the instant application are also entitled on the

same basis as the Petitioner in the previous Writ Application.11 All what the

SLMC states is that the Petitioners’ application is time barred and that the

said judgment of this Court is per incuriam.

Perusal of the said judgment makes it clear that this Court, in the said

judgment of the said previous Writ Application,12 has decided in unequivocal

terms on 09-12-2016, that the Petitioner in that case is entitled to provisional

registration as a medical practitioner, under section 29 (2) of the Medical

Ordinance and the SLMC is required, by law, to forthwith grant that

provisional registration to the said Petitioner. This means that the Petitioner

in that case, after the said judgment, has become entitled as of a right, for

11 Ibid. 12 Ibid.

17

provisional registration as a medical practitioner, under section 29 (2) of the

Medical Ordinance.

I think this is an appropriate stage to consider the first argument advanced

on behalf of the 5th Respondent. That is, the argument that the Petitioners

cannot seek relief for the parties who are not before Court.

All what the Petitioners have stated in their petition is that they are amongst

the eighty three Medical Graduates of SAITM and the Petitioners have

preferred the instant application on behalf of all of them whom the

Petitioners state in their petition ‘are innocent and helpless victims of grave

prejudice and discrimination by the SLMC’. This Court cannot prevent itself

from considering the case of the Petitioners for the mere reason that the

Petitioners have referred to in their petition about many others who are also

facing the same situation. Indeed, one must not forget the fact that the

Petitioners in the instant application are three Medical Graduates of SAITM

amongst those who are eagerly waiting for provisional registration as

medical practitioners with fresh hopes after the Supreme Court pronounced

the decision in the previous case filed by a Medical Graduate of SAITM. When

18

the Petitioner in that case13, after the said judgment, becomes entitled as of

a right, for provisional registration as a medical practitioner, under section

29 (2) of the Medical Ordinance, this Court cannot see as to how the SLMC

being a statutory body, can refuse provisional registration to the other

similarly circumstanced Medical Graduates of SAITM. What the Petitioners

have done in this instance is to bring that situation to the attention of Court.

Further, one must understand that it was necessary for the Petitioners to

highlight that situation in order to convince this Court that there has been a

clear discrimination, which has deprived the Petitioners of the equal

protection of law guaranteed by Article 12(1) of the Constitution. In those

circumstances, the argument that this application is misconceived on that

account, must fail.

The Petitioners of the instant case are similarly circumstanced MBBS

graduates as the Petitioner of the previous Writ Application.14 Thus, it stands

to reason that all those who are similarly circumstanced, become entitled to

the same right as the said Petitioner in that case. This is because, this Court

13 SC Appeal No. 184 / 2017 pertaining to the appeal of C A Writ Appn No. 187 / 2016. 14 Ibid.

19

in that case has decided that SAITM is a Degree Awarding Institute as per

the relevant legal provisions. Moreover, the Petitioner in that case was not

the only student of SAITM who passed out as a MBBS graduate. It follows

that, the Petitioners and all those who are similarly circumstanced, are

entitled for provisional registration as medical practitioners, under section 29

(2) of the Medical Ordinance and the SLMC was required, by law, to forthwith

grant such provisional registrations to each one of them. This entitlement

was positively established only on 09-12-2016 with the pronouncement of

the Supreme Court judgment.15

As has been stated before, the Petitioners had submitted their second set of

applications in the year 2017 together with a sum of Rs. 4,000, which is the

requisite fee to the SLMC to obtain provisional registration. This had

happened after the Supreme Court judgment. The SLMC, so far, has neither

rejected nor refused these applications. It has also not so far refunded the

monies deposited by the Petitioners. Further, as has been mentioned above,

according to the judgment of this Court, the rights the SAITM Medical

Graduates for provisional registration are continuing rights. Therefore, the

15 SC Appeal No. 184 / 2017.

20

fact that the SLMC has not yet granted them provisional registration would

be a continuing infringement of their rights.

The entitlement of the Petitioners and those who are similarly circumstanced,

for provisional registration as medical practitioners, under section 29 (2) of

the Medical Ordinance flows from the law of the country. They will therefore

continue to have that entitlement. That entitlement cannot be taken away

by the SLMC. Therefore, the Petitioners and those who are similarly

circumstanced shall be entitled to continue to enjoy the said right. Since the

SLMC has not so far refused the applications for provisional registration, the

SLMC continues to deprive them of their due registration. Thus, the SLMC is

denying them the equal protection of law and their right to engage in any

lawful occupation, profession, trade, business or enterprise. This no doubt

would be a continuous infringement of the fundamental rights guaranteed

to them by Article 12(1) and 14(1) (g) of the Constitution. Further, the said

infringement continues to date. The said continuous infringement shows no

signs of abating. Thus, the argument by the Respondent that the Petitioners’

application is out of time cannot succeed.

In addition to the above, it must be noted that the Petitioners in the instant

application, which was filed on 14-02-2019, have also challenged the notice

/ circular dated 29-01-2019 produced marked P 6.

The operative part of P 6 is as follows.

21

“… The batch of Medical Graduates recruited to local universities for the

academic year 2010/ 2011 (Repeat batch) Medical Graduates of Sir John

Kotalawela Defence University and Medical Graduates of foreign universities,

who are provisionally registered at SLMC will be given internship

appointments in due course…”

One of the compulsory requirements P 6 has insisted on foreign medical

graduates is the requirement to submit a copy of the letter granting approval

for the degree by the SLMC.

The Petitioners in challenging this document (P 6) have prayed from this

Court, declarations to annul the said notice/circular. Prayers (e) and (f) of

the amended petition16 are to this effect and are as follows,

e) Declare and direct that the purported decision of the 1st and/ or 2nd

Respondent and/ or the 3rd Respondent to exclude the 82 medical

graduates of the South Asian Institute of Technology and Medicine Sri

Lanka, including the Petitioners from being awarded internship

appointments as Medical Officers as reflected in the notice/circular

16 This Court having considered the objections of the 5th Respondent had made order on 02-04-2019 accepting the amended petition filed by the Petitioners.

22

dated 29.01.2019 produced marked P 6 is illegal, null and void ab initio

and of no force or avail in law;

f) Declare and direct that the portion of purported decision of the 1st and/

or 2nd Respondent and/ or the 3rd Respondent to exclude the 82

medical graduates of the South Asian Institute of Technology and

Medicine Sri Lanka, including the Petitioners from being awarded

internship appointments as Medical Officers as reflected in the

notice/circular dated 29.01.2019 produced marked P 6 is illegal, null

and void ab initio and of no force or avail in law;

As the Petitioners have filed this application on 14-02-2019 and the

notice/circular under challenge in the above prayers was issued on

29.01.2019 (P 6) the application of the Petitioners is not out of time.

Despite the fact that the complaint of the Petitioners to this Court in the

instant application is the failure on the part of the SLMC not affording them

the equal protection of law on the strength of the judgment in SC Appeal

184 / 2014, the 5th Respondent has unsuccessfully attempted to paint a

picture before this Court that the application of the Petitioners is time barred

as the violation of the right had taken place on 28-11-2016. For the above

23

reasons this Court decides to reject the argument of the 5th Respondent that

the Petitioner’s application is time barred.

What remains to be considered is the second argument advanced by the

respondents that the SAITM is not a ‘Degree Awarding Institution’ in terms

of section 29 of the Medical Ordinance.

As has been already stated before, it is not in dispute that this Court by the

judgment in SC Appeal 184 / 2014 has positively decided that the SAITM is

a Degree Awarding Institution and that the SLMC is obliged to grant the

Petitioner in that case, the provisional registration as a Medical practitioner.

The argument advanced by the learned President’s Counsel for the 5th

Respondent in the instant application is that the decision contained in the

above judgment is per incuriam for the reasons set out in his objections and

subsequently in his written submissions. It is on that basis that the 5th

Respondent argues that the judgment in SC Appeal 184 / 2014 should not

be considered as a correct judgment.

The Petitioners have brought to the notice17 of this Court that the 5th

Respondent has not so far granted the provisional registration to Dhilmi

17 Paragraph 23 of the amended petition.

24

Kasunda Malshani Sooriyarachchi, the Petitioner who filed the writ

application18 in the Court of Appeal. The Petitioners have further brought to

the notice of this Court that the Petitioner in that case has filed in the Court

of Appeal, Contempt of Court proceedings19 against the 5th Respondent and

that the Court of Appeal has directed the 5th Respondent to show cause as

to why it should not be punished for Contempt of Court for noncompliance

of its order. It is in that backdrop that the Petitioners have complained to

this Court that the 1st - 5th Respondents have unlawfully, illegally, without

any justifiable grounds and in blatant and gross contempt of Court, has failed

to process the applications submitted by them and the other similarly

circumstanced 80 Medical Graduates of SAITM. It is this failure (on the part

of the 5th Respondent) that infringes the fundamental rights of the

Petitioners and those who are similarly circumstanced.

It is the position of the Petitioners that the SLMC, in gross violation of their

fundamental rights (guaranteed by Article 12 (1) and 14 (1) (g) of the

Constitution), has taken steps to grant provisional registration to some other

candidates while denying the same to the Petitioners who also have fulfilled

18 C A Writ Application No. 187 / 2016. 19 Contempt of Court Application No. CC / 09 / 18.

25

the legal requirements for such provisional registration as per prevailing law.

The 5th Respondent has not stated that it is not so.

The sole defence raised by the 5th Respondent to justify the alleged

infringement by it, is just raising an issue that the judgment20 of this Court

is per incuriam. In other words, the SLMC is not prepared to comply with the

said judgment because it thinks that the decision of the Supreme Court is

per incuriam.

Thus, the question arises as to whether it is open for the 5th Respondent to

take up such a position.

According to Article 127 of the Constitution, the judgements of the Supreme

Court shall be final and conclusive. The said Article is as follows.

Article 127 (1) - The Supreme Court shall, subject to the Constitution, be the

final Court of civil and criminal appellate jurisdiction for and within the

Republic of Sri Lanka for the correction of all errors in fact or in law which

shall be committed by the Court of Appeal or any Court of First Instance,

20 SC Appeal No. 184 / 2017 decided on 21-09-2018 (CA writ application No. 187 / 2016 decided on 31-01-2017).

26

tribunal or other institution and the judgements and orders of the Supreme

Court shall in all cases be final and conclusive in all such matters.

In the case of Jayraj Fenandopulle Vs. Premachandra de Silva21 a bench of

five Judges of this Court has unanimously held that ‘when the Supreme Court

has decided a matter, the matter is at an end, and there is no occasion for

other judges to be called upon to review or revise a matter.’ 22 His Lordship

Justice Amerasinghe in the said judgment went on to state as follows.

“ … However, as we shall see, the Court has inherent power in certain

circumstances to revise an order made by it on the basis that one division of

the Court may do what another may do, it would be competent for one

division, in the exercise of that power, to set aside an order of another

division of the Court. This must be so, for there may be circumstances in

which it may not be possible for the review to be undertaken by the same

bench: For instance, one or more of the Judges who decided the first matter

may not be available, due to absence abroad, or retirement or some such

reason. E.g. see Palitha O.I.C. Police Station Polonnaruwa and Others,23

21 1996 1 Sri L R 70. 22 Ibid, at page 86. 23 1993 (1) Sri L R 161.

27

Justice cannot be denied because one or more of the Judges are not

available. However, where they are available, such matters should be

considered by the same Bench of Judges. …”

It is of paramount importance to observe that the SLMC despite being the

appellant at whose instance this Court had entertained the said appeal, has

ever taken any step to bring to the notice of this Court that the judgment of

that case is per incuriam. The SLMC has not made any application so far

seeking any correction of any such error in the said judgment. Further, the

SLMC has not made any application so far to have such error brought to the

attention of His Lordship Justice Prasanna Jayawardena PC who pronounced

that judgment. This is despite the fact that His Lordship Justice Prasanna

Jayawardena PC continues to sit on the bench as a Judge of this Court to

date. This amply demonstrates that the 5th Respondent in the instant case,

who stood as the primary respondent in SC Appeal No. 184 / 2017 has had

no such complaint since the time of pronouncement of that judgment i.e.

21-09-2018. It was in the objections filed by the 5th Respondent in the instant

case that it has raised such a ground. This is also not with a view of seeking

any correction of any error in the said judgment but as a defence for not

28

carrying out the decision contained in the said judgment of the Supreme

Court.

Although this Court, in view of the decision of Jayraj Fenandopulle’s case24

cannot consider the correctness of the said judgment of the Supreme Court

to ascertain whether it is per incuriam, in order to demonstrate the fallacy

of the above argument, the paragraph (h) of the statement of objections

filed by the 5th Respondent setting out the basis for the said judgment to be

per incuriam, is worthwhile being reproduced. It is as follows.

Paragraph (h)

“ ….The judgment entered in CA writ 187/2016 and SC Appeal 184/2017

have been made per incuriam in as much as

(i) In the SC Appeal 184/2017, there were several vital documents which

has been considered in the judgment, being introduced by the State

after the hearings were concluded through their written submissions

and denied the 5th Respondent from responding to the said vital

documents,

24 Supra.

29

(ii) The 5th Respondent state that the Petitioners of the instant application

cannot seek relief under the judgment of the SC Appeal 184/2017, and

the 5th Respondent reserves the right to collaterally challenge the

application of the judgment of SC Appeal 184/2017 to the Petitioners.

The 5th Respondent annexes herewith marked ‘5 R 1‘ the written

submissions filed by the State in SC Appeal 184/2017 and ‘5 R 2‘ the

judgment of SC Appeal 184/2017 and respectfully pleads that same be

considered as part and parcel of these statement of objections. … “

The written submissions referred to above (5 R 1) is dated 19th October

2017. However, the next document the 5th Respondent has filed, the

Supreme Court judgment in SC Appeal No. 184/2017 (5 R 2) amply

demonstrates that it was on 29-09-2017 that the Supreme Court (upon the

application by the 5th Respondent), by the majority decision, had granted

special leave to appeal. Thus, it is clear that the written submission referred

to above by the 5th Respondent is a written submission filed not very long

after this court had granted special leave to appeal in the said case.

30

This was so confirmed by the firm submissions made by Senior Additional

Solicitor General Sanjaya Rajaratnam PC who specifically appeared before

this court to clarify that particular issue.

Hence, the argument advanced by the 5th Respondents that the said

judgment by this Court in SC Appeal No. 184/2017 is per incuriam on the

basis that state introduced several documents with their written submissions

after the hearings were concluded denying the opportunity of the 5th

Respondent of responding to the said vital documents, is manifestly a

frivolous argument.

It is not in dispute that this Court has held that the said Petitioner in the

previous case is entitled to the provisional registration as a medical

practitioner and the SLMC is obliged to grant such registration to that

Petitioner. Therefore, the SLMC cannot have any discretion to deviate from

the said direction of the above case. The SLMC must grant provisional

registration to the Petitioner in that case. When the SLMC is obliged under

law to grant to that Petitioner, provisional registration without any

restriction, it cannot in law, treat the Petitioners of the instant application

and everyone else who is similarly circumstanced in a different way. Doing

31

so would be a gross and blatant violation of their fundamental rights

guaranteed by the primary law of the land itself.

As stated above, the 5th Respondent is not entitled to challenge the validity

of the judgment of this Court. There is a general rule in the construction of

statutes that what a Court or a person is prohibited from doing directly,

cannot be done indirectly or in a circuitous manner.25 What the 5th

Respondent has done in the instant case is exactly that.

The above decisions clearly indicate that the present Bench cannot

reconsider the judgment pronounced in the above case. It must be observed

that the validity of the said judgment was questioned by the 5th Respondent

as justification for defiance when its very compliance was in issue in the

instant case. The reason as to why the Petitioners relied on the said

judgment is rather simple. It is just their innocent expectation that the SLMC

being a statutory body would in all probabilities have respected the

conclusions of the apex court of the country. Unfortunately for them that

turned out not to be the case.

25 Bandaranayake Vs. Weeraratne & others 1981 (1) Sri L R 10 at 16.

32

As has been decided by this Court in that case,26 the SLMC is not exempted

from obeying the statutory provisions of the Medical Ordinance and the

Universities Act. The SLMC is a creation of the Medical Ordinance and must

confine itself to the powers vested in it by the Medical Ordinance.

It has no powers outside those expressly conferred on it by the provisions

of the Medical Ordinance.

Thus, when considering the totality of the circumstances relating to the

instant case it is not difficult for this Court to conclude that the actions and

the conduct of the 5th Respondent being a council created by the statute has

amounted to taking the law into its hands with a deliberate intention to flout

the law and violate the order made by this Court as well as the Court of

Appeal.

The interim order staying and/or suspending the award of any internship

appointments as Medical Officers to the Medical Graduates stipulated in the

notice/circular dated 29.01.2019, produced marked P 6, issued by this Court

at initial stages, was vacated by this Court on 02-04-2019 subject to the

condition that the seniority of the Petitioners and their placements will not

26 At page 53 of the judgment of SC Appeal 184/2017.

33

be jeopardized in the event the Petitioners become successful in this case

and that the seniority of the Petitioners should be considered on par with

the 278 Intervenient Petitioners who intervened into this case. Therefore,

this Court needs to be mindful of that fact when granting relief to the

Petitioners.

For the foregoing reasons, this Court decides;

a) to declare that the 5th Respondent has infringed the Petitioners’

fundamental rights to equality and equal protection of law guaranteed

by Article 12(1) of the Constitution;

b) to declare that the 5th Respondent has infringed the Petitioners’

fundamental rights to the freedom to engage in their preferred lawful

occupation or/and profession, guaranteed by Article 14(1)(g) of the

Constitution;

c) to direct the 5th Respondent to provisionally register the Petitioners as

medical practitioners in terms of Section 29(2) of the Medical

Ordinance forthwith,

d) to declare that any decision by the 1st and/or 2nd and/or 3rd and/or 4th

and or 5th Respondents to exclude the Medical Graduates of the South

Asian Institute of Technology and Medicine Sri Lanka, from being

eligible for the award of internship appointments as Medical Officers

on the sole basis that they are Graduates of the South Asian Institute

of Technology and Medicine Sri Lanka, as reflected in the

34

notice/circular dated 29.01.2019 produced marked P 6 is illegal, null

and void ab initio and of no force or avail in law;

e) to direct the 1st and/or 2nd and/or 3rd and/or 4th and or 5th Respondents

to include in the notice/circular dated 29.01.2019 produced marked P

6, the Medical Graduates of the South Asian Institute of Technology

and Medicine Sri Lanka, as being eligible for the award of internship

appointments as Medical Officers;

f) to direct the 5th Respondent to pay as compensation Rs. 200,000/=

each to each of the Petitioners separately;

g) to direct the 1st and/or 2nd and/or 3rd and/or 4th and or 5th Respondents

to include the Petitioners and those who are entitled for provisional

registration as medical practitioners in terms of Section 29(2) of the

Medical Ordinance on similar basis, in the same list in which the names

of Intervenient Petitioners appear as provisionally registered medical

practitioners as per the notice/circular dated 29.01.2019 produced

marked P 6

h) to direct the 1st and/or 2nd and/or 3rd and/or 4th and or 5th Respondents

to take all necessary steps to ensure that the seniority of the

Petitioners and their placements will not be jeopardized due to the

arbitrary decision on its part to exclude them from being granted the

provisional registration as medical practitioners in terms of Section

29(2) of the Medical Ordinance,

i) to direct the 1st and/or 2nd and/or 3rd and/or 4th and or 5th Respondents

to take all necessary steps to ensure that the seniority of the

35

Petitioners to be considered on par with the other 278 Intervenient

Petitioners who intervened into this case,

j) To direct the 1st and/or 2nd and/or 3rd and/or 4th and or 5th Respondents

to take all necessary steps to comply with the directions given in this

judgment within three weeks from the date this judgment is

pronounced.

The Petitioners are entitled to the costs of this application.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Buwaneka Aluwihare PC J

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

L. T. B. Dehideniya J

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT