1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

S.C. (FR) Application No. 394/2008

In the matter of an Application under Article 126 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Oenone Saummiya Amalasontha Gunewardena No. 285/12, Hokandara South Hokandara PETITIONER Vs.

1. Sri Lankan Airlines Limited

Level 22, East Tower, World Trade Centre, Echelon Square, Colombo 1.

2. Dr. P. B. Jayasundera

Chairman Sri Lanka Airlines Limited, Level 22, East Tower, World Trade Centre, Echelon Square. Colombo 1. 2A. Ajith Dias Chairman Sri Lankan Airlines Limited

Level 22, East Tower, World Trade Centre, Echelon Square, Colombo 1.

2

3. Manoj Gunewardena

Chief Executive Officer, Sri Lankan Airlines Limited, Level 22, East Tower, World Trade Centre, Echelon Square. Colombo 1. 3A. Rakhitha Jayawardena Chief Executive Officer, Sri Lankan Airlines Limited

Level 22, East Tower, World Trade Centre, Echelon Square, Colombo 1.

4. Capt/ Milinda Ratnayake

Sri Lankan Airlines Limited Level 22, East Tower, World Trade Centre, Echelon Square, Colombo 1.

5. Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 1. RESPONDENTS BEFORE: B. P. Aluwihare P.C., J. Sisira J. de Abrew J. & Anil Gooneratne J. COUNSEL: M. A. Sumanthiran with Ermizo Tegal Instructed by S. Sunderalingam and Balendra For the Petitioner Romesh de Silva P.C., with Sugath Caldera For the 1st and 3rd Respondents

3

Anura Meddegoda with T. Nanayakkara Instructed by Varners for the 2nd Respondent Palitha Kumarasinghe P.C., with Chinthaka Mendis For the 4th Respondent Indika Demuni de Silva P.C., A.S.G. for the 5th Respondent WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS TENDERED ON: 11.03.2009 – By the Petitioner 07.05.2009 – By the 2nd Respondent 11.05.2009 – By the 1st & 3rd Respondents ARGUED ON: 14.12.2016 DECIDED ON: 15.02.2017 GOONERATNE J. The Petitioner by her petition to this court states she is one of the

pioneers of the 1st Respondent Company (Sri Lankan Airlines Limited) and inter

alia states that the Petitioner was promoted to the management level in 1984

and Senior Manager Level in 1992. Petition filed of record gives details and

positions held by the Petitioner during her tenue of office. It is also pleaded that

at one point of time Petitioner was the largest shareholder of the 1st Respondent

Company from among its employees. Petitioner describes, in her petition

several wrongs caused to her by her superiors and to certain discriminatory acts.

4

Her main complaint is her non selection to the post of Head of Service Delivery

for which she applied and faced an interview before an interview panel, and the

selection of the 4th Respondent to the said post.

On a perusal of the entire petition, I find that very many paragraphs

in same refer to mismanagement and lapses of the 4th Respondent, and further

complains that the interview was not properly held and that the 4th Respondent

is not a fit and proper person to be appointed as Head of Service Delivery.

Qualifications required for the said post are contained in paragraph 24 of the

petition. In paragraph 27 it is pleaded that format of the interview as

communicated by the Human Resources Division was a 20 minute presentation

followed by an interview. Special reference is made for a separate interview

before the Chairman of the 1st Respondent for all candidates in the afternoon of

the day of the interview. Presentation and interview would be for one hour as

intimated by the Human Resources Division. The interview with the Chairman

(2nd Respondent) was to be half an hour duration.

Petitioner complains that upon entering the room where the

interview was held the 2nd Respondent had informed her that both the

presentation and interview would have to be completed within 20 minutes. As

a result of this sudden and unexpected change, the Petitioner was forced to skip

certain slides in her presentation which was prepared for a 20 minutes time

5

allocation. Petitioner further complains that during the interview no questions

had been asked by the 3rd Respondent or the Chief Financial Officer (as pleaded).

The 2nd Respondent asked only a few questions and one question put to her by

the Head of Human Resources. It is also the position of the petitioner that the

2nd and 3rd Respondents showed complete disinterest and a desire to complete

the interview hastily. The other allegation was that the 2nd and 3rd Respondents

had already decided that the Petitioner would not be appointed even prior to

the commencement of the interview. A copy of the extract of the Annual Report

for 2008 (P18) is produced and it is pleaded that the Chief Executive Officer and

the Management Team had been already appointed, though the Management

Agreement with Emirates expired on 30th March 2008.

The learned counsel for the Petitioner argued that the interview

process was flawed. He referred to document R13 (appraisal of interview) and

more particularly to documents 13(a) and 13(b) which are unsigned documents.

His position as regards 13(c) was that subjective grades are given and the

entirety was subjective. The learned counsel also invited court to documents

P13A to P13C which demonstrate unprofessional conduct of the 4th Respondent.

It was his position that his client had been discriminated and the interview had

not been held properly for the reasons stated above.

6

The learned President’s Counsel for 1st and 3rd Respondents raised

a question of time bar and inter alia submitted that all necessary parties are not

before court, as only three members of the panel are made parties. Interview

held on 04.08.2008 and the petition is dated 03.10.2008. It was further

submitted by learned President’s Counsel that appointment of the 4th

Respondent is not a violation contemplated by law. In any event he submitted

there is no allegation of corruption, mala fides and fraud on the part of the

interview panel. It was a unanimous decision of the interview panel to select the

4th Respondent. He also submitted that the 4th Respondent was serving in an

acting capacity in the same post prior to being appointed in a permanent

capacity. The Learned President’s Counsel drew the attention of this court to

documents R13(a) to R13(f) and R13(g). At the interview the 2nd and 3rd

Respondents and the Head of Human Resources were requested to and did

make in writing summary of their observations. The Chief Finance Officer and

the Executive Directors were requested to give their appraisal which they did

independently.

The Learned Counsel for the 2nd Respondent whilst associating

himself with the submissions of learned President’s Counsel informed court that

the 2nd Respondent held the post of Chairman in the 1st Respondent Company

for a period of six months and submitted that the 1st Respondent followed and

7

adopted the accepted criteria for selection and there was nothing unfair in the

selection process. The learned President’s Counsel for the 4th Respondent also

associated himself with the submissions of all other counsel for the Respondents

and submitted that the 4th Respondent was a Pilot of Air Lanka and that a Pilot

is a fit and competent person to hold the post in question and drew the attention

of this court to all documents filed of record along with the affidavit of the 4th

Respondent.

The learned counsel for the Petitioner informed this court on or

about 30.06.2011 that his client would only pursue the remedy as per paragraph

(b) of the prayer to the petition which deals with a declaration in terms of Article

12 of the Constitution. This court as far back as 08.10.2008 granted Leave to

Proceed for an alleged violation of Article 12(1) of the Constitution. Since then

hearing of this case had been postponed for various reasons and on applications

of parties on either side. The Petitioner seeks to blame the interview panel and

at the same time argue that the 4th Respondent who was the successful

candidate is not a fit and proper person to be appointed to the post in question.

The Supreme Court is vested with wide powers to grant relief or

make such decision or give directions as it may deem just and equitable in the

circumstances. But the matter of relief is in the discretion of the court. The relief

granted must be in accordance with law, principles of equity, justice and the

8

jurisdiction of the Supreme Court entitles the court to subject the exercise of

legal rights to equitable consideration, that is, of a personal character arising

between one individual an another which makes it unjust or inequitable, to insist

on legal rights to exercise them in a particular way: Per Lord Wilberforce in

Ibrahim Vs. Westbourne Galleries Ltd. (1972) 2 AER 4490 at 500. However equal

protection of the law would not mean that any violation by the executive and or

Administrative action fall within the equality provisions under Article 12 of the

Constitution. As such the question of non-selection of the Petitioner and the

allegation levelled against the interview panel should be correctly and properly

established. This is the main point to be considered.

If an allegation is made against the interview panel all the members

should have been made parties. It is unfortunate that all of them are not before

court. Only three out of five are made parties. As such learned President’s

Counsel who raised this point correctly directed the attention of this court to

this aspect. Necessary parties are not before court. On one hand it would be

unfair to fault the interview panel in the absence of some of them. (members of

the panel).

Learned Counsel for the Petitioner urged before this court that

upon the Petitioner entering the room in which the presentation and interviews

were held, the 2nd Respondent informed the Petitioner that both the

9

presentation and interview had to be completed within 20 minutes. This was a

sudden an unexpected change and the Petitioner was forced to skip certain

slides in her presentation, which was prepared by her earlier.

The other complaint is that no questions were put to her by the 3rd

Respondent or the Chief Financial Officer. 2nd Respondent asked only a few

questions. One question was asked by the Head of Human Resources. Further

the attitude of the 2nd and 3rd Respondents was one of complete disinterest and

a desire to conclude the interview hastily. In reply to above it is the position of

the 4th Respondent that he and all others were told that the presentation and

interview would last only for 20 minutes. If that be so this court cannot fault the

panel. This seems to be the yard stick applicable for all the candidates. Was there

a total denial of the time limit or less time allocated to the Petitioner or were

others given more time for their presentation and interview? If it was so

Petitioner would have had a genuine grievance. This court cannot blame the

interview panel on this aspect and consider this sort of change to be a violation

of a right, notwithstanding prior intimation of longer time. No, doubt limiting of

time could have affected all the candidates to a point. The 4th Respondent

managed to adapt to the time limit suggested by the interview panel but not the

Petitioner in the manner she complains to this court. Further the 4th Respondent

argues that it is part of the profession as a Manager to manage time and handle

10

a crisis situation. This seems to be an acceptable argument especially in the

Airline field. I am unable to accept the views expressed by the Petitioner on this

aspect.

The material made available to this court indicates that the five

member panel followed and adopted a certain method to interview candidates.

A careful analysis had been undertaken by three members of the panel and they

had written down required notes. The other two gave their appraisals

independently (paragraph 17 of the statement of objection of 1st & 3rd

Respondents and it’s corresponding affidavit).

I cannot fault the panel for doing so since it is a matter for the panel

to adopt their own criteria. This court cannot expect the panel to ask certain

number of questions to fathom the suitability of candidates.

The 4th Respondent was Acting Head of Service Delivery for a short

period prior to being appointed as Head of Service Delivery. Both the Petitioner

and the 4th Respondent seems to have had a long standing career in the 1st

Respondent Company. The 4th Respondent may have had the edge over the

Petitioner since he was an experienced Pilot with long years of service.

Nevertheless final selection would have to be based on a proper interview. I

cannot conclude that the above matters influenced the interview panel. There

is no material in regard to above for this court to arrive at such a conclusion i.e

11

improper interview. Mere allegations and comments that he or she is better

experience or qualified are best left for the interview panel unless a serious flaw

in the interview process, could be detected.

Documents R13(a) to R13(g) indicates a careful comprehensive

analysis by the panel. Mere allegation of it being not signed cannot be a ground

to reject same. Affidavits of Pradeep, Padmeshwari Dahanayake (Head of

Human Resources 1st Respondent) who was in the interview panel and that of

the 3rd Respondent explain the method adopted to allocate marks as in

paragraphs 17 to 19 of the affidavit.

The bare assertions contained in the petition and affidavit would

not suffice. Material projected by the Petitioner does not directly substantiate

these allegations. In any event allegations must be established by the Petitioner

to the satisfaction of court. Even a wrong decision bona fide made on a question

of fact cannot constitute a breach of fundamental right of equality in the eyes

of the law – Gunatilleke Vs. A.G and Sirimanna vs. A.G - S.C. Application No.

47/79 & 48/79 (Reported in Fundamental Rights decision of the Supreme Court

Vol. I pg. 86). In the case in hand I do not think the interview panel came to a

wrong decision.

12

That upon a consideration of all the material placed before court by

either side, I am of the view that the Petitioner’s fundamental rights are not

violated by the Respondents. Therefore this application stand dismissed without

costs.

Application dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

B.P. Aluwihare P.C., J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Sisira J. de Abrew J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT