1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

An appeal against the judgment of the Learned Judges in case No. PHC Kegalle (Civil) 334/2007 of the High Court of Province (Civil Appellate), Kegalle dated 27.04.2011 under the High Court of Provinces (Special Provisions) Amendment Act No. 54 of 2006.

Seneviratne Mudiyanselage Kirihamy Seneviratne of Senani, Panagamuwa, Ambulugala, Mawanella.

SC Appeal No. 151/2016 Plaintiff

SC HCCA L/A No. 192/2011

PHC Kegalle (Civil) 334/2007 Vs.

DC Mawanella No. 608/L

1. Ihala Wahumpurayalage Emalin 2. Viyannalage Kusuma 3. Viyannalage Wimalawathi 4. Viyannalage Nishshanka 5. Viyannalage Cyril 6. Viyannalage Gamini Gunathunga 7. Viyannalage Sita 8. Viyannalage Sunil 9. Viyannalage Lesly Wijethunge 10. Viyannalage Somaratne all of Nayawetunuhena, Attanagoda (Panagamuwa), Ambulugala, Mawanella.

Defendants

And Now

2

Seneviratne Mudiyanselage Kirihamy Seneviratne of Senani, Panagamuwa, Ambulugala, Mawanella. Plaintiff-Appellant

Vs.

1. Ihala Wahumpurayalage Emalin 2. Viyannalage Kusuma 3. Viyannalage Wimalawathi 4. Viyannalage Nishshanka 5. Viyannalage Cyril 6. Viyannalage Gamini Gunathunga 7. Viyannalage Sita 8. Viyannalage Sunil 9. Viyannalage Lesly Wijethunge 10. Viyannalage Somaratne

all of Nayawetunuhena, Attanagoda (Panagamuwa), Ambulugala, Mawanella.

Defendant-Respondents

And Now Between

1. Ihala Vahumpurayalage Emalin (Deceased)

1A. Viyannalage Kusuma

2. Viyannalage Kusuma 3. Viyannalage Wimalawathi 4. Viyannalage Nishshanka 5. Viyannalage Cyril 6. Viyannalage Gamini Gunathunga 7. Viyannalage Sita 8. Viyannalage Lesly Wijethunge 9. Viyannalage Somaratne

all of Nayawetunuhena, Attanagoda (Panagamuwa), Ambulugala, Mawanella.

3

Defendant-Respondent-Appellants

Vs.

Seneviratne Mudiyanselage Kirihamy Seneviratne of Senani, Panagamuwa, Ambulugala, Mawanella. Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent

Viyannalage Sunil (deceased)

Nayawetunuhena, Attanagoda (Panagamuwa), Ambulugala, Mawanella.

8. Defendant-Respondent-Respondent

Subhasinghe Mudiyanselage Ranjani Kumari of Ehawatte, Atanagoda, Ambulugala, Mawanella.

8A. Substituted Defendant-Respondent-Respondent

Before: Buwaneka Aluwihare, PC. J. Priyantha Jayawardena, PC. J. L. T. B. Dehideniya, J.

Counsel

Argued on:

Decided on:

Sunil Abeyrathne with Buddhika Alagiyawanna for Defendant-Respondent- Appellant. H. Withanachchi-for-the Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent. 15. 11. 2018 14.12.2020

4

JUDGEMENT

Aluwihare PC. J.,

1. The Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Plaintiff’)

filed action in the District Court of Mawanella seeking inter alia a

declaration that the Plaintiff is the absolute owner of the land, one acre in

extent, described in the second schedule to the plaint, called ‘Nayawatuna

Hena’ (khdjegqk fyak) now ‘Watte Paren Yatiatha Thun Pela Paddy’

(j;af;a mdfrka há w; ù ;=ka mE,l jmißh) and also for an order to have

the Defendant-Respondent-Petitioner-Appellants (hereinafter referred to as

the ‘Defendants’) ejected from the land in question.

2. The Learned District Judge by his judgment dated 12th December 2005

dismissed the case of the Plaintiff subject to costs. Aggrieved by the said

judgment the Plaintiff appealed to the High Court of Civil Appeals and by its

judgment dated 27th April 2011, the High Court set aside the judgment of

the Learned District Court and held that the Plaintiff was entitled to all the

reliefs prayed for in paragraph (a) and (b) of the plaint i.e. that the Plaintiff

is the absolute owner of the land depicted in the second schedule to the

plaint and to have the Petitioners, their agents and servants ejected from the

same.

3. In challenging the said judgment, the Defendants were granted leave to

appeal on the question of law set out in Paragraph 7 (ii) of the Petition;

“Whether the Learned Judges of the High Court of Province (Civil

Appellate), Kegalle have stated in their judgment erroneously that the

determination or the decision by the Conciliation Board, Wakirigala

area on 14th February 1976 in the matter bearing No. 295/75 had

5

acquired the force of a decree entered by the District Court of

Kegalle?”

4. According to the Conciliation Boards Act No. 10 of 1958 (as amended)

(hereinafter sometimes referred to as ‘the Act’), the Conciliation Boards have

jurisdiction to settle ‘disputes’ regarding matters relating to immovable

property situate wholly or partly within a particular Conciliation Board

area.

5. The thrust of the argument on behalf of the Defendant-Appellant before this

court was that; for the Conciliation Board to exercise its jurisdiction, there

must foremost be a ‘dispute’. It was argued that ‘partitioning of a land’, not

being a dispute-and being provided for by specific legislation in the form of

the Partition Act- cannot be effected by a ‘settlement’ of a Conciliation Board

even when such settlement has been duly filed of record in the District Court

as required by Section 13 (3) (a) of the Conciliation Boards Act.

Chronology of Events

6. One Viyannalage Malida had transferred an undivided one acre from and

out of the land called ‘Nayawetuna Hena’ upon a conditional transfer, to one

Jane Nona Hettiarachchi, the wife of the Plaintiff, by Deed No. 54895 dated

25th May 1963, reserving the right to repurchase the same within 4 years.

Two years later, however, by Deed No. 56097, said Malida had transferred

the right to repurchase that he had retained under earlier Deed (No. 54895).

Thereby, in 1965, Jane Nona became the absolute owner of the said land,

one acre in extent.

6

7. Jane Nona, subsequently, went before the Conciliation Board of Wakirigala

to have her one acre of land demarcated and carved out of the larger land,

Nayawatuna Hena. Consequent to the decision of the Conciliation Board of

Wakirigala in case No. 296/75, the divided portion of land, one acre in

extent, had been surveyed and demarcated by Licensed Surveyor K. S.

Panditharatne and the Plan No. 2679 dated 18th May 1976 prepared. The

said divided portion is more fully described in the second schedule to the

plaint. It has been submitted on behalf of the Plaintiff that Jane Nona had

thus possessed a defined and a divided portion of land as a distinct and a

separate land, from that point onwards.

8. In 1982, Malida had filed an action in the District Court of Kegalle against

Jane Nona (case No. 2419/L) seeking a declaration that the above-

mentioned deeds No. 54895 and No. 56097 are null and void and to recover

the possession of the land Jane Nona was in possession of. The judgment in

this case had been entered in favour of Malida.

9. Aggrieved by the aforesaid judgment, Jane Nona had appealed to the Court

of Appeal. While the case was pending before the Court of Appeal Malida

had passed away and Malida’s wife and children were substituted. The said

decision of the District Court had been set aside by the Court of Appeal.

Thereafter, leave to appeal had been sought against the judgment of the

Court of Appeal, which application had been refused by the Supreme Court

by its order dated 26th March 1996.

10. In the year 1996, Jane Nona had transferred the said land to her husband,

Kirihamy Seneviratne, the Plaintiff, by Deed No. 3946 [‘P27’].

7

11. Undeterred by the unsuccessful attempt to have the deeds executed in

favour of Jane Nona annulled, the 1st and 2nd Defendants (the wife and a

child of Malida) had filed a Partition action in the District Court of

Mawanella. The court had dismissed this action (case No. 201P) because the

case had not been diligently prosecuted.

12. Trouble appears to have arisen again in 2003. The Plaintiff alleges that on

or about 31st January 2003, the Defendants had forcibly entered the land

in question and threatened the Plaintiff ordering not to enter the land,

leading to the filing of the present case before the District Court, which, as

referred to earlier, was dismissed by the Learned District Judge.

The Judgment of the High Court of Civil Appeals

13. The High Court of Civil Appeals, by its judgment of 27th April 2011 set

aside the decision of the Learned District Judge and determined that the

Plaintiff is the sole owner of the portion of land described in the second

schedule to the plaint and that the Plaintiff is in fact entitled to eject the

Defendant-Respondents and their agents and those who are claiming under

them from the possession of the said land.

14. The High Court had held in its judgment that; “It is clear upon the perusal

of the document marked P35, that the determination made by the

Conciliation Board on 14th February 1976 and the Certificate of settlement

issued on 20th November 1976, in accordance of provisions of section 13(2)

of the Conciliation Board Act has been filed of record, in accordance with

the provisions of section 13(3)(a) of the said act, in the case bearing number

2498/Sama Mandala of the District Court of Kegalle.”

8

“In the circumstances, the determination or the decision made by the

Conciliation Board of Wakirigala area on 14th February 1976 in the matter

bearing no 295/75 had acquired the force of a decree entered by the District

Court of Kegalle.”

“We are of the opinion that the learned District Judge had erred himself in

law by holding that the Conciliation Board Act did not vest authority with

the Conciliation Board to partition a land.” (Page 10-11 of the judgment)

15. In arriving at their decision, the Learned Judges of the High Court relied

on Section 13 of the Conciliation Boards Act. Here, it would be useful to

consider Section 13 within the make and mechanism of the Conciliation

Board as formulated by the Act.

Make and Mechanism of the Conciliation Board

16. Conciliation Boards as established by the Conciliation Boards Act

functioned until such time as they were abolished and subsequently replaced

with Mediation Boards constituted under the Mediation Boards Act No. 72

of 1988. The purpose of Conciliation Boards was to provide a forum to settle

minor disputes at the community level without the time consuming and

costly process of litigation before a formal court. The make and mechanism

of the Conciliation Boards are such that the dispute between the parties need

not be settled by an application of the rules of law. Panels of Conciliation are

not constituted by persons learned in the law, but rather by any person

resident in a Conciliation Board area or any public officer engaged in any

work in that Conciliation Board area fit to be a member of such panel, in the

9

opinion of the recommending body or person (See Sections 3 (3) and 3 (4)).

No pleadings or precise definition of legal issues takes place.

17. Section 13 of the Conciliation Boards Act reads thus;

Section 13. (1) Any party to a civil dispute which is settled by a Conciliation

Board in any Conciliation Board area may, within thirty days after

the date of settlement of such dispute, in writing notify to the

Chairman of the Panel of Conciliators constituted for such

Conciliation Board area that, with effect from such date as shall be

specified in the notification, the settlement effected by such Board

will be repudiated by him for the reasons stated in the notification,

and, where such notification is made with such reasons stated

therein, such settlement shall cease to be in force from the date

specified in such notification.

(2) Where the written notification referred to in subsection (1) is not

received by such Chairman within thirty days after the date of

settlement of such dispute, such Chairman shall forthwith transmit to

the District Court or the Court of Requests or the Rural Court, as the

case may be, having jurisdiction to hear and adjudicate upon such

dispute, a copy of the settlement recorded by that Board. Such copy

shall be signed and certified by the President of that Board.

(3) (a) Immediately upon the receipt by the District Court or the Court of

Requests, as the case may be, of the copy of the settlement referred to

in subsection (2), the District Judge or the Commissioner of Requests

of that court shall cause such copy to be filed of record in such court.

Such settlement shall, with effect from the date of such filing, be

deemed to be a decree of that court, and such of the provisions of the

10

Civil Procedure Code as relate to the execution of decrees shall, as far

as may be practicable, apply mutatis mutandis to and in relation to

such settlement which is deemed to be a decree……

18. Section 13 of the Act- on which the decision in the High Court pivoted- has

the effect of bestowing on a settlement of a Conciliation Board, the force of

a decree of the District Court, once it is duly registered in the District Court.

However, we are of the opinion that Section 13 of the Conciliation Boards

Act, rather than being read in isolation, should be read together with the

other provisions of the Act and applied.

Jurisdiction of the Conciliation Boards

19. Section 6 of the Conciliation Boards Act sets out the offences or disputes

that can be brought before a Conciliation Board thus;

Section 6. The Chairman of the Panel of Conciliators constituted for any

Conciliation Board area may, and shall, upon application made

to him in that behalf, refer for inquiry to Conciliation Boards

constituted out of that Panel the following disputes and

offences:-

(a) any dispute in respect of any movable property that is kept, or

any immovable property that is wholly or partly situate, in

that Conciliation Board area; (emphasis added)

(b) …..

20. Section 6 delineates that where the subject matter is any immovable

property wholly or partially situate in the particular Conciliation Board

area, a ‘dispute’ regarding such property can be brought before the

Conciliation Board. R. K. W. Goonesekere and Barry Metzger in their

11

research evaluating the role of the Conciliation Boards, titled ‘The

Conciliation Boards Act: Entering the Second Decade’ appearing in ‘The

Journal of Ceylon Law’ (Volume 2, June 1971) in reference to Section 6 of

the Act, have expressed the opinion that “… regard must be had for the

terms used in Section 6, particularly the use of the word “dispute”. It

suggests a deliberate restriction of the Board’s jurisdiction to something less

than all matters which can be brought before a civil court. A dispute

implies that there is an area of conflict which, if not resolved will lead to

an action by one party against the other. The facts should reveal the

existence of a dispute….” (at page 53). The writers have gone on to express

the view that “certain matters which properly may be brought before the

court do not involve a dispute. For example, a partition action is founded

on the inconvenience of co-ownership, not on there being a dispute

between parties as to their respective rights.”. The authors say that, as these

matters do ‘not necessarily involve a dispute’, they cannot, therefore, be

inquired into by a Conciliation Board.

21. The learned counsel for the Defendant-Appellants presented his argument

on a basis similar to that which is set out in the preceding paragraph. The

learned Counsel contended that; the Conciliation Boards are not vested

with the power to partition lands, since partition actions do not come under

the category of ‘civil disputes’ and they are special matters, as explained in

the then Partition Act No. 16 of 1951, and drew the attention of court to

Section 2 of the Partition Act, the law that was applicable at the point of

time relevant to the dispute in issue.

22. Section 2 of the Partition Act of 1951 states; “Where any land belongs in

common to two or more owners, any one or more of them may institute an

action for partition or sale of the land in accordance with the provisions of

this Act”.

12

23. On the basis of the aforestated, it was argued that the settlement reached

before the Conciliation Board (No. 295/75) and the District Court of

Kegalle, by causing the said settlement to be filed of record (2498/idu

uKav,), cannot be considered as a partition action under the Partition Act.

Thus, it was contended on behalf of the Defendant-Appellants, that the

learned judges of the High Court of Civil Appeals erred in holding that the

decision of the Conciliation Board has acquired the force of a decree.

24. It is true that in the case of R. Arnolis v. R. Hendrick 75 NLR 532 it was held

that an action for partition of land can be instituted without the production

of the certificate from a Conciliation Board, which is referred to in Section

14 (1) of the Conciliation Board Act. I do not see a conflict between the

decision in Arnolis (supra) and the jurisdiction of the Conciliation Board to

entertain a complaint relating to a land dispute. On one hand any co-owner

of a land, to obtain relief against the inconvenience of common possession

has the right to make an application to a District court for relief and may

do so, not necessarily due to the existence of a dispute. K.D.P.

Wickremesinghe in his work “The Law of Partition in Ceylon” states that

“a Partition action is not founded upon a ‘wrong’ (page 24).”

25. The law, on the other hand, would not stand in the way if co-owners decide

to have a co-owned land partitioned amicably without the intervention of

the court. Where similarly, two co-owners may enjoy the property,

provided they know what each is entitled to. If a dispute arises in relation

to the enjoyment of land under any of the arrangements referred to, their

right to refer such matter to the Conciliation Board (presently Mediation

Board) for a settlement cannot be denied, for the simple reason that, now

there exists a dispute relating to immovable property.

13

26. If the disputing parties reach a settlement and that settlement is not

repudiated by a party within the 30-day period provided by Section 13(1)

of the Act and consequently once it is forwarded to the relevant District

Court and filed of record in terms of Section 13(3) of the Act, the settlement

so reached would be deemed to be a decree of that District Court by

operation of law.

27. One needs to appreciate, however, the distinction between a Partition

decree and a settlement entered before a Conciliation Board. The

settlement, once it acquires the status of a decree of court, would only bind

the parties to the settlement or anyone who claims rights under those

parties and no other. As opposed to that, the essence of a Partition decree is

that the persons declared under it obtains a title good against the whole

world, it being an action in Rem. Thus, proceedings before the Conciliation

Board cannot be equated to the partition proceedings contemplated by the

Partition Act.

28. On the other hand, whenever parties seek the assistance of the Conciliation

Board to resolve any ‘dispute’ relating to immovable property, the

objectives of the Act demand that the Conciliation Board makes every

endeavour to mediate and bring about a settlement to the dispute within

the framework of the Act. In my view, it would be artificial to argue that

‘partitioning’ of land cannot strictly be considered a dispute thereby

ousting the jurisdiction of the Conciliation Board and driving the parties to

litigation continuing for generations, wringing them dry of resources.

Thus, whether the parties approached the Conciliation Board due to a

subsisting dispute or not is a matter to be determined based on the facts and

circumstances of each case.

14

29. It is pertinent to note here that the above reasoning finds support in the

continuation of the research (alluded to before) by Goonesekere and

Metzger published in the December 1971 Volume (2) of ‘The Journal of

Ceylon Law’ titled ‘The Conciliation Boards Act: Necessary Amendments

and Administrative Reforms’ Expressing the opinion that although it would

be prudent to say that certain civil actions, including partition actions “for

differing reasons are inappropriate for Conciliation”, the writers observed

that the jurisdiction of Conciliation Boards could nevertheless be invoked

“as to partition actions requiring an attempt at reconciliation” while

making clear that the Boards have no power to enter settlements

partitioning land with the in rem effect of a decree under the Partition

Ordinance.

30. The writers went onto state that, “It is desirable, as much as possible, to

encourage amicable partitions by conveyances rather than by judicial

decree. This may be encouraged by conciliation; according to J. S. C.

statistics already 15 per cent of all partition actions filed are settled. The

settlement of partition disputes may not prove as successful as might be

hoped, however, because of the frequent desire of the parties, even if they

are in agreement as to their shares, to have a judicial partition nonetheless

to settle title and thus remedy any flaws in their paper pedigrees. Where

parties are willing to partition amicably, but there is a dispute as to the

shares or the manner of partition, proceeding before a Conciliation Board

can help resolve the differences. Jurisdiction of the Conciliation Boards

should therefore require these matters to be brought before the Boards and

settlements should be confined to enabling the parties to conclude any of

the non-judicial modes of partition recognized by law. Boards’ experience

under such a rule should be closely monitored because of the strong

possibility such jurisdiction will not yield the substantial benefits hoped

for.” (at page 295).

15

31. The facts of the case before us, therefore, must be considered in the

backdrop of the legal position referred to above.

Did a Dispute Subsist, within the parameters of the Conciliation Board?

32. A certified copy of the case record in District Court of Kegalle case no.

2419/L was marked and produced as ‘P3’, in the proceedings before the

District Court in the instant case. Kirihamy had testified to the effect that

after Malida transferred the land to Jane Nona in 1965, one acre was

demarcated and fenced with the assistance of the Grama Niladari on 19th

February 1965. Since then he and his wife Jane Nona had improved and

enjoyed the portion of the land so demarcated (page 169 of the brief).

Subsequently, however, they had been harassed by one of Malida’s sons

and the fence had been damaged by removing the barbed wire. At this point

Kirihamy maintains that his wife went to the Conciliation Board as they

wanted to carve out their one acre with a proper boundary. The relief

sought from the Conciliation Board had been to separate the land belonging

to Jane Nona and formally fix the boundary. Thus, Jane Nona sought the

assistance of the Conciliation Board, owing to her peaceful possession being

disturbed by Malida’s son Nissanka, who, according to Kirihamy, was

residing with Malida (page176 of the brief).

33. From the facts, it appears that there had been a dispute between the

Defendant-Appellants and the Plaintiff at the point of time the matter was

referred to the Conciliation Board. The Conciliation Board having

entertained the complaint, had directed surveyor Panditharathne to survey

the land. He had done so on 19th April 1976 and had prepared the plan No.

2679 dated 27th July 1976, which had been marked and produced as ‘P12’

in the instant case and the same refers to the Wakirigala conciliation case

16

No. idu 295/75. The plan clearly depicts a one-acre land carved out of

Nayawatuna Hena. The surveyor Panditharathne in his evidence in the case

2419/L has stated that he received a commission from the Wakirigala

Conciliation Board to carve out, an extent of one acre, from and out of the

land called Nayawatuna Hena. Accordingly, he had gone to the land and

had explained to Malida the manner in which he intends to separate one

acre from the larger land. He had added that, having surveyed, he prepared

the plan No. 2679 depicting the boundaries of the one-acre lot, separated

from the larger land of Nayawatuna Hena. He also had stated that he

surveyed the portion of land which one party had enjoyed possession (page

160 of the brief).

34. Ironically the Defendant-Appellants themselves had taken up the position

that “there was only a decision to carving of a portion, ONE ACRE of this

land and to give same to the Respondent”. (Paragraph 7 of the written

submissions dated 13th September 2016, filed before this court on behalf of

the Defendant- Appellants). There is no doubt, this is exactly what was

done by the Conciliation Board and the order of settlement clearly reflects

this position.

35. The settlement recorded by the Conciliation Board clearly states that the

“the parties agreed to settle the dispute on 14.02.1976” and it is further

recorded that “pursuant to the survey carried out by the licensed surveyor

K.S.D. Panditharathne on 19.04.79, land in extent of 1-acre owned by D.J.

Hettiarchchi was surveyed and separated.” (…uek fjka lrk ,oS.)

36. The facts of the instant case not only belie this argument but in fact

conclusively prove that the case does not come within the ambit of the

Partition Act as well, in as much as by deeds 54859 and 56097, executed

by the original owner Malida, Jane Nona became the absolute owner of the

17

property, exclusively possessed it and the one acre of Nayawatuna Hena in

question ceased to be part of the common property.

The action that was filed by the heirs of Malida was nothing more than a

covert attempt to bring the case within the ambit of the Partition Act,

deprive Jane Nona and her successors of property which was rightfully

theirs and give the Defendants a title in rem.

In two cases century apart, this court has come down hard on the practice.

In Selenchi Appuhamy v. Livinia and Others 9 N.L.R.59, Layard CJ stated

“I have never come across a more manifest attempt to abuse the Partition

Ordinance …..the object being to obtain good title against all the world in

respect of a land not held in common Plaintiff’s action must be dismissed”

37. The above position was followed by a series of decisions that followed after

Selenchi Appuhamy (supra) and notably the pronouncement made by his

Lordship Justice Weerasuriya in the case of Angela Fernando v.

Devadeepthi Fernando and Others 2006 2 SLR 188 where his Lordship

succinctly stated;

“It is a prerequisite to every partition action that the land sought to be

partitioned must be held in common as seen from the provisions of section

2 (1) of the Partition Law. What is understood as common ownership is

where persons do not hold on separate and distinct titles or where land is

not held as separate and divided lots. When land is not held in common,

but exclusively by a party even though under prescriptive title, no action

can be maintained to partition such land.

It is imperative that the investigation of the title must be preceded by a

careful examination of the preliminary issue whether the land sought to be

partitioned is commonly owned as required by section 2 (1) of the Partition

Law. Learned District Judge having carefully examined this question had

18

correctly held that the land was dividedly possessed as from 1938 and

proceeded to dismiss the action without resorting to a full and exhaustive

investigation as to the rights of the parties, which in the circumstances was

lawful and justified.”

It is manifestly clear that even in the instant case, both Malida and Jane

Nona had enjoyed distinct portions of land since 1965.

38. When one considers the totality of the facts relating to this matter, it is

apparent that the incident had had all the hallmarks of a ‘dispute’ relating

to ‘immovable property’ between Malida and Jane Nona Hettiarchchi and

the Conciliation Board has acted well within the jurisdiction vested in it, to

resolve the dispute.

39. I am also of the view that, when the learned judges of the High Court of

Civil Appeals stated that “We are of the opinion that the learned District

Judge had erred himself in law by holding that the Conciliation Board Act

did not vest authority with the Conciliation Board to partition a land.” The

learned judges did not refer to the word ‘partition’ in the context of the

partitioning land in terms of the Partition Act (Partition Law) but in a literal

sense.

40. Considering the reasoning referred to above, I answer the question of law

on which leave to appeal was granted in the negative. The judgement of

the High Court of Civil Appeal dated 27th April 2011 is affirmed.

19

41. Accordingly, I make order dismissing this appeal.

The Respondents are entitled to the cost of this appeal.

Appeal Dismissed

Judge of the Supreme Court

Priyantha Jayawardena, PC. J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

L. T. B. Dehideniya, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court