1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA In the matter of an appeal Hasini Dilshani Wijesinghe Jayawardane No.465/50, Nelum Place, Jalthor, Ranala. Minor appearing by her Next Friend Amitha Damayanthi Konggahage Jayawardane No.465/50, Nelum Place, Jalthor, Ranala. Plaintiff SC Appeal 207/2016 SC(HC)CALA185/16 WP/HCCA/COL/60/2010/F(A) DCColombo 57651/MR Vs Pitakanda Wahumpurage Rohana Sumith Ananda. No.402, Himbutana Road, Mulleriyawa, New Town. KMD Samantha No.467/8, Rajasinghe Mawatha, Udumulla, Mulleriyawa, New Town. Wajira Sumith Udunuwara No.406, Udumulla

2

Mulleriyawa, New Town Defendants AND Wajira Sumith Udunuwara No.406, Udumulla Mulleriyawa, New Town 3rd Defendant-Petitioner-Appellant Vs 1. Amitha Damayanthi Konggahage Jayawardane No.465/50, Nelum Place, Jalthor, Ranala. Plaintiff-Respondent 2. Pitakanda Wahumpurage Rohana Sumith Ananda. No.402, Himbutana Road, Mulleriyawa, New Town. 3. KMD Samantha No.467/8, Rajasinghe Mawatha, Udumulla, Mulleriyawa, New Town. Defendant-Respondents AND NOW Wajira Sumith Udunuwara No.406, Udumulla Mulleriyawa, New Town 3rd Defendant-Petitioner-Appellant-

3

Petitioner-Appellant Vs 1. Amitha Damayanthi Konggahage Jayawardane No.465/50, Nelum Place, Jalthor, Ranala. Plaintiff-Respondent- Respondent-Respondent 2. Pitakanda Wahumpurage Rohana Sumith Ananda. No.402, Himbutana Road, Mulleriyawa, New Town. 3. KMD Samantha No.467/8, Rajasinghe Mawatha, Udumulla, Mulleriyawa, New Town. Defendant-Respondents- Respondent-Respondents Before : Sisira J de Abrew J LTB Dehideniya J Murdu Fernando PC J Counsel : S Kumaralingam for 3rd Defendant-Petitioner-Appellant- Petitioner-Appellant MDJ Bandara for the Plaintiff-Respondent- Respondent-Respondent Argued on : 21.6.2018 Written Submission Tendered on : 29.6.2018 by the 3rd Defendant-Petitioner-Appellant- Petitioner-Appellant 19.1.2018 by the Plaintiff-Respondent- Respondent-Respondent Decided on : 03.12.2018

4

Sisira J de Abrew J In this case the Plaintiff states that 1st to 3rd defendants did not answer the

summons of the learned District judge. The learned District judge fixed the case

for ex-parte trial. After serving the decree on the 2nd and 3rd Defendants, the 3rd

Defendant made an application under Section 86(2) of the Civil Procedure Code to

purge the default. The learned District Judge by his order dated 23.3.2010

dismissed the application to purge the default. Being aggrieved by the said order of

the learned District Judge, the 3rd Defendant appealed to the Civil Appellate High

Court. The Civil Appellate High Court, by its judgment dated 11.3.2016 dismissed

the appeal and affirmed the judgment of the learned District Judge. Being

aggrieved by the said judgment of the Civil Appellate High Court, the 3rd

Defendant has appealed to this court. This court, by its order dated 1.11.2016,

granted leave to appeal on questions of law stated in paragraphs 11(b) and 11(d) of

the petition of appeal dated 20.4.2016 which are set out below.

1. Have the Honourable Judges of the Civil Appellate High Court erred by

failing to consider that since statutory provisions apply to service of

summons and unless the summons are duly served the other statutory

consequences for non-appearance on serving summons would not apply on

the Defendant.

2. Have the Honourable Judges of the Civil Appellate High Court erred by

failing to consider the provisions of Section 62 of the Civil Procedure Code

which categorically deals with substituted service and provides that service

(of summons) has to be on an order of the court.

The 2nd and 3rd Defendant-Appellants both gave evidence at the inquiry. They both

said that they did not receive summons in this case. The 2nd Defendant in his

5

evidence stated that no summons had been pasted on his door. The 3rd Defendant-

Appellant in his evidence stated that no summons had been pasted on his gate. S.L

Dougles Priyantha, the Process Server in his evidence stated that he pasted

summons on the door of the 2nd Defendant-Appellant. He also, in his evidence,

stated that he pasted summons on the gate of the 3rd Defendant-Appellant. Both

Defendant-Appellants in their evidence denied this position. Section 60 of the Civil

Procedure Code reads as follows.

(1) The court shall, where it is reported that summons could not be effected by registered post

or where the summons having been served and the defendant fails to appear, direct that such

summons be served personally on the defendant by delivering or tendering to him the said

summons through the Fiscal or the Grama Niladhari within whose division the defendant

resides or in any case where the plaintiff is a lending institution within the meaning of the Debt

Recovery (Special Provisions) Act, No. 2 of 1990, through the Fiscal or other officer

authorized by court, accompanied by a precept in form No. 17 of the First Schedule. In the

case of a corporation summons may be served personally by delivering or tendering it to the

secretary or like officer or a director or the person in charge of the principal place of business

of such corporation.

(2) If the service referred to in the preceding provisions of this section cannot by the exercise

of due diligence be effected, the Fiscal or Grama Niladhari shall affix the summons to some

conspicuous part of the house in which the defendant ordinarily resides or in the case of a

corporation or unincorporated body, to the usual place of business or office of such

corporation or such body and in every such case the summon shall be deemed to have been

duly served on the defendant.

In terms of Section 60(2) of the Civil Procedure Code, the Fiscal has the right to

affix the summons on a conspicuous part of the house. There is no dispute on this

point. In an inquiry to purge the default it is the burden of the defendant to

establish that summons had not been served on him. In Windawath Vs thopman

6

[1998] 3 SLR 1 Court of Appeal held thus “The defendants have to begin leading evidence

and once the defendant's lead evidence to prove that summons had not been served on them and

establish that fact, burden shifts back onto the plaintiffs to rebut the evidence.”

The 2nd and 3rd Defendant-Appellants have stated in their evidence that they did not

receive summons. Dougles Priyantha, the Process Server in his evidence stated that

when he went to the 2nd Defendant’s house, the wife of the 2nd Defendant was

sweeping the house and he affixed the summons on the door. If this evidence is

true it is very strange as to why the 2nd Defendant did not appear in court. In these

circumstances the question that arises is whether the Process Server’s evidence

could be accepted as true evidence. Dougles Priyantha, the Process Server in his

evidence stated that when he went to the 3rd Defendant’s house, his house was

closed; that he made inquiries from the person who is living in front of the 3rd

Defendant’s house; and that he learnt that the 3rd Defendant would return in a short

while. If that is so, question that arises is as to why he did not wait to meet the 3rd

Defendant. Thus the question arises whether his evidence satisfies the test of

probability. Dougles Priyantha, the Process Server in his evidence states that he

normally takes down notes with regard to the details of the people from he makes

inquiries when he goes to serve summons. But in the present case he had not done

so. According to Dougles Priyantha, the Process Server, summons was pasted on

the gate of the 3rd Defendant on 17.4.2018 and he knocked on the gate. The 3rd

Defendant categorically states in his evidence that he was present at home on

17.4.2018. When I consider the evidence of Dougles Priyantha, the Process Server,

I feel that I am unable to accept his evidence as true evidence. When I consider the

evidence led at the trial and the judgment of the learned District Judge, I feel that

the learned District Judge has not analyzed the evidence properly. If he had

properly analyzed the evidence of the Process Server, he would have realized the

7

improbability of the situation narrated by the Process Server. In the case of De

Silva and others Vs Seneviratne and others [1981] 2 SLR 7 Ranasinghe J at page

16 made the following observation.

“H.N.G. Fernando, J. (as His Lordship the Chief Justice then was) in the case of Mahawithana vs.

Commissioner of Inland Revenue 64 NLR 217 where in dealing with the question as to when an appellate

Court would interfere with the findings of a tribunal on the primary questions of fact, at page 223, it was

stated that it was open to an appellate Court to reconsider such findings of fact only:

(a) If that inference has been drawn on a consideration of inadmissible evidence or after excluding

admissible and relevant evidence,

(b) If the inference was a conclusion of fact drawn by the Board but unsupported by legal evidence, or

(c) If the conclusion drawn from relevant facts is not rationally possible, and is perverse and should

therefore be set aside.”

In the present case also the stand taken up by the Process Server is impossible and

therefore I hold that the order of the learned District Judge is perverse

For the above reasons, I cannot permit to stand the order of the learned District

Judge dated 23.3.2010. The Civil Appellate High Court affirmed the said order of

the learned District Judge. For the above reasons, I set aside the order of the

learned District Judge dated 23.3.2010 and the judgment of the Civil Appellate

High Court dated 11.3.2016. In view of the conclusion reached above, the 1st

question of law is answered as follows:

The learned Judges of the Civil Appellate High Court have failed to evaluate the

evidence led at the trial. The 2nd question of law does not arise for consideration.

When the order of the learned District Judge dated 23.3.2010 is set aside, the 2nd

Defendant too becomes entitled to file his answer. I direct the learned District

8

Judge to give an opportunity to the 2nd and 3rd Defendant-Appellants to file their

answer. The learned District Judge is directed to conclude this case without any

delay.

Judge of the Supreme Court.

L.T.B. Dehideniya

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court.

Murdu Fernando PC J

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court.