==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 21

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal under and in terms of Section 15 (11) of the National Gem and Jewellery Authority Act, No. 50 of 1993. 1. K. G. Keerthi Karangoda Amuthagoda, Panukerapitiya, Hidellana, Ratnapura. 2. K. Sarath Gamini No. 79, Thembili Kadey Junction, Kandangoda, Higgashena, Kuruwita. S.C. (Misc.) No. 02/2016 Appeal No. 02/08/මැණික්/05/2015

Appellants

Vs. 1. National Gem and Jewellery Authority, No. 25, Galle Face Terrace, Colombo 03. 2. Udaya R. Seneviratne, Secretary, Ministry of Mahaweli Development and Environment, ‘Sampathpaya’ No. 82, Rajamalwatta Road, Battaramulla. 2A. Anura Dissanayake,

Secretary, Ministry of Mahaweli Development and Environment, ‘Sampathpaya’ No. 82, Rajamalwatta Road, Battaramulla.

Page 2 of 21

2B. J. A. Ranjith

Ministry of Industries and Supply Chain Management, No. 73/1, Galle Road, Colombo 03. 2C. S. M. Piyatissa,

Secretary, State Ministry of Gem and Jewellery Related Industries, No. 561/3, Elvitigala Mawatha, Narahenpita, Colombo 05. 3. Lumbini Kiriella Legal Officer, Ministry of Mahaweli Development and Environment, ‘Sampathpaya’ No. 82, Rajamalwatta Road, Battaramulla. 4. Asanka Sanjeewa Welagedara, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, No. 25, National Gem and Jewellery Authority, Galle Face Terrace, Colombo 03. 4A. 4B.

Reginald Cooray, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, No. 25, National Gem and Jewellery Authority, Galle Face Terrace, Colombo 03. Amitha Gamage, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer No. 25, National Gem and Jewellery Authority, Galle Face Terrace, Colombo 03.

Page 3 of 21

4C. Thilak Weerasinghe,

Chairman, National Gem and Jewellery Authority, Galle Face Terrace, Colombo 03. 5. M. P. N. M. Wickramasinghe, Director General, No. 25, National Gem and Jewellery Authority, Galle Face Terrace, Colombo 03. 5A. H. P. Sumanasekara,

Director General, No. 25, National Gem and Jewellery Authority, Galle Face Terrace, Colombo 03. 5B. P. U. K. Thenuwara,

Director General, National Gem and Jewellery Authority, Macksons Tower, Alfred House Gardens, Colombo 03. 6. Priyanthi Jayasinghe, Assistant Director Legal, No. 25, National Gem and Jewellery Authority, Galle Face Terrace, Colombo 03. 7. K. S. Abeynayake, Assistant Director Enforcement and Regional Development, National Gem and Jewellery Authority, Regional Office, Ratnapura.

Page 4 of 21

Before: Hon. Vijith K. Malalgoda, P.C., J.

Hon. Janak De Silva, J.

Hon. Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Anuruddha Dharmaratne for the Appellants

Rajitha Perera, D.S.G. for the 1st and 2(C) Respondents

Vidura Gunaratne for the 9th Respondent

7A. H. P. Karunathilake,

Deputy Director Enforcement and Regional Development, National Gem and Jewellery Authority, Regional Office, Ratnapura. 8. M. B. N. S. Munamalpe, Assistant Director Enforcement and Regional Development, National Gem and Jewellery Authority, Regional Office, Ratnapura. 8A. M. P. I. C. Manchanayake,

Assistant Director Enforcement and Regional Development, National Gem and Jewellery Authority, Regional Office, Ratnapura. 9. J. M. Jayathilake Bandara, No. 29, Mihindu Place, Hidellana, Ratnapura. Respondents

Page 5 of 21

Written Submissions:

11.09.2019 by the 9th Respondent

Argued on: 21.11.2022

Decided on: 26.07.2024

Janak De Silva, J.

The dispute is on the issue of a gem mining licence to the 9th Respondent in

respect of the land called ‘Hiran Kumbura Owita’ situated in ‘Amuthagoda’ in the

Ratnapura district. He has been issued an annual gem mining licence for the

corpus from 2006 to 2013.

In 2014, the 1st and 2nd Appellants also applied for a gem mining license. The 1st

Respondent after due inquiry held that the 9th Respondent has been issued with

a licence to carry out gem mining on the corpus for years without any objection

by the Appellants and that the Appellants have failed to prove that the original

owners of the corpus were entitled to an equal undivided 1/6 share. Accordingly,

the application of the Appellants was rejected.

The Appellants appealed to the 2nd Respondent in terms of Section 15 (8) of the

National Gem and Jewellery Authority Act No, 50 of 1993 (“Act”). The 2nd

Respondent dismissed the appeal. He held that the 9th Respondent had

established his right to a 2/3 share of the corpus and thus entitled to a gem

mining licence. It was further held that the Appellants have failed to establish

their entitlement to a gem mining licence and also that the corpus differs from

the land described in the deeds relied upon by the Appellants.

Page 6 of 21

Right to a Gem Mining License

The 1st Respondent has been empowered by Section 15 of the Act to issue gem

mining licences. These licences can be issued in conformity with the State Gem

Corporation By-laws, No. 1 of 1971 which have been kept alive by Section 54

(2)(h) of the Act.

According to By-Law 8 (2), no licence shall be granted to any person unless (a)

he himself owns the land or (b) he has obtained the consent of so many of the

other owners as to ensure that the applicant and such other consenting owners

together own at least two-thirds of the land in respect of which the application

has been made.

Neither the Appellants nor the 9th Respondent claim to be the absolute owners

of the corpus. Both rely on the second limb, namely that the applicant and such

other consenting owners together own at least two-thirds of the land in respect

of which the application has been made.

Both the claims of the Appellants and the 9th Respondent flow from rights of

paraveni nilakarayas to the corpus. Hence, it is necessary to examine the nature

of paraveni or praveni rights which formed part of the system of land tenure

under the Kandyan Kings in order to decide whether either party has satisfied

the required criteria.

Service Tenures during Kandyan Kingdom

The use of the word tenure rather than ownership, appears to indicate the

existence of a distinction between them.

According to Liyanapatabandi and Dharmasiri [L. N. D. Liyanapatabandi and L. M.

Dharmasiri, Evolution of Land Tenure and Land Ownership: Land Possession of

Page 7 of 21

Temples and Shrines in Sri Lanka, Research Reinforcement, Vol. 10: Issue 1 (May-

October, 2022), page 20]:

“Land ownership may be defined as a bundle of rights. The rights are

associated with ownership of land, such as rights to use, rent and sell it,

use of any types of resources, make buildings, extracting minerals, and so

on. However, the rights are limited by laws and regulations. However, Land

tenure is the relationship, whether legally or customarily defined,

among people, as individuals or groups, with respect to land. Land tenure

is an institution, i.e., rules invented by societies to regulate behavior. Rules

of tenure define how property rights to land are to be allocated within

societies. They define how access is granted to rights to use, control, and

transfer land, as well as associated responsibilities and restraints. In

simple terms, land tenure systems determine who can use what resources

for how long, and under what conditions (FAO, 2002).” (emphasis added)

Codrington [H. W. Codrington, Ancient Land Tenure and Revenue in Ceylon,

(Ceylon Government Press, July 1938), page 11] explains the classification by the

right enjoyed by a possessor in ancient Ceylon as follows:

“By paraveniya, in Sanskrit guise paravēniya, is denoted that which has

come down from one’s ancestors; the Ceylon Tamil form is paravani. The

Sanskrit word praveni has the meaning of “a braid of hair”; the Pali paveni

in addition has that of “series, succession, line; tradition, custom, usage”

[…] Such land nowadays often is considered as absolute property. […]

Opposed to paraveni is māruvena, “changing”. This is often defined as

tenure at will, but incorrectly as the tenant cannot be removed until the

end of the cultivation year or season. In practice the māruvena tenant

often remains without interference for many generations. This leads to

Page 8 of 21

claim that the land held is paraveni and but for the evidence of the Service

Tenures Register such a claim would difficult to rebut. This development of

māruvena tenure into paraveni doubtless has been going on through the

centuries”

In Herath v. Attorney General [60 N.L.R.193 at 205-206], Basnayake C.J.

succinctly explained the service tenures in existence during the times of the

Kandyan Kings. They are:

1. A village or gama in respect of which services (rajakariya) were performed

were of four kinds, viz., gabadagama, nindagama, viharagama, and

dewalagama.

2. Gabadagama is a royal village which was the exclusive property of the

Sovereign. The Royal Store or Treasury was supplied from the

gabadagama, which the tenants had to cultivate gratuitously in

consideration of being holders of praveni panguwas.

3. Nindagama is a village granted by the Sovereign to a chief or noble or

another person on a sannasa or grant. According to Codrington [supra.,

page 8], Ninda in Sanskirt means “one’s own”. The Tamil word was

“nintam” which meant “one’s own peculiar right, exemption from claim

by others, immunity”.

4. Viharagama is a village granted by the Sovereign to a vihare.

5. Dewalagama is a village granted by the Sovereign to a dewale.

6. Each gama or village consisted of a number of holdings or minor villages.

Each such holding or minor village was known as a panguwa. Each

panguwa consisted of a number of fields and gardens.

7. Panguwas were of two kinds, viz., praveni or paraveni panguwa and

māruvena panguwa.

Page 9 of 21

8. A praveni panguwa is a hereditary holding and a maruwena panguwa is a

holding given out to a tenant for each cultivation year or for a period of

years.

According to Wijayatunga [Harischandra Wijayatunga, Legal Philosophy in

Medieval Siṅhalē, First Ed., 1989, pages 198-201], in practice there came

into existence different terms to denote various types of paraveni

panguwas. Aňda paravēni was Crown land given to a person as a heritable

possession on condition that half of the produce be given to the State.

However, according to Codrington [supra., pages 11-12] this was land

which was originally the property of Government cleared and cultivated

by individuals without permission. The cultivators or the persons who

converted them into fields are entitled to one-half of the soil which they

may either sell or mortgage and which is heritable.

Kaņu-is paravēni is agricultural high land cultivated once every seven to

eight years and given to cultivator on condition that one fifth produce be

given to the owner. According to Codrington [supra. 8] these were

originally forests or jungles of large extent cut down and cleared by

individuals, which were sown once every seven or eight years. In other

words, they were chenas.

Karudena paravēni is heritable agricultural land given to a cultivator on

condition that one fifth of the produce be given to the owner.

Otu paravēni is land given as a heritable possession for which a tithe of

one tenth of the produce be paid to the owner. According to Codrington

[supra., page 12) this type of interest was alienable.

9. The holder of a panguwa was known as a nilakaraya. They were of two

kinds, praveni or paraveni nilakarayas and maruwena nilakarayas.

Page 10 of 21

10. Historically paraveni nilakarayas were originally hereditary holders under

the King before the grant of the royal village to the ninda lord. Basnayake

C.J., for the purpose of convenience denoted the term ‘ninda lord’ for the

grantee of gama, irrespective if it was a nindagama, viharagama or

dewalagama [supra., 205].

11. However, the ninda lord is not free to change them. They were free to

transmit their lands to their male heirs but were not free to sell or

mortgage their rights. They were obliged to perform services in respect of

their panguwas. The services varied accordingly as the ninda lord was an

individual, a vihare or a dewale. In the case of vihares or dewales, personal

services were such as keeping the buildings in repair, cultivating the fields

of the temple, preparing the daily dana, participating in the annual

procession, and performing services at the daily pooja of the vihare or

dewale. In the scheme of land tenure, the panguwa though consisting of

extensive lands is indivisible and the nilakarayas are jointly and severally

liable to render services or pay dues. Though the panguwa was indivisible,

especially after a praveni nilakaraya's right to sell, gift, devise, and

mortgage his panguwa came to be recognised, the practice came into

existence of different persons who obtained rights from a nilakaraya

occupying separate allotments of land for convenience of possession.

12. The māruvena nilakaraya though known as a tenant-at-will held on a

tenancy which lasted at least for one cultivation year at a time. Unlike the

praveni nilakaraya he could be changed by the ninda lord; but it was

seldom done. He went on year after year but was not entitled to transmit

his rights to his heirs. On the death of a māruvena tenant, his heirs are

entitled to continue only if they receive the tenancy.

Page 11 of 21

According to the notes of John D'Oyley, paraveni tenants are those who

held their lands before the nindagama or the temple village was granted

to the proprietor, and māruvena tenants are those who receive their

panguwas from the proprietor subsequent to the grant. This is confirmed

by the Service Tenures Commissioners, who in their report stated that the

only paraveni tenants were those who were on the land prior to the grant

of the village to the ninda lord or vihare or dewale.

Māruvena panguwa was also known as Bandara land or muttetu [Banda v. Soysa

(1998) 1 Sri.L.R. 255 at 257].

Developments under the British

The Rajakariya, services rendered by the people directly to the King, was

abolished by the British Government by an Order-in-Council dated 12th April

1832. Nevertheless, the service tenures system in relation to nindagama,

viharagama and devalagama continued. In fact, the Order-in-Council dated 12th

April 1832 specifically stated that such abolition should not be construed to

affect the services performed by nilakarayas to any temples, dewalayas and to

other owners or proprietors of such services.

The Service Tenures Ordinance No. 4 of 1870 (“Service Tenures Ordinance”) was

enacted to define the services due by the “praveni” tenant of “wiharagama”,

“dewalagama” and “nindagama” lands, and to provide for the commutation of

those services. Hence any customary meaning ascribed to these terms were

replaced by statutory definitions to the extent of any inconsistency.

Page 12 of 21

The Service Tenures Ordinance provided statutory definitions to the following

terms:

“Māruvena nilakaraya” shall mean the tenant at will of a maruwena pangu.

“Maruwena pangu” shall mean an allotment or share of land in a temple or

nindagama village held by one or more tenants at will.

“Nindagama proprietor” shall mean any proprietor of nindagama entitled to

demand services from any praveni nilakaraya or maruwena nilakaraya, for and

in respect of a praveni pangu or maruwena pangu held by him.

“Praveni nilakaraya” shall mean the holder of a praveni pangu in perpetuity,

subject to the performance of certain services to the temple or nindagama

proprietor.

“Praveni pangu” shall mean an allotment or share of land in a temple or

nindagama village held in perpetuity by one or more holders, subject to the

performance of certain services to the temple or nindagama proprietor.

“Wiharagama proprietor” or “dewalagama proprietor” shall include the officer

of any wihara or dewala respectively entitled to demand services from any

praveni nilakaraya or maruwena nilakaraya, for and in respect of a praveni

pangu or maruwena pangu held by him.

Bandara land in a nindagama was construed as the absolute property of the

ninda lord (the grantee of the gama) and did not come within the scope of the

Service Tenure Ordinance.

Several decisions which followed the enactment of the Service Tenures

Ordinance held that the paraveni nilakaraya was only the tenant and not owner

[Jotihamy v. Dingirihamy (1906) 3 Bal. Reports 67; Kaluwa v. Rankira (1907) 3

Bal. Reports 264]. However, in Appuhamy v. Menike [19 N.L.R. 361], Ennis, J.

Page 13 of 21

and De Sampayo, J. (with Shaw, J. dissenting) held that paraveni nilakarayas are

the owners of the land although the nature of ownership was not sufficient to

maintain a partition action.

In Herath [supra.] Court was required to examine the nature of the rights held

by a parveni nilakaraya. Basnayake CJ went on to hold that a paraveni nilakaraya

is not the owner of the lands comprised in his share of the paraveni panguwa

within the meaning of the expression “owner” in Section 3 (1)(b) of the Land

Redemption Ordinance, No. 61 of 1942. According to him (at page 207), the

ninda lord, be it a nindagama, viharagama or dewalagama was the owner and

the nilakarayas continue as the tenants of the grantee.

However, in Attorney-General v. Herath [62 N.L.R. 145] the Privy Council

dissented from the view taken by Basnayake, C.J. in Herath [supra.]. The Privy

Council held that the word “owner” in Section 3 (1)(b) of the Land Redemption

Ordinance means a person possessing the attributes of ownership under the

general law and that a paraveni nilakaraya is an “owner” within the meaning of

that term.

This decision clearly established that a paraveni nilakaraya is the owner of the

land in issue.

The status of a paraveni nilakaraya and maruwena nilakaraya was put beyond

debate by the Nindagama Lands Act No. 30 of 1968 (“Nindagama Lands Act”).

Its preamble states that it is an Act to abolish the services due from the tenants

and holders of nindagama lands to the proprietors thereof, to make such tenants

and holders the absolute owners of such lands and to provide for the registration

of such tenants and holders as absolute owners thereof. Section 3 declared that

every tenant or holder of any nindagama land is thereby declared to be the

owner thereof.

Page 14 of 21

According to Section 31 (1) of the Nindagama Lands Act, Tenant, in relation to

any nindagama land, means a person who was, prior to the date of the

commencement of that Act, a maruwena nilakaraya of a maruwena pangu of

that land within the meaning of the Ordinance.

Holder in relation to any nindagama land was defined by Section 31 (1) of the

Nindagama Lands Act to mean a person who, was, prior to the date of the

commencement of that Act, a praveni nilakaraya of any praveni pangu of that

land within the meaning of the Nindagama Lands Act.

Therefore, the Nindagama Lands Act while clearing any lingering doubts of the

ownership of a praveni nilakaraya in a praveni pangu of a nindagama, also

declared that a maruwena nilakaraya is to be the owner of the maruwena

pangu. Section 29 of the Nindagama Lands Act stated that the Service Tenures

Ordinance shall cease to apply to any nindagama land.

Both disputing parties agree that the corpus is part of the paraveni panguwa of

the Sabaragamuwa Saman Dewalaya. Hence the ownership of the corpus will be

with the relevant paraveni nilakaraya and the parties are in a position to

establish their entitlement to a gem mining licence only upon proof that the

applicant and such other consenting owners together own at least two-thirds of

the land in respect of which the application has been made.

Title of the Parties

The dispute between the parties can be narrowed down to the starting point of

the two pedigrees presented by them.

According to the Appellants, the original owners were Henaka Arachchilage

Hamy Vidane, Henaka Arachchilage Mohotihamy, Madewatte Punchirala,

Page 15 of 21

Henaka Arachchilage Lamaethana, Henaka Arachchilage Mohottala and Henaka

Arachchilage Awusadahamy who held an undivided 1/6 share.

According to the 9th Respondent, the original owners were Henaka Arachchilage

Hamy Vidane who held an undivided 5/12 share, Henaka Arachchilage

Mohotihamy who held an undivided 5/12 share, Henaka Arachchilage

Danthahamy who held an undivided 1/12 share and Madamemawatta

Punchirala who held an undivided 1/12 share.

The claim of the Appellants that Henaka Arachchilage Hamy Vidane, Henaka

Arachchilage Mohottihamy, Madamewatte Punchirala, Henaka Arachchilage

Lamaethana, Henaka Arachchilage Mohottala and Henaka Arachchilage

Awusadahamy held an undivided 1/6 share of the corpus each is based upon the

register maintained in terms of the Service Tenures Ordinance.

The material before Court reflects that the relevant register has an entry for

Henaka Archchilage panguwa. As explained above, each gama or village in the

service tenure system consisted of a number of holdings or minor villages. Each

such holding or minor village was known as a panguwa. Each panguwa consisted

of a number of fields and gardens. According to the register, one of the fields or

gardens falling within Henaka Archchilage panguwa is Hiran Kumbura.

However, the said register identifies Henaka Arachchilage Hamy, Henaka

Arachchilage Mohottihamy, Madamewatte Punchirala, Madamewatte

Danthahamy, Kuruwita Lokuhamy, Mudanthaka Mohottala and Henaka

Arachchilage Awusadahamy as the paraveni nilakarays of the Henaka

Archchilage panguwa which is more than one paraveni nilakaraya, relied on by

the Appellants and three relied on by the 9th Respondent.

Page 16 of 21

According to Section 9 of the Service Tenures Ordinance, the Commissioners

appointed in terms of the said Ordinance shall after due inquiry determine:

(a) the tenure of each pangu subject to service in the village, whether it be

praveni or maruwena;

(b) the names, so far as the same can be ascertained, of the proprietors and

holders of each praveni pangu;

(c) the nature and extent of the services due for each praveni pangu;

(d) the annual amount of money payment for which such services may be

fairly commuted at the time the registries are made.

Their determination was made final and conclusive as to the tenure of the

pangus in such village, whether it be praveni or maruwena, the nature of the

service due for and in respect of each praveni pangu, and the annual amount of

money payment for which the services due for each praveni pangu may be fairly

commuted at the time those registries are made.

Accordingly, it was contended on behalf of the 9th Respondent that the entry in

the register does not provide conclusive evidence as to the identity of paraveni

nilakarayas.

In Samarasinghe v. Weerapulla [(1882) 5 S.C.C. 40] Clarence A.C.J. held that the

entry in the service tenures commutation register, though conclusive against the

tenants on the question of tenure, is not conclusive against anybody on the

question – Who is the owner of the nindagama?

In Bogolle Punchirala and Another v. Kadapatawehera Ding and Others [(1884)

6 S.C.C. 157], Burnside C.J. (at page 158) held that a District Judge was not bound

by the finding of the Commissioners that a person was a ninda proprietor of the

village in question. Clarence, J. (at page 159) was of the view that the Service

Page 17 of 21

Tenure Ordinance proceeds on the assumption that the inquiry by the

Commissioners concerns a panguwa which is subject to service and if the

Commissioners were mistaken, such act is not made conclusive.

In Hevawitarane v. Dangan Rubber Co. Ltd. [17 N.L.R. 49 at 52], Wood Renton

A.C.J. took the view that the entry of any land in the register prepared under the

Service Tenure Ordinance as a paraveni land belonging to a specified tenant is

conclusive evidence as to the nature of the tenure and relevant, but not

conclusive evidence as to the identity of the tenant. Pereira, J. (at page 54)

appears to take a different view.

Our attention was also drawn to the decision in Wanduragala v. Somananda [26

N.L.R. 417 at 420] where it was held that the Service Tenure Ordinance makes

the register final and conclusive as to the tenure of the pangu, whether it

be paraveni or maruwena, the nature of the service due for each paraveni

pangu and the annual amount of money payment for which the services may be

fairly commuted. It nowhere makes the registration of lands as a nindagama

conclusive proof of the existence of it as a nindagama.

I am of the view that the correct approach is not to accept the details registered

in a register maintained in terms of the Service Tenure Ordinance as final and

conclusive evidence as to the identity of the tenant as the legislative intent is

clear. Only the tenure of the pangus in such village, whether it be praveni or

māruvena, the nature of the service due for and in respect of each praveni

pangu, and the annual amount of money payment for which the services due for

each praveni pangu may be fairly commuted at the time those registries are

made are made final and conclusive.

Page 18 of 21

Nevertheless, details of the names of the proprietors and holders of each praveni

pangu contained in such registers are relevant in terms of the Evidence

Ordinance and can, in conjunction with other evidence, assist in proving the

identity of the paraveni nilakarayas.

As adumbrated above, the details of the register pertaining to the corpus does

not greatly assist either the Appellants or the 9th Respondent in establishing the

requirements to obtain a gem mining licence since the number of paraveni

nilakarayas relied on both parties vary with the number of paraveni nilakarayas

for the corpus in the register.

However, there is a crucial weakness in the case presented by the Appellants.

According to them, Henaka Arachchilage Mohottihamy, held an undivided 1/6

share of the corpus as a paraveni nilakaraya. However, in the pedigree they have

presented, the rights of Henaka Arachchilage Mohottihamy has been transferred

upon deed Nos. 335 dated 12.02.1932, 8121 dated 08.07.1955, 2994 dated

01.09.1961 and 10499 dated 23.02.1968 on the basis that he held 5/12 share of

the corpus as claimed by the 9th Respondent and not 1/6 share as claimed by the

Appellants.

Moreover, according to ancient measures of capacity and surface, 10 Lahas is

equal to 1 Pela and 4 Pelas is equal to 1 Amunum [See (2002) 1 Sri.L.R. 73]. The

corpus is 12 paddy lahas sowing in extent whereas the deeds on which the

Appellants rely on refer to a land 40 paddy amunu in extent which shows a great

disparity with the extent of the corpus.

Furthermore, the 9th Respondent in obtaining the gem mining licences for the

previous years obtained the written consent of the Appellants. This is an

acknowledgement of the pedigree relied upon by the 9th Respondent and thus

the Appellants are estopped from contending otherwise.

Page 19 of 21

Finally, in terms of Section 15 (13) of the Act, this Court can, in an appeal made

under Section 15 (11), either allow such appeal and direct the 1st Respondent to

issue or renew the licence which is the subject of that appeal or disallow such

appeal.

The learned DSG submitted that the Appellants have only prayed for the grant

and/or issue an interim order immediately suspending the gem mining licence

issued to the 9th Respondent in respect of the land called ‘Hiran Kumbura Owita’

situated in ‘Amuthugoda’ and refrain the 9th Respondent from carrying out any

gem mining operations on the said land until the final determination of this

appeal and for costs and such other relief as to Court shall seem meet. It was

submitted that the licence in issue has now lapsed and the question of setting

aside the licence does not arise. There is merit in this submission.

For all the foregoing reasons, the appeal is dismissed. Parties shall bear their

costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Vijith K. Malalgoda, P.C., J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Samayawardhena, J.

I had the advantage of reading in draft the judgment of my brother, Justice De

Silva.

I agree with the conclusion that this appeal should be dismissed, primarily

because it now holds only academic interest. The appeal pertains to an

Page 20 of 21

application for a gem mining licence made in 2014 for one year. However, I would

like to express my opinion on some aspects because the authorities will take

those matters into consideration in future applications.

There is no dispute that this land is subject to Rajakariya. The history and ambit

of the Rajakariya system and the Service Tenures Ordinance were also discussed

in my judgment in Sirisena and Others v. Matheshamy and Others

(SC/APPEAL/82/2010, SC Minutes of 13.11.2023). Section 9 of the Service

Tenures Ordinance is not conclusive on the question of who the owners of the

paraveni pangu were at the time the Register was made because, according to

Section 9(b), the determination of the names of the proprietors and holders of

each paraveni pangu should be made “so far as the same can be ascertained”.

However, the names of the proprietors and holders of each paraveni pangu in

the Commissioners’ determination present prima facie evidence until disproved

by the opposing party.

It seems that according to the Commissioners’ determination, as entered in the

Register, there are nine original owners. However, according to the 9th

respondent, only four of them are original owners. I am not satisfied that the 9th

respondent has disproved the inclusion of the other five as original owners in

the Register.

The 9th respondent seems to have asserted that Henaka Arachchilage

Mohottihamy, who is one of the original owners, had 1/6 share is not acceptable

since Mohottihamy had later transferred his rights on the basis that he held 5/12

share of the corpus, not 2/12 share. This argument does not suggest that

Mohottihamy did not have 2/12 (=1/6 share). It only suggests that he did not

have 5/12 share. In any event, it affects only that 1/6 share. The 5/6 share of

other five original owners remains unaffected. What the appellants need to

Page 21 of 21

establish is that they have received the consent of more than 2/3 of the owners

of the land.

It seems that the extent of land for which the appellants have sought a gem

mining license is 12 paddy lahas, whereas the deeds of the appellants refer to a

much larger extent of 40 paddy amunus. The greater includes the less. Therefore

the disparity cannot be held against the appellants.

The failure of the appellants to object to the issuance of gem mining licences in

favour of the 9th respondent previously cannot be regarded as “written consent”

on the part of the appellants.

Judge of the Supreme Court