==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

H.M. Bandara Menike,

Nattharampotha, Polgaswela,

Kundasale.

Plaintiff

SC APPEAL NO: SC/APPEAL/23/2014

SC LA NO: SC/HCCA/LA/385/2011

HCCA KANDY NO: CP/HCCA/733/2005A (F)

DC KANDY NO: P/11663

Vs.

1. S.M. Dingiri Banda,

Pansalawatte Road,

Walamale, Ulpothawatte,

Kundasale.

2. H.M. Biso Manike,

Madanwela, Hanguranketha.

3. H.M. Punchibanda,

Walamale, Ampitiya.

4. Tanthirige Wilfred De Silva,

No. 39, Gurudeniya Road,

Ampitiya.

5. T. Leslie De Silva,

No. 39, Gurudeniya Road,

Ampitiya.

Defendants

AND BETWEEN

2

SC/APPEAL/23/2014

4. Tanthirige Wilfred De Silva, (Deceased)

4A/5. T. Leslie De Silva,

Both of No. 39,

Gurudeniya Road,

Ampitiya.

Defendant-Appellants

Vs.

H.M. Bandara Menike,

Nattharampotha,

Polgaswela,

Kundasale.

Plaintiff-Respondent

1. S.M. Dingiri Banda,

Pansalawatte Road,

Walamale, Ulpothawatte,

Kundasale.

2. H.M. Biso Manike,

Madanwela, Hanguranketha.

3. H.M. Punchibanda,

Walamale, Ampitiya.

Defendant-Respondents

AND NOW BETWEEN

T. Leslie De Silva,

No. 39,

Gurudeniya Road,

Ampitiya.

4A and 5th Defendant-Appellant-

Appellant

Vs.

3

SC/APPEAL/23/2014

H.M. Bandara Menike,

Nattharampotha, Polgaswela,

Kundasale.

Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent

1. S.M. Dingiri Banda,

Pansalawatte Road,

Walamale, Ulpothawatte,

Kundasale.

Presently at,

Ulpatthawaththa,

Temple Road,

Ketawala, Lewla,

Kandy.

2. H.M. Biso Manike, (Deceased)

2A. D. M. Chandrasekara Banda,

Both of Madanwela, Hanguranketha.

3. H.M. Punchibanda,

Walamale, Ampitiya.

Defendant-Respondent-Respondents

Before: Hon. Justice Priyantha Jayawardena, P.C.

Hon. Justice A.L. Shiran Gooneratne

Hon. Justice Mahinda Samayawardhena

Counsel: Dr. Sunil Coorey with Sudarshani Coorey for the 4A and 5th

Defendant-Appellant-Appellant.

Panchali Ekanayaka for the Plaintiff-Respondent-

Respondent.

Chanaka Kulathunga for the 1st Defendant-Respondent-

Respondent.

Argued on : 26.10.2021

4

SC/APPEAL/23/2014

Written submissions:

by the 4A and 5th Defendant-Appellant-Appellant on

04.04.2014 and 02.11.2021.

by the 1st Defendant-Respondent-Respondent on

02.10.2019, 05.07.2021 and 01.11.2021.

Decided on: 28.02.2024

Samayawardhena, J.

The plaintiff filed this action to partition the land described in the

schedule to the plaint among the plaintiff and the 1st and 2nd defendants

in equal shares, each being entitled to a 1/3 share of the land. After an

uncontested trial in which only the evidence of the plaintiff was led, the

judgment dated 15.07.1992 was entered allotting the shares as

previously mentioned.

The District Court refused the 4th defendant’s application for intervention

after the judgment was delivered. Thereafter the Court of Appeal made

order dated 07.06.2000 directing the District Court to add the 4th

defendant as a party and to allow him to place evidence of his interests

in the land and to amend the interlocutory decree accordingly. Upon this

direction, the District Judge allowed further evidence to be led and made

order dated 05.12.2005 whereby it was decided to divide the 1/3 share

originally allotted to the 1st defendant between the 1st and 4th defendants

equally, i.e. each being entitled to a 1/6 share. No change was made in

respect of the 1/3 share each allotted to the plaintiff and the 2nd

defendant. On appeal, the High Court set aside this order and restored

the previous judgment of the District Court dated 15.07.1992. This

appeal by the 4th defendant is against the judgment of the High Court.

5

SC/APPEAL/23/2014

Heen Banda was at one time owner of the land to be partitioned by deed

No. 500 dated 22.10.1942 (P2). According to the deed, he became entitled

to “One undivided third part or share of and all that land called

Ulpathewatte of three amunams in paddy sowing extent”. Heen Banda

had plan No. 262 dated 09.11.1945 (P3) prepared to depict this land.

According to this plan, the extent of the land is 1 acre, 2 roods and 3/4

of a perch. Heen Banda transferred undivided 2 roods to the 2nd

defendant by deed No. 287 dated 17.12.1974 (P5), and another undivided

2 roods to the plaintiff by deed No. 288 (P4) executed on the same date

by the same notary. After the execution of these two deeds, Heen Banda

was left with only 2 roods and 3/4 of a perch. These facts are not

disputed.

Thereafter, Heen Banda transferred an undivided extent of one pela

paddy sowing area to the 4th defendant by deed No. 4390 dated

17.03.1977 (5D5) and another same extent of land to the 1st defendant

by deed No. 4392 (1D1) executed on the same date by the same notary.

According to traditional Sinhala land measurements as reported in

Ratnayake v. Kumarihamy [2002] 1 Sri LR 65 at 81, 1 pela of paddy

sowing extent is equivalent to 2 roods and 20 perches. After the execution

of deeds P4 and P5, it is undisputed that Heen Banda did not have rights

on the land to transfer one pela each to the 1st and 4th defendants. As I

stated previously, he had only 2 roods and 3/4 of a perch left. Therefore,

after the transfer of his remaining rights to the 4th defendant by deed

5D5, Heen Banda did not have any rights to alienate to the 1st defendant

by deed 1D1.

However, the 1st defendant claims priority over the 4th defendant’s deed

by prior registration. Although the 4th defendant’s deed is prior in date of

execution, it is not prior in date by registration. The 1st defendant’s deed

was registered at the Land Registry before the 4th defendant’s deed was

6

SC/APPEAL/23/2014

registered there. This is the crux of the matter on this appeal. The contest

of this appeal is only between the 1st defendant and the 4th defendant.

There is no issue with regard to the 1/3 share each of the plaintiff and

the 2nd defendant.

In terms of section 7(1) of the Registration of Documents Ordinance, No.

23 of 1927, as amended, an instrument affecting land is void as against

all parties claiming an adverse interest thereto on valuable consideration

by virtue of any subsequent instrument which is duly registered under

the Ordinance. If A sells his land to B by a notarially executed deed and

after some time sells the same to C in the same way, the second sale

overrides the first sale, if C registers his deed before the first deed is

registered. Section 7(2) enacts that fraud or collusion in obtaining such

subsequent instrument or in securing the prior registration thereof shall

defeat the priority of the person claiming thereunder.

However, registration is not indispensable for the validity of a deed. Want

of registration does not make an otherwise perfect title imperfect. An

unregistered deed may be considered void when compared to a registered

one, but it remains valid and enforceable for all other purposes.

Three main requisites need to be satisfied for the doctrine of priority by

registration to operate:

(1) Both deeds shall proceed from the same source.

(2) The interests sought to be conferred shall be adverse, creating a

clash of interests.

(3) The conveyance shall be for valuable consideration.

There is no dispute that the 1st defendant’s deed and the 4th defendant’s

deed originate from the same source for valuable consideration. But the

issue is whether the interests sought to be conferred by Heen Banda by

7

SC/APPEAL/23/2014

those two deeds are adverse, creating a clash of interests. The deeds must

conflict with one another to claim priority by registration.

A. St. V. Jayewardene, The Law Relating to the Registration of Deeds

(1919), page 80 states:

Instruments may be said to be adverse when the rights dealt with

by them are inconsistent or antagonistic, but not when the rights

dealt with by one, do not interfere with, or infringe the rights dealt

with, by the other.

In Samaranayake v. Cornelis (1943) 44 NLR 508 at 511 De Kretser J.

states:

The argument that the competing deeds must come from the same

source is quite correct if properly understood. It does not mean that

they must come from the same person or persona. As de Sampayo

J. put it in Bernard v. Fernando [16 N. L. R. 438], “The truth, I think,

is that the expression ‘adverse interest’ refers only to cases where

two persons claim interests traceable to the same origin”, i.e., the

lines of title must not be parallel but must intersect at some point

and so produce the clash of interests.

In Wijewardena v. Lorenzu Perera (1880) 4 SCC 9, the plaintiff took a

secondary mortgage of a piece of land, and his mortgage expressly recited

that the land was subject to the claimant’s primary mortgage. The

plaintiff registered his secondary mortgage prior to the registration of the

claimant’s primary mortgage. The Supreme Court held that the plaintiff’s

priority of registration did not give his mortgage priority over the

claimant’s mortgage. Cayley C.J. states at pages 9-10:

[The Ordinance] renders void a prior unregistered deed as against

parties claiming an adverse interest thereto by virtue of a

8

SC/APPEAL/23/2014

subsequent deed which has been duly registered. But in the present

case there is no conflict of adverse interests in the deeds. The same

interest is not dealt with by the two deeds. The plaintiff’s deed

purports to creates a secondary mortgage, and the claimant’s

primary mortgage is expressly recited in the plaintiff’s deed. It is

clear that the intention of the parties was that the plaintiff’s

mortgage should be subject to the claimant’s. The two mortgages are

not adverse one to other, but the second one hypothecates such

interest only as the mortgagor had left to him in the land after the

first mortgage was effected.

In the case of Mohamad Ali v. Weerasuriya (1914) 17 NLR 417 the Court

impressed upon the requirement of “adverse interest” as an

indispensable one for a successful plea for priority by registration.

In Jayawardena v. Subadra Menike (SC/APPEAL/32/2009, SC Minutes

of 04.03.2010) it was held:

It is quite clear that in terms of section 7(1) of the Registration

of Documents Ordinance, an instrument becomes void if it is not duly

registered, provided that there is an adverse claim against the said

instrument by virtue of a subsequent instrument, which is duly

registered.

In Jinaratana Thero v. Somaratana Thero (1946) 32 NLR 11, Jayetileke

J. held that “To interpret a deed, the expressed intention of the parties

must be discovered.”

On the facts and circumstances of this case, it is evident that Heen Banda

did not intend to dispose of the same portion of land to two different

people dishonestly or otherwise. According to the schedules of the two

deeds, Heen Banda transferred “An undivided extent of one pela paddy

sowing towards the West” of the land to the 4th defendant by deed No.

9

SC/APPEAL/23/2014

4390 dated 17.03.1977 (5D5) and “An undivided one pela paddy sowing

towards the North” of the land to the 1st defendant by deed No. 4392

(1D1) executed on the same date by the same notary. The deeds 5D5 and

1D1 are not competing deeds and there is no clash of interests. The

argument of learned counsel for the 1st defendant that since no divided

portions were transferred, both deeds convey “some adverse or

inconsistent interest” in the land to attract the applicability of the

statutory principle of priority by registration is unacceptable.

Section 7(4) of the Registration of Documents Ordinance states that

registration of an instrument under the Ordinance shall not cure any

defect in the instrument or confer upon it any effect or validity which it

would not otherwise have except the priority conferred by the section.

Prior registration does not confer title on the holder of the prior registered

subsequent deed.

There is no ambiguity as to what was intended to be conveyed by the said

two deeds by Heen Banda. He wanted to convey equal shares to both the

1st and 4th defendants but from different parts of the larger land. If there

is any ambiguity, the court can look for extrinsic evidence to resolve the

ambiguity.

It was held in the Supreme Court case of Appuhamy v. Gallella (1976) 78

NLR 404:

Where the extent of a grant of land is stated in an ambiguous

manner in a conveyance, it is legitimate to look at the conveyance in

the light of the circumstances which surrounded it in order to

ascertain what was therein expressed as the intention of the parties.

It is permissible to resort to extrinsic evidence in order to resolve the

ambiguity relating to the subject matter referred to in the

conveyance. In such circumstances it is proper to have regard to the

10

SC/APPEAL/23/2014

subsequent conduct of each of the parties, especially when such

conduct amounts to an admission against the party’s proprietary

interest.

In the instant case, after Heen Banda had executed the two deeds, the 1st

defendant entered into possession of the northern portion of the land and

the 4th defendant entered into possession of the south-western portion of

the land. The preliminary plan and the report clearly confirm this. The

buildings of the northern portion of the land including the house marked

D were claimed by the 1st defendant before the surveyor and the house

marked F in the south-western boundary was claimed by the 4th

defendant. There is no dispute over these improvements. The house

claimed by the 1st defendant is in lot 1 in the preliminary plan whereas

the house claimed by the 4th defendant is in lot 2 in the same plan and

the two lots are separated by a “ගල් වැට”. These circumstances amply

demonstrate the intention of not only the transferor Heen Banda but also

the 1st and 4th defendants.

In Dingiri Naide v. Kirimenike (1955) 57 NLR 559 it was held that “Where

several deeds form part of one transaction and are contemporaneously

executed, each deed must speak only as part of the one transaction.”

Hence I hold that the doctrine of priority by registration is inapplicable in

this instance.

The District Court correctly analysed the evidence from the proper

perspective and gave effect to the intention of Heen Banda. Accordingly,

the remaining interest of Heen Banda was divided equally between the

1st and the 4th defendants (each receiving a 1/6 share). However, the High

Court took the view that there was “no sufficient material available to

arrive at such finding” by the District Court, despite there being, as I

previously explained, sufficient material to support that conclusion.

11

SC/APPEAL/23/2014

The main argument of learned counsel for the 1st defendant is that the

Court of Appeal did not set aside the original judgment of the District

Court dated 15.07.1992 whereby the entire land was divided equally

among the plaintiff and the 1st and 2nd defendants, but only allowed the

4th defendant to place evidence of his interests in the land before the

District Court and the amendment of the interlocutory decree, if

necessary. His argument is that since the Court of Appeal did not set

aside the original judgment of the District Court, the 4th defendant’s

appeal must necessarily fail as the District Court could not have altered

its own judgment. If that argument is accepted, the Court of Appeal order

allowing the 4th defendant to lead evidence to establish his rights to the

land and to amend the interlocutory decree accordingly is meaningless.

I reject that argument unhesitatingly.

This Court granted leave to appeal against the judgment of the High

Court on the following questions of law:

(a) Did the High Court err in holding that the intention of Heen Banda in

executing deeds 1D1 and 5D5 was to convey equally to the 1st and

4th defendants his balance 1/3 share, was not relevant?

(b) In terms of the contents of the schedules of the said two deeds

should those two deeds be read together?

(c) Are the said two deeds only one transaction although contained in

two separate documents?

(d) Did the High Court err in holding that deed 1D1 gets priority by prior

registration over deed 5D5?

I answer the questions of law in the affirmative and set aside the

judgment of the High Court dated 23.08.2011 and restore the order of

the District Court dated 05.12.2005 and allow the appeal with costs

payable by the 1st defendant to the 4(a) defendant.

12

SC/APPEAL/23/2014

Judge of the Supreme Court

Priyantha Jayawardena, P.C., J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court