==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

1. Rev. E.H. Palitha

Mission House, Liyanwala, Padukka.

1A. Rev. Ranjan Karunaratne

Maithri Christ Church,

Preeman Mawatha, Anuradhapura.

2. Raja Uswetakeiyawa

No.10/1, Kotugodella Street, Kandy.

3. Cyril Piyasena Wijayahewa

No.646/1 A, Henawatte Road,

Gonawala, Kelaniya.

4. Dharmadasa Kumarage,

No.306/47,

Thalawathugoda Road, Madiwela, Kotte.

5. Munisami Nesamani

Danibar Mawatha, Hatton.

The Trustees of Christian Labour

Brotherhood of No.39, YMBA Building,

Bristol Street, Colombo 01.

Plaintiff-Respondents-Appellants

SC/APPEAL/30/2022

SC/HCCCA/LA/40/2021 Vs.

WP/HCCA/MT/25/2017/F

DC MT. LAVINIA 2832/14/L

Kurugamage Kingsley Perera,

No.10/1, Attidiya Road, Ratmalana.

Defendant-Appellant-Respondent

2

SC/APPEAL/30/2022

Before: Hon. P. Padman Surasena, J.

Hon. Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J.

Hon. Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Samantha Vithana with Nishanthi Mendis and Samudika

de Silva for the Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellants.

Mokshini Jayamanne for the Defendant-Appellant-

Respondent.

Written Submissions:

By the Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant on 02.08.2022

By the Defendant-Appellant-Respondent on 24.11.2023

Argued on: 28.11.2023

Decided on: 31.01.2024

Samayawardhena, J.

The plaintiffs filed this action in the District Court of Mt. Lavinia seeking

a declaration of title to the land described in the 5th schedule to the plaint,

ejectment of the defendant therefrom and damages. On the summons

returnable date (29.05.2014), a proxy was filed on behalf of the

defendant. The District Court fixed 10.07.2014 to file the answer.

However, on 10.07.2014 the defendant being absent and unrepresented,

the Court fixed the case for ex parte trial. Following the ex parte trial, the

judgment was entered in favor of the plaintiff, and the ex parte decree

was duly served on the defendant. The defendant filed an application in

terms of section 86(2) of the Civil Procedure Code to vacate the ex parte

decree. At the inquiry, the registered Attorney for the defendant and the

defendant himself gave evidence. After the conclusion of the inquiry, the

learned District Judge by order dated 26.01.2017 refused to vacate the

ex parte judgment and dismissed the application of the defendant. On

3

SC/APPEAL/30/2022

appeal, the High Court of Civil Appeal of Mt. Lavinia set aside the said

order and directed the District Court to accept the answer and continue

with the case. The plaintiffs are before this Court against the judgment

of the High Court of Civil Appeal. This Court granted leave to appeal

against the said judgment on the question whether the judgment of the

High Court is contrary to law and against the weight of the evidence led

before the District Court.

This appeal revolves around a question of fact, not law. Learned counsel

for both parties accept that under section 86(2) of the Civil Procedure

Code the defaulting defendant needs only to satisfy Court that “he had

reasonable grounds for such default” in order to get the ex parte judgment

and decree vacated.

Section 86(2) of the Civil Procedure Code reads as follows:

Where, within fourteen days of the service of the decree entered

against him for default, the defendant with notice to the plaintiff

makes application to and thereafter satisfies court, that he had

reasonable grounds for such default, the court shall set aside

the judgment and decree and permit the defendant to proceed with

his defence as from the stage of default upon such terms as to costs

or otherwise as to the court shall appear proper.

The only reason given on behalf of the defendant at the inquiry into the

purging default was that the instructing Attorney for the defendant

mistakenly heard the date to file the answer as 16.07.2014 instead of

10.07.2014. Both counsel agree that, if this reason is acceptable, the ex

parte judgment shall be vacated. It is for this reason, I stated that this

appeal concerns a question fact, not law.

4

SC/APPEAL/30/2022

As learned counsel for the defendant emphasises in the written

submissions, the learned District Judge dismissed the defendant’s

application on the basis that the defendant’s version cannot be believed.

It is important to note that the whole evidence at the inquiry was led

before the District Judge by whom the impugned order was delivered. In

the well-written order running into 14 pages, the learned District Judge

has meticulously analysed the evidence and came to the conclusion that

she cannot accept the evidence of the instructing Attorney on the

mishearing of the date given for the answer.

Let me now consider the basis on which the High Court reversed the order

of the District Judge. The High Court order virtually runs into two pages,

and the relevant part reads as follows:

The reason adduced for the defendant under section 86(2) of the

Civil Procedure Code is that the Attorney at Law of the defendant

Mr. Thushara Nilantha Daskon heard the date as 16.07.2014 and

so entered in his diary. He has given evidence and he has produced

his diary.

But the learned district judge has not believed this and had not

vacated the ex parte judgment and the decree. It appears that one

of the reasons as to why the learned district judge did not believe

the above evidence is that Mr. Daskon has written in his diary under

10.07.2014 as ‘Kamkaru Sevana Case’. The explanation given was

however that he is having a consultation about 05 or 06 days

previous to the date of the action and that entry related to such a

consultation.

Another reason that the learned district judge did not believe the

said evidence is that the defendant stating in evidence that the

answer was prepared in the month of August. However this evidence

5

SC/APPEAL/30/2022

does not become conclusive since the answer bears the date 26th of

July 2014. Although this is also considered as an indication that

false evidence is given it could be that the defendant who is not a

professional mistakenly thought that the answer was prepared in

the month of August and that for 16th of July the answer mistakenly

was dated as 26th of July.

The provisions of section 86(2) reads as “Where, within fourteen

days of the service of the decree entered against him for default, the

defendant with notice to the plaintiff makes application to and

thereafter satisfies court, that he had reasonable grounds for such

default, the court shall set aside the judgment and decree and permit

the defendant to proceed with his defence as from the stage of

default upon such terms as to costs or otherwise as to the court shall

appear proper”.

Hence it appears to this court that the defendant has by evidence

adduced sufficiently established that he had a reasonable ground

for the default.

The High Court only highlights two reasons for disbelieving the

defendant’s version by the trial Judge. I do not venture to enumerate

other reasons given by the learned District Judge in her 14-page order

for her inability to accept the defence version. Assuming those are the

only two reasons given, can the High Court sitting in appeal reverse the

said findings of fact of the District Judge in the manner it did in this

appeal?

The High Court does not explain why the trial Judge was wrong in

refusing to accept the explanation provided by the Attorney for writing

down “Kamkaru Sevena case” on 10.07.2014 (the date the case was

called for filing the answer) in his professional diary. The High Court has

6

SC/APPEAL/30/2022

not analysed the evidence at all but says “Hence it appears to this court

that the defendant has by evidence adduced sufficiently established that

he had a reasonable ground for the default”. To say the least, this is very

unsatisfactory.

It is trite law that, the findings of fact of the trial judge who has the

priceless advantage of seeing and hearing witnesses giving evidence,

thereby getting the opportunity to observe inter alia the demeanour and

deportment of the witnesses, are regarded as sacrosanct and should not

be lightly disturbed unless there are compelling reasons. There are no

live witnesses before the appellate Court but only printed evidence. It is

important to bear in mind that the trial Judge has the benefit of assessing

the evidence in its overall context to reach the final decision, unlike the

piecemeal approach adopted in presenting the case before the appellate

Court.

One of the issues before the Court of Appeal of the United Kingdom in the

recent case of Musst Holdings Ltd v. Astra Asset Management UK Ltd

[2023] EWCA Civ 128 was whether novation could be inferred from the

conduct of the parties involved in the case. Falk J. at paras 69-70 stated:

The question whether a novation can be inferred from the parties’

conduct is a question of fact, with which this court will not lightly

interfere. The judge had the benefit, which we do not, of a

consideration of all the evidence. It is quite clear from his decision

that he took careful account of the evidence as a whole in reaching

his conclusions. This was not simply a question of looking at a few

emails and invoices and determining that they amounted to an offer

and acceptance. The judge explained that he was considering the

documents to which he referred in their context. As Musst correctly

emphasised, this was an evaluative exercise. The comment made by

David Richards LJ in UK Learning Academy v. Secretary of State for

7

SC/APPEAL/30/2022

Education [2020] EWCA Civ 370 at [41] bears repeating: “As has

been frequently said, the trial judge is in the best position to assess

the evidence not only because the judge sees and hears the

witnesses but also because the judge can set the evidence on any

particular issue in its overall context. This is true also of an

assessment of what a particular document would convey to a

reasonable reader in the position of the party who received it, having

regard to all that had preceded it.”

In Pickford (A.P) v. Imperial Chemical Industries PLC [1998] 3 All ER 462,

the House of Lords held that the Court of Appeal should not have

interfered with the decision of the trial Judge that the appellants are not

liable to the respondent in damages because the respondent had not

discharged the onus of proving, as it was necessary to prove, that the

pain she suffered due to excessively long periods of typing was organic in

origin. Lord Hope of Craighead opined:

In the second place, the judge had the advantage of seeing and

hearing all the medical evidence. The majority of the Court of Appeal

said that they were well aware of the rules which define the

approach which an appellate court should adopt in these

circumstances. But they did not apply them as they should have

done in the circumstances. As Lord Bridge of Harwich said in

Wilsher v. Essex Area Health Authority [1988] AC 1074, 1091, the

advantage which the trial judge enjoys is not confined to conflicts of

primary fact on purely mundane matters between lay witnesses. In

this case the medical experts were at odds with each other about

complex issues which were particularly difficult to resolve as no

pathology for the condition known as PDA4 has yet been

demonstrated. They were examined and cross examined on these

issues over several days. Their demeanour and the manner which

8

SC/APPEAL/30/2022

they gave their evidence was before the judge, who saw and heard

them while they were in the witness box. All the Court of Appeal had

before them was the printed evidence.

In Peter Johan Devries and Another v. Australian National Railways

Commission and Another (1993) 112 ALR 641 the question before the

High Court of Australia (the apex Court in Australia) was whether the

Full Court of the Supreme Court of South Australia erred in setting aside

a finding of a trial Judge that the plaintiff had been injured as the result

of the defendants’ negligence in circumstances where the trial judge had

accepted the plaintiff’s evidence as to how the injury occurred. The High

Court answered this question in the affirmative and allowed the appeal.

Brennan, Gaudron and McHugh JJ. stated at paras 10-11:

More than once in recent years, this Court has pointed out that a

finding of fact by a trial judge, based on the credibility of a witness,

is not to be set aside because an appellate court thinks that the

probabilities of the case are against - even strongly against - that

finding of fact (See Brunskill (1985) 59 ALJR 842; 62 ALR 53; Jones

v. Hyde (1989) 63 ALJR 349; 85 ALR 23; Abalos v. Australian Postal

Commission (1990) 171 CLR 167). If the trial judge’s finding

depends to any substantial degree on the credibility of the witness,

the finding must stand unless it can be shown that the trial judge

“has failed to use or has palpably misused his (or her) advantage”

(S.S. Hontestroom v. S.S. Sagaporack (1927) AC 37, at p 47) or has

acted on evidence which was “inconsistent with facts

incontrovertibly established by the evidence” or which was

“glaringly improbable” (Brunskill (1985) 59 ALJR, at p 844; 62 ALR,

at p 57).

The evidence of the plaintiff was not glaringly improbable. Nor was

it inconsistent with facts incontrovertibly established by evidence.

9

SC/APPEAL/30/2022

Indeed, the plaintiff's account received much support from the

evidence of his wife and his fellow worker. The learned trial judge

dealt in detail with the inconsistencies between the plaintiff's

evidence and his out-of-court statements. No ground exists for

concluding that the judge failed to use or palpably misused his

advantage.

In Munasinghe v. Vidanage (1966) 69 NLR 97 the Privy Council quoted

with approval the following part of the speech of Viscount Simon in Watt

or Thomas v. Thomas (1947) AC 484 at 485-486:

If there is no evidence to support a particular conclusion (and this is

really a question of law) the appellate court will not hesitate so to

decide. But if the evidence as a whole can reasonably be regarded

as justifying the conclusion arrived at the trial, and especially if that

conclusion has been arrived at on conflicting testimony by a tribunal

which saw and heard the witnesses, the appellate court will bear in

mind that it has not enjoyed this opportunity and that the view of

the trial judge as to where credibility lies is entitled to great weight.

This is not to say that the judge of first instance can be treated as

infallible in determining which side is telling the truth or is refraining

from exaggeration. Like other tribunals, he may go wrong on a

question of fact, but it is a cogent circumstance that a judge of first

instance, when estimating the value of verbal testimony, has the

advantage (which is denied to courts of appeal) of having the

witnesses before him and observing the manner in which their

evidence is given.

In Munasinghe’s case the Privy Council stated that the Supreme Court

should not have reversed the findings of the trial judge who heard and

saw the witnesses giving evidence because it was a case of complicated

facts and there was a good deal to be said on each side and the findings

10

SC/APPEAL/30/2022

of the trial judge were not unreasonable. The Privy Council restored the

judgment of the trial Court.

Fradd v. Brown & Co. Ltd (1918) 20 NLR 282 is a similar case where the

Privy Council quashed the judgment of the Court of Appeal and restored

the judgment of the trial Court because the whole case depended upon

the veracity and trustworthiness of the witnesses who gave evidence at

the trial. The Privy Council stated at 282-283:

Accordingly, in those circumstances, immense importance attaches,

not only to the demeanour of the witnesses, but also in the course of

the trial and the general impression left on the mind of the Judge

present, who saw and noted everything that took place in regard to

what was said by one or other witness. It is rare that a decision of

a Judge so express, so explicit, upon a point of fact purely, is over-

ruled by a Court of Appeal, because Courts of Appeal recognize the

priceless advantage which a Judge of first instance has in matters

of that kind, as contrasted with any Judge of a Court of Appeal, who

can only learn from paper or from narrative of those who were

present. It is very rare that, in questions of veracity so direct and so

specific as these, a Court of Appeal will over-rule a Judge of first

instance.

Vide also Dharmatilleke Thero v. Buddharakkita Thero [1990] 1 Sri LR

211, Alwis v. Piyasena Fernando [1993] 1 Sri LR 119.

However, I must emphasise that this does not absolve the appellate Court

from its responsibility when it is fully convinced that the trial judge has

clearly erred in evaluating the evidence. Many injustices may lurk in

factual mistakes, surpassing errors of law.

It is in this context Ranasinghe J. (later C.J.) in De Silva v. Seneviratne

[1981] 2 Sri LR 7 at 17 stated:

11

SC/APPEAL/30/2022

On an examination of the principles laid down by the authorities

referred to above, it seems to me: that, where the trial judge’s

findings on questions of fact are based upon the credibility of

witnesses, on the footing of the trial judge’s perception of such

evidence, then such findings are entitled to great weight and the

utmost consideration, and will be reversed only if it appears to the

appellate Court that the trial judge has failed to make full use of the

“priceless advantage” given to him of seeing and listening to the

witnesses giving viva voce evidence, and the appellate Court is

convinced by the plainest consideration that it would be justified in

doing so: that, where the findings of fact are based upon the trial

judge’s evaluation of facts, the appellate Court is then in as good a

position as the trial judge to evaluate such facts, and no sanctity

attaches to such findings of fact of the trial judge: that, if on either

of these grounds, it appears to the appellate Court that such findings

of fact should be reversed, then the appellate Court “ought not to

shrink from that task”.

In Fox v. Percy [2003] HCA 22, Callinan J. in the High Court of Australia

stated at para 142:

Statements made by appellate judges about findings of fact by trial

judges repeatedly emphasize the advantages attaching to an

opportunity to hear and see witnesses. They tend to understate or

even overlook that appellate courts enjoy advantages as well: for

example, the collective knowledge and experience of no fewer than

three judges armed with an organized and complete record of the

proceedings, and the opportunity to take an independent overview

of the proceedings below, in a different atmosphere from, and a less

urgent setting than the trial.

12

SC/APPEAL/30/2022

In the instant case, the registered Attorney marked the page of his

professional diary for the date 16.07.2014 as P2 to show that the case

number relevant to this case is mentioned under that date among other

case numbers. The witness was cross-examined on the basis that it was

an interpolation and an afterthought. Thereafter, the counsel for the

plaintiffs (having perused the diary) marked the page for 10.07.2014 (the

correct date on which the case was to be called) as V1 where it is

mentioned “Kamkaru Sevana Case” in English. The witness admits that

“Kamkaru Sevana Case” refers to the present case but his explanation

was that it is a reference to his discussion about the case with his senior

counsel about 5-6 days before the due date, which he usually does. The

counsel inter alia has shown to the witness the entry for 21.07.2014

wherein it is written “Galle case” without a case number, which the

witness has admitted as a case to appear on that date. It indicates that

describing the case without the case number does not necessarily imply

anything other than Court appearance.

ප්‍ර: ඔබ සඳහන් කළා මෙෙ ගරු අධිකරණයට සෑෙ විටෙ නඩු අංකයකින් තෙයි මෙෙ

දිනම ාමේ සඳහන් කරන්මන් කියලා මෙෙ නඩු තිමබන මකාට?

උ: එමහෙයි

ප්‍ර: 2014.07.21 දින ඔබ සඳහන් කරනවා Galle case කියලා?

උ: එමහෙයි

ප්‍ර: ඔබ ම නී සිටින නඩුවල නඩු අංකය මනාෙැතිව අදාළ අධිකරණමේ නඩුවක් කියන

එක ෙණක් ඔබ සඳහන් කරනවා ඔබමේ දිනම ාමේ?

උ: එමහෙයි.

ප්‍ර: ඒ ආකාරයට ඔබ මෙෙ අධිකරණමේ මෙෙ නඩුව පිළිබඳව ඔබමේ දිනම ාමේ

2014.07.10 වන දින ැහැදිලිවෙ සඳහන් කර තිමබනවා

උ: කම්කරු මසවන මක්ස් යනුමවන් සඳහන් කර තිමබනවා.

13

SC/APPEAL/30/2022

ප්‍ර: ඔබමේ සාක්ි අනුව මූලික සාක්ිමේදී ඔබ විසින් සඳහන් කළ කරුණු අසතයක් කියා

මයෝජනා කරනවා?

උ: ප්‍රතික්මෂ් කරනවා.

Notwithstanding that the witness was an Attorney-at-Law, the learned

District Judge by giving reasons has disbelieved the witness that he

mistakenly heard the date to file the answer as 16.07.2014 instead of

10.07.2014 taking all the evidence led before her in its overall context. I

cannot say that it is unreasonable or perverse. The trial Judge was

entitled to come to the conclusion that she did on this issue of fact, and

it was quite impossible for the High Court to substitute its own finding of

fact on it unless there were cogent reasons that warrant such

interference. The High Court in this case has manifestly failed to give

such reasons.

In my view, on the facts and circumstances of this case, the High Court

of Civil Appeal should not have cavalierly interfered with the factual

findings of the trial Judge and reversed the order.

I answer the question of law upon which leave to appeal was granted in

the affirmative. I set aside the judgment of the High Court of Civil Appeal

dated 27.11.2020 and restore the judgment of the District Court. The

plaintiffs are entitled to costs in all three Courts.

Judge of the Supreme Court

P. Padman Surasena, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court