==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

SC Appeal 47/2018

SC (HC) CALA 98/2017

WP/HCCA/COL/49/2016 (LA)

D.C. Colombo DLM 49/08

In the matter of an application for

Leave to Appeal in terms of Section

5(c)(1) of the High Court of the

Provinces (Special Provisions)

Amendment No 54 of 2006

Karunahaluge Lal Sumithkumara

Presently at

No. 72, Elton Avenue,

Wembley, Middlesex HAO 3AU,

United Kingdom.

Appearing by his Power of Attorney

Kalubandanage Sunil

Manajjawa,

Ambalantota.

PLAINTIFF

Vs.

1. Karunahaluge Sarath Kumara

Deepawansa

No. 55/11A, Heenatikumbura,

Thalangama North,

Thalangama,

Battaramulla.

2. Mohamed Ashpak Amardeen

No. 64, Ambalanwatte,

Heenatikumbura,

Battaramulla.

DEFENDANTS

2

And Between

Karunahaluge Lal Sumithkumara

Presently at

No. 72, Elton Avenue,

Wembley, Middlesex HAO 3AU,

United Kingdom.

Appearing by his Power of Attorney

Kalubandanage Sunil

Manajjawa,

Ambalantota.

PLAINTIFF-APPELLANT

Vs.

1. Karunahaluge Sarath Kumara

Deepawansa

No. 55/11A, Heenatikumbura,

Thalangama North,

Thalangama,

Battaramulla.

2. Mohamed Ashpak Amardeen

No. 64, Ambalanwatte,

Heenatikumbura,

Battaramulla.

DEFENDANT-RESPONDENTS

And now between

Karunahaluge Lal Sumithkumara

Presently at

No. 72, Elton Avenue,

Wembley, Middlesex HAO 3AU,

United Kingdom.

3

Appearing by his Power of Attorney

Kalubandanage Sunil

Manajjawa,

Ambalantota

PLAINTIFF-APPELLANT-

APPELLANT

Vs.

1. Karunahaluge Sarath Kumara

Deepawansa

No. 55/11A, Heenatikumbura

Thalangama North,

Thalangama, Battaramulla

2. Mohamed Ashpak Amardeen

No. 64, Ambalanwatte,

Heenatikumbura

Battaramulla

DEFENDANT-RESPONDENT-

RESPONDENTS

Before: Justice A.L. Shiran Gooneratne

Justice Menaka Wijesundera

Justice Sampath K. B. Wijeratne

Counsel: Rohan Sahabandu, PC with Ms. Chathurika Elvitigala,

Ms. Sachini Senanayake and Ms. Pubudu Weerasuriya

instructed by Ms. Asha Rathnayake for the Plaintiff-

Appellant- Appellant.

Sanjeewa Dassanayaka with Asanka Lowe instructed by

Ms. K.K. Nilushani for the 2nd Defendant-Respondent

-Respondent.

4

Argued on: 16/03/2026

Decided on: 21/05/2026

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

By Plaint dated 21/02/2008, the Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant (hereinafter

referred to as the “Plaintiff-Appellant”) filed this action No. D.C. Colombo

DLM/00049/08 against the Defendant-Respondent-Respondent [the 1st

Defendant-Respondent-Respondent in the Petition filed before this Court,

hereinafter referred to as the “1st Defendant-Respondent”] and sought inter

alia, a declaration that the Plaintiff-Appellant is the owner of the land in

extent 0.A 0.R 15P, described in the schedule of the Plaint, a declaration

that Deed No. 25 dated 04/01/2007, is a fraudulent document, to eject the 1st

Defendant-Respondent from the land and for damages.

By Answer dated 11/02/2009, the 1st Defendant-Respondent denied that the

impugned Deed was fraudulently prepared and moved that the Plaintiff’s

action be dismissed and further made a claim in reconvention for damages.

In paragraphs 2 and 4 of the Petition to this court dated 06/03/2017, the

Plaintiff-Appellant states that, in or about March 2010, the 2nd Defendant-

Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the ‘2nd Defendant-

Respondent’) was added as a party. However, no application was made

under section 21 of the Civil Procedure Code (CPC) to effect the necessary

amendment to the plaint. Nevertheless, upon the 2nd Defendant’s failure to

appear on summons, the court fixed the case for ex-parte trial against the

2nd Defendant.

In Paragraph 5 of the aforesaid Petition the Plaintiff-Appellant states that

parties raised issues on 16/09/2011, and when the case came up for further

trial on 17/09/2012, the 1st Defendant-Respondent failed to appear in court,

5

his Attorney conveyed to court that he had no instructions. The case was

then fixed for ex-parte trial against the 1st Defendant as well.

At the conclusion of the ex-parte trial, judgment was delivered on 25/10/2013

against both Defendants, and ex-parte decree was entered accordingly.

Both Defendant-Respondents filed applications to purge default under

section 86 of the CPC. On or about 20/03/2015, the Plaintiff consented to

vacate the ex-parte judgment against the 2nd Defendant, and accordingly,

the court permitted the 2nd Defendant to proceed with the trial. On or about

28/05/2015, the Plaintiff-Appellant moved court to amend the Plaint by

incorporating the necessary averments and reliefs against the 2nd

Defendant. This application was made under section 93(1) of the CPC. The

2nd Defendant-Respondent objected to the said application.

By order dated 16/05/2016, the learned Judge of the District Court refused

the said application to amend the Plaint, and the learned Judges of the Civil

Appeal High Court, by their Judgment dated 25/01/2017, refused leave to

appeal against the said order.

By Order dated 12/02/2018, this Court granted leave to appeal on the

following questions of law;

1. Have the Hon. High Court Judges and the learned Trial Judge err in

law by failing to consider and or disregarding the effect of the

provisions contained in section 21 read together with section 93(1) of

the Civil Procedure Code in arriving at their respective conclusions?

2. In any event should the proposed amendment to the plaint be permitted

even under the Provisions of Section 93(2) of the Civil Procedure Code

Before proceeding to address the aforesaid questions of law, it is pertinent

to observe that the original plaint, together with the reliefs sought therein,

6

was against the 1st Defendant. When it was later revealed that the 1st

Defendant is said to have transferred the property to one Chamari by Deed

No. 5227 dated 05/10/2007, and the said Chamari is thereafter said to have

transferred the property to the 2nd Defendant by Deed No. 1287 dated

01/08/2008, the Plaintiff filed an application dated 08/10/2009 under section

18 of the CPC to add the 2nd Defendant-Respondent as a party Defendant.

However, it is noted that the Plaintiff did not file an application under

section 21 of the CPC to amend the Pleadings.

The omission to amend the Plaint after the addition of the 2nd Defendant

persisted for over five years. The position of the Plaintiff-Appellant,

however, is that both the learned trial Judge and the appellate court erred

in law in applying section 93(2) of the CPC when refusing the application to

amend the Plaint.

It was brought to the notice of this Court that the inquiry to vacate the ex-

parte judgment entered against the 1st Defendant is in progress.

It is contended that the circumstances of the case attracted the operation of

section 93(1), and not section 93(2). In particular, it is urged that, upon the

vacation of the ex-parte order against the 2nd Defendant, the court did not

proceed to fix the matter for trial, and consequently, the stage contemplated

by section 93(2) had not arisen. Accordingly, the Plaintiff-Appellant

maintains that the applicable provision was section 93(1), under which the

proposed amendment should have been considered.

The learned President’s Counsel for the Plaintiff-Appellant further submits

that this position is further supported by the fact that the ex-parte judgment

entered against the 2nd Defendant has been vacated, and that it necessarily

follows that the trial against the 2nd Defendant must now commence.

7

Section 93(1) and (2) of the CPC as amended by Act No. 9 of 1991 reads as

follows;

“(1) Upon application made to it before the day first fixed for trial of the

action, in the presence of, or after reasonable notice to all the parties to the

action, the Court shall have full power of amending in its discretion, all

pleadings in the action, by way of addition, or alteration, or of omission.

(2) On or after the day first fixed for the trial of the action and before final

judgement, no application for the amendment of any pleadings shall be

allowed unless the Court is satisfied, for reasons to be recorded by the Court,

that grave and irremediable injustice will be caused if such amendment is

not permitted, and on no other ground, and that the party so applying has

not been guilty of laches.”

It is observed that when this matter was taken up on 16/09/2011, the

Plaintiff-Appellant raised issues against the 1st and 2nd Defendants and

proceeded to trial inter-parte against the 1st Defendant, and ex parte against

the 2nd Defendant. Accordingly, there can be no doubt that the trial, as

against both Defendants, commenced on that date.

When the case was next called on 17/09/2012 for further trial, the 1st

Defendant was absent, and for the reasons recorded by court, the trial

against the 1st Defendant was also fixed ex-parte, thereby proceeding ex-

parte against both Defendants. Thereafter, on 09/05/2013, the Plaintiff led

evidence, marked documents P1 to P8, and closed its case. Subsequently, on

25/10/2013, the learned trial Judge entered judgment in favour of the

Plaintiff, and accordingly, the decree was entered against both Defendants.

If the Plaintiff-Appellant’s position, that such an application falls within the

purview of section 93(1), is to be accepted in the present case, it would, in

effect, recognise a fresh date for the commencement of trial against the 2nd

8

Defendant, well after the original date fixed for trial of the action. Such a

proposition is untenable since it would amount to recognising different dates

of commencement of trial for different Defendants in the same action. This

may, in turn, introduce a state of uncertainty into the process of litigation,

and may give rise to inconsistent procedural consequences, including the

possibility of different judgments or decrees being entered in the same

action on different pleadings. Such a result would undermine procedural

fairness and finality in the orderly conduct of trials.

Section 93(1) of the CPC contemplates a situation in which an application

is made to amend pleadings before the date first fixed for the trial of an

action. In the present case, however, the Plaintiff’s application to amend the

Plaint was made on or about 28/05/2015, long after the action had passed

that stage. The subsequent vacation of the ex-parte judgment against the

2nd Defendant did not alter the date first fixed for trial of the action. The

learned Judge of the Civil Appeal High Court, was therefore correct to

observe that "if the amendment is to be permitted there will be two plaints

in the case one for the 1st Defendant and another for the 2nd Defendant.”

Therefore, for all the aforesaid reasons, I am of the view that the application

to amend the pleadings was made after the date first fixed for trial of the

action, and that both the District Court and the Civil Appeal High Court

were correct in deciding that section 93(2) of the CPC applies in the facts

and circumstances of this case.

The learned Judge of the Civil Appeal High Court has drawn attention to

Nimalraj v. Tharmarajah (2005) 3 SLR 309, where the Court of Appeal

was called upon to decide on matters similar to those of the present case.

Andrew Somawansa, J. (P/CA) inter alia, held that;

9

“The application to amend the plaint was clearly a belated application made

after three trial dates - section 93 (2) would become operative and applicable.

(2) There are two limbs in section 93 (2) and the two ingredients are separate

and distinct requirements and a party seeking to amend the pleadings after

the first date of trial should establish the existence of both ingredients.

(3) In the instant action the plaintiff-respondents are clearly guilty of laches.

The proposed amended plaint was filed nearly 2 years after the 3rd

defendant-petitioner was added as a party.”

The Plaintiff-Appellant, having relied on Section 93(1) to pursue his

application, has also contended that when the ex-parte judgment is vacated,

a fresh trial against the 2nd Defendant has to take place, and in a situation

where the court has not fixed a date of trial against the 2nd Defendant,

Section 80 of the Civil Procedure Code comes into operation.

However, the contention of the Plaintiff-Appellant that the vacation of the

ex-parte judgment necessitates a fresh trial against the 2nd Defendant based

on section 93(1) is, in my view, wholly misconceived. This position was

authoritatively laid down by Weerasuriya J. in Ceylon Insurance Co. Ltd.

v. Nanayakkara (1999) 3 SLR 50, wherein it was held that;

“The discretion vested in the judge either to continue with the trial or to

commence proceedings afresh does not affect the nature of the order made

under section 80 of the Civil Procedure Code relating to the fixing of the first

trial date. The order made fixing the date of trial in terms of section 80

becomes the day first fixed for trial within the meaning of section 93(2) of the

Civil Procedure Code.”

A similar issue arose in Bastian Koralalage Camillus Sunny Rodrigo

v. Bastian Koralalage Kingsley Rodrigo, SC Appeal No. 24/2020,

decided on 08/11/2021. In that case, the Plaintiff had instituted action in

10

2008 and later sought to add further Defendants under section 18 of the

Civil Procedure Code. Although the additional Defendants were permitted

to be added by order dated 24/09/2012, the Plaintiff filed the amended plaint

only on 21/02/2018. The case had already been fixed for trial on 30/04/2015,

but was thereafter taken out of the trial roll for further steps. The Plaintiff

contended that the amendment fell within section 93(1), as the case had not

proceeded to trial on the earlier date.

This Court rejected that contention and held that the relevant consideration

is the date first fixed for trial of the action. It was observed that, “In an

action, the appointed date for the trial of the action and/or the first date

fixed for trial can be one and the same.” The Court further held that, since

the amendments were moved after the day first fixed for trial, “it is

imperative that Section 93(2) should apply.”

The principle in the said decision is applicable to the present case. The fact

that the ex-parte judgment against the 2nd Defendant was later vacated does

not alter the date first fixed for trial of the action. The Plaintiff-Appellant’s

application to amend the Plaint was therefore one made after the date first

fixed for trial and was properly governed by section 93(2), and not section

93(1), of the Civil Procedure Code.

The Plaintiff-Appellant did not prefer the application before the District

Court or the Civil Appeal High Court on the basis of section 93(2) of the

CPC. However, a question of law has now been raised before this Court as

to whether the proposed amendment ought to be permitted even under

section 93(2). Therefore, this Court would be required to consider whether

that grave and irremediable injustice would be caused if the amendment is

not permitted, and that the party applying has not been guilty of laches.

11

In Nimalraj v. Tharmarajah (Supra), where a defendant had been

added under section 18 of the CPC and no steps had been taken under

section 21 to amend the plaint, Somawansa J. observed that, “the plaintiffs-

respondents totally failed to take steps in terms of mandatory provisions

contained in section 21 of the Civil Procedure Code.” His Lordship held that

the application to amend the plaint, made nearly two years after the added

defendant was brought into the action, was “clearly a belated application”

and that “Undoubtedly the plaintiffs-respondents are guilty of laches in

prosecuting this action and the said laches cannot be condoned or excused by

any means.”

In the present case, the 2nd Defendant was added as a party in or about

March 2010. The Plaintiff-Appellant was therefore aware, from that point,

that the Plaint required amendment if any relief was to be sought against

the 2nd Defendant. However, no amended Plaint was tendered at that stage.

Instead, the Plaintiff-Appellant proceeded on the original Plaint, allowed

the matter to proceed ex-parte against the 2nd Defendant, led evidence,

obtained ex-parte judgment against both Defendants, and moved to amend

the Plaint only on or about 28/05/2015, after the ex-parte judgment against

the 2nd Defendant was vacated. No satisfactory explanation has been placed

before this Court for this delay of over five years. The need to amend did not

arise unexpectedly. It arose directly from the addition of the 2nd Defendant.

The failure to take the necessary steps under section 21 for such a prolonged

period therefore amounts to a lack of due diligence.

In Sumanasekera and others v. Mohammed Tuwan Mohommed

Meezam (2012) 2 SLR 373, this Court held that the learned District Judge

erred by relying on section 18 alone, without taking into account the

principles relating to section 93 of the CPC. In that case, the Court answered

the question on laches and inter alia held that “the laches on the part of the

Plaintiff disentitled him from getting an order in his favour.”

12

Accordingly, even if the application is considered under section 93(2), the

Plaintiff-Appellant has failed to satisfy the requirement that he is not guilty

of laches. For that reason too, the proposed amendment cannot be

permitted.

In the foregoing circumstances, I am of the view that the questions on which

leave to appeal was granted should be answered in the negative.

For these reasons, the judgment dated 25/01/2017 of the Civil Appellate

High Court is affirmed. The learned District Judge is directed to proceed to

trial against the 2nd Defendant-Respondent on the original plaint filed by

the Plaintiff-Appellant.

The appeal is dismissed. The 2nd Defendant-Respondent is entitled to costs

fixed at Rs. 150,000.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Menaka Wijesundera, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Sampath K. B. Wijeratne, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court