1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application in terms of Article 126 read with Article 17 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Ravivathani Thuraisingam 18, Mathvady Lane, Thirunelvely, Jaffna.

Petitioner

SC (FR) Application No: 180/2014 -VS-

1. University of Jaffna,

Thirunelvely, Jaffna.

2. Prof. (Miss) V. Arasaratnam,

Vice Chancellor. 3. Mr. K.K. Arulvel.

4. Prof. S.Sathiaseelan.

5. Prof. V.P. Sivanathan.

6. Dr. (Mrs.) S. Sichandran.

7. Dr. S. Balakumar.

8. Prof. T. Velnampy.

9. Dr. A. Pushpanathan.

10. Mr. S. Kuganesan.

2

11. Prof. S. Sirsatkunarajah.

12. Dr. A. Atputharajah.

13. Prof. R. Vigneswaran.

14. Dr. S. Sivanandarajah.

15. Rev. Fr. Dr. Justin B. Gnanapragasam.

16. Mr. M. Balasubramanium.

17. Mr. M. Sripathy.

18. Mr. P. Thiyagarajah.

19. Mr. T. Rajaratnam.

20. Prof. P. Balasundarampillai.

21. Eng. M. Ramathasan.

22. Mr. K. Theventhiran.

23. Mr. D. Rengan.

24. Ms. S. Sarangapani.

25. Mr. K.Kesavan.

26. Dr. S. Raviraj.

27. Mr. E. Annalingam.

28. Ms. Sherine Xavier

All members of the Governing Council

29. Mr. V. Kandeepan,

Registrar.

30. Mr. V.A. Subramaniam.

31. Mr. S. Balaputhiran

3

All of, The University of Jaffna, Thirunelvely, Jaffna.

32. University Grants Commission -Sri

Lanka, UGC Secretariat, 20, Ward, Place, Colombo 07.

33. Ms. Tharshiga Murugesu,

Thiruppathy, Neervely North, Neervely, Jaffna.

34. Mrs. Thushyanthi Rajakumaran

Amman Road, Thirunelvely, Jaffna.

35. Mrs. Sangeetha Mahinthan, 385/20, Mudamavady Junction, Temple Road, Jaffna.

36. Mrs. Sentheeswary Senuthuran, 214/12, Sir P. Ramanathan Road, Thirunelvely, Jaffna.

37. Ms. Hanitha Vijeyaratnam, Dutch Road Alavaddy West, Alavaddy.

38. Mr. k. Piratheepan, 241, Periyamathavady, Udduvil East, Chunnakam, Jaffna.

39. Mr. N. Sivathaasan, 74/12, Aththisoody Lane, Thirunelvely, Jaffna.

40. Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General’s Department, Hulftsdorp, Colombo 12. Respondents

4

Before: B. P Aluwihare, PC. J.,

Murdu N.B.Fernando, PC. J. and

S.Thurairaja PC. J.

Counsel: Viran Corea with Ms. Sarita de Fonseka for the Petitioner.

S. Barrie SSC for 1st to 32nd and 40th Respondents.

V. Puvitharan PC with Anuya Rasanyakkam for the 33rd Respondent.

Argued on: 06-05-2019 and 30-05-2019

Decided on: 29-03- 2021

Murdu N.B Fernando, PC J.

The Petitioner came before this Court seeking inter-alia a declaration that the

Respondents have violated the fundamental rights of the Petitioner guaranteed under Article

12(1) of the Constitution. Leave to Proceed was granted to the Petitioner by this Court on

27.04.2014.

The Petitioners case as referred to in the petition, albeit brief is as follows:

1. The 1st Respondent University advertised the Post of Lecturer (Probationary)

in the Faculty of Management Studies and Commerce in November 2013 and

called for applications from suitable candidates.

2. The Petitioner a holder of a Bachelor of Business Administration Degree (1st

class) specializing in Finance Management applied for the said post. The

Petitioner graduated from the 1st Respondent University with a GPA score of

3.63 in the year 2012 and at the time of tendering of the application was a

5

temporary lecturer attached to the 1st Respondent University and reading for a

Master’s Degree in Business Administration at the Faculty of Management and

Finance of the University of Colombo.

3. In March 2014, interviews for the said post were conducted by a six-member

selection committee headed by the 2nd Respondent, the Vice chancellor of the

1st Respondent University. The other members were the 8th, 16th, 19th, 30th and

31st Respondents.

4. In May 2014, the Governing Council of the 1st Respondent University (2nd to

28th Respondents) approved the recommendation of the selection committee

and appointed the 33rd Respondent to the said post.

5. The grievance of the Petitioner is that the said appointment is adhoc, arbitrary,

unfair and completely unlawful and violated the Petitioners fundamental rights

for the reasons inter-alia;

- that the Petitioner had a higher GPA score and possesses more teaching

experience than the 33rd Respondent;

- that the 33rd Respondent has given false and incorrect information

pertaining to work experience;

- that the primary criterion for recruitment is academic excellence and the

Petitioner is the most suitable candidate and should have been appointed;

and

- that extraneous factors have been considered by the Governing Council

in the appointment of the 33rd Respondent to the post advertised.

6. The Petitioner also alleged that the recommendation of the selection committee

submitted to the Government Council was signed by the 2nd Respondent who

was not even present throughout the Petitioners interview and that the

6

Petitioner brought such fact to the attention of the Governing Council with the

hope that it would objectively view the recommendation, but to no avail.

7. Thus, the Petitioner seeks a declaration from this Court that the Petitioners

fundamental rights have been infringed and also moves for a declaration that

the selection and/or appointment of the 33rd Respondent is null and void and

for a direction that the Petitioner be appointed to the said post.

The case of the 1st to 32nd Respondents (“the Respondents”) is that the 1st Respondent

University at all times acted in accordance with the relevant Circulars pertaining to the

procedure for appointment of the selection committee and the Scheme of Recruitment of

Academic Staff issued by the University Grants Commission (32nd Respondent), the

University Establishment Code and the approved marking scheme applicable for the relevant

faculty. The Respondents also averred that by unanimous decision the selection committee

recommended the 33rd Respondent to the post advertised and the General Council also

unanimously approved the said recommendation. Thus, the Respondents aver that the

Respondents have not violated the fundamental rights of the Petitioner. The case presented by the 33rd Respondent is that she too is a graduate of the 1st

Respondent University with a 1st class in Financial Management and denies that she misled or

misdirected the selection committee as averred to by the Petitioner.

Having referred to the main arguments relied upon by the parties, I would now move

on to consider and examine the said positions in detail in order to determine whether the

Petitioners fundamental rights secured and guaranteed by Article 12(1) of the Constitution

have been infringed by the 1st to 32nd Respondents, by the non-appointment of the Petitioner

to the post of Lecturer (Probationary) at the 1st Respondent University.

7

Article 12(1) of the Constitution reads thus:

“all persons are equal before the law and are entitled to the

equal protection of the law.”

This Article has been meticulously analyzed, examined and developed by this Court in

a plethora of judgements during the last four decades.

In one of the first cases decided by this Court, Rienzie Perera and another V

University Grants Commission and another [1978 – 79- 80] 1 SLR 128, Sharavananda J.,

at page 137 observed as follows:

“Equality of opportunity is only an instance of the application of

the general rule of equality laid down in Article 12. Equal

protection of the law postulates an equal protection of all alike in

the same situations and under like circumstances. There should

be no discrimination among equals, either in the privileges

conferred or on the liabilities imposed.”

In Perera and Nine Others V Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka

and twenty-two others [ 1994] 1 SLR 152, Amersinghe J., at page 166 referring to

promotions in the public service and the legitimacy and rationality of the marking schemes

adopted at interviews, explained as follows:

“Transparency in recruitment proceedings would go a long way

in achieving public expectations of equal treatment. The selection

of a person must be viewed as a serious matter requiring a

thorough going consideration of the need for the services of an

officer, and a clear formulation of both the basic qualities and

qualifications necessary to perform the services, and the way in

which such qualities and qualifications are to be established.”

8

Thus, it is trite law that in achieving public expectations of equal treatment,

transparency in the recruitment process is a key element.

The 1st Respondent University together with other State Universities provide tertiary

education and comes under the purview of the University Grants Commission (“UGC”)

established under the provisions of the Universities Act No 16 of 1978 as amended. The

appointment of academic staff of Universities is governed by Circulars issued by the UGC.

In the instant case the selection process began by calling for applications for the post

of Lecturer (Probationary) – Non medical/ dental category in terms of Circular bearing no 721

dated 21-11-1997 (R1) as amended by Circular bearing no 08/2005 dated 11-08-2005 (R4).

The applicability of the said Circulars to the post advertised is not in issue between the parties.

The 1st Respondent University empaneled a selection committee in terms of the relevant

Circular (R1) to conduct interviews. The selection committee comprised of six members

headed by the 2nd Respondent Vice Chancellor. The other members were the 8th Respondent

Dean of the Faculty of Management and Commerce, 16th and 19th Respondents being nominees

of the Governing Council, the 30th and 31st Respondents head of the Department of Finance

and Management and nominee of the Senate. The empaneling of the selection committee is

also not in issue between the parties.

The bone of contention of the parties is the recommendation of the selection committee.

The selection committee interviewed eight applicants (33rd to 39th Respondents and the

Petitioner) and recommended the 33rd Respondent to the post advertised and the Petitioner was

named as the reserve (R12).

The Petitioners’ contention is that the said recommendation of the selection committee

is flawed for the following reasons.

Firstly, the Petitioner has a higher GPA score of 3.63 in comparison to the GPA score

of 3.43 of the 33rd Respondent;

9

Secondly, the Petitioner possess more teaching experience compared to the 33rd

Respondent and the Petitioner demonstrated the ability to teach, having been appointed to a

post of temporary lecturer at the 1st Respondent University in November 2012. The Petitioner

also contended that the 33rd Respondent began her teaching career at the 1st Respondent

University only in May 2013, although she adverts to the date as April 2012 in the curriculum

vitae tendered to the University. Thus, the Petitioner alleges that the 33rd Respondent has given

false information and upon the said ground adverts that the 33rd Respondent misled the

selection committee.

In response to the said facts the Respondents aver that the GPA score and teaching

experience do not accrue any advantage to a candidate since marks are not given for same at

the interview and with regard to the erroneous date of appointment as a temporary lecturer

referred to in the curriculum vitae the explanation of the 33rd Respondent that it was an

oversight, was accepted by the selection committee.

Thirdly, the Petitioner also challenged the marking scheme as well as the ensuring

selection committee recommendation upon the ground that it is based on collateral

considerations and thus arbitrary.

With regard to the marking scheme, the Respondents contention is that it is in use at

the 1st Respondent University since 2010, on seven of its faculties and has proved to be a

suitable basis of assessment of a candidate at an interview.

Having referred to the focal points of the Petitioners case, let me move on to consider

the 1st and 2nd points of challenge viz-a-viz the Scheme of Recruitment adopted by the 1st

Respondent University.

The Scheme of Recruitment which is UGC Circular no 721 (R2) issued in 1997,

required one years’ teaching experience as a pre- qualification to apply for the post of Lecturer

(Probationary). In 2010, the said provision was relaxed and amended by UGC Circular no 935

(R4). It introduced a new provision for a candidate to make a presentation before the

selection committee in order for the selection committee to assess the ‘teaching ability’ of

10

a candidate and did away with the requirement of one years’ teaching experience. The

rationale of such decision of the UGC made in the year 2010 that a lecturer should have the

ability to teach has not been challenged before any forum.

The Respondents advert that in view of the above said provisions the requirement of

one years’ teaching experience is not a mandatory factor and at the 1st Respondent University

marks are not awarded for teaching experience. The ‘ability to teach’ is the main criterion to

be decided at the interview and the Respondents submit that it is a subjective analysis and is

based upon the marking scheme (R5) approved by the 1st Respondent University.

Thus, it is observed under the prevailing Scheme of Recruitment, ‘teaching

experience’ is no longer a threshold requirement to be considered for recruitment for the

post of Lecturer (Probationary). Hence, the Petitioners grievance that she possesses more

teaching experience as well as a higher GPA score viz-a-viz the 33rd Respondent and upon the

said ground and the said ground alone that the Petitioner should have been appointed to the

post of Lecturer (Probationary) and not the 33rd Respondent, in my view, has no basis nor merit

in law.

The Petitioners next point of challenge was the marking scheme. Initially, the

Petitioner did not challenge or refer to a marking scheme in its petition. When the approved

marking scheme (R5), the assessment sheet (R11) and the recommendation of the selection

committee (R12) were tendered to Court by the 1st Respondent University together with its

statement of objections, the Petitioner contended that the marking scheme was not duly

authorized by the 1st Respondent University. Thus, the Petitioner challenged the vires of the

marking scheme.

However, it is observed that the Petitioner failed to substantiate its argument by placing

any material or evidence before Court, to negate the proposition of the Respondents that the

marking scheme (R5) was in use at the 1st Respondent University since 2010 i.e. 3 years

precedent to the date of the interview and it was formulated consequent to the issuance of

UGC Circular no 935 (R4), which introduced the concept of making presentations to assess

the teaching ability of a candidate for recruitment as a member of the academic staff. The post

11

of Lecturer (Probationary) is one such post in the academia. Hence, it is too late in the day for

the Petitioner to challenge the veracity or vires of the marking scheme (R5) before this Court

and for the said reason I see no merit in the said objection either.

The Petitioner also challenged the recommendation of the selection committee upon

the ground of consideration of extraneous and collateral factors by the selection committee. In

response, the Respondents denied the said allegation and contended that the candidates were

assessed not on extraneous or collateral considerations, but based upon the approved marking

scheme (R5) only.

Hence, I would pause at this moment to examine the marking scheme R5. The marking

scheme clearly envisage that 50% of the marks are to be awarded for academic excellence

and out of the balance 50%, 20 marks for presentation skills and subject knowledge and the

rest of the 30 marks for vision, creativity, research interest and overall performance of a

candidate at the interview.

The Respondents submitted that the Petitioner and the 33rd Respondents were both

awarded the maximum 50 marks for academic excellence since both candidates possess 1st

classes. However, for the presentation, the selection committee awarded variant marks under

the respective heads for the Petitioner and the 33rd Respondent. The marks awarded and

tabulated in the assessment sheet R11 is reflected below.

Petitioner 33rd Respondent

(1) For presentation and subject knowledge 12 15

(2) For creativity, vision, research interest

and overall performance

15 25

(3) For Degree 50 50

Total 77 90

12

The above table clearly shows that the 33rd Respondent obtained more marks than the

Petitioner. Thus, the Respondents contend that the 33rd Respondent was selected for the post

advertised through a transparent recruitment process devoid of any collateral or

extraneous considerations.

Hence, upon perusal of the documents before Court i.e R2 and R4 Scheme of

Recruitment, R5 the marking scheme and R11 the assessment sheet, I see no reason to doubt

that the candidates were assessed by the selection committee based on a clear formulation of

qualities and qualifications necessary to perform the functions of office stipulated by the UGC

and the 1st Respondent University.

Thus, the transparency in recruitment process advocated in Perera v Monetary Board

case (supra) in my view has been adhered to by the Respondents.

However, at the hearing the Learned Counsel for the Petitioner emphasized that all

norms of justice and fairness were completely violated in the selection process and that

the Petitioners outstanding performance throughout her university career, her high GPA score,

her unparalleled teaching experience has not been considered by the selection committee.

Moreover, the highlight of the Petitioners case was that the 2nd Respondent Vice Chancellor

was not even present at the interview when the Petitioner made her presentation. Thus, the

learned Counsel strenuously contended that extraneous factors have been the consideration for

the selection and relied very much on the fact that the 2nd Respondent, Vice Chancellor who

was said to be not present at the interview, had signed the assessment sheet (R11) and

forwarded the recommendation of the selection committee (R12) to the General Council.

Hence, I would now move on to examine the said proposition of the Petitioner. Firstly, the assertion pertaining to the absence of the 2nd Respondent, the Vice

Chancellor of the 1st Respondent University at the interview.

13

It is observed that both the assessment sheet (R 11) and the recommendation of the

selection committee (R12) have been signed, not only by the 2nd Respondent but by all six

members of the selection committee. Furthermore, responding to the aforesaid contention of

the Petitioner, the 2nd Respondent has tendered an affidavit to this Court, stating that she was

present at the interview, listened to the presentations and asked questions from the candidates

based on the presentations, but that during the presentation of the Petitioner, she was urgently

called to answer an important telephone call and was not available for a brief moment. The

said position is supported by two other affidavits filed of record together with the statement of

objections of the Respondents. The said two affidavits were affirmed to by two other members

of the selection committee. i.e the 8th and 16th Respondents.

Hence, upon consideration of the said material before this Court, I do not consider the

allegation of the Petitioner with regard to the 2nd Respondents brief absence to be a gross

violation of the selection process, as the decision of the selection committee should be

considered as a composite decision and not merely as an individual decision. The decision of

the six-member selection committee was a unanimous decision and all six members have

concurred with the said decision and the signatures in the assessment sheet (R11) and the

recommendation made to the Governing Council (R12) establishes beyond doubt that it was a

composite decision.

Thus, in my view, the brief absence of the 2nd Respondent will not cause any prejudice

to the Petitioner. In any event, the Petitioner brought such fact of the absence of the 2nd

Respondent Vice Chancellor to the notice of the appointing authority, the Governing Council

prior to the Governing Council considering and evaluating the recommendation of the

selection committee. Nevertheless, the Governing Council consisting of 27 members, being

satisfied with the recommendation of the selection committee unanimously approved the

appointment of the 33rd Respondent to the post of Lecturer (Probationary).

At this juncture, I wish to refer to the observations of this Court in the case of,

Abeykoon v National Water Supply and Drainage Board SC FR 127/2014 SC

minutes 09.05.2016.

14

In the said case the Petitioners main grievance was that he was interviewed by a panel

of three members whereas the selected candidate was interviewed by a panel of four members

and the Court observed,

“Whether the Petitioner was interviewed by a panel of three

members or a panel of four members, the interview board has

followed the marking scheme which has already been adopted []

Therefore, one cannot argue that the Petitioner was placed at a

disadvantage… the Petitioner has failed to satisfy this Court as

to how any prejudice was caused to him when he was interviewed

by a panel of three members….”

Hence, I see no merit in the assertion of the Petitioner, that the absence of the 2nd

Respondent for a fleeting moment had any prejudicial impact on the Petitioner.

Let me now examine, the Petitioners unparalleled teaching experience and high

GPA score, two other factors repeatedly emphasized by the Petitioner before this Court, to be

instances of gross violations of the selection process.

It is not in dispute that according to the Scheme of Recruitment (R2), Lecturer

(Probationary) is the lowest rung in the academic staff of the University structure. It is

the recruitment step in the hierarchical structure and it leads up to Senior Lecturer Grade II, I

etc. The Scheme of Recruitment (R2) i.e. Circular no 721, clearly indicates the post of

Lecturer (Probationary) is filled by ‘open examination’.

It is common knowledge that the reference to tutor, mentor, demonstrator, instructor

and temporary lecturer in universities are ad-hoc appointments given for short durations and

are not governed by the said Scheme of Recruitment (R2). Thus, appointments for the said

posts especially to the post of ‘temporary lecturer’ is not by open examination. It could be

walk-in interviews or by invitation and necessarily does not follow the recruitment process

referred to in UGC Circulars R2 and R4 which essentially introduced the mechanism of

15

assessing the teaching ability of a candidate by way of a presentation made before a selection

committee.

The case of the Petitioner is that in the years 2012 and 2013, the very same University

appointed the Petitioner as a ‘temporary lecturer’ after an interview process and hence the

experience gained by the Petitioner during such period should be reckoned with regard to her

‘teaching experience’. The Petitioner goes on to assert in 2012 the Petitioner was appointed as

a temporary lecturer, whereas the 33rd Respondent who too was interviewed, was neither

selected nor recommended. Thus, the Petitioner contends that the Petitioner is better suited for

the post advertised since she has already been evaluated by an interview panel and has extra

months of teaching experience compared to the 33rd Respondent. Moreover, the Petitioner

contends that the 33rd Respondents performance cannot be improved so quickly and

dramatically during such a short time and upon the said basis justifies that she should be

chosen, and not the 33rd Respondent to the post of Lecturer (Probationary).

It is observed that in 2012 (R6), the Petitioner was recommended and appointed for the

post of temporary lecturer at a walk – in interview for a period of 2 months and in 2013 (R7),

the Petitioner as well as the 33rd Respondent were both recommended and appointed as

temporary lecturers for a period of nine months by the 1st Respondent University. Thus, at the

time of the interview, the Petitioner as well as 33rd Respondent were both serving the 1st

Respondent University as ‘temporary lecturers’, Petitioner being employed ahead of the 33rd

Respondent.

Hence, employing the Petitioner as a ‘temporary lecturer’, which is not in the

hierarchical structure of the academic staff of the University, in my view does not give the

Petitioner an additional benefit, a free ticket or free entry to be recruited to the academic staff

of the 1st Respondent University ipso facto. The plain reading of the word denotes it is a

temporary appointment. Thus, there is no automatic promotion from the post of temporary

lecturer to the post of Lecturer (Probationary).

The post of Lecturer (Probationary) is a new appointment, for which the procedure laid

down should be strictly followed. The qualifications to be appointed as a Lecturer

16

(Probationary) is distinct, clear and precise in the Scheme of Recruitment (R2 and R4). The

threshold requirement is academic qualification. Thereafter, the presentation before a selection

committee, to assess the teaching ability. If a candidate could pass the said hurdle then based

on the assessment made in line with the marking scheme, a ‘recommendation’ is made by the

selection committee to the Governing Council. The appointment to the post of Lecturer

(Probationary) is finally in the hands of the Governing Council. It is noteworthy to observe,

that the Petitioner does not allege any wrong doing of the Governing Council, excepting the

same grounds alleged against the selection committee.

Thus, in my view the contention of the Petitioner, that on the strength of the temporary

lectureship that the Petitioner ought to have been appointed to the post advertised has no basis

nor merit. Similarly, the contention of the Petitioner that the appointment of the 33rd

Respondent was based on extraneous and collateral considerations is also frivolous. As seen

from the marks obtained, the 33rd Respondent has fared better than the Petitioner at the

presentation and had the highest mark among all the candidates interviewed. Hence in my

view the Petitioner has failed to establish before this Court, that she has an ‘unparalleled

teaching experience’ or that ‘collateral and extraneous factors’ have been the consideration

in the instant selection process.

The learned Counsel for the Petitioner in order to satisfy this Court that the Petitioner

is better suited for the post advertised, finally and vehemently relied upon the Petitioners’ GPA

score. According to the Petitioner the primary and only criteria of appointment, irrespective of

what is in the Scheme of Recruitment, should only be academic excellence. The Petitioner

contends that she has a higher GPA score in comparison to the 33rd Respondent and her

academic excellence is unquestionably the best among the candidates.

However, the resume of qualifications of candidates annexed to the assessment sheet

(R11) shows that out of the twelve candidates short listed for the interview, only seven

candidates had GPA scores. Interestingly, all of them have passed out during the years 2010

to 2013. The other five candidates who have passed out prior to 2010 did not have a GPA

score. Assessing the graduates on a GPA or the Overall Grade Point Average, is a relatively

new phenomenon which is computed and given by only certain Universities. It is not a pre-

17

condition in the Scheme of Recruitment (R2 and R4) and the marking scheme (R5) and thus,

in my view GPA cannot be the only consideration to be reckoned with or relied upon at an

interview. It will only be one factor, among many others that the selection committee would

consider with regard to assessing the subject knowledge of a candidate at an interview.

It is also observed that there is one candidate who graduated in 2013 with a GPA of

3.66 which is higher than the Petitioners GPA of 3.63. It is further observed that the said

candidates’ overall performance at the interview has not been that great in comparison to the

rest of the candidates.

The aforesaid factors denote, that the GPA score which only some candidates have,

cannot be used as a yardstick or a standard measure or a unique factor in assessing a candidate

at an interview of this nature where applicants face an open competitive examination.

Thus, in my view, the contention of the Petitioner that she has a ‘higher GPA’ and

possesses ‘more teaching experience’ in comparison to the 33rd Respondent and is better suited

and qualified and thus should have been appointed to the post of Lecturer (Probationary) is

devoid of merit.

Similarly, the Petitioners submission that all norms of justice and fairness were

completely violated in the selection process and extraneous and collateral factors were the

consideration for selection by the selection committee in my view too has no basis nor merit.

A level playing field was laid for candidates who were similarly circumstanced and only one

winner could emerge.

Furthermore, the decision to appoint the 33rd Respondent to the post advertised was

taken unanimously by the General Council of the 1st Respondent University which consists of

27 members (the 2nd to 28th Respondents) who are eminent persons and whose versatility and

integrity has not been challenged in this application. Hence, the appointment of the 33rd

Respondent to the post of Lecturer (Probationary) by the General Council of the 1st Respondent

University, in my view is neither arbitrary nor unlawful as contended by the Petitioner.

18

Thus, for the reasons adumbrated in this judgement, I hold that the Petitioner has not

been successful in establishing that the fundamental rights of the Petitioner guaranteed in terms

of Article 12 (1) have been violated by the 1st to 32nd Respondents. This application is

accordingly dismissed. I make no order as to costs.

The application is dismissed.

Judge of the Supreme Court

B. P Aluwihare PC, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

S.Thurairaja PC, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court