1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

S.C Appeal Mo. 170/2015 S.C/HCCA/LA No. 14/2015 WP/HCCA/GPH/ No. 109/2007(F) D.C. Gampaha Case No. 321/L

In the matter of an Application for Leave to Appeal in terms of Section 5C (1) of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) (Amendment) Act No. 54 of 2006 against the Judgment of the Civil Appellate High Court of Gampaha. H.D. Lionel Weeraratne of No. 156, Walpola Road, Ragama. PLAINTIFF Vs.

1. Velu Kannappan 2. Sawarimuththu Rajendra 3. Hakmana Kaluthanthrige Don Anthony

Bernard Perera

All of Suraweera Mawatha, Walpola, Ragama. DEFENDANTS AND BETWEEN

1. Velu Kannappan

More correctly Velu Kannappan Thevar (now deceased) 1a. Kannappan Ranjith 2. Sawarimuththu Rajendra

2

3. Hakmana Kaluthanthrige Don Anthony

Bernard Perera

All of Suraweera Mawatha, Walpola, Ragama. DEFENDANTS-APPELLANTS Vs. H H.D. Lionel Weeraratne of No. 156, Walpola Road, Ragama.

PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT AND NOW BETWEEN H H.D. Lionel Weeraratne of No. 156, Walpola Road, Ragama.

PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT-PETITIONER Vs. 1. Velu Kannappan

More correctly Velu Kannappan Thevar (now deceased) 1a. Kannappan Ranjith 2. Sawarimuththu Rajendra 3. Hakmana Kaluthanthrige Don Anthony

Bernard Perera

All of Suraweera Mawatha, Walpola, Ragama. DEFENDANTS-APPELLANTS-RESPONDENTS

3

BEFORE: S.E. Wanasundera P.C., J. Anil Gooneratne J. & Nalin Perera J. COUNSEL: S.A.D.S. Suraweera with P.K.C. Dilhan For the Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant Chandana Wijesuriya for the Defendant-Appellant-Respondents WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS TENDERED BY THE APPELLANT ON: 14.06.2016 ARGUED ON: 29.06.2017 DECIDED ON: 12.07.2017 GOONERATNE J. This was an action filed in the District Court of Gampaha for a

declaration of title and ejectment/damages against the Defendants from

premises described in the schedule to the plaint. The case before court is not so

complicated. Plaintiff-Respondent-Petitioner rely on his paper title and

Defendant-Appellant-Respondent plead prescriptive title. Parties proceeded to

trial on 10 issues. Learned District Judge held with the Plaintiff and entered

Judgment in favour of Plaintiff-Respondent-Petitioner. The Defendant being

4

aggrieved with the above Judgment appealed to the High Court and the learned

Judge of the High Court set aside the District Court Judgment.

The Supreme Court on or about 07.10.2015 granted leave on the

question of law raised in sub paragraphs ii, iii, iv & v of paragraph 13 of the

petition, filed of record. It reads thus:

(ii) Did the learned Judges of the Provincial High Court misdirect

themselves on the fundamental principles on the law prescription and

does the said judgment have any force or avail in law?

(iii) Did the learned judges of the Provincial High Court have arrived at the

erroneous conclusion that the Defendants have been in possession of the

land for a period well over ten years at a time when the evidence of the

Defendants themselves was to the contrary?

(iv) Did the learned Judges of the Provincial High Court have arrived at an

erroneous conclusion that the evidence of the Plaintiff is contradictory

and is against the pleadings which had greatly influenced the judgment

and is the said judgment bad in law for the said reason?

(v) Did the learned Judges of the Provincial High Court have misdirected

themselves on the facts of the case in arriving at the erroneous conclusion

that the learned trial Judge had considered documents ‘P7’ to ‘P9’ which

were not proved by misinterpreting the Judgment of the learned trial

Judge?

I have read the evidence led at the trial which is supportive of the

submissions of learned counsel for the Plaintiff-Respondent-Petitioner. The

5

evidence of the 1st Defendant was that he came into occupation of the land only

in the year 1997 or 1998. This evidence is corroborated by the police statement

dated 15.12.2000 marked P10(a) by the 1st Defendant. 3rd Defendant testified

that he came into occupation on or about 1999. So was the 2nd Defendant. The

Defendant’s position was that they do not know who the owner of the property

in dispute. The 2nd Defendant testified that they entered the land without

knowing who the owner of the property in question. The Plaintiff filed action on

or about 2001.

This court heard both counsel for the Plaintiff-Respondent-

Petitioner as well as the learned counsel for Defendant-Respondent. We are

unable to accept the submissions of learned counsel for Defendant-Appellant in

the context of the case in hand that the case enunciated must reasonably accord

with the pleadings vide explanation 2 of Section 150 of the Civil Procedure Code.

No such issue was raised in the Trial Court, i.e a case materially different from

that which was pleaded. When I consider the date of institution of action and

the alleged date of possession of Defendants, it is very clear that the required

10 years as per Section 3 of the Prescriptive Ordinance have not been fulfilled

by the Defendant party. As such all questions of law raised before this court are

answered in the affirmative in favour of the Plaintiff-Respondent-Petitioner.

6

The Defendant party had never possessed the land for 10 years. In

fact they do not know as to who the owner of the land in dispute. It appears that

the Defendants are trespassers. The Provincial High Court Judgement is bad in

law and in fact. There is no basis to set aside the Judgment of the learned District

Judge. I affirm the Judgment of the District Court and set aside the High Court

Judgment.

Appeal Allowed with costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

S.E. Wanasundera P.C., J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Nalin Perera J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT