[SC FR 170/2022] - Page 1 of 18

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application in terms of Article

126 read with Article 17 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

SC. FR. NO. 170/2022

P. W. T. Dhanushka No. 297-D080A, Arukgoda, Alubomulla, Panadura.

PETITIONER Vs. 1. C.D. Wickramaratne Inspector General of Police, Police Headquarters, Church Road, Colombo 01. 2. SSP Nishantha De Zoysa Director, Criminal Investigation, Criminal Investigation Department, Colombo 01.

3. CI Lalith Dissanayake Officer-in-Charge, Special-Unit. Criminal Investigation Department, Colombo 01. 4. CI Waduge Krishantha Ruwan Kumara Officer-in-Charge (Acting), Police Station, Mahawa. 5. Hon. Attorney General Attorney Generals Department, Hulftsdorp, Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

[SC FR 170/2022] - Page 2 of 18

BEFORE : P. PADMAN SURASENA, J. A.L. SHIRAN GOONERATNE, J. & MAHINDA SAMAYAWARDHENA, J. COUNSEL : Chrishmal Warnasuriya with Pramodya Thilakarathne

instructed by M. I. M. Iyunullah for the Petitioner.

Shaminda Wickrema, SSC for the Respondents.

ARGUED ON : 29-04-2024

DECIDED ON : 30-01-2025

P. PADMAN SURASENA, J. The Petitioner named in the caption is a Sergeant of Police attached to the Police

Narcotics Bureau (hereinafter referred to as the PNB).

The Petitioner alleges that he was arrested on 26-06-2020, by the officers of the

Criminal Investigations Department (hereinafter referred to as the CID) while carrying

out his duties at the PNB. The Petitioner further alleges that the CID officers gave no

reason for his arrest. The Petitioner has also alleged that he was thereafter detained

under the Prevention of Terrorism Act No. 48 of 1979 as amended (hereinafter

referred to as PTA), under three consecutive Detention Orders each of which was for

ninety days. The Petitioner has produced one of the three consecutive Detention

Orders marked P 2. The 3rd Respondent has produced the said Detention Orders

marked 3 R 6, 3 R 7 and 3 R 8.

In contradistinction to the Petitioners version, the position taken up by the 3rd

Respondent is that the CID, on 26-06-2020, had summoned the Petitioner to the

premises of the CID. It is also the position of the 3rd Respondent that the CID arrested

the Petitioner on 26-06-2020 at the Special Branch of the CID upon reasonable

suspicion of his involvement in certain crimes.

Upon this Petition being supported, this Court by its order dated 23-11-2022, had

granted Leave to Proceed in respect of the alleged infringements of the Fundamental

[SC FR 170/2022] - Page 3 of 18

Rights of the Petitioner guaranteed under Articles 11, 12(1), 13(1), 13(2), 13(3),

13(5), 14(1)(g) and 14(1)(h) of the Constitution.

In light of the above assertions, the primary issue I have to address in this proceeding

is the issue as to whether the claim by the Petitioner that he was arrested by the CID

while carrying out his duties at the PNB on 26-06-2023 has been established. It is

to the said issue that I would now turn.

It is the position of the Petitioner that he was suddenly placed under arrest,1 by the

3rd Respondent who had accompanied several individuals clad in civil attire claiming

to be from the CID. The submission of the learned Counsel who appeared for the

Petitioner in the course of the hearing was that the Petitioner was arrested on 26-06-

2020, while in the premises of PNB which is his own workplace as averred by the

Petitioner himself at paragraph 08 of the Petition.

In order for the Respondents to make an arrest of an officer of the PNB within the

premises of the PNB itself as alleged by the Petitioner, it would undoubtedly follow

that the superior officers of the PNB are required to have been informed of the carrying

out of such an arrest and consequently it should have been only with the permission

of such superior officers or at least with their knowledge that the Petitioner could have

been arrested.

However, I observe that the Petitioner has chosen not to name any PNB officer as a

Respondent and also chosen not to attribute any responsibility to any PNB officer for

allowing some other person to arrest the Petitioner inside the PNB premises itself.

Although the Petitioner has made CI Ruwan Kumara of PNB as the 4th Respondent in

his Petition, that has been done on the basis that it was his complaint which had led

to initiate the investigations against the Petitioner by the CID and not on the basis

that the 4th Respondent is responsible for his physical arrest and detention in PNB

premises.

1 Paragraph 08 of the Petition dated 06th May 2022.

[SC FR 170/2022] - Page 4 of 18

As stated above, it is the Petitioners stated position in this case that he was arrested

while carrying out his duties in the premises of the Police Narcotics Bureau. Therefore,

whoever who was instrumental in placing the Petitioner under arrest, had physically

kept him in custody within the PNB premises. In such a scenario, the primary

responsibility or at its least, a considerable amount of some shared responsibility for

such illegal act must be placed in the hands of those who are responsible for the

administration of the PNB premises for it is not the case of the Petitioner that the PNB

is a part of the CID. If that is the case, why didnt the Petitioner make/name any or

all officers responsible for the affairs of the PNB as persons who are responsible for

arresting the Petitioner within the PNB premises. This lapse on the part of the

Petitioner in my view, is fatal to the maintainability of this Petition. This is because it

is those responsible for running the affairs of the PNB who would not only become

responsible for such an act but would also be the best persons to explain (if such an

incident had in fact taken place), the circumstances under which such incident had

occurred within the precincts of the PNB. This is further aggravated by the fact that

the 3rd Respondent has denied that the CID had arrested the Petitioner within the PNB

premises on 26-06-2020. On the above material, I am unable to hold that the

Petitioner has succeeded in establishing that the Petitioner was arrested on 26-06-

2020, in the premises of PNB which is his own workplace.

As a result of the above conclusion, what prevails before me now, is only the position

taken up by the CID that it had summoned the Petitioner to the CID on 26-06-2020

and subsequently arrested the Petitioner on the same day i.e., on 26-06-2020. Thus,

the next issue I have to decide in this proceeding is the issue as to whether there was

any justification for the CID to cause the arrest of the Petitioner on 26-06-2020.

Although the CID has arrested the Petitioner under the provisions of the PTA, let me

first consider the power to arrest a person conferred on a Police officer under the Code

of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979. Under Section 32(1)(b) of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act, a Police Officer is authorized to arrest without a warrant, any

person:

[SC FR 170/2022] - Page 5 of 18

i. who has been concerned in any cognizable offence or

ii. against whom a reasonable complaint has been made or

iii. against whom a credible information has been received or

iv. against whom a reasonable suspicion exists of his having been so concerned.

Suffice it to state here at this stage that the 4th Respondent CI Ruwan Kumara of PNB

had made a complaint to the CID disclosing that the Petitioner, with some other

officers of the PNB were complicit in illicit drug trafficking which is prima facie, a

ground to cause the arrest of the Petitioner even in terms of Section 32(1)(b) of the

Code of Criminal Procedure Act.

As would be shown shortly in this Judgment, the power of arrest under the PTA is

wider than that under the Code of Criminal Procedure Act. Section 6(1) of the PTA

which is found in its Chapter Investigation of Offences and which is reproduced

below, would show this difference.

Section 6(1) of the PTA.

Any police officer not below the rank of Superintendent or any other police

officer not below the rank of Sub-Inspector authorized in writing by him in that

behalf may, without a warrant and with or without assistance and

notwithstanding anything in any other law to the contrary-

(a) arrest any person;

(b) enter and search any premises;

(c) stop and search any individual or any vehicle, vessel, train or

aircraft; and

(d) seize any document or thing,

connected with or concerned in or reasonably suspected of being

connected with or concerned in any unlawful activity.

The phrase emphasized above shows that while Section 32(1)(b) of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act has specified the threshold requirement to be a suspicion or

[SC FR 170/2022] - Page 6 of 18

being concerned in any cognizable offence, Section 6 of the PTA has specified

the threshold requirement to be a suspicion or being concerned in a different category

of things identified as an unlawful activity".

The Interpretation Section of the PTA (Section 31) has defined this term in the

following manner.

Section 31 of the PTA.

unlawful activity" means any action taken or act committed by any means

whatsoever, whether Within or outside Sri Lanka, and whether such action was

taken or act was committed before or after the date of Coming into operation

of all or any of the provision of this Act in the commission or in connection

with the commission of any offence under this Act or any act committed

prior to the date of passing of this Act, which act would, if committed after such

date, constitute an offence under this Act.2

This means that any action taken or act committed, in connection with the commission

of any offence under this Act, would be an unlawful activity. Thus, such action taken

or act committed although on its own may not constitute an offence (therefore would

not constitute a cognizable offence in any case), would still fall under the definition of

an Unlawful Activity, if such action taken or act committed, was done in connection

with the commission of any offence under PTA.

In the case of Dissanayaka v Superintendent Mahara Prison and others,3 Kulatunga,

J. held as follows:

"The expression "unlawful activity" as defined in Section 31 of the (Preven-

tion of Terrorism) Act is of wide import and encompasses any person

2 Emphasis added. 3 1991 (2) SLR 247, 248-249.

[SC FR 170/2022] - Page 7 of 18

whose acts "by any means whatsoever" are connected with "the commis-

sion of any offence under this Act". This would include a person who

has committed an offence under the Act".4

Therefore, one could observe that the threshold requirement under section 32(1)(b)

of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act for the existence of a reasonable suspicion or

being concerned of any cognizable offence has been reduced under Section 6(1) of

the PTA to a threshold requirement of the existence of a reasonable suspicion or being

connected with or concerned in any unlawful activity. The said unlawful activity"

could be any action taken or act committed by any means whatsoever, in the

commission or in connection with the commission of any offence under this Act.

Let me now consider whether the decision of the 3rd Respondent to proceed to arrest

the Petitioner, in terms of Section 6(1) of the PTA could be justified.

In Dissanayakas case,5 Kulatunga, J. stated the following to highlight the importance

of examining the material to decide the validity of the arrest.

Nevertheless, it is for the Court to determine the validity of the arrest

objectively. The Court will not surrender its judgement to the executive

for if it did so, the fundamental right to freedom from arbitrary arrest

secured by Article 13(1) of the Constitution will be defeated. The executive

must place sufficient material before the Court to enable the Court to make

a decision, such as the notes of investigation, including the statements of

witnesses, observations etc. without relying on bare statements in

affidavits".

Having that in mind, let me now turn to some of the material placed before Court, by

the 3rd Respondent who was the Officer-in-Charge of the Special Unit of the Criminal

Investigation Department. He is the officer who had conducted the investigation into

4 Emphasis added. 5 Supra.

[SC FR 170/2022] - Page 8 of 18

the complaint received, from the 4th Respondent (Chief Inspector Ruwan Kumara of

PNB). He has filed an affidavit explaining the circumstances which led to the arrest of

the Petitioner. He has also annexed all relevant documentation marked from 3 R 1 to

3 R 13.

Let me now refer to the circumstances which led to the arrest of the Petitioner. It was

the 4th Respondent CI Ruwan Kumara of the PNB who had disclosed that several

officers who were attached to the PNB were complicit in illicit drug trafficking and

weapons dealings. It was on that basis that the CID had summoned the Petitioner to

the CID on 26-06-2020 and conducted preliminary interrogations. This was because

the CID had found the contents revealed from CI Ruwan Kumaras statement credible.

It was on that basis that the CID had proceeded to arrest the Petitioner as the CID

officers had entertained a reasonable suspicion upon preliminary interrogations that

the Petitioner was concerned with some unlawful activities within the meaning of the

PTA.

In order to substantiate this claim, copies of the notes made by Sergeant 8175 Palitha

and Sub Inspector of Police Kavinda Wickramarachchi have been produced before

Court, marked 3 R 2. The 3rd Respondent has further produced the letter of

authorization (3 R 3) issued in terms of Section 6(1) of the PTA, to cause the arrest

of the Petitioner on the basis that he was reasonably suspected of being connected

with or concerned in any unlawful activity within the meaning of the PTA.

In order to substantiate the claim that the Petitioner was made aware of the reasons

for the arrests, the 3rd Respondent has further produced the document, marked 3 R

4, which is a receipt of the arrest issued to the Petitioner at the time of arrest.

The note (3 R 4) reveals that the Petitioner is alleged to have maintained ties with

one Gihan Fonseka (said to be a close associate of Makadura Madush, whom he says

is an infamous member of an organized crime group) and other drug traffickers in

remand. The 3rd Respondent has further averred in his Affidavit (as substantiated by

3 R 4), that the preliminary investigations had disclosed that apart from large scale

[SC FR 170/2022] - Page 9 of 18

drug trafficking, the Petitioner was also involved in/connected to several illicit activities

including collecting weapons through organised crime groups, abetment/ planning to

commit murders, inflicting death threats on investigating officers, promoting terrorism,

financing or abetting to finance terrorism.

The CID had conducted a search of the Petitioners residence on 28-06-2020. The CID

investigators led by the 3rd Respondent and along with one Inspector of Police

Dayananda and Police Sergeant 52961 in addition to several other officers attached

to the CID in the course of that search, had taken into custody, several items from

the residence of the Petitioner. It was on that material that the CID had proceeded to

obtain Detention Orders in terms of Section 7 of the PTA. The 3rd Respondent has

produced the first Detention Order to detain the Petitioner for ninety days from 29-

06-2020, marked 3 R 6.

The Petitioner himself has produced a list of items seized from his residence by the

CID team upon the said search. This list is contained in the document produced by

the Petitioner, marked P 6. The list includes items such as;

i) Several pen drives

ii) An external hard drive

iii) Several sim cards.

However, the Petitioner does not make any attempt to explain the reasons for having

in his possession such items.

Furthermore, as per the 3rd Respondent, further investigations have revealed that the

Petitioner was, inter alia, involved in the following suspicious/ illicit activities:

Abetting the transportation of 43 kilograms of Heroin and weapons (4 Pistols).

Trafficking Heroin by distributing bags of Heroin to traffickers.

Facilitating an action of an informant of the PNB to bring to shore, a boat

transporting 273 kilograms of Heroin which broke down at sea.

The Petitioner, having served as Chief Production clerk of the Production room

at the PNB, was found in possession of a key to the Safe Box of the PNB which

was discovered in the Petitioners House.

[SC FR 170/2022] - Page 10 of 18

Following an inspection of the Production room by the Government Analyst,

upon a Court order, 19 milligrams of Heroin was discovered, which did not

belong to any of the productions identified with any Court case.

The above information is substantiated by the document produced, marked 3 R 11,

which is a further report submitted in relation to case No. B 35602/01/2020, before

the Magistrate Court of Colombo.

Although the Petitioner has alleged that the 4th Respondent had acted mala fide in

lodging the complaint against the Petitioner (3 R 1). I find that there is no proof of

such a mala fide/ ill-motivated action attributable to the 4th Respondent.

In Dissanayakas case,6 Kulatunga, J. stated that it is not the duty of the Court to

determine whether on the available material the arrest should have been made or

not. This statement is included in the following excerpt taken from that Judgment.

. Where the power to arrest without a warrant is couched in the

language of Section 6(1) of the PTA it is well settled that the validity of

the arrest is determined by applying the objective test. This is so whether

the arrest is under the normal law....., under the Emergency

Regulations..... or under the P.T.A. However, it is not the duty of the Court

to determine whether on the available material the arrest should have

been made or not. The question for the Court is whether there was

material for a reasonable officer to cause the arrest.... Proof of the

commission of the offence is not required; a reasonable suspicion or a

reasonable complaint of the commission of the offence suffices.....

The facts and circumstances of this case and the absence of an explanation offered

by the Petitioner as to why he had such items in his house (items found by the CID

team upon search of his residence), should lead me to refrain from accepting as

6 Supra.

[SC FR 170/2022] - Page 11 of 18

truthful, the allegations made by the Petitioner against the 4th Respondent that the 4th

Respondent has acted mala fide against the Petitioner. Such baseless allegations

would not be strong enough to dispel the existence of the reasonable suspicion

entertained by the 3rd Respondent that the Petitioner could be reasonably suspected

of or be concerned in some unlawful activity within the meaning of the PTA. Moreover,

I must also be mindful that the time at which the 3rd Respondent had entertained the

afore-said reasonable suspicion was the time of the arrest of the Petitioner and the

said reasonable suspicion was confirmed by the subsequent search conducted at the

residence of the Petitioner.

While the credibility of the witnesses must be left for the trial Court, I am unable at

this stage, to accept the submission of the learned Counsel for the Petitioner that the

CID or PNB had fabricated evidence against the Petitioner. I have no reason not to

allow the law to take its own course in this instance. In these circumstances, I hold

that the arrest of the Petitioner caused by the CID is justified in terms of Section 6(1)

of the PTA.

Another argument advanced by the learned Counsel for the Petitioner is that it was

unlawful for the CID not to have produced the Petitioner before any Court of law up

until the 23-03-2021.7 This is, therefore, the submission made by the learned Counsel

for the Petitioner that the CID had failed to produce the Petitioner before a competent

Court within the time limits specified either under the PTA or ordinary law (Section 37,

CCPA).

It is necessary first to reproduce here, Section 7 of the PTA which deals with the

applicable law pertaining to the stage at which a person arrested under Section 6(1)

of the PTA must be produced before a Magistrate.

Section 7 of the PTA:

7 Para 20 of the Petition dated, 18-05-2022.

[SC FR 170/2022] - Page 12 of 18

(1) Any person arrested under subsection (1) of section 6 may be kept in

custody for a period not exceeding seventy-two hours and shall, unless a

detention order under section 9 has been made in respect of such person,

be produced before a Magistrate before the expiry of such period and the

Magistrate shall, on an application made in writing in that behalf by a

police officer not below the rank of Superintendent, make order that such

person be remanded until the conclusion of the trial of such person :

Provided that, where the Attorney-General consents to the release, of such

person from custody before the conclusion of the trial, the Magistrate shall

release such person from custody.

(2) Where any person connected with or concerned in or reasonably

suspected to be connected with or concerned in the commission of any

offence under this Act appears or is produced before any court other than

in the manner referred to in subsection (1), such court shall order the

remand of such person until the conclusion of the trial:

Provided that, if an application is made under the hand of a police officer

not below the rank of Superintendent to keep such person in police

custody for a period not exceeding seventy-two hours, the Magistrate shall

authorise such custody and thereupon the order of remand made by the

Magistrate shall remain suspended for the period during which such

person is in police custody.

(3) A police officer conducting an investigation under this Act in respect

of any person arrested under subsection (1) of section 6 or remanded

under subsection (1) or subsection (2) of this section-

(a) shall have the right of access to such person and the right to take such

person during reasonable hours to any place for the purpose of

[SC FR 170/2022] - Page 13 of 18

interrogation and from place to place for the purposes of investigation;

and

(b) may obtain a specimen of the handwriting of such person and do all such

acts as may reasonably be necessary for fingerprinting or otherwise

identifying such person;

In the case of Weerawansa v The Attorney-General and others,8 Fernando, J. held

that if a Detention Order under Section 9(1) is obtained within 72 hours of arrest,

there is no necessity to produce the detainee before the Magistrate. In Fernando Js

words, it is as follows:

If a Detention Order under section 9(1) is obtained within 72 hours of

arrest, non-production before a judicial officer is excused by section 7(1).

However, I must also mention here for the sake of completeness that in Weerawansas

case, Fernando, J. went on to hold that the CID had no right to keep the Petitioner in

that case in custody without producing him before a Magistrate, in terms of section

7(1) as Court had not accepted the assertion by the Respondent in that case that the

Petitioner had been arrested by the CID in accordance with Section 6(1) of the PTA.

As stated above, the CID had arrested the Petitioner on 26-06-2020. The CID as per

Section 7(1) of the PTA has kept the Petitioner in custody for a period not exceeding

seventy-two hours. Thereafter, the CID had kept him in custody till the Detention

Order dated 29-06-2020 (3 R 6) was made in terms of Section 9 of the PTA. Thus,

the said period of custody in CID has not exceeded seventy-two hours as per Section

6(1) of the PTA. Therefore, there is no violation of law by the CID in that instance.

Another argument advanced by the learned Counsel for the Petitioner is that some of

the Detention Orders issued against the Petitioner are not valid. The Petitioner was

detained under three consecutive Detention Orders, i.e., the detention orders dated

8 2000 (1) SLR 387.

[SC FR 170/2022] - Page 14 of 18

29-06-2020 (3 R 6); the detention order dated 26-09-2020 (3 R 7); the detention

order dated 25-12-2020 (3 R 8).9

Let me now reproduce below, Section 9 of the PTA which empowers the Minister to

order detention of a person connected with or concerned in any unlawful activity.

Section 9 of the PTA (Detention Orders)

1) Where the Minister has reason to believe or suspect that any person is

connected with or concerned in any unlawful activity, the Minister may order

that such person be detained for a period not exceeding three months in the

first instance, in such place and subject to such conditions as may be

determined by the Minister, and any such order may be extended from time to

time for a period not exceeding three months at a time:

Provided, however, that the aggregate period of such detention shall not

exceed a period of eighteen months.

2)

(a) At any time after an order has been made in respect of any person under

subsection (1), the Minister may direct that the operation of such order be

suspended and may make an order under subsection (1) of section 11.

(b) The Minister may revoke any such direction if he is satisfied that the person in

respect of whom the direction was made has failed to observe any condition

imposed or that the operation of the order can no longer remain suspended

without detriment to public safety.

In Weerawansas case10, Fernando, J. took the following view:

9 The Petitioner has only produced the Detention Order dated 25-12-2020 marked P 2.

10 Supra at page 378.

[SC FR 170/2022] - Page 15 of 18

"Not only must the Minister of Defence, subjectively, have the required

belief or suspicion, but there must also be, objectively, 'reason' for

such belief.

I have already adverted to above, the material placed against the Petitioner. I am of

the view that the said material is sufficient to pass on the objective test, the decision

made by the Minister of Defence that there was sufficient basis for the issuance of the

Detention Order.

The leaned Counsel for the Petitioner also advanced another argument with regard to

the validity of the Detention Orders marked 3 R 6, 3 R 7 and 3 R 8. It is the

submission of the learned Counsel for the Petitioner that it is only the Minsters of

Defence who has been empowered in terms of Section 9(1) of the PTA, to make

Detention Orders. It is also his submission that some of the Detention Orders [marked

3 R 6, 3 R 7] issued to detain the Petitioner have been signed by the President and

therefore not valid in law.

I observe that the designation of the signatory of the Detention Orders marked 3 R 6

and 3 R 7, has been mentioned on those two Detention Orders as President and

the designation of the signatory of the Detention Order marked 3 R 8 has been

mentioned therein as President and Minister of Defence.

While it is correct that Section 9(1) of the PTA empowers the Minster of Defence to

issue detention orders I cannot forget the fact that in terms of Article 44(3) of the

Constitution it is always the President who must hold the portfolio of the Minister of

Defence in this country.

Further, Article 44(3) of the Constitution requires that the position of the Minister in

charge of the subject of Defence be filled by the President. It is as follows:

(3) The President shall be the Minister in charge of the subject of

Defence and may exercise, perform and discharge the powers, duties and

[SC FR 170/2022] - Page 16 of 18

functions of any Minister of the Cabinet of Ministers or any Minister who is

not a member of the Cabinet of Ministers, subject to the provisions of the

Constitution, for not exceeding fourteen days during a period within which

any subject or function is not assigned to any such Minister under the

provisions of paragraph (1) of this Article or under paragraph (1) of Article

45 and accordingly, any reference in the Constitution or any written law to

the Minster to whom such subject or function is assigned, shall be read and

construed as a reference to the President:

Provided however, preceding provisions of this paragraph shall not

preclude the President from assigning any subject or function to himself in

consultation with the Prime Minister and accordingly, any reference in the

Constitution or any written law to the Minister to whom such subject or

function is assigned, shall be read and construed as a reference to the

President. [emphasis added]

In SC/SD/06/2001, this Court in determining the Constitutionality of the Seventeenth

Amendment to the Constitution, stated obiter regarding the exercise of the functions

of Minister of Defence, which is as follows:

The relevant provision as to the exercise of the sovereignty of the People in

relation to executive power is contained in Article 4(b), which reads thus:

executive power of the People, including the defence of Sri Lanka, shall

be exercised by the President of the Public elected by the People,

Therefore the executive power of the People including defend [sic] is exercised

[by] the president of [the] Republic who is elected by the People.

Therefore, I am satisfied that the Detention Orders have been issued by the Minster

of Defence who was also the President of the Country at that time.

The condition precedent to the issuance of the Detention Order is that the issuer, the

Minister of Defence, must have been satisfied that there were adequate grounds to

detain the Petitioner. In the instant case, it was just the same individual who held the

[SC FR 170/2022] - Page 17 of 18

posts of both the President and the Minister of Defence of the country. Therefore,

irrespective of the designation written underneath the signature, it was the same

individual who had signed. The said individual should have signed the Detention

Orders after being satisfied that there were adequate grounds to detain the Petitioner.

Therefore, the main issue for the validity of the Detention Orders would be whether

there were such grounds for the issuer to detain the Petitioner in custody. This is

because the person who had signed the Detention Orders was indeed the Minister of

Defence. I have no basis or justification to hold the Detention Orders 3 R 6 and 3 R

7 are invalid merely because the designation of the issuer has been mentioned as the

President and not as the Minister of Defence in the Detention Orders 3 R 6 and 3 R

7. Moreover, I am of the view that this argument is so technical in nature and is not

capable of persuading me to declare these Detention Orders invalid on that basis,

particularly in view of the material available against the Petitioner calling for the

necessity to detain him in custody pending investigation into very serious crimes.

For the foregoing reasons, I hold that the Respondents have not infringed any of the

Fundamental Rights of the Petitioner guaranteed by the Constitution. In the above

circumstances, the Petitioner is not entitled to succeed with his Petition. I proceed to

dismiss this Petition with costs.

The Petitioner in this Petition has stated that he was placed under interdiction on the

allegations some of which were discussed in the course of this Judgment.11 However,

in the course of the argument, Court was informed by the learned counsel who

appeared for the Petitioner that the Petitioner has been reinstated and therefore has

resumed working as a Police officer but neither the learned Counsel for the Petitioner

nor the learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General has offered any explanation acceptable

to Court as to how a person who is suspected to be concerned with offences of that

magnitude came to be re-employed as a Police officer. I cannot forget the fact that

the learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General resisted this application against granting

relief to the Petitioner on the basis that there is evidence to justify both his arrest and

11 Paragraph 20 of the Petition dated 04-03-2021.

[SC FR 170/2022] - Page 18 of 18

detention. I cannot turn a blind eye to the above situation. Therefore, I direct the

Inspector General of Police to look in to those matters with a view of deciding the

legality/ suitability of allowing the Petitioner to continue to be employed as a Police

officer. The 6th Respondent is also directed to examine the relevant facts pertaining

to the aforesaid aspects and consider giving necessary advices to the Inspector

General of Police.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

A. L. SHIRAN GOONERATNE, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

MAHINDA SAMAYAWARDHENA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT