==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal against the Judgment of the Court of Appeal dated 21st July,2015 under and in terms of Chapter LVIII of the Civil Procedure Code. 1. Niranjan Naganathan 2. Yogendran Naganathan Both of 312/1, Hendala Road, Wattala. 3. P. Sudarshan 57, Senanayake Mawatha, Bandarawela Plaintiffs SC Appeal No. 96/2016 SC SPL LA No. 159/2015 C.A. No. 1214/99(F) D.C. Matale No. 1928/P Vs. 1. Alangara Naganathan 2. Somasekaran Shanmuganathan Of Mandandawela, Matale. Defendants

AND BETWEEN 2. Somasekaran Shanmuganathan

S.C. Appeal No.96/2016 with 97/2016

2

Of Mandandawela, Matale. 2nd Defendant-Appellant Vs. 1. Niranjan Naganathan 2. Yogendran Naganathan Both of 312/1, Hendala Road, Wattala. 3. P. Sudarshan 57, Senanayake Mawatha, Bandarawela Plaintiff-Respondents AND NOW BETWEEN 1. Niranjan Naganathan 2. Yogendran Naganathan Both of 312/1, Hendala Road, Wattala. 3. P. Sudarshan 57, Senanayake Mawatha, Bandarawela Plaintiff-Respondent- Appellants Vs. 2. Somasekaran Shanmuganathan Of Mandandawela, Matale. 2nd Defendant-Appellant- Respondent. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

S.C. Appeal No.96/2016 with 97/2016

3

In the matter of an appeal from the Judgment dated 21- 07-,2015 of the Court of Appeal in C.A.1214/99(f) in terms of Article 128 of the Constitution. 1. Niranjan Naganathan 2. Yogendran Naganathan Both of 312/1, Hendala Road, Wattala. 3. P. Sudarshan 57, Senanayake Mawatha, Bandarawela Plaintiffs SC Appeal No. 97/2016 SC SPL LA No. 160/2015 C.A. No. 1214/99(F) D.C. Matale No. 1928/P Vs. 1. Alangara Naganathan 2. Somasekaran Shanmuganathan Of Mandandawela, Matale. Defendants

AND BETWEEN 2. Somasekaran Shanmuganathan Of Mandandawela, Matale. 2nd Defendant-Appellant

S.C. Appeal No.96/2016 with 97/2016

4

Vs. 1. Niranjan Naganathan 2. Yogendran Naganathan Both of 312/1, Hendala Road, Wattala. 3. P. Sudarshan 57, Senanayake Mawatha, Bandarawela Plaintiff-Respondents

AND NOW BETWEEN 2. Somasekaran Shanmuganathan Of Mandandawela, Matale. 2nd Defendant-Appellant- Appellant Vs. 1. Niranjan Naganathan 2. Yogendran Naganathan Both of 312/1, Hendala Road, Wattala. 3. P. Sudarshan 57, Senanayake Mawatha, Bandarawela Plaintiff-Respondent- Respondents **********

S.C. Appeal No.96/2016 with 97/2016

5

BEFORE : VIJITH K. MALALGODA, P.C., J. A.H.M.D. NAWAZ, J. ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

COUNSEL : Geoffrey Alagaratnam, PC with Luwie Ganeshanathan for the 1st to 3rd Plaintiff- Respondent-Appellants in S.C. Appeal No. 96/2016. H. Withanachchi with Shantha Karunadara for the 2nd Defendant-Appellant-Respondent in S.C. Appeal No. 96/2016. H. Withanachchi with Shantha Karunadara for the 2nd Defendant-Appellant-Appellant in S.C. Appeal No. 97/2016. Geoffrey Alagaratnam, PC with Luwie Ganeshanathan for the 1st to 3rd Plaintiff- Respondent-Respondents in S.C. Appeal No. 97/2016. ARGUED ON : 01st June, 2023 DECIDED ON : 02nd August, 2024 ********** ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

The 1st to 3rd Plaintiffs instituted a partition action in the District

Court of Matale naming the 1st and 2nd Defendants as Defendants seeking

to partition a land. After trial, the District Court held with the devolution

of title pleaded by the Plaintiffs and granted only a ¼ share of the

estimated value of the building that stood on the corpus to the 2nd

Defendant. The 2nd Defendant preferred an appeal against the said

S.C. Appeal No.96/2016 with 97/2016

6

judgment to the Court of Appeal. With its judgment, the Court of Appeal

altered the judgment of the District Court, making the 2nd Defendant

entitled to a ½ share of the building along with soil rights it covered over

the corpus. The 1st to 3rd Plaintiffs sought special leave to appeal against the

judgment of the Court of Appeal in SC/CA/SPL/LA 159/2015 while the

2nd Defendant also sought special leave to appeal in SC/CA/SPL/LA

160/2015.

On 16.05.2016, after hearing parties in both these applications, this

Court granted special leave to appeal on the following questions of law:

a. Did the Court of Appeal err in law in misconstruing the

uncontroverted documentary evidence in holding that the 2nd

defendant is entitled to an undivided ½ share of the house

depicted as “A” in the Plan marked “X” and especially in

disregarding the amended Plaint and the points of contest

framed by the District Court?

b. Did the Court of Appeal err in law in failing to appreciate the

impracticality of granting rights in a house without any rights to

the soil?

c. Did the Court of Appeal err in law in failing to consider that the

2nd Defendant who has no soil rights is not recognised as a co-

owner under the law?

d. Did the Court of Appeal misdirect itself by not applying the

principles in relation to question of prescription in favour of the

2nd Defendant based on the evidence adduced in his testimony?

e. Whether the 1st to 3rd Plaintiffs could have and maintain this

action for partition on the footing that they were entitled to the

S.C. Appeal No.96/2016 with 97/2016

7

entirety of the corpus as pleaded in their amended Plaint and also

by raising points of contest on that basis?

At the hearing of the two appeals, the contesting parties agreed that

a consolidated judgment could be pronounced by this Court as the two

appeals arose out of a single judgment of the District Court as well as of

the Court of Appeal.

The Plaintiffs instituted the partition action in the District Court of

Matale against 1st and 2nd Defendants to partition a land depicted in Final

Partition Plan No. 2172 of 29.04.1959 as Lot No. Y. It was their claim that

their predecessors in title became entitled to the corpus by the final decree

in that partition action, namely No. P582 of the same Court. The land to be

partitioned is in extent of one rood and twenty-four perches in total. The

land also had a building consisting of two parts, standing on it, shown in

the said plan as “A” and “B”, bearing assessment No. 790.

In their 3rd amended Plaint, the Plaintiffs have claimed that Alangara

Ammal, Aiyanadan Kanagammal, Aiyanadan Somasegaram, Aiyanadan

Nathanagan and AiyanadanThiyaganathan, were some of the defendants in

the partition action No. P582 of District Court of Matale. They were

allocated the corpus by the said final partition decree. Each of them became

entitled to 1/5th undivided share of the corpus. Thereupon, Alangara Ammal

transferred her 1/5th undivided share of the corpus to Iyanathan

Nathanagan, by executing Deed No. 117 on 28.11.1960, retaining her

entitlement to the building. Upon her death, her rights over the building

were devolved equally among her four children. The Plaintiffs also

claimed that Iyanathan Kanagammal and Iyanathan Somasegaram have

S.C. Appeal No.96/2016 with 97/2016

8

transferred their shares in favour of their father, Iyanathan Nathanagan by

execution of Deed No. 2916 on 07.11.1973. Thus, it is claimed by the

Plaintiffs that their father Iyanathan Nathanagan became entitled to the

entirety of the land and also to a ¾ undivided share of the house, which

devolved on them after his passing. The Plaintiff allocated only a ¼ share

of the house to the 2nd Defendant, which was accepted by the District

Court in the instant partition action.

The 2nd Defendant, in his amended Statement of Claims, denied the

devolution of title pleaded by the Plaintiffs and averred that his father had

built a house on it in 1976, as depicted in the preliminary plan as “A”. He

averred that his father built the new house, after demolishing a building

that stood on that land. It was further averred by the 2nd Defendant that his

father Iyanathan Somasegaram, by execution of Deed of Gift No. 904 of

13.03.1970, transferred his ¼ undivided share of the corpus to the 2nd

Defendant, who, by having possessed the house in its entirety had

acquired prescriptive rights to the house, by exclusion of others. He

further claims that he is also entitled to a ¼ share of the corpus as well. In

Point of Contest No. 6, the 2nd Defendant sought a determination of his

rights to the house, on the basis that he had acquired same by prescription.

Parties proceeded to trial on a total of seven points of contest. At the

conclusion of the trial, the District Court held with the Plaintiffs. With

regard to the entitlement of the 2nd Defendant, Court granted only a ¼

share of the house. The Court then ordered the 2nd Defendant be

compensated by payment of ¼ of the value of the building in consideration

of the practical limitations in the exercise of his entitlement.

S.C. Appeal No.96/2016 with 97/2016

9

In determining the appeal preferred by the Plaintiffs, against the

judgment of the District Court, the Court of Appeal found that the 2nd

Defendant is entitled to a ½ share of the building marked “A” along with

soil rights of the area covered by that building. The appellate Court arrived

at the said conclusion on the basis that, after having accepted the 1st

Plaintiff’s evidence, the District Court should have allocated the said ½

share of the house to the 2nd Defendant, as he himself conceded to a ½

share of the house to Iyanathan Somasegaram.

Learned President’s Counsel for the Plaintiffs submitted before this

Court that the 2nd Defendant in his evidence accepted the signature of his

father appearing in the Deed of Transfer No. 2916 of 07.11.1973 (P2). It is

by this deed, his father, Iyanathan Somasegaram, transferred his 1/5th

undivided share of the corpus in favour of the 1st Plaintiff’s father Iyanathan

Nathanagan. It was also contended by the learned President’s Counsel that

the 2nd Defendant did not dispute the validity of the said Deed of Transfer

during the trial and therefore Deed P2 gets priority over the Deed of Gift

No. 904 of 13.03.1970 (2V2), on which the 2nd Defendant relied on, in

claiming his entitlement to the corpus. With regard to the 2nd Defendant’s

claim of prescription, learned President’s Counsel contended that

Iyanathan Somasegaram was only entitled to a ¼ share, but his claim of

prescription has no basis as the building, depicted as “A” in the

preliminary plan, is not a newly constructed one. He further submitted

that it was only renovated from time to time and the 2nd Defendant had

failed to establish his claim of prescription against other co-owners, as

correctly held by the District Court.

S.C. Appeal No.96/2016 with 97/2016

10

It was also contended by the learned President’s Counsel that the

Court of Appeal, in arriving at its impugned finding, had overlooked or

disregarded the amended Plaint and the Points of Contest on which the

parties proceeded to trial but acted only on what the 1st Plaintiff said in

evidence, totally disregarding the entitlement decided by the District

Court, after undertaking a careful investigation of title of each party. In

support of his contention learned Counsel relied on the judgment of

Richard and another v Seibel Nona and Others (2001) 1 Sri L.R. 1, where it

was emphasised that the duty of the District Court to investigate title and

not to on admissions. Challenging the legality of the conclusion reached

by the Court of Appeal in conceding to soil rights of the 2nd Defendant in

relation to the land on which the house stood on, learned President’s

Counsel submitted that the District Court had correctly held that he is only

entitled to compensation for the building as he is not entitled to any soil

rights as the judgment of Katherina v Jandiris (1904) 7 NLR 133, held that

a house built on a co-owned land becomes property of the soil owners and

the builder is only entitled to compensation.

Learned Counsel for the 2nd Defendant, in his reply submissions,

advanced an argument that the Deeds P1 and P2 were executed by the

executants; while retaining their rights over the buildings “A” and “B”

and, as these buildings included the soil covered by them, they accrue to

the soil as well. Therefore, he contended what was transferred are the soil

rights over the land, excluding soil rights over the area covered by the said

building. Therefore, he contended that the District Court was in error in

determining the rights of the parties. He also added that there was neither

compliance of the provisions of Section 12(1) of the Partition Law nor of

S.C. Appeal No.96/2016 with 97/2016

11

Section 16(3). It is his submission that the Court of Appeal should have

proceeded to set aside entire proceedings before the District Court rather

than modifying it.

The devolution of title pleaded by the Plaintiffs is not a complicated

one. Since the core dispute between the contestants is related to the rights

of the building, I shall consider their respective rights over same, after the

question of devolution of title to the corpus is considered.

After the final partition decree in the District Court of Matale No. P

582, Alangara Ammal, Aiyanadan Kanagammal, Aiyanadan Somasegaram,

Aiyanadan Nathanagan and Aiyanadan Thiyaganathan became entitled to an

undivided 1/5th share each on the land depicted in Plan No. 2172A and

also to the building that stood on it, depicted as “A” and “B”. It appears

from the said plan, what is depicted therein as “A” and “B” are two

sections of a one building with a common wall between them. Alangara

Ammal, before her death, transferred her 1/5th undivided share to one of

her sons, Aiyanadan Nathanagan, by executing Deed No. 117 (P2), while

retaining her rights over the building. Aiyanadan Thiyaganathan by

executing Deed No. 3717 (P3), transferred his 1/5th share to Aiyanadan

Nathanagan, whose name erroneously appears therein a Alangara

Nathanagan . Thereafter, remaining siblings of Aiyanadan Nathanagan,

namely Aiyanadan Kanagammal and Aiyanadan Somasegaram, also have

transferred their rights in favour of Aiyanadan Nathanagan, by execution of

Deed No. 2910 (P2). With these notarial executions Aiyanadan Nathanagan

became the sole owner to the corpus.

S.C. Appeal No.96/2016 with 97/2016

12

However, the 2nd Defendant tendered a Deed of Gift No. 904 (2V1),

through which he claimed that his father Aiyanadan Somasegaram had

gifted his rights over the corpus to him. Thus, it is clear that Aiyanadan

Somasegaram, who executed P2 in favour of Aiyanadan Nathanagan, also

executed 2V2 in favour of his son, the 2nd Defendant. The trial Court

investigated into these two conflicting notarial executions. After having

observed that the Deed No. 2910 (P2) was executed on 07.11.1973, whereas

the Deed of Gift No. 904 (2V2) was executed three years later on

13.03.1976, it had rightly concluded that the 2nd Defendant is not entitled to

any rights over the corpus on deed 2V2. It is clear from the evidence that

when Aiyanadan Somasegaram executed deed 2V2 in favour of his son, the

2nd Defendant, he already had alienated his rights over the land in favour

of his brother Aiyanadan Nathanagan and had no residual entitlement to the

corpus was retained. The trial Court also considered the discrepancy that

appeared in the folio of the Land Registry in which the details of these

notarial executions were entered. The folio indicates only Aiyanadan

Kanagammal made the transfer, while the Deed No. 2910 (P2) contained the

signature of Aiyanadan Somasegaram, in addition to the signature of

Aiyanadan Kanagammal. The undivided share component that was

transferred by that deed also indicates as 2/5th as Aiyanadan Kanagammal

only had 1/5th share to transfer. The notarial certificate too confirms that

Aiyanadan Somasegaram too had signed on that instrument as one of the

executants. I therefore concur with the conclusion reached by the District

Court that, the absence of the name of Aiyanadan Somasegaram in the folio

of the Land Registry, in all probability was due to a clerical error, which

has no adverse impact on the rights that were conveyed through the said

S.C. Appeal No.96/2016 with 97/2016

13

notarial execution. The 2nd Defendant admitted his father’s signature on P2

and did not contest its authenticity. Thus, the finding of the District Court

that the 2nd Defendant is not entitled to any share of the corpus in Deed 2V2

is a correct finding.

Now I turn to consider the share entitlement of the 2nd Defendant

over the building on his claim of prescription.

The 2nd Defendant had claimed acquisition of prescriptive rights to

the building over his entitlement to a ¼ share to same and to the land

covered by it and suggested a Point of Contest before the trial Court. Point

of Contest No. 6 was framed to the effect whether the 2nd Defendant had

acquired a prescriptive title over the entire building and to the ¼ share of

the land, upon being in exclusive and adverse possession thereof for over

ten years.

During cross examination, the 1st Plaintiff admitted that since 1975,

the 2nd Defendant is in possession of the front part of the building shown

as “A” in the preliminary plan “X”. It is his position that the two parts of

the building as per Plan No. 2172A, still exists, although certain

renovations were made to it from time to time. The 2nd Defendant, in his

evidence relied on a plan (2V4), approved by Matale Municipal Council, in

support of his claim of prescription that his father Aiyanadan Somasegaram

had built a new house on the property after demolishing the old building

without any protest by others. During his cross examination by the

Plaintiffs, the 2nd Defendant identified his claim to the land as a ¼ share.

He also claimed full ownership to the house. The 2nd Defendant also

conceded to the suggestion by the Plaintiffs that he has no evidence to

S.C. Appeal No.96/2016 with 97/2016

14

present before Court that his father built a new building on the land

sought to be partitioned.

The trial Court rejected the claim of the 2nd Defendant that he had

acquired prescriptive title to ¼ share of the land and to the building, in its

entirety. In coming to the said conclusion, the trial Court considered the

fact that the plan, said to be approved by the Municipal Council is dated

09.04.1976, whereas the Deed of Gift No. 904 (2V1) was executed on

13.03.1976, and as such there could not have been any new building in

existence when Aiyanadan Somasegaram gifted his rights to the 2nd

Defendant. In order to succeed in his claim of prescription over the “new”

building, the 2nd Defendant was to establish that his father, by demolishing

a building and made a new construction on the land to be partitioned, in

terms of Section 3 of the Prescription Ordinance. He claimed prescription

against his own relatives and should have presented cogent evidence in

support of his claim. In the absence of any such evidence that the present

building was built, only after the old one, to which the Plaintiffs had an

entitlement, was demolished adverse to their interests, the trial Court was

right to hold that he is not entitled to the full rights over the building on

prescription as he is only entitled to a ¼ share.

In view of these considerations, I am inclined to agree with the

conclusion reached by the trial Court that the 1st to 3rd Plaintiffs, being the

heirs of Aiyanadan Nathanagan, are entitled to the title of the land sought to

be partitioned in its entirety. The conclusion reached by the trial Court that

the 2nd Defendant has no soil rights to the area covered by the building,

although he is entitled only to a ¼ share of that building too is supported

by authority. The judgment of Katherina v Jandiris (supra) was in relation

S.C. Appeal No.96/2016 with 97/2016

15

to a house built by a co-owner, who transferred his entitlement to the co-

owned land to other co-owners but remained in possession of that house.

When his creditor seized that house in execution of decree, it was held (at

p. 134) following the ratio of De Silva v Haramanis (1895) 3 NLR 160, that

the house in question was the property of the soil owners and the former

co-owner had only a right to compensation, which by then had prescribed.

Turning to consider the actual share entitlement of the 2nd Defendant

in relation to the building, it must be observed at the outset that the deeds

P2 and P3, by which the executants have transferred their shares over the

land to be partitioned, indicate they expressly retained and reserved their

rights over the building “A” with them. After the death of Alangara Ammal,

her 1/5th undivided share over the building, which she retained after

transferring her 1/5th share to Aiyanadan Nathanagan, was devolved on her

four children, making their entitlement to a ¼ share of the building to

each. When Aiyanadan Somasegaram, transferred his entitlement to the land

in favour of Aiyanadan Nathanagan, he too retained his ¼ share to the

building, which now devolved on the 2nd Defendant, while the balance ¾

share was inherited by the Plaintiffs. Therefore, the conclusion reached by

the District Court on the entitlement of the 2nd Defendant of a ¼ share over

the building is based on the evidence and was determined after an

investigation into his title. This conclusion is in line with the principle

enunciated in the judgment Hamidu v Gunasekera (1922) 24 NLR 143,

where it was held (at p. 145) “[A]s a matter of fact a person entitled merely to

an interest in a building on a land which has become the subject of a partition

action can only obtain compensation for the interest in the building and cannot

get any share of the land in the partition.”

S.C. Appeal No.96/2016 with 97/2016

16

The decision of the Court of Appeal to alter the judgment of the

District Court was made merely on the basis that the 1st Plaintiff in his oral

evidence had accepted the 2nd Defendant’s entitlement and is not a finding

arrived at after an investigation, as did by the District Court. It is factually

correct that the 1st Plaintiff conceded that Aiyanadan Somasegaram is entitled

to ½ share of the building and also to a ½ share of the land on which the

said building stood. Interestingly, the 2nd Defendant too, in his oral

evidence restricted his share to ¼ even after the 1st Plaintiff conceded to a

½ share and if one were to determine rights on the admissions, still the

conclusion reached by the District Court is correct. The appellate Court

had accepted oral evidence of the 1st Plaintiff and opted to act only on that

evidence but preferred to ignore the oral evidence of the 2nd Defendant,

who conceded that he is only entitled to ¼ share.

In this regard, it is important to note that the Point of Contest

suggested by the Plaintiffs was whether the Plaintiffs are entitled to ¾

share of the building and the 2nd Defendant is entitled to the remaining ¼

share. The trial Court after having undertaken an investigation of title of

each party had arrived at the finding it eventually did. In oral evidence, a

party may correctly state his entitlement, overstate or even would concede

to an entitlement due to many reasons, but after an investigation into their

respective titles was conducted that evidence might not found to be

corrected. Section 25(1) of the Partition Law imposes a mandatory duty on

a trial Court that it “… shall examine the title of each party and shall hear and

receive evidence in support thereof and shall try and determine all questions of law

and fact arising in that action in regard to the right, share or interest of each party

S.C. Appeal No.96/2016 with 97/2016

17

to, of, or in the land to which the action relates, …”. In Juliana Hamine at al v

Don Thomas et al (1957) 59 NLR 546, it was emphasised (at p.549):

“… that a partition decree cannot be the subject of a private

arrangement between parties on matters of title which the Court is

bound by law to examine. While it is indeed essential for parties to a

partition action to state to the Court the points of contest inter se

and to obtain a determination on them, the obligations of the Court

are not discharged unless the provisions of section 25 of the Act are

complied with quite independently of what parties may or may not

do.”

Learned Counsel for the 2nd Defendant, in relation to the Question of

Law whether the Plaintiffs could have and maintain this action for

partition on the footing that they were entitled to the entirety of the corpus

as pleaded in their amended Plaint and also by raising points of contest on

that basis, submitted that the 2nd Defendant should be recognised as a co-

owner by them since he has soil rights over the area covered by the

building. This particular Question of Law was raised by the 2nd Defendant,

on the basis that the District Court has held that no soil rights could be

accrued to him as his entitlement is restricted to the building only.

Learned President’s Counsel’s submission on this issue was Section 5 of

the Partition Law is wide enough to cover the inclusion of the 2nd

Defendant as he could either be considered as a party “claimed to be

entitled” to any right, share or interest etc., or to “any improvement made or

effected on or to the land” and therefore could properly be named as a

defendant in the partition action. He also relied on the interpretation given

to the “co-owner” in Section 83 of the Partition Law. The District Court has

S.C. Appeal No.96/2016 with 97/2016

18

held that the 2nd Defendant had no soil rights and his entitlement is

restricted only to the building, after an investigation into his title and until

that determination, the 2nd Defendant’s status of co-owner is based on his

own Statement of Claim, which made him to be cited as a defendant, in

terms of Section 5 of the Partition Law.

In view of the afore stated reasoning, I proceed to answer the

Questions of Law on which these two appeals were proceeded in the

following manner

1. Did the Court of Appeal err in law in misconstruing the

uncontroverted documentary evidence in holding that the 2nd

defendant is entitled to an undivided ½ share of the house

depicted as “A” in the Plan marked “X” and especially in

disregarding the amended Plaint and the points of contest

framed by the District Court? Yes

2. Did the Court of Appeal err in law in failing to appreciate the

impracticality of granting rights in a house without any rights to

the soil? Yes

3. Did the Court of Appeal err in law in failing to consider that the

2nd Defendant who has no soil rights is not recognised as a co-

owner under the law? 2nd Defendant has no soil rights over the

corpus

4. Did the Court of Appeal misdirect itself by not applying the

principles in relation to question of prescription in favour of the

2nd Defendant based on the evidence adduced in his testimony?

No

S.C. Appeal No.96/2016 with 97/2016

19

5. Whether the 1st to 3rd Plaintiffs could have and maintain this

action for partition on the footing that they were entitled to the

entirety of the corpus as pleaded in their amended Plaint and also

by raising points of contest on that basis? Yes, the 2nd Defendant

coupled his prescriptive claim with his entitlement for a ¼

undivided share to the corpus.

The impugned judgment of the Court of Appeal is accordingly set

aside, and the Judgement of the District Court is hereby restored. The

Appeal of the Plaintiffs (SC Appeal No. 96/2016) is allowed, and the

Appeal of the 2nd Defendant (SC Appeal No. 97/2016) stands dismissed.

Parties will bear their costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

VIJITH K. MALALGODA, P.C., J. I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

A.H.M.D. NAWAZ, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT