IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Wickramage Don Subadra,

No. 234/E,

Mulleriyawa North,

Angoda.

Petitioner

SC FR NO: SC/FR/247/2016 Vs.

1. Kotikawatte Mulleriyawa

Pradeshiya Sabhawa,

Head Office, Gothatuwa New Town.

2. Kumuduni Gunathilleka,

Secretary,

Kotikawatte Mulleriyawa

Pradeshiya Sabhawa,

Head Office, Gothatuwa New Town.

2A. Chandani Ekanayake,

Secretary,

Kotikawatte Mulleriyawa

Pradeshiya Sabhawa,

Head Office, Gothatuwa New Town.

3. Prasanna Solangarachchi,

Solanga Drive,

Himbutana, Angoda.

4. Polwattege Arosha Asantha Perera,

2

SC/FR/247/2016

No. 228/A, Mulleriyawa North,

Angoda.

5. Sri Lanka Land Reclamation and

Development Corporation,

No. 3, Jayawardenapura Mawatha,

Sri Jayawardenapura Kotte.

6. Urban Development Authority,

7th Floor, Sethsiripaya,

Battaramulla.

7. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondents

Before: Hon. Justice Vijith K. Malalgoda, P.C.

Hon. Justice Mahinda Samayawardhena

Hon. Justice Arjuna Obeyesekere

Counsel: Shantha Jayawardena with Thilini Vidanagamage for the

Petitioner.

Migara Kodithuwakku for the 1st and 2A Respondents.

Yuresha de Silva, D.S.G. for the 5th 7th Respondents.

Written Submissions:

By the Petitioner on 03.02.2021 and 08.07.2024

By the 1st 2nd Respondents on 29.07.2021 and 25.06.2024

By the 5th 7th Respondents on 12.01.2021

Argued on: 12.06.2024

Decided on: 05.08.2024

3

SC/FR/247/2016

Samayawardhena, J.

Introduction

The petitioner filed this application in this Court against (1) the

Kotikawatte-Mulleriyawa Pradeshieya Sabhawa, (2) its Secretary, (3) its

former Chairman, (4) a person by the name of P.A.A. Perera, (5) the Sri

Lanka Land Reclamation and Development Corporation, (6) the Urban

Development Authority and (7) the Attorney General, seeking a

declaration that her fundamental rights guaranteed by Article 12(1) of

the Constitution was infringed by the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 5th and 6th respondents

by the arbitrary demolition of the northern boundary wall of the

petitioners land, and compensation.

Although the Sri Lanka Land Reclamation and Development Corporation

and the Urban Development Authority were made as parties, the

petitioner primarily based her case on the claim that the Kotikawatte-

Mulleriyawa Pradeshiya Sabha, utilizing its own bulldozer and operated

by its employee, demolished her northern boundary wall on 02.07.2016.

Duty of uberrima fides, suppression and misrepresentation of

material facts

In the petition and corresponding affidavit of the petitioner dated

26.07.2016, the petitioners position was that the said boundary wall was

constructed with the approval of the Pradeshiya Sabha. The petitioner

gave prominence to this in her petition, the corresponding affidavit, and

the written submissions filed prior to the argument. In paragraph 8 of

her affidavit the petitioner stated that The said approval seal placed on

the building plan [marked P4] gave approval for a mixed purpose building,

security installations and boundary walls. (emphasis by the petitioner)

In paragraph 9 she further stated that after completing the construction

4

SC/FR/247/2016

of my house, including the boundary walls, the then Chairman of the 1st

respondent issued Certificate of Conformity marked P5.

According to the side minute under the journal entry dated 04.08.2016,

notices of this application had been issued on 05.08.2016. The

application was supported and leave to proceed was granted on

10.08.2016 in the absence of the Pradeshiya Sabha.

The position of the Pradeshiya Sabha is that the said boundary wall was

an unauthorized construction built without any approval from the

Pradeshiya Sabha. I am inclined to accept this position. The petitioner

relies solely on the seal placed on the building plan marked P4 by the

Pradeshiya Sabha to present a distorted case that the boundary wall was

constructed with the approval of the Pradeshiya Sabha, and that

following its construction, the Pradeshiya Sabha issued the Certificate of

Conformity. P4 contains only the building plan and nothing else. No

proposed boundary wall is shown on P4 although the common seal

placed on P4 contains the words Mixed-Residential/Commercial

purposes/Buildings for Security/Boundary Walls/Survey Plan. The

Pradeshiya Sabha has not deleted the irrelevant words. The Chairman

has placed his signature on the building plan under the said words.

This constitutes a misrepresentation or a distortion of material facts. If

this was drawn to the attention of the Court when the application was

supported for leave to proceed, the Court could have taken a different

view, although the petitioner now states that, even if it is an unauthorized

construction, the Pradeshiya Sabha could not demolish the wall without

an order obtained from the Magistrates Court under the relevant

statutory provisions, i.e. in terms of section 28 of the Urban Development

Authority Law, No. 41 of 1978, and other relevant laws.

5

SC/FR/247/2016

It is settled law that lack of uberrima fides, suppression or

misrepresentation of material facts, and the conduct of the petitioner are

relevant factors that the Court can consider, particularly in writ

applications, as writ is a discretionary remedy. This principle is

frequently applied in injunctive reliefs as well. This judge-made rule now

hardened into law has been extended to fundamental rights applications

as well, since the Supreme Court in the exercise of the fundamental rights

jurisdiction is empowered under Article 126(4) of the Constitution to

grant relief or make directions that it deems just and equitable in the

circumstances of the case. The Supreme Court in the exercise of

fundamental rights jurisdiction acts both as a court of law and a court of

equity, ensuring that justice is administered not only according to legal

rules but also in accordance with principles of equity. Any suppression

or misrepresentation of material facts by a petitioner in a fundamental

rights application entitles the Court to dismiss the application in limine

without going into the merits.

The fact suppressed or misrepresented must be a material fact, not any

fact. In Fonseka v. Lt. General Jagath Jayasuriya and Five Others [2011]

2 Sri LR 372, Justice Salam observed at page 410 that Material facts are

those which are material for the judge to know in dealing with the

application as made; materiality is to be decided by court and not by the

assessment of the applicant or his legal advisers. In order to decide

whether a fact is material, the pertinent question to ask is whether the

decision of the Court would have been different had it been aware of the

fact suppressed or misrepresented. However, it is not necessary to prove

conclusively that the decision of the Court would definitely have been

different. It is sufficient to demonstrate that the fact was material and

that its true disclosure could have influenced the decision of the Court.

6

SC/FR/247/2016

Qui aequitatem petit, aequitatem facere debet: He who seeks equity must

do equity. A petitioner who comes to Court seeking a just and equitable

relief in a fundamental rights application must act with uberrima fides

(utmost good faith) making full disclosure of all material facts frankly and

candidly.

Qui venit ad aequitatem debet esse mundis minibus: He who comes into

equity must come with clean hands. He who has committed iniquity shall

have no equity. His conduct and dealings, past and present, in relation

to the matter complained of is a relevant factor. (The Ceylon Hotels

Corporation v. Jayatunga (1969) 74 NLR 442 at 446, Felix Dias

Bandaranayake v. The State Film Corporation and Another [1981] 2 Sri

LR 287 at 303) However, this maxim does not refer to general misconduct.

Instead, it requires that the misconduct must have a necessary

connection to the relief being sought. In Dering v. Earl of Winchelsea

[1775-1802] All ER Rep 140 at 142, Eyre C.B. stated: A man must come

into a court of equity with clean hands, but when this is said it does not

refer to a general depravity; it must have an immediate and necessary

connection to the equity sued for; it must be a depravity in a legal as well

as in a moral sense.

In Fonseka v. Lt. General Jagath Jayasuriya and Five Others (supra),

Justice Salam remarked at page 410:

A maxim known almost during the whole of last century and having

its origin in equity courts is that one must approach the court with

clean hands. The maxim has been so indoctrinated in the legal

system that almost all our courts, loath to entertain claims that are

tainted with non-disclosure of material facts. It is particularly so

when the benefit of the maxim is invoked by the respondent or raised

by court ex mero motu.

7

SC/FR/247/2016

Ex turpi causa non oritur actio: No action can arise from an illegal act. Juri

ex injuria non oritur: A right does not arise from a wrong. If the

construction of the wall is unlawful, the petitioner cannot seek equitable

relief by claiming that the subsequent demolition is unlawful. Illegality

and equity are sworn enemies; they are not on speaking terms and will

never see eye to eye.

In R. Vishwanatha Pillai v. State of Kerala and Others 2004 (2) SCC 105,

the Supreme Court of India stated:

A person who seeks equity must come with clean hands. He, who

comes to the Court with false claims, cannot plead equity nor the

Court would be justified to exercise equity jurisdiction in his favour.

A person who seeks equity must act in a fair and equitable manner.

The Supreme Court of India, in Ramjas Foundation and Others v. Union

of India and Others (2010) 14 SCC 38, held that this rule should be

applied universally and not be restricted to any particular class of cases,

such as writs or injunctions:

The principle that a person who does not come to the Court with

clean hands is not entitled to be heard on the merits of his grievance

and, in any case, such person is not entitled to any relief is

applicable not only to the petitions filed under Articles 32, 226 and

136 of the Constitution but also to the cases instituted in others

courts and judicial forums. The object underlying the principle is that

every Court is not only entitled but is duty bound to protect itself

from unscrupulous litigants who do not have any respect for truth

and who try to pollute the stream of justice by resorting to falsehood

or by making misstatement or by suppressing facts which have

bearing on adjudication of the issue(s) arising in the case.

8

SC/FR/247/2016

The rationale behind this principle was articulated in the oft-quoted

landmark case of The King v. The General Commissioners for the Purposes

of the Income Tax Acts for the District of Kensington; Ex parte Princess

Edmond de Polignac [1917] 1 KB 486. The Divisional Courtthe Court of

Kings Benchrefused the writ of prohibition without going into the

merits of the case on the ground of the conduct of the applicant in

bringing the case before the Court. Viscount Reading C.J. observed at

495-496:

[I]f the Court comes to the conclusion that an affidavit in support of

the application was not candid and did not fairly state the facts, but

stated them in such a way as to mislead the Court as to the true

facts, the Court ought, for its own protection and to prevent an abuse

of its process, to refuse to proceed any further with the examination

of the merits. This is a power inherent in the Court, but one which

should only be used in cases which bring conviction to the mind of

the Court that it has been deceived.

On appeal, the Court of Appeal affirmed this finding. Lord Cozens-Hardy

M.R. in his judgment at page 504 quoted what Lord Langdale and Rolfe

B stated in Dalglish v. Jarvie 2 Mac. & G. 231 at 238:

It is the duty of a party asking for an injunction to bring under the

notice of the Court all facts material to the determination of his right

to that injunction; and it is no excuse for him to say that he was not

aware of the importance of any facts which he has omitted to bring

forward.

Lord Cozens-Hardy M.R. further stated at page 505:

That is merely one and perhaps rather a weighty authority in favour

of the general proposition which I think has been established, that

on an ex-parte application uberrima fides is required, and unless

9

SC/FR/247/2016

that can be established, if there is anything like deception practised

on the Court, the Court ought not to go into the merits of the case, but

simply say We will not listen to your application because of what

you have done.

Warrington L.J. stated at 509:

It is perfectly well settled that a person who makes an ex parte

application to the Courtthat is to say, in the absence of the person

who will be affected by that which the Court is asked to dois under

an obligation to the Court to make the fullest possible disclosure of

all material facts within his knowledge, and if he does not make that

fullest possible disclosure, then he cannot obtain any advantage

from the proceedings, and he will be deprived of any advantage he

may have already obtained by means of the order which has thus

wrongly been obtained by him. That is perfectly plain and requires

no authority to justify it.

Scrutton L.J. at pages 514-515 stated:

[I]t has been for many years the rule of the Court, and one which it

is of the greatest importance to maintain, that when an applicant

comes to the Court to obtain relief on an ex parte statement he should

make a full and fair disclosure of all the material factsfacts, not

law. He must not misstate the law if he can help itthe Court is

supposed to know the law. But it knows nothing about the facts, and

the applicant must state fully and fairly the facts, and the penalty

by which the Court enforces that obligation is that if it finds out that

the facts have not been fully and fairly stated to it, the Court will set

aside any action which it has taken on the faith of the imperfect

statement. this rule applies in various classes of procedure. One of

the commonest cases is an ex parte injunction obtained either in the

10

SC/FR/247/2016

Chancery or Kings Bench Division. I find in 1849 Wigram V.C. in the

case of Castelli v. Cook (1849) 7 Hare 89 at 94 stating the rule in

this way: A plaintiff applying ex parte comes (as it has been

expressed) under the contract with the Court that he will state the

whole case fully and fairly to the Court. If he fails to do that, and the

Court finds, when the other party applies to dissolve the injunction,

that any material fact has been suppressed or not properly brought

forward, the plaintiff is told that the Court will not decide on the

merits, and that, as he has broken faith with the Court, the injunction

must go. The same thing is said in the case to which the Master of

the Rolls has referred of Dalglish v. Jarvie 2 Mac. & G. 231. A similar

point arises in applications made ex parte to serve writs out of the

jurisdiction, and I find in the case of Republic of Peru v. Dreyfus

Brothers & Co. 55 L.T. 802 at 803. Kay J. stating the law in this

way: I have always maintained, and I think it is most important to

maintain most strictly, the rule that, in ex parte applications to this

Court, the utmost good faith must be observed. If there is an

important misstatement, speaking for myself, I have never hesitated,

and never shall hesitate until the rule is altered, to discharge the

order at once, so as to impress upon all persons who are suitors in

this Court the importance of dealing in good faith with the Court

when ex parte applications are made. A similar statement in a

similar class of case is made by Farwell L.J. in the case of The Hagen

[1908] P. 189 at 201: Inasmuch as the application is made ex parte,

full and fair disclosure is necessary, as in all ex parte applications,

and a failure to make such full and fair disclosure would justify the

Court in discharging the order, even although the party might

afterwards be in a position to make another application.

11

SC/FR/247/2016

However, on the question whether the defaulting party has another

opportunity, Scrutton L.J. at page 519 expressed the view that no second

application should be allowed after the first application has been refused.

In Walker Sons & Co Ltd v. Wijayasena [1997] 1 Sri LR 293 at 301-302,

Justice Ismail stated that, once suppression or misrepresentation is

shown, A party cannot thereafter plead that the misrepresentation was

due through inadvertence or misinformation or that the applicant was not

aware of the importance of certain facts which he omitted to place before

court.

This position was reiterated by the Supreme Court of India in Prestige

Lights Ltd v. State Bank of India 2007 AIR SCW 5350 wherein a court of

law was held to be synonymous with a court of equity:

It is thus clear that though the appellant-Company had approached

the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution, it had not

candidly stated all the facts to the Court. The High Court is

exercising discretionary and extraordinary jurisdiction under Article

226 of the Constitution. Over and above, a Court of Law is also a

Court of Equity. It is, therefore, of utmost necessity that when a party

approaches a High Court, he must place all the facts before the Court

without any reservation. If there is suppression of material facts on

the part of the applicant or twisted facts have been placed before the

Court, the Writ Court may refuse to entertain the petition and dismiss

it without entering into merits of the matter.

Suppression of material facts not only warrants dismissal of the

application in limine but also attracts dealing with the defaulting party

for contempt of Court. In K.D. Sharma v. Steel Authorities of India Ltd

[2008] 10 SCR 454, 472, the Supreme Court of India stated:

12

SC/FR/247/2016

If the primary object as highlighted in Kensington Income Tax

Commissioners is kept in mind, an applicant who does not come

with candid facts and clean breast cannot hold a writ of the Court

with soiled hands. Suppression or concealment of material facts is

not an advocacy. It is a jugglery, manipulation, maneuvering or

misrepresentation, which has no place in equitable and prerogative

jurisdiction. If the applicant does not disclose all the material facts

fairly and truly but states them in a distorted manner and misleads

the Court, the Court has inherent power in order to protect itself and

to prevent an abuse of its process to discharge the rule nisi and

refuse to proceed further with the examination of the case on merits.

If the Court does not reject the petition on that ground, the Court

would be failing in its duty. In fact, such an applicant requires to be

dealt with for contempt of Court for abusing the process of the Court.

In the Supreme Court case of Alponso Appuhamy v. Hettiarachchi (1973)

77 NLR 131, Justice Pathirana, having considered English authorities on

this point in great detail, held:

When an application for a prerogative writ or an injunction is made,

it is the duty of the Petitioner to place before the Court, before it

issues notice in the first instance, a full and truthful disclosure of all

the material facts; the Petitioner must act with uberrima fides.

In the case of Moosajees Ltd. v. Eksath Engineru Saha Samanya Kamkaru

Samithiya (1976) 79(1) NLR 285, the Supreme Court underscored the

paramount importance of full disclosure at the inception of the

application. Justice Rajaratnam, holding against the petitioner,

articulated its position at pages 287-288:

The pleadings in their petition and affidavit do not contain a full

disclosure of the real facts of the case and to say the least the

13

SC/FR/247/2016

petitioner has not observed the utmost good faith and has been

guilty of a lack of uberrima fides by a suppression of material facts

in the pleadings. It was neither fair by this Court nor by his counsel

that there was no full disclosure of material facts.

In the Supreme Court case of Namunukula Plantations Limited v. Minister

of Lands and Others [2012] 1 Sri LR 365 at 376, Justice Marsoof

emphasized that the Court has a duty to deny relief to those who fail to

truthfully disclose all material facts.

It is settled law that a person who approaches the Court for grant of

discretionary relief, to which category an application for certiorari

would undoubtedly belong, has to come with clean hands, and

should candidly disclose all the material facts which have any

bearing on the adjudication of the issues raised in the case. In other

words, he owes a duty of utmost good faith (uberrima fides) to the

court to make a full and complete disclosure of all material facts and

refrain from concealing or suppressing any material fact within his

knowledge or which he could have known by exercising diligence

expected of a person of ordinary prudence.

At page 374 it was further remarked:

If any party invoking the discretionary jurisdiction of a court of law

is found wanting in the discharge of its duty to disclose all material

facts, or is shown to have attempted to pollute the pure stream of

justice, the court not only has the right but a duty to deny relief to

such person.

In Blanca Diamonds (Pvt) Ltd. v. Wilfred Van Els [1997] 1 Sri LR 360,

Mowbray Hotels Ltd. v. D.M. Jayaratne [2004] BLR 51, Fernando v.

Commissioner General of Labour [2009] BLR 74, Sarath Hulangamuwa v.

Siriwardena, Principal, Visakha Vidyalaya [1986] 1 Sri LR 275, Fonseka

14

SC/FR/247/2016

v. Lt. General Jagath Jayasuriya [2011] 2 Sri LR 372, Abee Kuhafa v. The

Director General of Customs [2011] 2 BLR 459, Sri Lanka Standards

Institution v. Commissioner General of Labour and Others [2020] 3 Sri LR

38, Werage Sunil Jayasekara v. B.A.P. Ariyaratne (SC/FR/64/2014, SC

Minutes of 05.04.2022, Premalal & Others v. Commissioner of

Examinations & Others (SC/FR/502/2010, SC Minutes of 05.03.2019),

Fonseka v. Lt. General Jagath Jayasuriya and Five Others [2011] 2 Sri LR

372 similar conclusions were reached.

Supreme Court of India in the case of Hari Narain v. Badri Das 1963 AIR

1558 held that if at the hearing of the appeal the Supreme Court is

satisfied that the material statements made by the appellant in his

application for special leave are inaccurate and misleading, the special

leave granted to the appellant ought to be revoked and the appeal

dismissed.

In Abeywardene v. Inspector General of Police and Others [1991] 2 Sri LR

349 at 381, Justice Amerasinghe emphasized that a petitioner who seeks

just and equitable relief by invocation of the fundamental rights

jurisdiction of the Supreme Court must come with clean hands.

Moreover, a person who comes before this Court for just and

equitable relief under Article 126(4) of the Constitution must in his

act of supplication show the Court clean hands into which relief may

be given. The Supreme Court as Chief Justice Sharvananda said in

C. W. Mackie v. Hugh Molagoda, Commissioner-General of Inland

Revenue and Others [1986] 1 Sri LR 300, 309-311 cannot lend its

sanction or authority to any illegal act. Illegality and equity are not

on speaking terms. For the reasons stated, if I might borrow some

words from Mr. Justice Nihill in Rewata Thero v. Horatala (1939) 14

CLW 155, 156 He who seeks equity should come with clean hands.

15

SC/FR/247/2016

In that case, the hands of the defendant were described by Justice

Nihill as being very dirty indeed.

In Liyanage and Others v. Ratnasiri, Divisional Secretary, Gampaha and

Others [2013] 1 Sri LR 6 at 17, Justice Sathya Hettige, applying the same

principle in a fundamental right application proceeded to hold:

It must be stated that when the court considers applications on

fundamental rights made under Articles 17 and 126 of the

Constitution the court has an onerous task to cautiously consider the

material placed before court in relation to the infringement of

fundamental rights alleged by the petitioner supported by an

affidavit. Therefore, it is the paramount duty of the petitioner to

disclose all the relevant material facts truthfully. These petitioners

have failed and neglected to tender a material document, namely his

application for the post of registrar, to court. On a consideration of

all the material the court holds that this was a deliberate

suppression and there has been no complete disclosure.

Justice Hettige at page 11 has also referred to a judgment of Justice

Bandaranayake delivered in a fundamental rights application, namely,

Gas Conversions (Pvt) Ltd and Others v. Ceylon Petroleum Corporation and

Others (SC/FR/91/2002) where Her Ladyship has held: A series of

judgments of our courts have enunciated the requirement of complete

disclosure and uberrima fides with regard to the applications before Court.

It is now a well established principle that when an applicant has

suppressed or misrepresented the facts material to an application and

when there is no complete and truthful disclosure of all material facts the

court will not go into merits of the relevant application, but will dismiss it

in limine.

16

SC/FR/247/2016

Justice Dep (as His Lordship then was) in Ratnasiri Fernando v. Police

Sergeant Dayaratne and Others (SC/FR/514/2010, SC Minutes of

15.12.2014) acknowledged that When the Supreme Court exercises

fundamental rights jurisdiction it has power to grant just and equitable

relief.

In Sheriffdeen v. Principal, Visaka Vidyalaya and Others (SC/FR/1/2015,

SC Minutes of 03.10.2016), Justice De Abrew cited an array of authorities

to hold that in a fundamental rights application, if the petitioner is found

not to have been acted in uberrima fides and misrepresented facts, the

Court is entitled to dismiss the application on that ground alone. It was

a fundamental right application filed after the denial of admission of a

child to Visaka Vidyalaya.

When a person files a fundamental rights application in court, he

makes a declaration to court that all what he has submitted to court

in his petition and affidavit was true and moves court to act on the

said material and further he enters into a contractual obligation with

the court to the effect that all what would be submitted by him by

way further documents would be true. Subsequently, if the court

finds that his declaration to be false and/or he has not fulfilled the

said contractual obligation, his application or the petition should be

dismissed in limine. Further when he seeks intervention of court in

a case of this nature, he must come to court with frank and full

disclosure of facts. If he does not do so or does not disclose true

facts, his petition should be rejected on that ground alone.

Justice De Abrew cited Jayasinghe v. The National Institute of Fisheries

[2002] 1 Sri LR 277, Fernando v. Ranaweera [2002] 1 Sri LR 327, Sujeewa

Sampath and Hasali Gayara v. Sandamali Aviruppola, Principal Visakha

Vidyalaya (SC/FR/31/2014, SC Minutes of 26.3.2015) and R v.

17

SC/FR/247/2016

Kensington Income Tax Commissioner (1917) 1 KB 486 at 495 in support

of the said conclusion.

In Jayasinghe v. The National Institute of Fisheries and Nautical

Engineering (NIFNE) and Others [2002] 1 Sri LR 277, the petitioner filed a

fundamental rights application seeking a declaration that his

fundamental right to equality under Article 12(1) of the Constitution was

infringed by some of the respondents in appointing the 18th respondent

as the Director-General of the National Institute of Fisheries and Nautical

Engineering. This application was dismissed in limine on (a) time bar and

(b) lack of uberrima fides. In regard to the second ground, Justice Yapa

had this to say at 284-287:

The allegation that the petitioner was guilty of suppressing material

facts from Court is two-fold. Firstly, the petitioner had withheld from

Court the letter written by him to the 2nd respondent on 10.07.2000

marked 1R8, seeking a post of Director in the Ministry of Fisheries.

Secondly, the petitioner had withheld from Court the fact that he had

filed an application in the Court of Appeal seeking identical relief.

Some of the contents in the letter 1R8 explain very clearly that the

petitioner had no intention of making a claim to be the Director-

General NIFNE. () Therefore, the conduct of the petitioner in

withholding these material facts from Court shows a lack of

uberrima fides on the part of the petitioner. When a litigant makes

an application to this Court seeking relief, he enters into a

contractual obligation with the Court. This contractual relationship

requires the petitioner to disclose all material facts correctly and

frankly. This is a duty cast on any litigant seeking relief from Court.

In the case of Blanca Diamonds (Pvt) Limited v. Wilfred Van Els and

Two Others [1997] 1 Sri LR 360 the Court highlighted this contractual

obligation which a party enters into with the Court, requiring the

18

SC/FR/247/2016

need to disclose uberrima fides and disclose all material facts fully

and frankly to Court. Any party who misleads Court, misrepresents

facts to Court or utters falsehood in Court will not be entitled to

obtain redress from Court. It is a well-established proposition of law,

since Courts expect a party seeking relief to be frank and open with

the Court. This principle has been applied even in an application that

has been made to challenge a decision made without jurisdiction.

Further, Court will not go into the merits of the case in such

situations. Vide Rex v. Kensington Income Tax Commissioners;

Princess Edmond De Polignac Ex Parte (1917) 1 KB 486. This

principle of uberrima fides has been applied not only in writ cases

where discretionary relief is sought from Court, but even in

Admiralty cases involving the grant of injunctions. (.) It would

appear, therefore, that the petitioner in this application had wilfully

suppressed material facts from Court by withholding his own letter

1R8 dated 10.07.2000 and by non-disclosure of his application to

the Court of Appeal seeking identical relief.

In Fernando v. Ranaweera, Secretary, Ministry of Cultural and Religious

Affairs and Others [2002] 1 Sri LR 327, the petitioner fearing that the

respondents would refuse his application to purchase his official vehicle

alleged that there was an imminent infringement of his fundamental right

guaranteed under Article 12(1) and sought a direction on the respondents

to transfer the ownership of the said vehicle to the petitioner. In addition,

he sought an interim relief to direct the respondents to defer the recall of

the vehicle until the final determination of the fundamental right

application. The application was supported on 26. 01. 1999. The

petitioner was granted leave to proceed in respect of the alleged

infringement of Article 12(1) of the Constitution and was granted interim

relief as prayed for. The application was ultimately dismissed with costs,

19

SC/FR/247/2016

inter alia, on the basis of lack of good faith on the part of the petitioner.

Justice Yapa stated at 333-335:

There is another serious matter that has been observed in this

application namely, that the petitioner had withheld from Court the

contents of X2. The petitioner filed this application on 18.01.1999,

and it was supported and leave to proceed obtained on 26.01.1999.

On the same date, counsel for the petitioner had obtained interim

relief by seeking a direction on the 1st and 2nd respondents to defer

the recall of the vehicle bearing No. 15-9892 until the final hearing

and determination of this application. It would appear therefore, that

the petitioner had obtained leave to proceed and interim relief by

suppressing the contents of X2, which very clearly stated that the

petitioner was not eligible to purchase the vehicle he was using in

terms of the circular P6. Under normal circumstances X2 would have

reached the 1st respondent by about 06.01.1999. The petitioner who

was anxiously waiting for the approval from the 3rd respondent to

purchase the vehicle in question under the circular would have

known the decision conveyed by the 3rd respondent to the 1st

respondent by X2. Hence, the petitioner cannot be heard to say that

he had no knowledge of the contents of X2. Besides, the timing of

the petitioners application to this Court which was on 18.01.1999,

suggests that the petitioner had decided to file this application soon

after the 3rd respondents letter X2, which stated that the petitioner

was not eligible to purchase the vehicle in terms of the circular. It

should be mentioned here that, had the contents of X2 been made

known to the Court, it was very unlikely that the Court would have

given the interim relief that was granted to the petitioner. Therefore,

it would appear that the petitioner had been guilty of suppressing a

material fact from Court. In doing so, the petitioner had misled Court

and obtained an interim order which this Court would not have

20

SC/FR/247/2016

made, had the contents of X2, been made known to the Court.

Further, it is to be noted that the petitioner had obtained the said

interim relief from Court in the absence of the respondents. On the

other hand, if the respondents had timely notice of this application,

it was very likely that they would have brought to the notice of Court

the contents of X2.

The petitioner by withholding from Court the material contained in

X2, clearly showed a lack of uberrima fides on his part. When a

litigant makes an application to Court seeking relief, he enters into a

contractual obligation with the Court. This contractual relationship

requires the petitioner to disclose all material facts correctly and

frankly. This is a duty cast on any litigant seeking relief from Court.

It was highlighted in the case of Blanca Diamonds (Pvt) Limited v.

Wilfred Van Els and Two Others [1997] 1 Sri LR 360, that the

contractual obligation which a party enters into with the Court,

requires the need to disclose uberrima fides and disclose all material

facts fully and frankly to Court. Any party who misleads Court,

misrepresents facts to Court or utters a falsehood in Court will not

be entitled to obtain redress from Court. This is a well-established

proposition of law, since Courts expect a party seeking relief to be

frank and open with the Court.

In this case, it is very clear that the petitioner is not entitled to

purchase the vehicle he was using in terms of the Public

Administration Circular No. 24/93 (P6). Further, the petitioner by

suppressing a material fact from Court had brought about a situation

whereby he had continued to use the vehicle in question although he

was not entitled to do so. The vehicle No. 15-9892 is government

property and under normal circumstances, the petitioner as a law-

abiding citizen should have returned the vehicle to the Ministry of

21

SC/FR/247/2016

Cultural and Religious Affairs no sooner the 1st respondent

requested him to return the vehicle immediately by P8.

Fernando v. Ranaweera, Secretary, Ministry of Cultural and Religious

Affairs and Others is a textbook case on how fundamental rights

jurisdiction of this Court is abused by people. The petitioner used the

vehicle for more than three years during the pendency of the application

by obtaining an interim order by suppressing a material fact.

In Wickramaratna and Others v. University Grants Commission and

Others (SC/FR/13/2015, SC Minutes of 20.07.2016), the petitioners

challenged, inter alia, the failure on the part of the respondents to permit

the petitioners to cancel their registration at various universities for

different courses of study for the academic year 2013/14 and to permit

them to register for their preferred course of study for the academic year

2014/15 based on the results of their G.C.E. (Advanced Level)

Examination 2014. The Court granted leave to proceed on the alleged

violation of the petitioners fundamental right guaranteed by Article 12(1)

of the Constitution.

The respondents by way of a motion dated 23.07.2015 produced the

schedule in annexe I of the letters requesting the petitioners for

registration to universities for the academic year 2013/14. Annexe I,

which contained conditions regarding registration, was not produced to

Court by the petitioners. One condition of it was Please note that if you

will get registered to follow this Course of Study for the Academic Year

2013/14, you will not be eligible for University admission based on the

results of a subsequent G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Examination.

In this backdrop, Chief Justice Sripavan held that the petitioners are

disentitled to the relief due to their failure to make frank and full

disclosure of material facts.

22

SC/FR/247/2016

Learned Deputy Solicitor General sought to argue that the Petitioners

have suppressed this material fact from this Court by failing to

attach Annexe I of the schedule sent to them and referred to in the

Petitioners documents marked P5B to P6. In my view, there is much

substance in the contention raised by the learned Deputy Solicitor

General. It is well settled that the relief under Article 126 of the

Constitution is just and equitable and the Petitioners who approach

this Court for such relief must come with frank and full disclosure of

facts. If the Petitioners fail to do so and suppress material facts, their

application is liable to be dismissed on that ground alone. (.) I

therefore hold that failure to attach the Schedule in Annexe I to the

letters filed by the Petitioners marked P5B to P6 amounts to

suppression of a material fact and the application of the Petitioners

is liable to be dismissed without proceeding further with the

examination on the merits.

Chief Justice Sripavan echoed the same sentiments in Karunaratna and

Others v. University Grants Commission and Others (SC/FR/9/2015, SC

Minutes of 20.07.2016).

In Maduwanthi v. District Secretary, Matale and Others (SC/FR/23/2021,

SC Minutes of 18.11.2022, Justice Janak de Silva stated:

Furthermore, the Court is exercising its just and equitable

jurisdiction under Article 126(4) of the Constitution. It is an

established maxim that he who comes into equity must come with

clean hands. This doctrine has nothing to do with the general

conduct of a party. The misconduct which is condemned should form

part of the transaction which is the subject of the dispute. Where the

conduct of a party to the litigation is unmeritorious in relation to the

transaction forming the subject matter of the litigation, a Court

exercising equitable jurisdiction is entitled to refuse any relief to such

23

SC/FR/247/2016

party [See Gascoigne v. Gascoigne (1918) 1 K.B. 223, Tinker v.

Tinker (1970) 1 All ER 540]. In this application, the Petitioner has

sought a direction that she be appointed as Divisional Secretary of

Dambulla. Her unmeritorious conduct in relation to the land in

Dambulla suffices for Court to refuse any relief. Hence, I am of the

view that the Petitioner is not entitled to any relief.

In the case of Abeychandra v. Principal, Dharmasoka College,

Ambalangoda (SC/FR/52/2018, SC Minutes of 08.08.2019), where the

petitioner came to Court invoking the fundamental rights jurisdiction on

the right to equality, Justice Dehideniya stated:

It is emphasized in equity, that one who comes into court must come

with clean hands. This implies that a party is not permitted to profit

by his own wrong. If any party to the case is guilty of an improper

conduct, that guilty party is debarred from relief. It is doubtful to this

court whether the Petitioner has complied with the circular, in

providing information to the school. It appears to the court that, the

Petitioner has provided two addresses citing two different

residences. This is a contravention of the circular which needs the

particulars as to the current place the parents reside with the child.

The purpose of clean hands doctrine is predominantly directed to

protect the integrity of the court. This amounts to the disapproval of

illegal acts and deny the relief for bad conduct. The intention of the

court in prioritizing the clean hands doctrine is to discourage the

improper conduct as a matter of public policy. The court looks into

the matter whether the specific improper conduct is intentional and

the doctrine does not punish the carelessness or mistake. It is

evident to this court that, being a public servant, the Petitioner is

expected to be more responsible and transparent. The conduct of the

Petitioner is prima facie misleading, as to the residence.

24

SC/FR/247/2016

It is clear to this court that the Petitioner is not entitled to be

privileged under the transfer category of the circular No.22/2017 to

admit the child to Grade 1 as she is not similarly circumstanced with

the public servants who are transferred and reside in the feeder area

of the school after evacuating the former area of living.

Further, it is apparent to this court that, the Petitioner has

misrepresented the facts as to the residence, and in violation of the

clean hands doctrine in equity. This court is obliged to protect the

integrity of the court and simultaneously, bound to prevent the

improper acts being committed in the matter of public policy.

In the recent case of Kayleigh Frazer v. Jayawardena and Others

(SC/FR/399/2022, SC Minutes of 11.05.2023), where the petitioner filed

a fundamental rights application alleging violation of several Articles of

the Constitution, Justice Murdu Fernando remarked:

A Petitioner has an imperative legal duty and obligation to court and

comes to a contractual agreement with court to disclose all material

facts correctly and accurately to court. This in my view, is a sacred

duty, that should be preserved and protected at all costs. In fact, in

The Supreme Court (Conduct and Etiquette for Attorneys-at-Law)

Rules, under the heading Relationship with Court it is stated as

follows:

51. An Attorney-at-Law shall not mislead or deceive or permit his

client to mislead or deceive in any way the Court or Tribunal before

which he appears.

Thus, an Attorney-at-Law has a bounden duty not to permit his client

to mislead or deceive court, in any manner whatsoever, either by

suppression, misleading or misrepresenting facts to court to gain an

25

SC/FR/247/2016

advantage, which in my view is detrimental to the interests of

justice.

For the aforesaid reasons, I take the view that the application of the

petitioner in the instant application shall be dismissed in limine on lack

of uberrima fides and suppression of material facts.

Article 12(1) violation

The complaint of the petitioner is that the respondents violated the

fundamental right of the petitioner guaranteed by Article 12(1) of the

Constitution, which states All persons are equal before the law and are

entitled to the equal protection of the law.

For completeness, let me now consider whether there is a violation of

Article 12(1) based on the facts and circumstances of this case as alleged

by the petitioner, even in the absence of suppression of material facts.

Article 12(1) of the Constitution enshrines two fundamental principles of

equality: equality before the law and equal protection of the law. While

both principles promote equality and non-discrimination, equality before

the law emphasizes the uniform application of laws, whereas equal

protection of the law emphasizes the uniform application of legal

protections and remedies.

It must also be mentioned that equality before the law and equal

protection of the law cannot be understood or applied in a purely abstract

or strictly literal sense. Not all persons shall be treated alike, but all

persons similarly circumstanced shall be treated alike. Equality must be

ensured among equals, not unequals. Any attempt to ensure the latter

would defeat the very purpose that Article 12(1) seeks to achieve.

Classification among persons per se does not violate Article 12(1).

However, any classification must be based on an intelligible differentia,

26

SC/FR/247/2016

which must have a rational relation to the objective it seeks to achieve.

Classifications among persons must be reasonable, not arbitrary or

unjust. Reasonable classifications for legitimate purposes and differential

treatments between such classifications are permissible. What is

objectionable and sought to be prevented by Article 12(1) is differential

treatment within classifications. (Palihawadana v. Attorney General

[1978-79-80] 1 Sri LR 65 at 68-69, Wasantha Disanayake and Others v.

Secretary, Ministry of Public Administration and Home Affairs and Others

[2015] 1 Sri LR 363 at 367, Thilak Lalitha Kumara v. Secretary, Ministry

of Youth Affairs and Skills Development and Others [2015] 1 Sri LR 369

at 376-377)

In Ferdinandis and Another v. Principal, Vishaka Vidyalaya and Others

(SC/FR/117/2011, SC Minutes of 25.06.2012), Chief Justice

Bandaranayake explained that, in order to succeed in Article 12(1)

violation, it is necessary for the petitioners not only to establish that they

had been treated differently from others, but also that such treatment

was so different as the others were similarly circumstanced and there

were no grounds to differentiate them from him.

Our Constitution has clearly spelt out the concept of equality before

the law and there are numerous instances where that right had been

accepted and upheld. In the process this Court has also noted that

if a person complains of unequal treatment the burden is on that

person to place before this Court material that is sufficient to infer

that unequal treatment had been meted out to him. Accordingly, it is

necessary for the petitioners not only to establish that they had been

treated differently from others, but also that such treatment was so

different as the others were similarly circumstanced and there were

no grounds to differentiate them from him.

27

SC/FR/247/2016

However, the contours of the right to equality have evolved over the years.

As Justice Kodagoda has explained in Wijeratne v. Sri Lanka Ports

Authority and Others (SC/FR/256/2017, SC Minutes of 11.12.2020), we

have progressively moved away from the reasonable classification

doctrine to an expansive and more progressive definition of the concept

of equality, founded upon the concept of substantive equality, aimed at

protecting persons from arbitrary, unreasonable, malicious, and capricious

executive and administrative action.

Article 14 of the Indian Constitution is similar to Article 12(1) of our

Constitution. In Indian jurisprudence, the doctrine of equality was

expanded beyond the principle of reasonable classification. In the case of

E.P. Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu and Another 1974 AIR 555, Justice

Bhagwati (who later became the Chief Justice of India) articulated this

broader interpretation as follows:

The basic principle which, therefore, informs both Arts. 14 and 16 is

equality and inhibition against discrimination. Now, what is the

content and reach of this great equalising principle? It is a founding

faith, to use the words of Bose J., a way of life, and it must not be

subjected to a narrow pedantic or lexicographic approach. We cannot

countenance any; attempt to truncate its all-embracing scope and

meaning, for to do so would be to violate its activist magnitude.

Equality is a dynamic concept with many aspects and dimensions

and it cannot be cribbed cabined and confined within traditional

and doctrinaire limits. From a positivistic point of view, equality is

antithetic to arbitrariness. In fact equality and arbitrariness are

sworn enemies; one belongs to the rule of law in a republic while the

other, to the whim and caprice of an absolute monarch. Where an

act is arbitrary it is implicit in it that it is unequal both according to

political logic and constitutional law and is therefore violative of Art.

28

SC/FR/247/2016

14, and if it affects any matter relating to public employment, it is

also violative of Art. 16.

In Wickremasinghe v. Ceylon Petroleum Corporation and Others [2001] 2

Sri LR 409 at 414, Chief Justice S.N. Silva stated that if executive or

administrative action is reasonable and not arbitrary, it necessarily

follows that all persons in similar circumstances will be guaranteed the

equality enshrined in Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

Although the objective is to ensure that all persons, similarly

circumstanced are treated alike, it is seen that the essence of this

basic standard is to ensure reasonableness being the positive

connotation as opposed to arbitrariness being the related negative

connotation. The application of this basic standard has been blurred

in later cases due to an over emphasis on the objective of ensuring

that all persons similarly circumstanced shall be treated alike. The

case of Perera vs. Jayawickrema (1985) 1 Sri LR 285 demonstrates

the ineffectiveness of the guarantee in Article 12(1) which results

from the rigid application of the requirement to prove that persons

similarly circumstanced as the Petitioner were differently treated.

Such an application of the guarantee under Article 12(1) ignores the

essence of the basic standard which is to ensure reasonableness as

opposed to arbitrariness in the manner required by the basic

standard. If the legislation or the executive or administrative action

in question is thus reasonable and not arbitrary, it necessarily

follows that all persons similarly circumstanced will be treated alike,

being the end result of applying the guarantee of equality. As noted

above, the effectiveness of the guarantee would be minimized if there

is insistence that a failure of the end result should also be

established to prove an infringement of the guarantee. If however

there is such evidence of differential treatment that would indeed

29

SC/FR/247/2016

strengthen the case of a Petitioner in establishing the

unreasonableness of the impugned action.

This position was affirmed in later cases such as Kanapathipillai v. Sri

Lanka Broadcasting Corporation and Others [2009] 1 Sri LR 406, Azath S.

Salley v. Colombo Municipal Council (SC/FR/252/2007, SC Minutes of

04.03.2009), Wijesekera and Others v. Gamini Lokuge, Minister of Sports

and Public Recreation and Others [2011] 2 Sri LR 329, Vavuniya Solar

Power (Private) Limited v. Ceylon Electricity Board (SC/FR/172/2017, SC

Minutes of 20.09.2023).

The gravamen of the submission of learned counsel for the petitioner was

that the Pradeshiya Sabha acted arbitrarily, without giving a hearing to

the petitioner and without following the procedure established in law

when they demolished her boundary wall.

According to the documents tendered by the Pradeshiya Sabha with the

objections, I am not convinced that the Pradeshiya Sabha treated the

petitioner different from the people similarly circumstanced or denied the

equal protection of the law or acted arbitrarily. Residents of the area have

made written complaints to the Pradeshiya Sabha about water stagnation

due to the blockage of drains and the Pradeshiya Sabha has accordingly

taken steps to clear the drains (vide R1-R14). The Pradeshiya Sabha has

not targeted the petitioner due to extraneous reasons. There is no such

evidence. Prior to the actual work complained of, several inspections,

surveys etc. have been conducted with the technical team of the

Pradeshiya Sabha assisted by a surveyor. The petitioners sister who is

living on the adjoining land depicted in Plan No. 1221 marked P3 had

been informed well in advance about this issue. The Pradeshiya Sabha

had informed the petitioners sister in writing that due to the

unauthorized wall constructed by her, the drain system has been blocked

preventing the natural flow of water. This is evidenced by the letters sent

30

SC/FR/247/2016

and copied to the petitioners sister marked R2-R4. What the petitioner

states is that although her sister was informed, she herself was not

informed. The petitioners sister has not joined with the petitioner in this

application, nor has she filed another application complaining violation

of her fundamental rights. There is no evidence that the petitioner had

one boundary wall while her sister, who lives on the adjoining land, had

a separate boundary wall on the north of the common land. There is no

plan that indicates the existence of any boundary wall.

The petitioner has admitted that the Pradeshiya Sabha officials came to

her residence the previous day and informed her brother about the work

on the following day. I cannot accept the averment of the petitioner in the

petition that they had belligerently informed him that the 1st respondent

Pradeshiya Sabha was going to demolish the boundary wall on the

northern side of my land in the morning of 02.07.2016. Although the

petitioner claims to have made complaints to the police on 01.07.2016

and on 02.07.2016 (vide P7 and P9), these complaints have not been

tendered to Court up to now. If they were planning to forcefully demolish

the boundary wall, there was no reason for those officials to have come

to the petitioners house and inform it on the previous day.

The position of the Pradeshiya Sabha is that they did not intend to

demolish the wall, notwithstanding the fact that it was an illegal

construction. However, when they were clearing the drains to address the

issue of water stagnation along the northern boundary of the petitioners

land, the wall collapsed. On the facts and circumstances of this case, this

explanation is acceptable. The Court tried to settle this matter amicably,

and learned counsel for the Pradeshiya Sabha was cooperative in seeking

a settlement. However, his position was that, since the construction is

unauthorized, the Pradeshiya Sabha cannot lawfully pay compensation

31

SC/FR/247/2016

for the damage caused. I have no reason to disagree with this position,

both on facts and law.

Conclusion

On the facts and circumstances of this case, I hold that the petitioner

has failed to establish that the respondents violated her fundamental

right guaranteed under Article 12(1) of the Constitution. I dismiss the

petitioners application with costs fixed at Rs. 25,000 to be paid to the 1st

respondent Pradeshiya Sabha.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Vijith. K. Malalgoda, P.C., J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court