1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for Leave to

appeal made in terms of Section 5C of the

High Court of the Provinces (Special

Provisions) (Amendment) Act No. 54 of

2006.

1. Kanangara Koralage

Dona Anurushhika,

2. Kanangara Koralage Don Lessly

Kanangara

Both of:

No. 09, Siddhamulla,

Piliyandala.

PLAINTIFFS

Vs

Bank of Ceylon,

Head Office,

New Building,

Janadhipathi Mawatha,

Colombo 01.

DEFENDANT

AND

Bank of Ceylon,

Head Office,

New Building,

Janadhipathi Mawatha,

SC Appeal No. 133/12

WP/HCCA/MT/51/2005 (F)

DC Moratuwa Case No. 987/02/M

2

Colombo 01.

DEFENDANT-APPELLANT

Vs

1. Kanangara Koralage

Dona Anurushhika,

2. Kanangara Koralage Don Lessly

Kanangara

Both of:

No. 09, Siddhamulla,

Piliyandala

PLAINTIFFS-RESPONDENTS

AND NOW BETWEEN

Kanangara Koralage

Dona Anurushhika,

No. 09, Siddhamulla, Piliyandala

PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT-

PETITIONER

Kanangara Koralage Don Lessly

Kanangara. (Deceased)

Vs

Bank of Ceylon,

Head Office,

New Building,

3

Janadhipathi Mawatha,

Colombo 01.

DEFENDANT-APPELLANT-

RESPONDENT

Before : Priyantha Jayawardena PC, J

Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J

Counsel : Chathura Galhena with Darani Weerasinghe for the Plaintiff-Respondent-

Appellant

Suren Gnanaraj with Wathsala Kekulawala for the Defendant-Appellant-

Respondent

Argued on : 5th September, 2023

Decided on : 29th February, 2024

Priyantha Jayawardena PC, J

This is an appeal to set aside the judgment of the Civil Appellant High Court of the Western

Province of Mount Lavinia dated 13th of June, 2011 which set aside the judgment of the District

Court of Moratuwa dated 3rd of June, 2005, where it was held that the newspaper advertisement

published by the defendant-appellant-respondent (hereinafter referred to as the respondent-

bank) was an invitation to treat and not an offer.

Facts of the case

The respondent-bank published an advertisement in several newspapers, including the newspaper

Sirikatha to invest money in minors accounts with the respondent-bank.

After seeing the said newspaper advertisement, the 2nd plaintiff-respondent-appellant (hereinafter

referred to as the 2nd appellant) opened an account with the respondent bank and deposited a

sum of Rs. 5,400/- on behalf of his daughter, the 1st plaintiff-respondent-appellant (hereinafter

4

referred to as the 1st appellant), who was a minor at that time. The appellant stated that in terms

of the conditions stipulated in the advertisement published on the 12th of July, 1981, the 1st

appellant was entitled receive a sum of Rs. 351, 519/- after 21 years from the date of the said

deposit.

Upon the 1st appellant reaching 21 years of age on the 17th of July, 2002 she had requested the

respondent-bank to remit the said sum of Rs. 351, 519/- to her account maintained at the

Piliyandala Branch of the respondent bank. Responding to the said letter, the said bank by its letter

dated 18th of September, 2002 had informed the 1st appellant that she is only entitled for a sum of

Rs. 72, 244.96/-. However, the appellants stated that they were not informed of any conditions

regarding the variations of the interest rate and expected to receive the fixed benefits set out in the

said advertisement. Hence, the appellants have insisted that they be paid the amount agreed

between the parties which is Rs. 351, 519/-.

As the respondent-bank failed to pay a sum of Rs. 351, 519/-, the appellants instituted action in

the District Court of Moratuwa seeking to recover the said sum. Thereafter, the respondent bank

filed its answer stating that the said advertisement was an invitation to treat and not an offer and

sought for a dismissal of the plaint.

After the conclusion of the trial, the learned District Judge, by his judgment dated 3rd of June, 2005

granted the reliefs prayed for in the prayer to the plaint on the basis that the said newspaper

advertisement and the Certificate of Deposit marked P2 constitutes a contract binding on the

parties.

Being aggrieved by the said judgment of the learned District Judge, the respondent-bank appealed

to the Civil Appellant High Court of the Western Province of Mount Lavinia (hereinafter referred

to as the High Court) to have the said judgment set aside.

After hearing the submissions of the parties, the High Court delivered its judgment dated 13th of

June, 2011 setting aside the judgment of the District Court on the basis that the newspaper

advertisement produced marked as P1 is only an advertisement inviting the public to make offers

and thus, it cannot constitute a contract between the parties.

Being aggrieved by the judgment of the High Court, the appellants sought leave to appeal from

this court and the court granted leave to appeal on the following questions of law;

5

a) Whether the learned High Court Judges have misconceived the legal definition

for an offer and invitation to treat?

b) Whether the learned High Court Judges erred in law setting aside the judgment

of the learned District Judge who had pronounced it on proper analysis of law

of Contract?

c) Whether the learned High Court Judges have misinterpreted the contractual

obligations arising out of offer and acceptance and duty and obligation of a

banker who opens accounts on prior invitations?

Submissions of the appellant

The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that all the conditions relating to the said account

have been set out in the said newspaper advertisement marked and produced as P1. Thus, the

said advertisement is an offer and not an invitation to treat.

The learned counsel drew the attention of court to the word offer referred to in The Law of

Contracts Volume 1 at page 110 by C.G. Weeramantry where it states;

an offer is a proposal by one person to another of certain terms of performance,

which proposal is made with the intention that it be accepted by such other person.

It was further submitted that an account holder/investor and the respondent-bank are bound by the

terms and conditions stipulated in the said advertisement. Further, internal circulars of the

respondent-bank, which are not known to such account holders/investors have no application to

the said deposits. Moreover, the learned counsel contended that acceptance of an offer may take

place by express words or by conduct of the parties. In support of the above contention, the learned

counsel cited Carlill v Carbolic Smoke Ball Company (1893) 1 QB 256

Hence, it was submitted that the advertisement marked and produced as P1 is an offer, and

therefore, the respondent-bank is bound by the terms and conditions set out in it as it constitutes a

valid contract between the parties. In the circumstances, it was submitted that the said judgment

of the High Court should be set aside and the judgment of the learned District Judge should be

affirmed.

6

Submissions of the respondent bank

The learned counsel for the appellants submitted that the main distinction between an offer and an

invitation to treat is that an offer can be accepted, and upon acceptance of an offer, it constitutes a

contract, whereas an invitation to treat is not capable of being accepted.

In support of the above submission, the learned counsel cited Chitty on Contracts, 27th edition,

Volume 1 at page 94, which states;

A communication by which a party is invited to make an offer is commonly called

an invitation to treat it is distinguishable from an offer primarily on the ground that

it is not made with the intention that it shall become binding as soon as the person

to whom it is addressed simply communicates his assent to its terms. A statement is

clearly not an offer if it expressly provides that the person who makes it is not be

bound merely by the other partys notification of assent but only when he himself

has signed the document in which the statement is contained.

It was further submitted that the said newspaper advertisement invited any person interested in the

scheme referred to the advertisement to visit the bank, obtain further information, and thereafter,

submit a formal application to the bank to open an account referred to in the advertisement. Hence,

the advertisement was clearly an invitation to visit the bank and for customers to make an offer to

the bank to accept his application to open an account. Further, the learned counsel for the

respondent-bank contended that it is trite law that an advertisement published in a newspaper is

generally considered an invitation to treat and not an offer. In support of the above contention,

he cited Partridge v Crittenden [1968] 2 AER 421.

The learned counsel also cited Law of Contracts Volume 1 at page 114 by C.G. Weeramantry

which refers to Tradesmens Puff. It states;

Tradesmen often endeavor to increase their sales by extolling the virtues of their

goods. Common human experience teaches us that the laudatory expressions used

by vendors must not be literally accepted. Consequently, offers by a tradesman to

sell goods which he describes as being of a high order of excellence must not be

seriously taken to be offer terms. In order that an assertion regarding his

willingness to sell goods of the description indicated be regarded as a serious offer,

it must fall outside the pale of puffery.

7

The learned counsel further submitted that the 2nd appellants evidence given at the trial shows that

the said newspaper advertisement was only an invitation to treat and not an offer. Further, the said

newspaper advertisement was not capable of being accepted as it was not an offer but an invitation

to treat. Thus, the actual offer was made by the 2nd appellant when he visited the Moratuwa branch

on the 17th of July, 1981 and signed the mandate marked and produced as V1, which was accepted

by the respondent-bank, resulting in a binding contract between the parties on the terms and

conditions set out in V1.

The learned counsel contended that in the instant case, the respondent-bank did not convey an

intention to be bound with a reader of its advertisement. On the contrary, it invited the reader to

obtain further details from the nearest branch of the respondent-bank with regard to the Savings

Scheme and to submit an application to the bank for its acceptance.

Hence, it was submitted that the High Court was correct in law in setting aside the judgment of the

learned District Judge. Therefore, it was submitted that the instant appeal should be dismissed with

costs.

Whether the learned High Court Judges have misconceived the legal definition for an offer

and invitation to treat?

The learned Judges of the High Court held that the newspaper advertisement marked and produced

as P1 is only an invitation to treat. Hence, it cannot be accepted by the public. Thus, the issue

that needs to be considered is whether the said advertisement was an offer or an invitation to treat.

An offer is part of contract negotiations where a party agrees to carry out a specific act or refrain

from doing it in exchange for consideration. Further, if an offer is accepted, it would form a binding

contract. However, an invitation to treat is an invitation to start negotiations with the intention to

create a contract. An invitation to treat cannot be accepted and thus, it does not create a contract.

Further, the distinction between an offer and an invitation to treat was referred to in The Law of

Contracts Volume 1 by C.G. Weeramantry at page 109, where it states;

The main distinction is that whereas an offer ripens into a contract upon

acceptance, an invitation to treat on the other hand, is not capable of being

accepted and is certainly not intended to be binding.

8

Does the advertisement marked P1 constitute an offer or an invitation to treat?

Generally, advertisements are considered as invitations to treat as it is considered that an effective

offer cannot be made to the public at large.

In Partridge v Crittenden [1968] 2 EAR 421 at 424, Lord Parker C.J. held;

I say with less reluctance because I think that when one is dealing with

advertisements and circulars, unless they indeed come from manufacturers, there

is business sense in their being construed as invitations to treat and not offers for

sale.

However, an advertisement would be considered as an offer where one party makes it clear

expressly or impliedly that he is prepared to be bound by the said advertisement as soon as the

offer is accepted by a person. A similar view was observed in Carlill v Carbolic Smoke Ball [1892]

2 QB 256 where Bowen L.J. held;

It is an offer to become liable to anyone who, before it is retracted, performs the

condition, and, although the offer is made to the world, the contract is made with

that limited portion of the public who come forward and perform the condition on

the faith of the advertisement.

Thus, an offer could be made to the public at large and such offers are known as unilateral offers.

Further, such offers can be accepted by performing the conditions set out in the advertisement.

Hence, in order to consider whether an advertisement is an offer or an invitation to treat, the

wording of the advertisement should be considered to ascertain whether it contains an offer

intended to be legally bound when anyone accepts it. Moreover, an advertisement would be

considered as an offer where it contains all the terms that are required to formulate a contract.

Further, once an advertisement is published in a newspaper to be read by the public, the wording

in the said advertisement should be read in its plain meaning, as the public would read and

understand it. In the circumstances, the court needs consider the said advertisement in the way an

ordinary person reading it would understand it.

9

The wording in the advertisement produced at the trial marked as P1 stated as follows;

,

.

.

. .

,

. 600/- . 600.- , ,

(600/- )

.

. 600/-. .

25/- 21 .

. 600

21 . 40,000 .

. 21

. 600/-

.

.

. 2,400/-

, 21

(. 1,56,231) .

. 100/- 21

.

.

10

.

.

[emphasis added]

The advertisement published in the Sirikatha Newspaper stipulated the sum to be deposited and

the amount to be received after 21 years, i.e.;

21

600 1,200 2,400 4,800 9,600 12,000 15,600 18,000

25 50 100 200 400 500 650 750

21

39,057 78,115 156,231 312,462 624,924 781,155 1,015,501 1,171,731

600 1,200 2,400 4,800 9,600 12,000 15,000 18,000

It is pertinent to note that the above advertisement specifically stated the amount that should be

deposited, how the money should be deposited, and the amount that will be paid after 21 years. It

also stated,

. Accordingly, by the said

advertisement the public was informed how a small sum deposited by them could turn into a large

sum, as shown in the said schedule.

After seeing the above advertisement in the Sirikatha Newspaper, the 2nd appellant deposited a

sum of Rs. 5,400/- on behalf of the 1st appellant in the Moratuwa branch of the respondent bank.

Thereafter, the respondent-bank issued a Deposit Certificate which was produced marked as a

receipt of the said sum. It stated as follows;

11

BANK OF CEYLON

NATIONAL ENDOWNMENT (MINORS & ADULTS) SCHEME

DEPOSIT CERTIFICATE

Date: 17th July 1981

Received the sum of Rs. 5400/- (Rupees FIVE THOUSAND FOUR HUNDRED

ONLY) to be placed to the credit of the NATIONAL ENDOWNMENT (MINORS

AND ADULTS) Account of KANNANGARA KORALALAGE DONA

ANURUDDHIKA (Name of Account holder) No. 9, Siddhamulla Piliyandala

(Address).

*The account holder shall make further 20 monthly instalments of identical sums

shown on the opposite page overleaf

BANK OF CEYLON

RAWATAWATTE, MORATUWA BRANCH

.. .

Accountant Manager

The above Deposit Certificate shows that it is specifically prepared to acknowledge payments

made by the public who wants to participate in the investment plan stated in the said advertisement.

Further, the manager and the accountant who signed the said Deposit Certificate had struck off

the phrase The account holder shall make further 20 monthly instalments of identical sums shown

on the opposite page overleaf as it has no application to the appellant since he has deposited a

lump sum.

Hence, taking into consideration the terms set out in the said advertisement and the aforementioned

deposit certificate, it is evident that the said advertisement contained all the terms and conditions

that are required to formulate a contract and could be accepted without any negotiations.

However, it was held by the learned High Court Judge that the document marked V1 was the

contract between the parties and not the advertisement marked P1. Further, it was contended by

the learned counsel for the respondent-bank that the document marked V1 was a mandate given

12

by the appellants to the respondent-bank with regard to the deposit made in the name of the 1st

appellant and the respondent bank had the discretion to convert the said account opened by the 2nd

appellant into a renewal fixed deposit.

As a banking practice, whenever interest rates vary, such variations are communicated to the

depositors by the bank. It was submitted by the learned counsel for the respondent-bank that

variation in interest rates was stipulated in the document marked and produced as V1 and the

circulars marked and produced as V3 and V4 in evidence. Upon a perusal of the said

documents, it is apparent that the said documents are formal documents maintained by the

respondent-bank with respect to general deposit schemes. However, the deposit under

consideration in the instant appeal falls under a special scheme, and thus, the documents marked

V1, V3 and V4 have no application to the advertisement under reference though the 2nd

appellant has signed V1.

It is pertinent to note that the variation in interest rates stipulated in the said document and the

circulars were not referred to in the advertisement marked P1. Thus, it is not possible for the

respondent-bank to offer totally different terms and conditions when the public goes to the bank

to make a deposit under the scheme stated in the said advertisement. If the respondent-bank

intended to offer different terms and conditions that were different from those of the said

advertisement, it should have cancelled the said advertisement and informed the public regarding

the new deposit scheme.

Moreover, the case of Partridge v Crittenden (supra) cited by the learned counsel for the

respondent has no application to the instant appeal as the advertisement under reference was a

unilateral offer made to the public at large and not an invitation to treat as submitted by him.

In the circumstances, I am of the opinion that the advertisement marked P1 was an offer made

by the respondent bank to the public, and when the 2nd appellant deposited the sum of Rs. 5,400/-

a binding contract was created between the respondent-bank and the appellants.

Therefore, I hold that the 1st appellant is entitled to a sum of Rs. 351, 519/- as agreed between the

parties.

13

Conclusion

In light of the above, the following question of law is answered as follows;

Whether the learned High Court Judges have misconceived the legal definition for an offer and

invitation to treat?

Yes

In the circumstance, the other questions of law need not be answered.

In view of the aforementioned answer given to the question of law stated above, and the reasoning

given in this judgment, I set aside the judgment of the Civil Appellate High Court dated 13th of

June, 2011 and affirm the judgment of District Court dated 3rd of June, 2005.

The appeal is allowed. No costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J

I Agree Judge of the Supreme Court

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J

I Agree Judge of the Supreme Court