P a g e 1 | 10

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal made in terms of the

Section 5C (1) of the High Court of the Provinces

(Special Provisions) (Amendment) Act, No. 54

of 2006, against the Judgment dated 13/12/2011

of the High Court (Civil Appeal) of the North

Central Province held at Anuradhapura.

Pihille Gedara Heen Banda,

13/4, Kalinga Ela,

Polonnaruwa.

Plaintiff SC Appeal No: 119/2012 SC/HCCA/LA No: 43/2012 Civil Appellate High Court of Anuradhapura Case No. NCPP/HCCA/ARP/794/2010 District Court of Polonnaruwa Case No. 12494/L/08

Vs.

Pihille Gedara Punchi Rala,

13/90, Kalinga Ela,

Polonnaruwa.

Defendant

AND BETWEEN

P a g e 2 | 10

Pihille Gedara Heen Banda,

13/4, Kalinga Ela,

Polonnaruwa.

Plaintiff-Appellant

Vs.

Pihille Gedara Punchi Rala,

13/90, Kalinga Ela,

Polonnaruwa.

Defendant-Respondent

AND BETWEEN

Pihille Gedara Heen Banda,

13/4, Kalinga Ela,

Polonnaruwa.

Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant

Pihille Gedara Punchi Rala,

13/90, Kalinga Ela, Polonnaruwa.

Defendant-Respondent-

Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

P a g e 3 | 10

1A. Thusitha Chandana Kumara,

1B. Chaminda Jayalath Kumara,

Both of,

13/4, Kalinga Ela,

Polonnaruwa.

Substituted Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant-Petitioners

Vs.

Pihille Gedara Punchi Rala, (deceased)

13/90, Kalinga Ela,

Polonnaruwa.

1A. Arugoda Pandakkara Gedara Biso Manike, 1B. Nimal Tilakaratne Bandara,

1C. Nandanie Renuka,

1D. Sankya Kumari

All of, 13/90, Kalinga Ela,

Polonnaruwa.

Substituted Defendant-Respondent-Respondent-Respondents

Before: Justice S. Thurairaja, PC

Justice A.L. Shiran Gooneratne

Justice Mahinda Samayawardhena

P a g e 4 | 10

Counsel: R. Chula Bandara with Bhagya Gunawardena for the Appellants.

L.M.C.D. Bandara for the Substituted Respondent-Respondent-

Respondents.

Argued on: 05/06/2024

Decided on: 04/09/2024

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

By Plaint dated 12/06/2008, the Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant (hereinafter sometimes

referred to as the Plaintiff-Appellant) filed action bearing No. 12494/L/08 in the

District Court of Polonnaruwa against the Defendant-Respondent-Respondent (the

Defendant-Respondent), and sought, inter alia, a declaration that the Plaintiff-

Appellant is the legal owner of the land described in the second schedule to the Plaint,

pleaded as part of the land morefully described in the first schedule and to eject the

Defendant-Respondent from the said land described in the said second schedule to the

Plaint.

Pihille Gedara Ukku Banda, was issued a State Grant No. po/pra/6681, dated

03/05/1983 under the Land Development Ordinance (L.D.O), in respect of Lot 71

depicted in Plan No. 57 made by the Survey General, situated at 73 B Grama Niladhari

Division of Kalinga Ela in the Thamankaduwa Divisional Secretary Division in the

Polonnaruwa District. The Plaintiff-Appellant is the younger son of the said Pihille

Gedara Ukku Banda, and the Defendant, is the elder son.

Consequent to the death of the said Ukku Banda on 14/01/1987, by letter No. e/6/282/34

dated 13/06/1990, the Government Agent Polonnaruwa transferred the said land to the

P a g e 5 | 10

Plaintiff, as he was the nominee under the said grant issued to his father Ukku Banda,

which was duly registered in the Land Registry of Polonnaruwa.

The Plaintiff contends that the land described in the second schedule which is a part of

the first schedule was encroached by the Defendant and is presently in possession

illegally and without the authority of the Plaintiff.

In the Answer filed dated 05/12/2008, the Defendant-Respondent admitted that the said

original holder of State Grant No. po/pra/668/1, dated 03/05/1983 was Pihille Gedara

Ukku Banda. The Defendant-Respondent contends that he was in possession of the land

described in the second schedule to the Plaint from the time his father was the permit

holder of the entire land. He also stated that the Plaintiff-Appellant has not derived legal

title to the said land in terms of the L.D.O.

The relief prayed for in the answer by the Defendant was confined to a dismissal of the

action and that in the event a judgment is delivered in favour of the Plaintiff, to declare

that he is entitled for compensation and his right to possess and enjoy the potion of land

until such time compensation payable is fully satisfied.

At the conclusion of the trial, the learned District Judge by Judgment dated 11/05/2010,

dismissed the case of the Plaintiff.

Being aggrieved by the said Judgment, the Plaintiff-Appellant by Petition of Appeal

dated 28/06/2010, appealed to the Civil Appeal High Court of the North Western

Province exercising civil appellate jurisdiction holden in Anuradhapura (the Civil

Appeal High Court). The Civil Appeal High Court, after hearing, and considering the

submissions tendered by both parties, by Judgment dated 13/12/2011, affirmed the said

Judgment of the District Court dated 11/05/2010 and dismissed the Appeal.

The Plaintiff-Appellant, by Amended Petition dated 26/06/2012 is before this Court, to

set aside the said Judgment dated 13/12/2011, delivered by the Civil Appeal High

Court.

P a g e 6 | 10

By Order dated 06/07/2012, this Court granted leave to appeal on the questions of law

set out in paragraph 19 (i) to (vi) of the said Petition. However, when this matter was

taken up for argument on 05/06/2024, with the concurrence of the respective counsel,

the following questions of law set out in paragraph 19, (v) and (vi), were agreed upon

to be answered by this Court;

19 (v) Did their Lordships in the Civil Appeal High Court of Anuradhapura

and the learned District Judge of Polonnaruwa err in law by relying upon

the provisions of Section 19(4) of the Land Development Ordinance (now

repealed) with regard to succession, in spite of the judgment by their

Lordships of the Court of Appeal in Piyasena vs. Wijesinghe1 and M.W.D.

Dayaratne vs. M.W.D. Agosinno,2 decided on 23/03/2005, wherein it was

concluded that the change in the nature of the holding from that of a permit

to a grant is one process and should not be taken as two distinct processes

for the purpose of annulling a nomination that has been previously made.

19 (vi) Did their Lordships in Civil Appeal High Court of Anuradhapura

and the learned District Judge of Polonnaruwa err in law by applying the

provisions of Section 72 of the Land Development Ordinance

notwithstanding the fact that the Petitioner had been nominated under the

permit issued to the said Ukku Banda and that nomination continues under

the grant as the grantee was issued the grant after his demise.

It is common ground that the said grant dated 03/05/1983 was issued to Ukku Banda.

The Plaintiff-Appellant was the nominee of Ukku Banda. In terms of Section 26 of the

State Lands Ordinance, the said land was registered in the Land Registry of

Polonnaruwa on 30/01/1987, which is a mandatory requirement.

1 2002 (2) SLR 242. 2 SC Appeal No. 30/2004.

P a g e 7 | 10

The Plaintiff-Appellant contends that the District Court and the Civil Appeal High

Court erred in law by applying Section 19(4) of the Land Development Ordinance

which is now repealed, and relied upon the ratio decidendi of Piyasena vs. Wijesinghe3

and M.W.D. Dayaratne vs. M.W.D. Agosinno,4 in annulling a nomination that has been

previously made.

In Piyasena vs. Wijesinghe,5 the Court of Appeal considered the question of whether

the nomination of a successor under a permit was converted to a nomination made by

the grantee as the owner of the land. The Court also considered whether the issuance of

a grant changes the status of a permit holder to that of an owner who derives title to

the land in question and whether the failure to nominate a successor under the grant

amounts to a non-nomination and invites the application of the provisions of Section

72, notwithstanding the prior nomination made by the grantee under the permit.

The application of Section 19(4) of the Land Development Ordinance was considered

in the context of a permit holder paying all sums and complying with all conditions

which entitled the permit holder to a grant to be issued in respect of the land.

M.W.D. Dayaratne vs. M.W.D. Agosinno6 was also decided on similar facts and

circumstances.

In Piyasena vs. Wijesinghe,7 the Court held that, the satisfaction of paying all sums

and complying with all conditions entitles the permit holder to a grant which shall

be issued in respect of the said land in terms of Section 19(4) of the same Act. This

pronouncement was made by the Court taking into consideration the provisions in

Section 19(4) of the said Act, that at the time of the death of the initial grantee, she was

3 Piyasena (n 1). 4 Dayaratne (n 2). 5 Piyasena (n 1). 6 Dayaratne (n 2). 7 Piyasena (n 1).

P a g e 8 | 10

entitled to be considered as the owner by virtue of the fact that she had been awarded

a grant.

In M.W.D. Dayaratne vs. M.W.D. Agosinno,8 S.N. Silva C.J. has stressed the

importance of giving effect to the wish of the original allotee who was already indicated

by the grantee to the relevant authority. In the said case this Court prevailed upon the

fact that the change in the nature of the holding from that of a permit to a grant is one

process and it should not be taken as two distinct processes for the purpose of annulling

a nomination that has been previously made.

Therefore, the circumstances in deciding Piyasena vs. Wijesinghe9 and M.W.D.

Dayaratne vs. M.W.D. Agosinno,10 are completely distinguishable to that of the case

at hand, for the reasons that;

The ownership of the original land grantee is not in issue in this case. Therefore, there

is no application of Section 19(4) to the facts and circumstances of this case.

Although the Plaintiff-Appellant contends that Section 19(4) of the L.D.O. was

repealed, it is not so. Section 19(4) remains part of the statute.

Secondly, prior to the death of Ukku Banda, a valid nomination was made to the

Plaintiff-Appellant, who was therefore entitled to be nominated as successor.

Thirdly, both cases delt with a situation of a change in the nature of the holding from

that of a permit to a grant.

The Plaintiff-Appellant relied on M.W.D. Dayaratne vs. M.W.D. Agosinno,11 to

advance his position that, notwithstanding the application of Section 72 of the L.D.O,

the Plaintiff-Appellant was nominated under the permit issued to the original permit

holder, and such nomination which continues under the grant, is valid in law. In their

8 Dayaratne (n 2). 9 Piyasena (n 1). 10 Dayaratne (n 2). 11 ibid.

P a g e 9 | 10

final determinations, the District Court, or the Civil Appeal High Court, did not disturb

or interfere with that position taken by the Plaintiff-Appellant.

As pointed out by the Defendant-Respondent, in the District Court Action, no

commission was taken out by the Plaintiff-Appellant to demarcate the boundaries of

the subject matter nor were steps taken to demonstrate the metes and bounds of the land.

Accordingly, with reference to the main relief prayed for by the Plaintiff-Appellant,

which was a declaration that the Plaintiff-Appellant is the legal owner of the land

described in the second schedule to the Plaint pleaded as part of the land morefully

described in the first schedule to the Plaint and to eject the Defendant-Respondent from

the said land described in the said second schedule to the Plaint, the District Court came

to a clear finding that the Plaintiff-Appellant has failed to prove that the land described

in the second schedule to the Plaint is part of the land described in the first schedule,

with which this Court agrees. The Civil Appeal High Court was also of the view that

the Judgment of the District Court was entered according to law.

It is also observed that in the District Court, the Defendant-Respondent challenged the

Plaintiff-Appellants right to the land, and asserted that the Plaintiff-Appellant must

prove his title to the land described in the second schedule to the Plaint in terms of the

L.D.O. In pursuit of the above contention, issues number 7 and 8 raised by the

Defendant-Respondent challenging the Plaintiff-Appellant, in proof of title to the said

portion of land, was held not proved. Accordingly, both lower courts having dismissed

the action of the Plaintiff-Appellant, did not in any manner interfere with the Plaintiff-

Appellants rights as a successor under the grant, nor did they annul any previous

nominations or deny the Plaintiff-Appellants ability to continue under the grant.

As discussed earlier in this Judgment, the Defendant-Respondents relief was only

limited to damages in the event that the Judgement was against him.

In light of the above, it is observed that the questions of law for which leave was granted

by this Court by Order dated 06/07/2012, and the two questions of law agreed upon by

P a g e 10 | 10

the Counsel for the Plaintiff-Appellant on the date of the hearing, do not correlate with

the main relief prayed, i.e., a declaration that the land described in the second schedule

is part of the first schedule and has been encroached upon by the Defendant-

Respondent, who is presently in possession illegally and without the authority of the

Plaintiff-Appellant.

In the circumstance, this Court is of the view that, in deciding on this Appeal, the two

questions on which leave to appeal to this Court was granted and which have been

quoted earlier in this Judgement need not be considered and I answer both questions

accordingly.

For these reasons, this Appeal is dismissed. No order for Costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

S. Thurairaja, PC, J

I agree

Judge of the Supreme Court

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J

I agree

Judge of the Supreme Court