IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

Plaintiff

SC APPEAL NO: 170/2019

SC LA NO: SC/HCCA/LA/36/2018

HCCA: WP/HCCA/COL/112/2014(F)

DC COLOMBO: 02227/09/DMR

Vs.

Ceylinco General Insurance Ltd,

No. 69, Janadipathi Mawatha,

Colombo 01.

Defendant

AND BETWEEN

Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

Plaintiff-Appellant

Vs.

Ceylinco General Insurance Ltd,

No. 69, Janadipathi Mawatha,

Colombo 01.

Defendant-Respondent

2 SC/APPEAL/170/2019

AND NOW BETWEEN

Ceylinco General Insurance Ltd,

No. 69,

Janadipathi Mawatha,

Colombo 01.

Defendant-Respondent-Appellant

Vs.

Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent

Before: P. Padman Surasena, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J.

Counsel: N.R. Sivendran with Sankamali Somaratna for the

Defendant-Respondent-Appellant.

Sureka Ahmed, S.C., for the Petitioner-Appellant-

Respondent.

Argued on : 11.02.2022

Written submissions:

by the Defendant-Respondent-Appellant on 11.02.2020

by the Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent on 28.08.2020

Decided on: 17.11.2022

3 SC/APPEAL/170/2019

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The plaintiff (the Attorney General on behalf of the State) filed this action

against the defendant insurance company in the District Court of

Colombo seeking to recover a sum of Rs. 818,061.20 with legal interest

on the advance payment bond marked P1 read with P3, P6 and P7. The

defendant filed answer seeking dismissal of the action. After trial, the

District Court dismissed the plaintiff’s action on the basis that the

plaintiff had failed to make a valid demand during the validity period of

the bond. On appeal, the High Court of Civil Appeal set aside the

judgment and directed the District Court to enter judgment for the

plaintiff on the basis that the demand on the advance payment bond was

made during the validity period. Hence this appeal by the defendant. This

court granted leave to appeal on the question whether the High Court of

Civil Appeal erred in law in directing the District Court to enter judgment

for the plaintiff when the demand on the advance payment bond was

made after the lapse of the validity period of the bond.

Advance payment bonds, performance bonds, performance guarantees,

bank guarantees, letters of guarantee, letters of credit etc. fall into one

category and practically perform the same function. Performance bonds

are common in construction contracts and real estate development. It

guarantees due performance of the underlying contract between the

employer and the contractor. Its purpose is to provide a prompt and

readily realisable security for obligations undertaken in the underlying

contract. That is the fundamental purpose of a performance bond. In all

these transactions three parties can be identified: (a) the principal

(obligor/debtor/contractor) at whose instance the instrument is issued;

(b) the guarantor (surety/the financial institution, e.g. bank) who

guarantees due performance of the obligations of the principal to the

beneficiary; and (c) the beneficiary (obligee/creditor/employer) for whose

4 SC/APPEAL/170/2019

benefit the instrument is issued. In these instruments, the word bond

and guarantee are used interchangeably. An advance performance bond

is an instrument obtained from the guarantor by the principal for

issuance to the beneficiary as a condition precedent to payment of an

advance for works to be performed by the principal (since money is

required for initial expenses such as labour, equipment, raw material). A

performance bond is an instrument obtained from the guarantor by the

principal for issuance to the beneficiary as a condition precedent to due

execution of the overall contract. However in practical terms a

performance bond covers both these aspects: advance payment and

overall discharge of obligations. In all these instances, with the issuance

of the bond, the guarantor guarantees to the beneficiary payment of the

agreed amount without conditions, unless the bond is conditional, no

sooner it is presented according to its terms to the guarantor for payment.

Although a bond can be conditional or unconditional, the trend is that

these bonds are issued at the instance of the principal to be payable to

the beneficiary “on demand” without any conditions.

The following passage by Dr. Wickrema Weerasooriyia in A Textbook of

Commercial Law (Business law) (4th edn) at page 647 shows that there is

no clear difference between advance payment bonds and performance

bonds.

The Third Party client wants an assurance that the contractor will

perform the work satisfactorily and on time. The client has also to

give the contractor what is called a “mobilization advance” so that

the contractor can get together the required labour, equipment and

raw material etc. In that context, the contractor gets its banker to

issue the Performance Bond to the client. The Bond states that the

contractor will perform as contracted and in the case of default, the

Bank will pay the client. The Bank normally has money of the

5 SC/APPEAL/170/2019

contractor in a bank account or fixed deposit to cover the amount of

the bond.

In Banking Law and Practice by R.K. Gupta (Volume 1, 2011 (reprint),

Modern Law Publications) a performance guarantee is defined as follows:

The performance guarantees are issued by the banks on behalf of

their clients in favour of third parties assuring that the customer on

behalf of which guarantee is issued, will perform his obligations as

per the terms and conditions of the contract, failing which the bank

will compensate the third party by paying the amount specified in

the guarantee. The performance guarantees are usually obtained

where the contractor undertakes to complete the assignment within

a specified period in accordance with the terms and conditions of the

contract e.g. building and engineering contract.

The International Chamber of Commerce Uniform Rules for Demand

Guarantees (URDG 758) defines a demand guarantee or guarantee as

“any signed undertaking, however named or described, providing for

payment on presentation of a complying demand.”

In Siporex Trade S.A. v. Banque Indosuez [1986] 2 Lloyd’s Law Reports

146, the purpose of a performance bond was descried as follows:

The whole commercial purpose of a performance bond was to

provide a security which was to be readily, promptly and assuredly

realisable when the prescribed event occurred; a purpose reflected

in the provision that it should be payable on first demand; the bank

guarantor was not and ought not to be concerned in any way with

the rights and wrongs of the underlying transaction.

Although there are three identifiable parties in these transactions as

stated above, if the bond or guarantee is unconditional and payable on-

6 SC/APPEAL/170/2019

demand, it is trite law that transactions between the guarantor and the

beneficiary under the performance bond are not tripartite transactions

among the guarantor, the beneficiary and the principal, but simply

autonomous or standalone transactions between the guarantor and the

beneficiary despite reference being made to the underlying contract

between the beneficiary and the principal. In other words, the guarantor

shall not be entitled to refuse payment to the beneficiary due to issues

between the guarantor and the principal or due to issues between the

principal and the beneficiary. If the beneficiary makes the demand in

accordance with the terms of the bond or guarantee, the guarantor has

no option but to honour it. Any dispute between the principal and the

beneficiary on the underlying contract shall be resolved in separate

proceedings to which the guarantor will not be a party.

In Tukan Timber LTD v. Barclays Bank PLC [1987] 1 QB 171 at 174, Hirst

J. observed:

It is of course very clearly established by the authorities that a letter

of credit is autonomous, that the bank is not concerned in any way

with the merits or demerits of the underlying transaction, and only

in the most extremely exceptional circumstances should the Court

interfere with the paying bank honouring a letter of credit in

accordance with its terms bearing in mind the importance of the free

and unrestricted flow of normal commercial dealings.

In Power Curber International Ltd. v. National Bank of Kuwait SAK [1981]

3 All ER 607 at 614 Lord Denning M.R. observed “Letters of credit have

become established as a universally acceptable means of payment in

international transactions. They are regarded by merchants the world over

as equivalent to cash”.

7 SC/APPEAL/170/2019

In R.D. Harbottle (Mercantile) Ltd v. National Westminster Bank Ltd [1977]

2 All ER 862 at 870, Kerr J. remarked:

It is only in exceptional cases that the courts will interfere with the

machinery of irrevocable obligations assumed by banks. They are

the life-blood of international commerce. Such obligations are

regarded as collateral to the underlying rights and obligations

between the merchants at either end of the banking chain. Except

possibly in clear cases of fraud of which the banks have notice, the

courts will leave the merchants to settle their disputes under the

contracts by litigation or arbitration as available to them or

stipulated in the contracts.

In Sztejn v. J. Henry Schroder Banking Corporation (1941) 31 N.Y.S. 2d

631 at 633 Shientag J. said:

It is well established that a letter of credit is independent of the

primary contract of sale between the buyer and the seller. The

issuing bank agrees to pay upon presentation of documents, not

goods. This rule is necessary to preserve the efficiency of the letter

of credit as an instrument for the financing of trade.

Vide also Edward Owen Engineering Ltd v. Barclays Bank International

Ltd [1978] 1 QB 159, Pesticides India v. State Chemical and

Pharmaceutical Corporation of India (1983) 54 CompCas 147 Delhi, ILR

1981 Delhi 864.

Notwithstanding that these performance bonds are autonomous and

standalone, if fraud is alleged and prima facie established, of which the

guarantor has knowledge or notice, this general principle can be relaxed

appropriately. In such event, the court can even issue an interim

injunction preventing the bank from making payment on the instrument

pending determination of the action. I must add that the mere sending of

8 SC/APPEAL/170/2019

a notice by the principal to the guarantor alleging fraud on the part of the

beneficiary will not allow the guarantor to refuse payment; nor will the

court clothe itself with jurisdiction on such bare assertions to stop

payment on bonds or guarantees considered to be the lifeblood of

international commerce or equivalent to cash. The court shall not make

interim orders ex parte or inter partes unless a strong prima facie case

has been made out on fraud. The fraud shall be of a serious character

that goes to the root of the underlying contract; an alleged violation of a

term of the contract such as delivery of substandard goods, an allegation

of overpayments or underpayments are not sufficient enough to establish

fraud. The court must guard itself against making this universally

acceptable mode of payment in national and international trade

ineffectual or nugatory by granting interim orders as a matter of course

or as a matter of routine.

Examples for the applicability of such exception are rare. In Edward

Owen Engineering Ltd v. Barclays Bank International Ltd (supra) at 169

Lord Denning M.R. stated “the bank ought not to pay under the credit if it

knows that the documents are forged or that the request for payment is

made fraudulently in circumstances when there is no right to payment.” At

page 171 it was further observed:

All this leads to the conclusion that the performance guarantee

stands on a similar footing to a letter of credit. A bank which gives a

performance guarantee must honour that guarantee according to its

terms. It is not concerned in the least with the relations between the

supplier and the customer; nor with the question whether the

supplier has performed his contracted obligation or not; nor with the

question whether the supplier is in default or not. The bank must

pay according to its guarantee, on demand, if so stipulated, without

9 SC/APPEAL/170/2019

proof or conditions. The only exception is when there is a clear fraud

of which the bank has notice.

Ackner, L.J., in United Trading Corporation S.A. and Murray Clayton Ltd

v. Allied Arab Bank Ltd [1985] 2 Lloyd’s Law Reports 554 at 561 observed:

We would expect the Court to require strong corroborative evidence

of the allegation, usually in the form of contemporary documents,

particularly those emanating from the buyer. In general, for the

evidence of fraud to be clear, we would also expect the buyer to have

been given an opportunity to answer the allegation and to have

failed to provide any, or any adequate answer in circumstances

where one could properly be expected. If the Court considers that on

the material before it the only realistic inference to draw is that of

fraud, then the seller would have made out a sufficient case of fraud.

In Indica Traders (Pvt) Ltd v. Seoul Lanka Construction (Pvt) Ltd [1994] 3

Sri LR 387 at 398, S.N. Silva J. (later C.J.) held:

It is thus clear that business transactions between a bank and a

beneficiary, constituted in the nature of a performance bond, a

performance guarantee, letter of guarantee or irrevocable letter of

credit, whereby the bank is obliged to pay money to a beneficiary,

are not tripartite transactions between the bank (surety), the

beneficiary (creditor) and the party at whose instance the bond,

guarantee or letter is issued (the principal debtor) but, simply

transactions between the bank and the beneficiary. A bank thereby

guarantees to the beneficiary payment of money and is obliged to

honour that guarantee according to its terms. Any dispute that may

arise between the beneficiary (creditor) and the party at whose

instance the guarantee or letter is given (the principal debtor), on the

underlying contract, cannot be urged to restrain the bank from

10 SC/APPEAL/170/2019

honouring the guarantee or letter according to its terms. In an

application for an injunction to restrain the bank from making

payment, the Court has to consider whether there is a challenge to

the validity of the bond, guarantee or letter itself, upon which

payment is claimed and whether the conditions as specified in the

writing are satisfied. If the challenge to the validity is not substantial

and the conditions as specified in the writing are met, prima facie no

injunction should be granted and the bank should be left free to

honour its obligation.

The only exception to this general rule is where it is established by

the party applying for the injunction that a claim for payment upon

such bond, guarantee or letter is clearly fraudulent. A mere plea of

fraud put in for the purpose of bringing the case within this exception

and which rest on the uncorroborated statement of the applicant will

not suffice. An injunction may be granted only in circumstances

where the Court is satisfied that the bank should not effect payment.

Therefore, an injunction may be granted on the ground of fraud only

where there is clear evidence as to:

(i) the fact of fraud and,

(ii) the knowledge of the bank as to the facts constituting the

fraud.

In relation to the standard of proof of fraud, it was further held at 399:

In any event, a default or a violation of a contract or even the receipt

of an over payment does not constitute fraud. Fraud as contemplated

in the exception stated above carries a far more serious connotation.

It is such fraudulent conduct on the part of the beneficiary as would

strike at the very root of the transaction and vitiate the bond,

guarantee or letter.

11 SC/APPEAL/170/2019

In Hemas Marketing (Pvt) Ltd v. Chandrasiri [1994] 2 Sri LR 181 at 186-

187, Ranaraja J. stated:

Bank guarantees like letters of credit and performance bonds are a

“new creature” of the commercial world. per Lord Denning Edward

Owen Engineering Ltd. v. Barclays Bank International Ltd (1978) All

ER 976 at 981. They were established as a universally acceptable

means of payment equivalent to cash in trade and commerce, on the

basis that the promise of the issuing bank to pay was wholly

independent of the contract between the buyer and the seller and

the issuing bank would honour its obligations to pay regardless of

the merits or demerits of the dispute between the buyer and the

seller. (Power Curber International Ltd. v. National Bank of Kuwait

[1981] 3 All ER 607) When a bank has given a guarantee, it is

required to honour it according to its terms and is not concerned

whether either party to the contract which underlay the contract was

in default. (Edward Owen – (supra)). The whole purpose of such

commercial instruments was to provide security which was to be

readily, promptly and assuredly realisable when the prescribed

event occurred. No bank is obliged to give such a guarantee unless

they wished to and no doubt when they did so they properly exacted

commercial terms and protected themselves by suitable cross

indemnities. Siporex Trade SA v. Banque Indo Suez (1986) 2 Lloyd’s

Law List Reports 146. It is only in exceptional circumstances that

courts will interfere with the machinery of obligations assumed by

the banks. They are the lifeblood of international commerce. Such

obligations are regarded as collateral to underlying rights and

obligations between merchants at either end of the banking chain.

Courts will leave the merchants to settle their disputes under the

contracts by litigation. The courts are not concerned with the

difficulties to enforce such claims. These are risks which merchants

12 SC/APPEAL/170/2019

take. Harbottle (Mercantile) Ltd. v. National Westminster Bank Ltd.

[1977] 2 All ER 862. If court interferes with a bank’s undertaking it

will undermine its greatest asset – its reputation for financial and

contractual probity. Sir Donaldson MR - Boliventer Oil SA v. Chase

Manhattan Bank [1984] 1 All ER 351 at 352. The only exception to

that rule is where fraud by one of the parties to the underlying

contract has been established and the bank had notice of the fraud.

(Edward Owen - supra, Boliventer - supra). A mere plea of fraud put

in for the purpose of bringing the case within this exception and

which rests on the uncorroborated statements of the applicant will

not suffice. An injunction may be granted only in circumstances

when the court is satisfied that the bank should not effect payment.

(S.N. Silva, J., Indika Traders v. Seoul Lanka Construction (Pvt) Ltd.

CA 916/93).

(Vide also Pan Asia Bank Ltd v. Bentota MPCS Ltd and Another [2012] 1

Sri LR 51)

In the instant case, the Commander of the Sri Lanka Army (the employer)

entered into an agreement with M/s Nimali Builders (the contractor) for

the latter to construct two storage ammunition dumps at the Ambepussa

Army camp. The defendant (guarantor) issued P1 in favour of the

Commander of the Sri Lanka Army guaranteeing payment of Rs.

809,880.00 from 03.10.2003 to 01.01.2004 “in accordance with the said

contract or in accordance with any subsequent agreement affecting the

period of repayment”. The validity period was thereafter extended by P3

from 03.10.2003 to 10.10.2004 and the value of the bond was increased

to Rs. 818,061.20.

It is common ground that in terms of paragraph 4 on page 2 of P1, there

shall be a demand made during the validity period for the defendant to

make the payment. The demand was made by the plaintiff by P7 dated

13 SC/APPEAL/170/2019

05.11.2004, which falls outside the extended validity period of P3, i.e.

10.10.2004.

The High Court of Civil Appeal set aside the judgment of the District

Court and held with the plaintiff on the following basis:

(a) paragraph 3 of P1 provides for entering into “any subsequent

agreement affecting the period of repayment”;

(b) the plaintiff “made a subsequent alteration affecting the period of

repayment unilaterally” and conveyed it to the defendant by P6

dated 05.10.2004, a date that falls within the validity period, “but

there was no objection to this alteration” and “tacit agreement of the

[defendant] could therefore be inferred upon its failure to resist the

alteration” and hence “it can safely be concluded that the [plaintiff]

has made his claim during the validity period of the said advance

payment bond”.

I am unable to accept this reasoning by any standard. What did the

plaintiff convey to the defendant by P6? The plaintiff stated, “The under

mentioned bonds issued by you in respect of the above contract on behalf

of M/s Nimali Builders, 292, Hospital Road, Kelanimulla, Angoda to be

with held with immediate effect to keep our rights in accordance with the

conditions of guarantee bonds.” Although the learned High Court Judge

says that by this expression the plaintiff made an alteration affecting the

period of repayment, which was tacitly accepted by the defendant in

remaining silent, I cannot arrive at such a conclusion by reading the

above. For me, this expression has no clear meaning to warrant a

response. Learned State Counsel in this regard refers to issue No. 6

raised by the plaintiff and the answer of the learned District Judge given

thereto which reads as follows:

14 SC/APPEAL/170/2019

එස ේ ගිවිසුම අව න් කිරීමට සිදුවීම ස ේතුසවන් පැ1 අත්තිකාරම් බැඳුම්කරය මත වු අයිිය

ත වුරු කර ගැනීම ද ා එකී බැඳුම්කරය රඳවා තබාගන්නා බව විත්තිකරුට 2004.10.05

දිනැිව දන්වා ඇත්තසත්තද?

මුදල් රඳවා තැබීමට ඉල්ලා ඇත.

In accordance with this issue, the position of the plaintiff before the

District Court was that by sending P6, the plaintiff informed the

defendant that the plaintiff retains the bond in order to enforce the rights

on the bond. The answer given to this issue is that the plaintiff has

requested to retain the money. This itself explains that P6 is a document

open to different interpretations. P6 is definitely neither a demand for

payment on the bond nor a demand or request for further extension of

the validity period of the bond beyond 10.10.2004 (the extended period

agreed upon by P3).

The bond concerned was payable on demand. What is meant by a

demand? A demand in this context means a clear request for payment of

an amount due. The ICC Uniform Rules for Demand Guarantees (URDG

758) defines a demand as “a signed document by the beneficiary

demanding payment under a guarantee.” A working definition for a valid

demand was given in Re Colonial Finance, Mortgage, Investment and

Guarantee Corporation Ltd (1905) 6 SR (NSW) 1 cited in Union Bank of

Colombo Ltd v. Emm Chem (Pvt) Ltd and Others

(SC/APPEAL/CHC/22/11, SC Minutes of 07.03.2019):

there must be a clear intimation that payment is required to

constitute a demand; nothing more is necessary, and the word

‘demand’ need not be used; neither is the validity of a demand

lessened by its being clothed in the language of politeness. It must

be of a peremptory character and unconditional, but the nature of

the language is immaterial provided it has this effect.

15 SC/APPEAL/170/2019

Contracts of guarantees are generally strictly construed. This happens in

both ways: against the guarantor as well as in favour of the guarantor. It

all depends on the terms of the guarantee. In Blest v. Brown (1862) 45

ER 1225 at 1229, Lord Campbell stated:

It must always be recollected in what manner a surety is bound. You

bind him to the letter of his engagement. Beyond the proper

interpretation of that engagement you have no hold upon him. He

receives no benefit and no consideration. He is bound, therefore,

merely according to the proper meaning and effect of the written

engagement that he has entered into.

There is no unilateral extension of time in P6, as the learned High Court

Judge states, which could have been understood by the defendant to

object to or accept tacitly or expressly. Even assuming the language in

P6 is crystal clear, can the validity period of the bond be extended

unilaterally by the plaintiff? The answer should be in the negative. For

how long was an extension sought or agreed upon? There is no such

indication in P6. An extension cannot be forever. It is uncontested that

P1 provides for entering into “any subsequent agreement affecting the

period of repayment” but P6 does not constitute a “subsequent agreement

affecting the period of repayment”.

The terms of a written contract cannot be implied in this manner. A high

standard is required before a term will be implied into a contract.

Imputing a term that the period of payment was extended for an indefinite

period without the consent of the other party flouts commercial common

sense. Terms are generally implied by necessary implication, by law or

by custom. If the wording of a contract is capable of more than one

meaning, it should be construed to further the parties’ common intention

and the essential purpose of the contract. Prof. C.G. Weeramantry in The

Law of Contracts, vol II, page 572 states that terms are implied when

16 SC/APPEAL/170/2019

“such implication is necessary in order to give to the contract the business

efficacy which the parties intended.” However, he adds “If the document

will be effective without the term, no such implication will be made. An

implied term cannot be added merely on the ground of reasonableness, but

its existence must be a necessary implication from the circumstances of the

case and the language of the contract.”

An implied term can be discerned when it is obvious that such a term

should be read into the contract. In Reigate v. Union Manufacturing Co

(Ramsbottom) Ltd [1918] 1 KB 592 at 605 Scrutton L.J. observed:

The first thing is to see what the parties have expressed in the

contract…A term can only be implied if it is necessary in the business

sense to give efficacy to the contract, that is, if it is such a term that

it can confidently be said that if at the time the contract was being

negotiated someone had said to the parties, “What will happen in

such a case?” they would both have replied: “Of course so and so

will happen; we did not trouble to say that; it is too clear”

Similar sentiments were echoed by MacKinnon L.J. in Shirlaw v. Southern

Foundries (1926) Ltd. [1939] 2 KB 206 at 227:

Prima facie that which in any contract is left to be implied and need

not be expressed is something so obvious that it goes without saying;

so that, if, while the parties were making their bargain, an officious

bystander were to suggest some express provision for it in their

agreement, they would testily suppress him with a common, ‘Oh, of

course.’

In Pan Asia Bank Ltd. v. Bentota MPCS Ltd [2012] 1 Sri LR 51, Basnayake

J. observed:

17 SC/APPEAL/170/2019

The effect of a guarantee, like that of other contracts, depends on the

words of the contract. In Smith Vs. Hughes (1871) LR 6 QB 597 at

607 Blackburn J said “If whatever a man’s real intention may be, he

so conducts himself that a reasonable man would believe that he

was assenting to the terms proposed by the other party and that

other party upon that belief enters into the contract with him, the

man thus conducting himself would be equally bound as if he had

intended to agree to the party’s terms”. The question to be answered

always is what is the meaning of what the parties have said? not

what did the parties mean to say (Lord Simon of Glaisdae L Schuler

AG Vs. Wickman Machine Tool Sales Ltd. [1973] All ER 39).

Law of Guarantees by Geraldine Andrews and Richard Millett (6th edn,

Sweet and Maxwell) at page 643 states “the nature of performance

guarantees is such that it is very difficult to persuade a court to imply terms

into them.” The court cannot imply a term which is inconsistent with the

express language of the bond agreed upon (B.P. Refinery (Westernport)

Pty Limited v. Shire of Hastings (1977) 180 CLR 266, Duke of Westminster

v. Guild [1985] QB 688). The bond in question expressly stipulates that a

demand should be made before 10.10.2004 but no such demand was

made.

I have no hesitation in holding that the High Court of Civil Appeal clearly

erred when it held that the validity period of the advance payment bond

was extended by P6 and therefore the demand made by P7 dated

05.11.2004 is within the extended validity period of the bond. There was

no demand made during the validity period of the advance payment bond.

I answer the question of law on which leave to appeal was granted in the

affirmative, set aside the judgment of the High Court of Civil Appeal,

restore the judgment of the District Court and allow the appeal with

costs.

18 SC/APPEAL/170/2019

Judge of the Supreme Court

P. Padman Surasena, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court