IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Film Locations (Private Limited)

No. 282/6, Kotte Road,

Nugegoda.

Plaintiff

SC APPEAL NO: SC/APPEAL/133/2015

SCLA NO: SC/HCCA/LA/491/2014

HC COLOMBO NO: WP/HCCA/COL/157/2012/LA

DC COLOMBO NO: 7461/SPL

Vs.

1. Sri Lanka Mahaweli Authority,

No. 500, T.B. Jayah Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

2. M. Sirisena,

Resident Project Manager,

Victoria Office,

Digana.

3. Taprobane Studio Ranch

(Private) Limited,

No 282/6,

Kotte Road,

Nugegoda.

Defendants

AND BETWEEN

2 SC/APPEAL/133/2015

Sri Lanka Mahaweli Authority,

No. 500, T.B. Jayah Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

1st Defendant-Petitioner

Vs.

Film Locations (Private Limited)

No. 282/6, Kotte Road,

Nugegoda.

Plaintiff-Respondent

M. Sirisena,

Resident Project Manager,

Victoria Office,

Digana.

2nd Defendant-Respondent

Taprobane Studio Ranch

(Private) Limited,

No 282/6, Kotte Road,

Nugegoda.

3rd Defendant-Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

Film Locations (Private Limited)

No. 282/6, Kotte Road,

Nugegoda.

Plaintiff-Respondent-Petitioner

Vs.

3 SC/APPEAL/133/2015

Sri Lanka Mahaweli Authority,

No. 500, T.B. Jayah Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

1st Defendant-Petitioner-Respondent

M. Sirisena,

Resident Project Manager,

Victoria Office,

Digana.

2nd Defendant-Respondent-Respondent

Taprobane Studio Ranch

(Private) Limited,

No 282/6, Kotte Road,

Nugegoda.

3rd Defendant-Respondent-Respondent

Before: P. Padman Surasena, J.

Kumudini Wickramasinghe, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Thisath Wijayagunawardane, P.C., with Gihan Liyanage

and Sharan Reeves for the Plaintiff-Respondent-Petitioner.

Pulasthi Rupasinghe and Lakna Kularatne for the 1st

Defendant-Petitioner-Respondent and 2nd Defendant-

Respondent-Respondent.

Argued on: 01.11.2021

Written submissions:

By the 1st Defendant-Petitioner-Respondent on 22.11.2021

By the Plaintiff-Respondent-Petitioner on 22.11.2021

Decided on: 21.11.2022

4 SC/APPEAL/133/2015

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The plaintiff instituted this action against the three defendants in the

District Court of Colombo seeking the following reliefs in the prayer to

the plaint.

(a) To enter a Judgment and a decree that the 1st Respondent is bound

by law to act in terms of expressed and/or implied terms of the

Agreement marked “A” with the Plaint and/or that the 1st

Respondent is not entitled in law to breach the conditions in the said

Agreement.

(b) A declaration that the 3rd Respondent is entitled to uninterrupted

possession of the lands described in the 1st and 2nd Schedules to the

Plaint.

(c) To enter a Judgment and a decree that the 1st and 2nd Defendants

are not entitled to obstruct and/or interfere with the uninterrupted

possession of the 3rd Defendant of the lands morefully described in

the 1st and 2nd schedules to the Plaint.

(d) A permanent injunction preventing the 1st and 2nd Defendants from

obstructing and/or interfering with the uninterrupted possession of

the 3rd Defendant of the lands morefully described in the 1st and 2nd

schedules to the Plaint.

(e) An interim injunction preventing the 1st and 2nd Respondents from

obstructing and/or interfering with the uninterrupted possession of

the 3rd Respondent of the lands morefully described in the 1st and

2nd Schedule to the Plaint.

The 1st and 2nd defendants filed answer seeking dismissal of the action.

By paragraphs 1 and 2 of the answer, they took up a preliminary

objection to the maintainability of the action on the basis that: the

plaintiff had not disclosed a cause of action against the 1st and 2nd

defendants; if at all a cause of action had been disclosed, it had accrued

5 SC/APPEAL/133/2015

to the 3rd defendant and not to the plaintiff, and since the 3rd defendant

being an incorporated company is a separate legal entity that can sue

and be sued in the eyes of the law, the plaintiff cannot file this action on

behalf of the 3rd defendant; therefore the plaint is defective on misjoinder

of parties.

The 3rd defendant did not file answer. When the case was called for

settlement of issues as part of the trial, the 3rd defendant was discharged

on the application of learned counsel for the plaintiff. The reference in

the issues to the 3rd defendant was changed to the name of the 3rd

defendant – Taprobane Studios Ranch (Private) Ltd.

Thereafter, learned counsel for the 1st and 2nd defendants had taken up

a preliminary objection to the maintainability of the action as presently

constituted on the basis that no cause of action survives for the plaintiff

to continue with the action upon discharging the 3rd defendant from the

case. The District Court overruled this objection and, on appeal, the High

Court of Civil Appeal upheld the objection and dismissed the action. The

plaintiff is before this Court against the judgment of the High Court. This

Court has granted leave to appeal against the judgment of the High Court

on the following questions of law as formulated by the plaintiff.

I. Did the Learned High Court Judges err in law holding that no cause

of action survives for the Petitioner to proceed with the said case

after the 3rd Respondent was discharged from the proceedings?

II. Did Learned High Court Judges err in law in holding that the

Petitioner has not sought reliefs for itself, and all reliefs prayed for

in the Plaint are in favour of the 3rd Respondent and hence the

Petitioner cannot maintain the said action?

III. Was the Petitioner entitled to have and maintain the said action

against the 1st Respondent without the 3rd Respondent being a party

as the Petitioner had filed the said action to exercise its rights under

6 SC/APPEAL/133/2015

the said Memorandum of Understanding and to enforce the said

legal obligation of the 1st Respondent to keep peaceful possession of

the said property with the 3rd Respondent?

IV. In view of the provisions of sections 17, 18 and 22 of the Civil

Procedure Code, did the Learned High Court Judges err in law in

upholding the said objection and allowing the said appeal?

As seen from the proceedings of the District Court dated 09.07.2009, the

plaintiff has raised 7 issues. Those seven issues are as follows:

1) පැමිණිල්ල සමඟ A ලලස ලකුණු කර ඇති ගිවිසුම මගින් සහ පැමිණිල්ල සමඟ

ඩී1 වශලෙන් ලකුණු කර ඇති අංක 410 සහ ඩී2 වශලෙන් ඇති අංක 411 දරණ

පිඹුරුවල දක්වා ඇති සම්පූර්ණ ලේපල 3 විත්තතිකාර සමාගමට සින්නක්කරලේ

පවරා දීමටත්ත, එහි නිරවුල් සන්තකෙ සහ බුක්තිෙ 3 විත්තතිකාර සමාගමට

ලබාදීමටත්ත 1 වන විත්තතිකාර අධිකාරිෙ එකඟවී සහ ලහෝ ගිවිසලගන ඇත්තද?

2) (a) 1 වන විත්තතිකරු පැමිණිල්ලල් සඳහන් පරිදි එකී ගිවිසුමට අනුව කටයුතු

කරමින් එකී 410 සහ 411 දරණ පිඹුරුවල දක්වා ඇති අක්කර 10 විශාල

භුමිලෙහි හිස් සහ නිරවුල් සන්තකෙ එම ගිවිසුම අත්තසන් කල වහාම

තැලරෝලේන් ස්ුඩිලෙෝ ලෑන්් රයිලවට් ලිමිට් සමාගම විසින් අවුරුදු 12කට

අධික කාලෙක් නිරවුල් ලලස එම ලේපල භුක්ති විඳින්ලන්ද?

2) (b) ඒ අනුව එම ගිවිසුම මගින් පැමිණිල්ලල් උපලල්ඛනලේ සඳහන් අක්කර 10ක්

විශාල බිම්ප රමාණෙ තැලරෝලේන් ස්ුඩිලෙෝ ලෑන්් ප්‍රියිලවට් ලිමිට් සමාගමට

පවරා දීමටද එහි හිස් සහ නිරවුල් සන්තකෙ බාරදීමටද 1 විත්තතිකාර සමාගම

එකඟ ලනාවූ බව රකාශ කර සිටීලමන් 1 විත්තතිකාර සමාගම නීතිලෙන්

රතිබන්ධනෙවී ඇත්තද?

3) පැමිණිලිකරු සහ 1 විත්තතිකරු අතර ඇති කරගත්ත එකී විලරෝධතා ගිවිසුමට

තැලරෝලේන් ස්ුඩිලෙෝ ලෑන්් රයිලවට් ලිමිට් ෙන සමාගලම්ප කටයුතු ලම්ප

වනලතක් ක්‍රිොත්තමකව සහ ලහෝ වලංගුව පවතින්ලන්ද?

4) එලස් තිබිෙදී 1 විත්තතිකරු සහ ලහෝ 1 විත්තතිකරුලේ ලස්වකලෙකු සහ ලහෝ

නිලෙෝජිතලෙකු වන 2 විත්තතිකරු එක්ව සහ වංක සහලෙෝගලෙන් සහ ලහෝ

අසත්තභාවලෙන් කටයුතු කරමින් ේලේශ සහගත ලලසත්ත, සහ ලහෝ

7 SC/APPEAL/133/2015

නීතිවිලරෝධී ලලසත්ත සහ ලහෝ එකී ගිවිසුලම්ප රකාශිතව සහ ලහෝ වයංග

ලකාන්ලේසිවලට පටහැනි ලලසත්ත, පැමිණිල්ලල් උපලල්ඛනලේ සඳහන් එකී

අංක 410 සහ 411 දරණ පිඹුරුවල දැක්ලවන ලේපලලහි 3 විත්තතිකරුලේ එකී

තැලරෝලේන් ස්ුඩිලෙෝ ලෑන්් රයිලවට් ලිමිට් ෙන සමාගලම්ප නිතයානුකුල

භුක්තිෙ සහ ලහෝ සන්තකෙට බාධා සහ ලහෝ අවහිර කිරීමට පටන් ගත්තලත්තද?

5) එකී ගිවිසුලම්ප රකාශන සහ වයාජ ලකාන්ලේසි රකාරව තැලරෝලේන් ස්ුඩිලෙෝ

ලෑන්් රයිලවට් ලිමිට් ෙන සමාගම 410 සහ 411 දරණ පිඹුරුවල දක්වා ඇති

සම්පුර්ණ ලේපලලහි නිරවුල් බුක්තිෙ සහ ලහෝ සන්තකෙ දැරීමට නිතයානුකුල

හිමිකම්ප සතුද සහ ලහෝ එකී සමාගමට එම ලේපලල් නිරවුල් බුක්තිෙ සහ ලහෝ

සන්තකෙ දැරීමට ඉඩදීමට 1 විත්තතිකරු නීතිලෙන් බැඳී ඇත්තද සහ ලහෝ එම

සමාගලම්ප එම ලේපලලහි නිරවුල් බුක්තිෙට බාධා සහ ලහෝ අවහිර සිදු කිරීමට

සහ ලහෝ 2 විත්තතිකරුවන්ට නීතිමෙ හිමිකම්ප ලනාමැතිද?

6) එම ලේපලලහි එකී තැලරෝලේන් ස්ුඩිලෙෝ ලෑන්් රයිලවට් ලිමිට් ෙන

සමාගලම්ප නිරවුල් බුක්තිෙ සහ ලහෝ සන්තකෙට බාධා සහ ලහෝ අවහිර

සිදුකිරීම වළක්වාලීමට සහ ලහෝ එලස් 1 විත්තතිකරු විසින් එම ගිවිසුලම්ප

ලකාන්ලේසි උල්ලංඝනෙ කිරීම වළක්වාලීමට එම සමාගලම්ප කළමනාකරණ

අධයක්ෂ සහ එකී සමාගලම්ප රධාන ලකාටස් හිමිො වන ලමම පැමිණිලිකාර

සමාගම නීතිලෙන් හිමිකම්ප ඇත්තද?

7) ඉහත විසඳිෙ යුතු රශ්න එකක් ලහෝ වැඩි ගණනකට ලහෝ සිෙල්ලම

පැමිණිලිකරුලේ වාසිෙට පිළිතුරු ලැලබන්ලන් නම්ප පැමිණිල්ලල් ඉල්ලා ඇති

සහන ලබා ගැනීමට පැමිණිලිකරුට හිමිකම්ප ඇත්තද?

It is clear that issue Nos. 1-6 are issues raised by the plaintiff on behalf

of the 3rd defendant. In other words, the answers to these issues –

whether in the affirmative or in the negative – will affect the 3rd defendant,

not the plaintiff.

What right does the plaintiff have to sue on behalf of the 3rd respondent

company? This is not a derivative action. The plaintiff does not file this

action as a shareholder of the 3rd defendant company. Suffice it to say

that this is against the fundamentals of Company Law. The plaintiff in

8 SC/APPEAL/133/2015

paragraph 24 of the amended plaint states “1 වන විත්තතිකරු 3 වන විත්තතිකාර

සමාගලම්ප රධාන ලකාටස් හිමිෙකු වන බැවින් පැමිණිලිකරුවකු ලලස එකතු කිරීම

සඳහා 3 වන විත්තතිකරුලේ කැමැත්තත ලබා ගැනීම රාලෙෝගිකව අපහසු කරුණක්

බවත්ත, ඒ අනුව 3 වන විත්තතිකරු ලමම නඩුලේ අතයාවශය පාර්ශවකරුවකු වශලෙන්

විත්තතිකරුවකු කර ඇති බවත්ත, එෙට එලරහිව කිසිදු සහනෙක් ලමම නඩුලවහි ඉල්ලා

ලනාසිටින බවත්ත පැමිණිලිකරු රකාශ කර සිටී.” The third paragraph of section

17 of the Civil Procedure Code states “If the consent of anyone who ought

to be joined as a plaintiff cannot be obtained, he may be made a defendant,

the reasons therefor being stated in the plaint.” By the aforesaid paragraph

24 in the plaint, the plaintiff accepts inter alia that (a) the 1st defendant

is a majority shareholder of the 3rd defendant company; (b) the consent

of the 1st defendant was not obtained to sue on behalf of the 3rd

defendant; and (c) the 3rd defendant is an essential party to the action

(the word used is “අතයාවශය”, not “අවශය”). If the plaintiff himself says

the 3rd defendant is an essential party to maintain this action, can he

later move the Court to release the 3rd defendant without affording any

reason? The answer is in the negative.

I have no hesitation in concluding that the plaintiff has no legal right to

file action on behalf of the 3rd defendant company. On the other hand,

without the 3rd defendant named as a party to the action, the Court

cannot decide the rights of the 3rd defendant (by answering the aforesaid

issues). The plaintiff contends that the affirmative answers to these

issues benefit the 3rd defendant and they are not in derogation of the

rights of the 3rd defendant. I am unable to accept this position. How does

the Court know, for instance, whether the 3rd defendant wants to take

over possession or continue to retain possession of the lands described

in the schedule to the plaint, because such commitment also involves the

discharge of corresponding obligations or responsibilities arising out of

such commitment. On the other hand, if the Court answers these issues

against the 3rd defendant, is the 3rd defendant bound by such order? The

9 SC/APPEAL/133/2015

answer is in the negative because the 3rd defendant is no longer a party

to the action. Is this not a futile exercise? According to the proceedings

dated 09.07.2009, the 3rd defendant has been discharged without any

representation on its behalf. In my view, after the 3rd defendant was

discharged from the proceedings, the Court cannot allow issue Nos. 1-6

to remain since those issues are directly relevant to the rights of the 3rd

defendant.

Then the only remaining issue is issue No. 7 which refers to the reliefs as

prayed for in the prayer to the plaint. This is a standard issue raised by

any plaintiff as a matter of routine after having raised specific issues.

Except paragraph (a) of the prayer to the plaint, all other prayers are

related to the 3rd defendant which I have already dealt with. I carefully

read the averments in the body of the plaint to learn that the plaintiff has

filed this action to secure possession of the lands described in the

schedule to the plaint on behalf of the 3rd defendant. Paragraph (a) of the

prayer to the plaint should be understood in that context, not in isolation.

This is easily discernible by reading paragraph 25 of the amended plaint

where the plaintiff says that he intends to file a separate action for the

enforcement of the agreement and claim compensation, which he has

admittedly done subsequently.

Learned President’s Counsel for the plaintiff, drawing the attention of

Court to section 17 of the Civil Procedure Code, contends that an action

cannot be dismissed on non-joinder of parties. Section 17 of the Civil

Procedure Code reads as follows:

No action shall be defeated by reason of the misjoinder or non-

joinder of parties, and the court may in every action deal with the

matter in controversy so far as regards the rights and interests of

the parties actually before it.

10 SC/APPEAL/133/2015

This section states that without dismissing the action on non-joinder or

misjoinder of parties, the Court may decide the rights of the parties who

are actually before the Court. But in this case, as explained above, there

are no rights to be safeguarded except for those of the 3rd defendant

which, as I have already stated, cannot be done by reason of the fact that

(a) the plaintiff cannot sue on behalf of the 3rd defendant, and (b) the

Court cannot adjudicate the rights of the 3rd defendant without the 3rd

defendant being a party to the case. Hence the plaintiff cannot shelter

behind this section.

Learned President’s Counsel for the plaintiff, also drawing the attention

of the Court to section 18(1) of the Civil Procedure Code, says that if the

Court thinks the 3rd defendant is a necessary party, the Court ought to

add the 3rd defendant as a party to the action. Section 18(1) of the Civil

Procedure Code reads as follows:

The court may on or before the hearing, upon the application of either

party, and on such terms as the court thinks just, order that the

name of any party, whether as plaintiff or as defendant improperly

joined, be struck out; and the court may at any time, either upon or

without such application, and on such terms as the court thinks just,

order that any plaintiff be made a defendant, or that any defendant

be made a plaintiff, and that the name of any person who ought to

have been joined, whether as plaintiff or defendant, or whose

presence before the court may be necessary in order to enable the

court effectually and completely to adjudicate upon and settle all the

questions involved in that action, be added.

There is no duty cast upon the Court to add parties and the Court may

ex mero motu do so in a fit case. Upon the application of the plaintiff, the

Court discharged the 3rd defendant. Does the plaintiff expect the Court

to add the 3rd defendant soon thereafter? The plaintiff shall also

11 SC/APPEAL/133/2015

understand that the system of justice practiced in our country is

adversarial not inquisitorial, and the Court shall adjudicate upon the

dispute as it is presented before Court by the respective parties and not

in the way the Court wants it to be presented.

I must also add that after the amendment to section 93(2) of the Civil

Procedure Code by the Civil Procedure Code (Amendment) Act No. 9 of

1991, the addition of parties after the day the case is first fixed for trial,

which necessitates the amendment of pleadings, is extremely restricted.

Section 18 shall be read together with section 93(2), not in isolation.

Learned President’s Counsel also draws the attention of this Court to

section 22 of the Civil Procedure Code to contend that the 1st and 2nd

defendants cannot take up this objection of non-joinder of parties after

the settlement of issues. Section 22 of the Civil Procedure Code reads as

follows:

All objections for want of parties, or for joinder of parties who have

no interest in the action, or for misjoinder as co-plaintiffs or co-

defendants, shall be taken at the earliest possible opportunity, and

in all cases before the hearing. And any such objection not so taken

shall be deemed to have been waived by the defendant.

The 1st and 2nd defendants took up the objection of misjoinder of the 3rd

defendant in the answer, in the teeth of the plaintiff’s averment in the

plaint that the 3rd defendant is an essential party to the action. Thereafter

when the plaintiff moved to discharge the 3rd defendant, the plaintiff

submitted that without the 3rd defendant the reliefs sought by the

plaintiff in the plaint could not be granted. Although this looks like the

1st and 2nd defendants are taking up a contradictory position, in the facts

and circumstances of this case, the 1st and 2nd defendants were

12 SC/APPEAL/133/2015

constrained to do so and, in my view, they did the right thing. I hold that

the plaintiff’s action from the outset is misconceived in law.

I answer the questions of law in the negative and dismiss the appeal with

costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

P. Padman Surasena, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Kumudini Wickramasinghe, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court