1

SC (FR) Application No. 677/2012

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application under

and in terms of Article 126 (2) of the

Constitution of the Republic of Sri Lanka

1. Landage Ishara Anjali (Minor)

Prosecutes this Application through

her Next Friend,

2. Wijesinghe Chulangani,

Both of,

Nilmenikgama,

Deegala, Marambha,

Akuressa

PETITIONERS

Vs.

1. Waruni Bogahawatte,

Matara Police Station,

Matara

2. Officer-in-charge,

Matara Police Station,

Matara.

2

3. Inspector General of Police,

Police Headquarters,

Colombo 01.

4. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

Before:

Buwaneka Aluwihare PC. J

Priyantha Jayawardena PC. J

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC. J

Counsel: J.C Weliamuna PC with Pulasthi Hewamanne

for the Petitioners

Warunika Hettige De Silva, DSG for the

Respondents

Argued on:

Written

submissions :

01.02.2018

14.02.2018

Decided on: 12.06.2019

3

Aluwihare PC. J,

This is a fundamental rights application by Landage Ishara Anjali a minor

(hereinafter Anjali) presented through her next friend (her mother Chulangani,

hereinafter the 2nd Petitioner). In the present application the Petitioners contend

that the conduct of the 1st Respondent, in taking the 1st Petitioner into custody and

detaining her violated her fundamental rights guaranteed under Article 11, 12 (1),

13 (1) and 13 (2). Leave to proceed was granted for all of the above mentioned

Articles. Before addressing the legal questions, it is apposite to present the facts of

the case.

Anjali was a grade 10 student of the Rajakeeya Maha Vidyalaya, Telijjiwila at the

time of the alleged incident. She was known among the villagers for her talent for

producing instant rhythmic verses (“හිටිවන කවි”). The alleged incident took

place in the midst of the school term test. On or about 17 – 07 – 2012, Anjali had

returned home after sitting for two question papers and was preparing herself for

the question papers of the following day. Around 3.30 pm the 1st Respondent,

along with 6 other officers of the Matara Police station had come to her residence

on the pretext of introducing Anjali to a local media station. It is disclosed that she

was alone at home at that point. The 1st Respondent had first shown interest in her

ability to produce instant rhythmic verses. One officer also requested Anjali to sing

a verse about the 1st Respondent with which request she complied. Anjali claims in

her petition that several people in the area gathered around her house at this point,

partly due to the curiosity of seeing a Police Jeep in the vicinity and partly, hearing

her rhythmic verse.

Thereafter, in the presence of the said crowd, the 1st Respondent had questioned

Anjali as to whether she was sexually molested by the Chairman of the Akuressa

Pradeshiya Sabha. To this question, she had emphatically answered in the negative.

4

However, the 1st Respondent persisted in her questioning stating that they have

received information that she was subjected to an alleged sexual abuse. Anjali had

continued to deny being subject to any such treatment. Around this time, her

grandmother and her parents (2nd Petitioner and Landage Priyantha) had arrived

at the scene. After receiving the same negative answer from Anjali to the alleged

sexual abuse, the 1st Respondent stated that they need to take Anjali to the Police

Station for further questioning. The parents of the 1st Petitioner objected to sending

their daughter alone and sought to accompany her. However, the 1st Respondent

objected, stating that it was not necessary. After several pleadings and requests, the

1st Respondent agreed to allow only the girl’s grandmother to accompany her to

the Matara Police station.

At the police station, the 1st Respondent had taken Anjali inside her office to

question her alone. She claims that she was shouted at and threatened to divulge

the truth about her relationship with the said chairman of the Akuressa Pradeshiya

Sabha. Anjali had repeatedly asserted that she had no relationship with the

Chairman. She also alleges that the 1st Respondent showed inappropriate photos to

her during the questioning.

The 1st Respondent thereafter locked Anjali in a cell where she spent the night

along with another female detainee. She had not been provided with any food or

water during her overnight detention. The following morning her parents visited

her and her father (Landage Priyantha) upon finding out that his daughter had

not eaten from the previous night, brought her some snacks. Around 9. 30 am,

Anjali had been taken to the 1st Respondent’s office and she was told that serious

consequences would follow if she fails to reveal the truth. She once again denied

having any relationship with the Chairman. Thereafter, Anjali alleges that she was

forced to sign a statement the content of which was not made known to her.

Around 10 am, Anjali had been taken to the Matara General Hospital for a medical

examination. She would remain there for another 8 days, presumably on the orders

5

of the Respondent. Anjali’s parents remained at the police station with a view to

taking their daughter home once she was brought from the hospital. However, it

is stated that they were asked to leave as soon as their statements were recorded.

On 19-07-2012 Anjali was subjected to a judicial medical examination. The

medico-legal report dated 19- 07- 2012 of the said examination shows that there

were no signs of any sexual abuse or other ailment. Despite this, Anjali had been

subjected to another medical examination about 4 days later and for a third time,

2 days thereafter. At this second referral, a medical staff member informed the

Police that the girl had already been examined and that she could be discharged.

Nevertheless, Anjali had been kept in the hospital for 8 continuous days.

Throughout this period, 2 male Police officers and 1 female police officer remained

stationed in her ward.

On 22- 07 -2012, Anjali’s mother, the 2nd Petitioner lodged a complaint at the

Human Rights Commission (HRC) that her daughter was detained unlawfully by

the 1st Respondent. The HRC promptly intervened and secured the discharge of

Anjali from the hospital on 25 - 07 - 2012. Even after the discharge the girl was

first taken to the Matara Police Station and was made to wait till later that day to

go home.

In her statement of objections, the 1st Respondent takes up the position that she

visited the 1st Petitioner’s house around 7. 30 pm on 17- 02-2012 when the

parents and the grandmother were in the house. She states that she visited the

house after receiving a communication from the Inspector General of Police to

inquire into an alleged case of sexual abuse by the Chairman of the Akuressa

Pradeshiya Sabha, where, Anjali, the 1st Petitioner was the alleged victim. She states

that during the inquiry, a separate incident of sexual abuse involving one

Kusumsiri was revealed to her and that she considered it fit to further inquire into

the said incident. She decided to take Anjali to the Police station that night as they

could not finish recording the statement pertaining to the said incident allegedly

6

committed by one Kusumsiri. The 1st Respondent also alludes that Anjali’s apparent

unease at disclosing all relevant facts in front of her parents prompted her to take

the 1st Petitioner to the Police Station. She denies disallowing the parents to

accompany the girl and claims that it was she who suggested that someone should

accompany the child when the 2nd Petitioner was reluctant to accompany Anjali as

the son (brother of Anjali) was suffering from influenza. The 1st Respondent also

denies that she ill-treated the girl; that she was keeping her in a cell; did not

provide food; showed inappropriate photos and made Anjali sign a statement.

There are a number of discrepancies in the version presented by the 1st Respondent.

Although the 1st Respondent claims that she arrived at the Petitioner’s house

around 7 pm when the parents were at home, affidavits produced by two

neighbours of the Petitioners (marked “P5 (a), P5 (b)”) disclose that they saw a

Police jeep parked in front of the petitioner’s house around 4 pm on the said day.

These affidavits also affirm that the parents arrived at the house some time later

and that they were not at first allowed to enter. The allegation that the 1st

Respondent objected to parents accompanying Anjali to the Police station is also

corroborated by these affidavits. Secondly, the affidavit produced by Anjali’s

grandmother (marked “P3”) -who accompanied the girl to the police station and

was physically present at the Police station the night the detention took place—

discloses that Anjali was in fact kept in the cell overnight. Her affidavit also lends

credence to the affidavits produced by the neighbours (P5 (a) and (b)) and to the

contents in the Petition, i.e. that the 1st Respondent objected to allowing anyone

accompanying Anjali, the 1st Petitioner. Their statements refute the claims made by

the 1st Respondent in her objections and places the veracity of the Respondent’s

version at peril. Although the 1st Respondent had ample opportunity to discredit

the content of the affidavits, she had failed to present before this Court the “In and

Out” entries made on that day or the record containing details of the detainees kept

in the cell as maintained by the Reserve. Furthermore, it is to be noted that the

Respondent has not denied that the Human Rights Commission initiated an

7

investigation against her for violating the fundamental rights of the 1st Petitioner.

Her responses in the statement of objections only seek to explain the failure to

appear before the HRC.

Apart from these, there are a number of infirmities in the Respondent’s version. Of

particular interest are the reasons adduced by the 1st Respondent that prompted

her to take the 1st Petitioner to the Matara Police Station. The 1st Respondent claims

that she took the girl child to the Matara Police to record the statement as she

seemed uneasy to speak the truth before the parents. It is difficult to believe that

the 1st Petitioner who apparently showed signs of unease of speaking in front of

her parents, in her own house, in a familiar background, would behave any

differently, and particularly more forthcoming about the information in a

completely unfamiliar background as a Police station. The 1st Respondent has

further stated that it was necessary to take the girl child to the Police station as they

did not have sufficient time to finish recording the statement at the 1st Petitioner’s

house. I fail to understand how a change of location would better facilitate

recording the statement if the 1st Respondent’s concern was with regards to the

lack of time. In my opinion, taking Anjali to the Matara Police station, which was

approximately 30 kms away from her house, would have had precisely the

opposite effect. The purported reasons therefore appear wholly counter-intuitive

and unconvincing. The 1st respondent has only produced an extract of the notes

taken during the investigation at 8.15 pm on 17 – 07 – 2012. In the said extract,

it is stated that the 1st Respondent took her to the Batapola junction to inquire into

the alleged sexual abuse by the three-wheeler driver. This investigation relating

to the scene had taken place at 10 pm on the same day. The 1st Respondent has

failed to explain why there was such an urgency to take all these steps during the

remaining hours of the same day. In the absence of any such reasons, the urgency

displayed by the 1st Respondent in taking the 1st petitioner away from her home to

record a statement, and inspect the scene at such an hour appears rather unusual.

Furthermore, the notes taken by the 1st Respondent do not disclose the events that

8

transpired at the police station. The failure to produce the statements recorded and

the notes of investigation add to the infirmities in the Respondent's version.

Apart from Section 109 (6) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act no 15 of 1979,

there is no other provision under the Code that empowers a police officer making

investigations, to order the attendance of a person acquainted with the

circumstances of the case, before that officer. Even such a request has to be in

writing, under the said provision. The provisions of the Code do not in any manner

empower a police officer to restrict the liberties that are recognized and enjoyed

by the public. In terms of Article 4 of the Constitution one manner in which

Sovereignty is to be enjoyed by the people is through the fundamental rights which

are by the Constitution declared and recognized.

Paragraph (d) of Article 4 of the constitution declares “the fundamental rights

which are by the Constitution declared and recognized shall be respected, secured

and advanced by all the organs of government and shall not be abridged, restricted

or denied, save in the manner and to the extent hereinafter provided” (Emphasis

added).

Admission on the part of the 1st Respondent, that she decided to take Anjali to

the Police station that night as they could not finish recording the statement

pertaining to the said incident allegedly committed by one Kusumsiri and that it

was necessary to take the girl child to the Police station as they did not have

sufficient time to finish recording the statement at the 1st Petitioner’s house are

clear instances where the 1st Respondent had failed to respect the fundamental

rights of Anjali. If there was no time to conclude recording her statement on that

day, the 1st Respondent could easily have adjourned recording the statement for

another day. These are steps taken by the police in the course of investigations day

in and day out. Anjali was in the midst of sitting for her term test at the relevant

time. She was not only removed from her home by the 1st Respondent but also made

9

her stay at the hospital for no ostensible reason, even after a medical examination

clearing her from being subjected to a sexual assault.

On the other hand, this was not a complaint made by Anjali or her parents but by

a third party ostensibly who had no connection to Anjali’s family. The moment

Anjali and her parents denied the occurrence of any such incident, I cannot

understand the undue enthusiasm on the part of the 1st Respondent to pursue with

the investigation. The only conclusion, this court can draw is that 1st Respondent

was purely acting in order to satisfy the desires of her superiors or a third party.

Thus, the conduct of the 1st Respondent cannot be condoned by any measure and

must be frowned upon.

In contrast, I find that the version narrated by the 1st and 2nd Petitioner is

consistent, supported by the affidavits of the others, and is intrinsically more

probable. The Respondent’s version when assessed against the Petitioners’ version

impress upon us that the 1st Respondent took the girl child away from her house

not to finish recording the statement, but to coerce her to make a different

statement to that made by her at her place.

With that in mind, it is pertinent to examine whether the conduct of the 1st

Respondent amounts to a violation of Article 11, 12 (1), 13 (1) and (2).

Violation of Article 13 (1)

The 1st Petitioner claims in the Petition that the 1st Respondent subjected her to

arbitrary arrest and detention and thereby violated Article 13 (1) of the

Constitution.

Article 13 (1) of the Sri Lankan Constitution declares the rights relating to personal

liberty and criminal procedure. It reads; “No person shall be arrested except

according to procedure established by law. Any person arrested shall be informed

of the reason for his arrest.” The Article guarantees freedom from arbitrary arrest

and mandates that any deprivation of liberty should strictly follow the procedure

10

established by law. These procedural safeguards are set in place to avoid rule by

whim or caprice and to prevent the abuse of judicial process for individual gain

and for political purposes.

Was there arrest:

In the present case, there is no evidence of formal arrest by the 1st Respondent.

Facts disclose that the 1st Respondent took the 1st Petitioner to the Police station to

record a statement, detained her overnight in the cell, and made her stay in the

hospital for 8 days for a judicial medical examination. Prior to answering whether

there was a violation of the procedure, it is appropriate to first determine whether

the present circumstances amount to an ‘arrest’ within the meaning of the Article.

The procedure for Arrest is provided in section 23 (1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Code No. 15 of 1979. “In making an arrest the person making the same

shall actually touch or confine the body of the person to be arrested unless there

be a submission to the custody by word or action and shall inform the person to be

arrested of the nature of the charge or allegation upon which he is arrested.” The

explanation to this provision reads;

“Explanation. -

Keeping a person in confinement or restraint without formally arresting him or

under the colourable pretension that an arrest has not been made when to all

intents and purposes such person is in custody shall be deemed to be an arrest of

such person”

What is needed therefore is not a strictly formal legal procedure of arrest.

Restraining or subjugating somebody in a way that impedes freedom of movement

falls well within the meaning of arrest in the Code. There is no question that when

the 1st Respondent took the 1st Petitioner to the Police Station and kept her inside

the cell overnight, she arrested the 1st petitioner. Even during the period of 8 days

the 1st Petitioner spent at the hospital, she was under the custody of the 1st

11

Respondent. The apprehension of arrest is irresistible when there are 3 police

officers stationed throughout.

The question whether a deprivation of liberty would amount to an ‘arrest’ within

the meaning of Article 13 (1) only if such deprivation is for the purpose of being

dealt with under the law was raised in Namasivayam v Gunawardena (1989) 1

SLR 394. In that case, the Petitioner alleged that he was arrested by the third

respondent while he was travelling in a bus and that he was not informed of the

reason for his arrest. The 3rd Respondent denied the arrest and stated that he was

investigating into a case of robbery and had reasons to believe that the petitioner

was acquainted with the facts and circumstances relating to the robbery. He

therefore required the petitioner to accompany him to the Police Station for

questioning and released him after recording his statement at the Police station.

Sharvanada CJ, with Athukorale and H.A.G. de Silva JJ agreeing stated;

“In my view, when the 3rd Respondent required the Petitioner to accompany him

to the Police Station and took him to the Police Station, the Petitioner was in law

arrested by the 3rd Respondent. The Petitioner was prevented by the action of the

3rd Respondent from proceeding with his journey in the bus. The Petitioner was

deprived of his liberty to go where he pleased. It was not necessary that there

should have been any actual use of force; threat of force used to procure the

Petitioner's submission was sufficient. The Petitioner did not go to the Police Station

voluntarily. He was taken to the Police by the 3rd Respondent, in my view the 3rd

Respondent's action of arresting the Petitioner and not informing him the reasons

for his arrest violated the Petitioner's fundamental rights warranted by Article 13

(1) of the Constitution.” (p. 401)

Similarly, in the present case the 1st Petitioner did not go to the police station on

her own volition. She was taken to the police station by the 1st Respondent against

her and her parents’ will. If the parents did not keep agitating to accompany her,

the 1st Respondent would have taken the 1st Petitioner alone to the Police station.

12

She was detained in a cell in the police station that night and on the following day

was referred to the hospital where she would stay for 8 days. From the time she

was taken away from the custody of her parents up to the point where she was

able to return home, she was at all times under the authority of the 1st Respondent.

Accordingly, I have no hesitation in holding that the conduct of the 1st Respondent

in taking the 1st Petitioner to the Police station for the ostensible reason of

completing the statement and compelling her to stay in the hospital for 8 days

amount to an arrest.

Was the arrest carried out according to the procedure established by law?

Article 13 (1) contains a prohibition on deprivation of liberty that no person shall

be arrested. However, there is an exception, that such deprivation of liberty may

be effected "according to the procedure established by law". In Kapugeekiyanage v

Hettiarachchi and two others (1984) 2 SLR 153, it was held that the “procedure

established by law cannot mean any other than the procedure established by the

Code of Criminal Procedure Code Act No. 15 of 1979”. Section 32 (1) the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 lays down the instances in which a peace

officer may without an order from a Magistrate and without a warrant arrest any

person. The section prescribes, inter alia, that a peace officer could arrest a person

who has been concerned in any cognizable offence or against whom a reasonable

complaint has been made or credible information has been received or a

reasonable suspicion exists of his having been so concerned.

As disclosed in the statement of objections, the 1st respondent arrived at Anjali’s

house upon receiving a communication (marked “1R1”) by the IGP that the

Chairman of the Akuressa Pradeshiya Sabha allegedly has sexually abused her. The

complaint therefore was made against the said Chairman and not against the 1st

petitioner. By the 1st Respondent’s own admission, the 1st Petitioner was only the

‘alleged victim.’ Therefore, there could not have been any circumstance that

permitted the 1st Respondent to arrest her let alone detain her in the cell overnight.

13

The Constitutional jurisprudence of this country has always placed a high

premium on personal liberty. It has been our judicial opinion throughout that

“This liberty should not be interfered with, whatever the status of that individual

be, arbitrarily or without legal justification” (Justice Sharvananda in the case of

Namasivayam supra). Children, who are vulnerable to exploitation and abuse of

power, must in particular be guaranteed these safeguards. Under Article 27 (13)

of the Constitution, the State has an obligation to promote with special care the

interest of children and youth and to protect them from exploitation and

discrimination. Article 9 of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC),

which Sri Lanka ratified in 1991, states that “a child shall not be separated from

his or her parents against their will, except when competent authorities subject to

judicial review determine, in accordance with the applicable law and procedures,

that such separation is necessary for the best interest of the child”. This is

reinforced by Rule 2 of the UN Rules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of

their Liberty (General Assembly Resolution 45/113, 14 December 1990) which

states that “Deprivation of the liberty of a juvenile should be a disposition of last

resort and to the minimum necessary period and should be limited to the

exceptional cases.” Officials charged with the duty of preserving and promoting

these interests should not flout these safeguards as they please. Arrest is legal only

if it is clearly permitted by law. There is no provision in our law which allows a

police officer to arrest or take into custody a victim of an alleged offence. The

1st Respondent took the 1st Petitioner into custody to interrogate her. Whatever her

reasons for the action may have been, the 1st Respondent was not empowered by

law to detain the 1st Petitioner in a cell overnight when she was only the ‘alleged

victim’ of an offence. There was no information or grounds warranting her

detention. She was further detained in the hospital for 8 days, despite the initial

medical reports clearly indicating that there were no signs of abuse. The young girl

child was prevented from attending school, and returning to her normal life and

there is no material placed before us explaining why such deprivation of liberty

14

was necessary. Accordingly, I hold that the 1st Respondent’s actions amount to a

violation of Article 13 (1) of the Constitution.

Violation of Article 13 (2)

Article 13 (1) prohibits not only the taking into custody, but also the keeping of

persons in a state of arrest by imprisonment or other physical restraint except

according to procedure established by law. Where a person is deprived of personal

liberty without being brought before the judge of the nearest competent court

according to the procedure established by law, there is a violation of Article 13 (2)

of the Constitution.

The obligation to produce every person held in custody or otherwise deprived of

personal liberty before the judge of the nearest competent court is one that should

be carried out according to procedure established by law. The said procedure is

found in Sections 36 and 37 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act which deal

with persons arrested without a warrant.

“36. A peace officer making an arrest without warrant shall without

unnecessary delay and subject to the provisions herein contained as to bail take

or send the person arrested before a Magistrate having jurisdiction in the case.

37. Any peace officer shall not detain in custody or otherwise confine a person

arrested without a warrant for a longer period than under all the circumstances

of the case is reasonable, and such period shall not exceed twenty-four hours

exclusive of the time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to the

Magistrate”

As these statutory provisions clearly indicate, any person arrested under the

regular procedure cannot be detained for longer than 24 hours. Adhering to this

time frame is primordial as it is linked to the detainee’s corollary right to challenge

the legality of the deprivation of liberty. Article 13 (2) does not draw any

distinction between types of people held in custody. It applies with equal force to

15

everyone held in custody, detained or otherwise deprived of liberty, whether the

same person be a suspect, victim or otherwise. It is a human right that has found

expression in core international human rights instruments to which Sri Lanka is a

party; such as Article 9 (4) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political

Rights and article 37 (d) of the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Every

person, including a child whose liberty is deprived, must be allowed to claim the

benefit of the said right.

Regrettably, the 1st Petitioner to the present application was not guaranteed the

protection accorded by the said provisions of law. There is not an iota of evidence

present before us to suggest that the 1st Respondent took measures to bring the 1st

Petitioner before a Magistrate within 24 hours of the arresting. Neither has any

reasons been adduced to justify the delay in this regard. It is also a matter of high

concern that the 2nd Respondent subjected the 1st Petitioner to a medical

examination without producing her before the Magistrate. Under section 122 (2)

and 137 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 it is the Magistrate

who can make an order authorizing a medical examination. There is no evidence

that the Respondents sought an order prior to subjecting the 1st Petitioner to a

medical examination, nor have they consulted the parents or the guardian to

obtain their consent. On the contrary, I find that the 1st Respondent continued to

detain her in the hospital for 8 more days without allowing any judicial

intervention to determine the legality of such detention. In these circumstances, I

have no hesitation in holding that the 1st Respondent and the 2nd Respondent

patently violated the law by failing to produce the 1st Petitioner before a Magistrate.

The failure amounts to a violation of Article 13 (2) of the Constitution.

16

Violation of Article 11

The next issue that requires the consideration of this Court is, whether there was

a violation of the fundamental right guaranteed to the Petitioner by Article 11 of

the Constitution. Article 11 reads as follows; “No person shall be subjected to

torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment or treatment." Apart from the

Constitution, The Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or

Degrading Treatment or Punishment Act, No. 22 Of 1994 prohibits inflicting

torture or subjecting persons to cruel, inhumane and degrading treatment or

punishment. Article 37 (a) of the UN Child Rights Convention also obliges the state

parties to ensure that “a child shall not be subjected to torture or cruel, inhuman

or degrading treatment”. Apart from these, all notable international declarations

of human rights prohibit torture as well as cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment

or punishment. Article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Article 7

of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and Article 1 of the

Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or

Punishment are in similar terms.

In analysing the contours of Article 11 of the Constitution, Dr. Amerasinghe J in

his separate judgment in Silva v. Chairman, Fertilizer Corporation (1989) 2 SLR

393, observed that; "The treatment contemplated by Article 11 wasn't confined to

the realm of physical violence. It would rather embrace the sphere of the soul or

mind as well." Thus, this Court has given a broad definition of the right not to be

subjected to inhumane treatment, extending beyond physical violence into

emotional harm as well.

In the present case, the 1st Petitioner alleges that the 1st Respondent’s conduct

during the entire investigation, i.e. the act of questioning her in the presence of

neighbours about an alleged sexual relationship between the chairman of the

17

Akuressa Pradeshiya Sabha, arresting her, and keeping her in custody overnight,

amounts to a violation of Article 11.

In ascertaining whether this behaviour is in contravention of Article 11, this Court

must consider the degree of proof necessary. In Vivienne Gunawardena v. Perera

(1983) 1 SLR 305, where violations of Articles 11 and 13 (1) were alleged, Soza J.

held that a high degree of probability is required where it is alleged that the

petitioner had been subjected to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. In

Channa Peris and Other v. Attorney General and Others (1994) 1 SLR 01,

Amerasinghe J held that in considering whether Article 11 has been violated, three

general observations apply:

I. “The acts or conduct complained of must be qualitatively of a kind that a

Court may take cognizance of. Where it is not so, the Court will not

declare that Article 11 has been violated.

II. Torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment may take

many forms, psychological and physical.

III. Having regard to the nature and gravity of the issue, a high degree of

certainty is required before the balance of probability might be said to tilt

in favour of a petitioner endeavouring to discharge his burden of proving

that he was subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading

treatment.”

Further, in W. Nandasena v. U. G. Chandradasa, OIC police Station, Hiniduma &

2 others reported in 2005 [B.L.R] 104, Shirani Bandaranayake, J held that when

there is an allegation based on violation of fundamental rights guaranteed in terms

of Article 11 of the Constitution, it would be necessary for the petitioner to prove

his position by way of medical evidence and/or by way of affidavits and for such

purpose it would be essential for the petitioner to bring forward such documents

with a high degree of certainty for the purpose of discharging his burden.

18

Along with the high degree of certainty, a very high degree of maltreatment is also

required to make a finding on cruel, inhumane, degrading treatment under Article

11. As Jameel J. enunciated in Silva v. Chairman, Fertilizer Corporation (1989) 2

SLR 393 “ill-treatment per se, whether physical or mental, is not enough; a very

high degree of maltreatment is required”.

Nevertheless, this Court recognizes that what amounts to a ‘high degree of

maltreatment’ in relation to an adult does not always resonate with the mental

constitution of a minor. Therefore, when a minor complains of degrading

treatment, the Court as the upper guardian must not be quick to dismiss the claims

for failing to meet the same high threshold of maltreatment. Instead, it must

carefully consider the impact the alleged treatment may have had on the mentality

and the growth of the child. In Bandara v. Wickremasinghe (1995) 2 SLR 167

where the petitioner who was a Minor and a student of Sri Subhuthi Vidyalaya

alleged that he was assaulted during school hours by the Principal, Deputy

Principal, Vice Principal and a teacher, Kulatunga J. holding that the Respondent's

conduct was violative of the Petitioner’s rights under Article 11 stated that; “This

Court has hitherto been deciding cases of torture by police officers. However, the

victims of such torture generally belong to a different class. Here it is a student

with an unblemished record. This Court must by granting appropriate relief

reassure the petitioner that the humiliation inflicted on him has been removed, and

his dignity is restored. That would in some way guarantee his future mental health,

which is vital to his advancement in life.”

In the present application Anjali, the 1st petitioner was 14 years of age at the time

of the incident. Being a young girl who was well known among the villagers, it is

very likely that she suffered humiliation when the 1st Respondent questioned her

whether she was the victim of an alleged sexual abuse in front of the villagers.

Affidavits marked P5 (a) to (c) clearly indicate that there were several villagers

gathered around the 1st Petitioner’s house when the said questioning took place.

19

Though the 1st Petitioner emphatically denied being subjected to any abuse, it was

to no avail. In the end, despite being the ‘alleged victim’, she was taken to the Police

station in front of the said crowd. The stigma attached to cases of this nature is a

concern which the 1st Respondent ought to have factored in before deciding her

course of action. Where a school child living in a close-knit community is

concerned, an even greater sensitivity must be displayed. Regrettably, the 1st

Respondent, when she initiated the investigation in public, failed to appreciate the

effect her actions may have on the dignity of the child. She also treated the 1st

Petitioner in a degrading manner in the Police station. As corroborated by the

affidavit of the 1st Petitioner’s grandmother (marked P3), the 1st Petitioner was

made to spend the night in the cell along with another female detainee. Not only

was this act degrading, it also constitutes a violation of section 13 of the Children

and Young Persons Ordinance, which obligates the authorities to make

arrangements to prevent a child or young person from associating with an adult

(not being a relative) who is charged with any offence while detained in a police

station. The same section also requires to ensure that a girl (being a child or young

person) while so detained be under the care of a woman. The right to humane

treatment also finds expression in Article 37 (c) of the Convention on the Rights of

the Child. Article 37 (c) of the Convention provides “every child deprived of liberty

shall be treated with humanity and respect for the inherent dignity of the human

person, and in a manner which takes into account the needs of persons of his or

her age”. The positive right to humane treatment is in general also expressly

guaranteed by Article 10 (1) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political

Rights to which Sri Lanka is a party.

It is understood that the civil rights of detained persons are also applicable to

children. However, the arrested, detained or imprisoned children have additional

rights on account of their age. Article 3 (2) of Sri Lanka’s Charter on the Rights on

the Child states that “the best interest of the child shall be the primary

consideration in any matter, action or proceeding concerning a child, whether

20

undertaken by any social welfare institution, court of law, administrative authority

or any legislative body”. I am of the view that the treatment meted out to the young

petitioner of this case did not conform to these standards. The 1st Respondent does

not appear to have regarded the circumstances particular to the child, her age or

her educational and social concerns when she questioned her, arrested her and

detained her for over a week. In those circumstances, this Court while stressing

the importance of treating children with dignity, finds that the treatment meted

out to the 1st Petitioner amounts to degrading treatment within the meaning of

Article 11 of the Constitution.

The Court further observes that the conduct of the 1st Respondent in arresting and

detaining the 1st Petitioner in violation of the procedure established by law also

deprived the 1st Petitioner of her right to equal protection of the law under Article

12 (1) of the Constitution.

Liability of the Respondents

While the State is responsible for all violations of Fundamental Rights, this Court

has observed that an individual officer could be held personally liable where there

is clear evidence to this effect. To quote Sharvananda CJ. In Mariadas v Attorney

General (1983) 2 SLR 461, 469: “The relief granted is principally against the state,

although the delinquent official may also be directed to make amends and/or

suffer punishments”.

In the present case, the 1st Respondent was responsible for the 1st petitioner's

unlawful arrest and deprivation of liberty; her unjustified detention without

production before a Magistrate and subjecting her to degrading treatment.

I hold that the 1st Respondent infringed the petitioner's fundamental rights under

Articles 11, 12 (1), 13 (1) and 13 (2). The 1st Respondent being the inquiring

officer of the alleged case of sexual abuse, had a mandatory duty in terms of

section 113 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act to report the result of the

21

investigation to the Officer-in-Charge of the police station, the 2nd Respondent and

in the ordinary course of events, this court, in the absence of any contrary

material, can presume that the 2nd Respondent had the knowledge of the steps

taken by the 1st Respondent in relation to the impugned investigation. As such, I

hold that the 2nd Respondent acquiesced in and condoned the 1st Respondent’s

actions and I therefore further hold that the 2nd Respondent infringed the Petitioner

Anjali’s fundamental right under Article 12 (1) of the Constitution. The 1st

Respondent’s conduct not only infringed the fundamental rights of the Petitioner

but displayed a callous disregard for the law.

The circumstances do not warrant her being excused or exempted from personal

liability. Accordingly, I order the State to pay a sum of Rs, 50,000 (Fifty Thousand)

as compensation to the 1st Petitioner. I further order the 1st Respondent personally

to pay the 1st Petitioner a sum of Rs.100, 000 (one hundred thousand) in

instalments of Rs 25,000 within 12 months, commencing from the date of the

delivery of this judgement.

This Court also takes an opportunity to note with concern the increasing number

of incidents of abuse of power by law enforcement authorities. There is no doubt

that what is brought before Courts is a fragment of the totality of incidents taking

place across the country. In view of the pervasive practice, the Court considers this

to be an opportune moment to direct the 3rd Respondent the Inspector General of

Police to lay down guidelines to be followed by law enforcement authorities if such

guidelines are already not in place. Guidelines that are thus formulated must

reflect the legal safeguards in our law, international instruments and global best

practices. The objective is to reinforce the content of the law, clarify any obscure

areas and shed light on the rights and obligations of concerned parties. This Court

stresses that law enforcement authorities must adhere to those guidelines in

addition to the law and take every possible measure to end the abuse of power.

22

Guidelines should broadly cover the following aspects and may include any other

area which the Inspector General of Police, the 3rd Respondent deems necessary,

in furtherance of securing and advancing the rights of the public that are

recognized under the Constitution and under the law.

• Law Enforcement Officials shall respect and protect human dignity and

maintain and uphold the human rights of all persons.

• Law enforcement officials shall respect the principles of legality, necessity,

non-discrimination, proportionality and humanity.

• Law enforcement officials shall at all times protect and promote, without

discrimination, equal protection of law. All persons are equal before the law,

and are entitled, without discrimination, to equal protection of the law.

• They shall not unlawfully discriminate on the basis of race, gender, religion,

language, colour, political opinion, national origin, property, birth or other

status.

• It shall not be considered unlawful or discriminatory to enforce certain

special measures designed to address the special status and needs of women

(including pregnant women and new mothers), juveniles, the sick, the

elderly, and others requiring special treatment in accordance with

international human rights standards.

• Children are to benefit from all the human rights guarantees available to

adults. In addition, children shall be treated in a manner which promotes

their sense of dignity and worth; which facilitates their reintegration into

society; which reflects the best interests of the child; and which takes into

account the needs of a person of that age.

• Detention or imprisonment of children shall be an extreme measure of last

resort, and detention shall be for the shortest possible time.

• Children shall be detained separately from adult detainees.

23

• Detained children shall receive visits and correspondence from family

members.

• Law Enforcement Officials shall exercise due diligence to prevent,

investigate and make arrests for all acts of violence against women and

children, whether perpetrated by public officials or private persons, in the

home, in the community, or in official institutions.

• Law Enforcement Officials shall take rigorous official action to prevent the

victimization of women, and shall ensure that revictimization does not occur

as a result of the omissions of police or gender-insensitive enforcement

practices.

• Arrested or detained women shall not suffer discrimination and shall be

protected from all forms of violence or exploitation.

• Law Enforcement Officials shall not under any circumstance use Torture

and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.

• No one shall be subjected to unlawful attacks on his or her honour or

reputation.

• Law Enforcement Officials shall at all times treat victims and witnesses with

compassion and consideration.

• Law Enforcement Officials shall at all times promptly inform anyone who is

arrested of reasons for the arrest.

• Law Enforcement Officials shall maintain a proper record of every arrest

made. This record shall include: the reason for the arrest; the time of the

arrest; the time the arrested person is transferred to a place of custody; the

time of appearance before a judicial authority; the identity of involved

officers; precise information on the place of custody; and details of the

interrogation.

24

• Anyone who is arrested has the right to appear before a judicial authority

for the purpose of having the legality of his or her arrest or detention

reviewed without delay.

• Law Enforcement Officials as far as possible shall take every possible

measure to separate juveniles from adults; women from men; and non-

convicted persons from convicted persons.

• Law Enforcement Officials shall at all times ensure to obey and uphold the

law and these rules.

Application allowed

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

JUSTICE PRIYANTHA JAYAWARDENA PC

I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

JUSTICE VIJITH MALALGODA PC

I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT