SC Appeal 69/2011 JUDGMENT Page 1 of 9

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application under

and in terms of Article 154P of the

Republic of Sri Lanka read with section

09 of the High Court of the Special

Provision Act No.19 of 1990 as

amended.

Lanka Banku Sewaka Sangamaya.

(on behalf of E.A. Sugathapala)

No.20, Temple Raod,

Maradana,

Colombo 10.

APPLICANT

-VS-

People’s Bank.

Head Office,

Sir Chittampalam A Gardiner Mawatha,

Colombo 02.

RESPONDENT

AND,

SC APPEAL NO.69/2011 SC/HCCA/LA No.96/2011 NWP/HCCA/KUR/04/2010 LT. LT Chilaw Case No. LT/28/430/03.

SC Appeal 69/2011 JUDGMENT Page 2 of 9

People’s Bank.

Head Office,

Sir Chittampalam A Gardiner Mawatha,

Colombo 02.

RESPONDENT-APPELLANT

-VS-

Lanka Banku Sewaka Sangamaya.

(on behalf of E.A. Sugathapala)

No.20, Temple Raod,

Maradana,

Colombo 10.

APPLICANT-RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

Lanka Banku Sewaka Sangamaya.

(on behalf of E.A. Sugathapala)

No.20, Temple Raod,

Maradana,

Colombo 10.

APPLICANT-RESPONDENT-

PETITIONER

-VS-

People’s Bank.

Head Office,

SC Appeal 69/2011 JUDGMENT Page 3 of 9

Sir Chittampalam A Gardiner Mawatha,

Colombo 02.

RESPONDENT-APPELLANT-

RESPONDENT

BEFORE : PRASANNA JAYAWARDENA, PC, J.

L.T.B. DEHIDENIYA, J.

S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

COUNSEL : Dilip Obeysekera with Lal Perera and Sanjeewa Dissanayaka

Attorneys-at-Law for the Applicant-Respondent-Petitioner.

Manoli Jinadasa with Shehara Karunaratne Attorneys-at- Law for the

Respondent- Appellant- Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 07th March 2019.

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS : Applicant-Respondent-Appellant on 5th April 2019

and 16th of July 2011.

Respondent- Appellant-Respondent on 10th of August

2011.

DECIDED ON : 7th June 2019.

S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

The Applicant-Respondent-Petitioner, Lanka Banku Sewaka Sangamaya filed this

application in the Labour Tribunal on behalf of E.A. Sugathapala (hereinafter sometimes

referred to as Applicant- Appellant) who was attached to the Peoples’ Bank,

Respondent-Appellant-Respondent (hereinafter sometimes referred to as Respondent -

SC Appeal 69/2011 JUDGMENT Page 4 of 9

Respondent). He joined as an office assistant in 1970 and gradually rose up to the

position of Assistant Manager, Class II. During this period of 1st June 1996 to 9th May

1997, he was attached to Kalpitiya branch as an acting branch manager. During the brief

period of 11 months, he was found to have granted Temporary Overdrafts (TODs) much

higher than his limit of approval. He was immediately transferred to the Regional Office

and an independent inquiry was held, at which it was found that, he had acted in

violation of Bank Circulars and brought risk to the financial situation of the Bank, hence,

was found guilty and his services were terminated (the said investigation report was

marked as R1 and produced at the Labour Tribunal).

The Applicant-Appellant had complained to the President of Labour Tribunal against his

termination, after the inquiry, the President of Labour Tribunal held, the termination of

employment to be unjust and inequitable and awarded salary for the period that, he was

not in service, which amounts to Rs. 1,581,178/-. Being aggrieved by the said order of

the Labour Tribunal, the Respondent-Respondent appealed to the Provincial High Court

of the North Western Province, holden at Kurunegala. The Provincial High Court set

aside the order of the Labour Tribunal and determined the order of the Labour Tribunal

is wrong and allowed the appeal.

Being aggrieved by the said order of the Provincial High Court, the Applicant- Appellant

has preferred this appeal.

This Court granted leave to appeal on the following questions of law.

1. Has the High Court (civil appeal) misdirected itself in regard to the burden of

proof in the circumstances of this case?

2. Did the High Court err in its conclusion that the Labour Tribunal had failed to

properly evaluate the evidence placed before it?

SC Appeal 69/2011 JUDGMENT Page 5 of 9

Both Counsel made their submissions orally and filed written submissions and the

proceedings before the Labour Tribunal and the Provincial High Court (Civil Appeal), are

available before this Court, it is revealed that, the Applicant-Appellant was an Officer in

the rank of Class II. According to the bank circulars every officer had approval limits. As

per the bank rules and regulations, TODs could be granted only for customers who fulfil

specified criteria (marked as R6 to R13). The circular marked R6; states instructions given

to all branch managers to strictly adhere to the circular, when granting TODs.

Accordingly, said Applicant-Appellant had a limit of Rs. 100,000/- for TODs and it is for

30 days. Beyond this limit, he should get approval from his higher officials, who were in

the higher spectrum of the loan line. They were permitted in very exceptional

circumstances to grant TODs, when some of the qualifying requisites had not been

satisfied.

It is evidenced that, the said Applicant- Appellant had granted TODs much higher than

his approval limits and the said amounts were not recovered within the said limited

period of 30 days. According to the accounts submitted, he had granted more than

Rs. 30 million on TODs which were not recovered for a period more than 10 months. It is

also revealed that, said Applicant-Appellant had over-valued some properties for the

purpose of granting the said TODs.

Evidence reveals that, granting of TOD is different to a loan, permanent overdraft and

other facilities. There are several safety measures to be taken before granting each of

these facilities. It is further revealed during the trial before the Labour Tribunal that,

most of these facilities were granted to the fishermen in that area. Due to the Civil War,

these fishermen could not carry on with their fishing business. Because of this situation,

the banks were careful of the granting of loan facilities. The Applicant-Appellant not

only granted TODs beyond his approval capacity but also did not recover the money

lent within the stipulated period. Further it was found that, he had not obtained

SC Appeal 69/2011 JUDGMENT Page 6 of 9

adequate sureties and some of the surety assets were over-valued by the said

Applicant- Appellant.

The Applicant-Appellant’s defence was that, he had obtained approval from the higher

officials and that, those documents were available at the Bank. But, none of these

documents were produced at the inquiry or at the Labour Tribunal. Applicant-

Respondent-Petitioner further submitted that, the money can be recovered from the

borrowers. However, according to the Respondent-Respondent in most of the cases,

money was not recovered and it was referred to the mediation board and some were

referred for filing of cases for money recovery (R5).

Considering the 1st question of law on which the leave was granted namely, Has the

High Court (civil appeal) misdirected itself in regard to the burden of proof in the

circumstances of this case.

It will be appropriate to consider the judgment of the said President of the Labour

Tribunal. He had analysed the facts of the case and placed a burden on the Respondent-

Respondent, Bank to prove its case at a standard of proof beyond reasonable doubt.

In the case of Indrajith Rodrigo v. Central Engineering Consultancy Bureau (2009) 1

SLLR 248 at 267, Marsoof J pronounced that,

“it is trite law that the burden of proof lies upon him who affirms, not upon him

who denies as expressed in the maxim ei incdimbit probation, qui dicit, non qui

negat...”

The Learned President has a duty to consider all of the evidence placed before him and

to properly evaluate them. In the case of Ceylon Transport Board v. Gunasinghe (72

NLR 76) the Court held that,

SC Appeal 69/2011 JUDGMENT Page 7 of 9

“The duty of hearing evidence must necessarily carry with it the duty of considering

such evidence, for the duty to hear such evidence is meaningless without the duty

to consider. The present case reveals quite clearly a total omission by the tribunal

to consider the evidence which has been placed before it and it cannot be said that

the Tribunal has been acting in accordance with the duties laid down for it by

Statute.”

In Jayasuriya v. Sri Lanka State Plantation Corporation (1995) 2SLLR 379 the Court

held that,

“Due account must be taken of the evidence in relation to the issues in the matter

before the Tribunal. Otherwise, the order of the Tribunal must be set aside as being

perverse.”

Further, he had completely relied on the provisions of the Evidence Ordinance. But, as

per the Section 36 (4) of the Industrial Disputes Act No. 43 of 1950 as amended by

Section 17 of Act No.62 of 1957, provides that in the conduct of proceedings under this

Act, any Industrial Court, Labour Tribunal shall not be bound by any of the provisions of

the Evidence Ordinance.

It is well accepted fact that, the Labour Tribunal acts on just and equitable standard.

Tribunal should not set the standard of proof of any fact at a standard of beyond

reasonable doubt as expected in criminal cases. It is reasonable for the President of the

Labour Tribunal to inquire into the matter to find the truth to come to a just and

equitable decision. He is not expected to apply two different standards of proof

between the parties before him. The Learned Judge of the Provincial High Court had

analysed the judgment of the Labour Tribunal and had come to a conclusion that, the

President of the Labour Tribunal erred by requiring the Respondent to establish its case

beyond reasonable doubt.

SC Appeal 69/2011 JUDGMENT Page 8 of 9

In this regard Justice Sharvananda (as he then was) in the case of Caledonian (Ceylon)

Tea and Rubber Estate Ltd. Vs. Hillman 79 (1) NLR 421 at page 436 held that:-

“The Legislature has wisely given untrammelled discretion, to the Tribunal to decide

what is just and equitable in the circumstances of each case. Of course, this

discretion has to be exercised judicially. It will not conduce to the proper exercise of

that discretion if this court were to lay down hard and cast rules which will fetter

the exercise of the discretion, especially when the legislature has not chosen to

prescribe or delimit the area of its operations. Flexibility is essential. Circumstances

may vary in each case and the weight to be attached to any factor depends on the

context of each case”.

In C.T.B. vs. Gunasinghe (72 NLR 76 at page 83) as per Justice Weeramanthry, it was

held that,

“Proper findings of fact are a necessary basis for the exercise by Labour

Tribunal of what wide jurisdiction given to them by Statute of making such

orders as they consider to be just and equitable. Where there is no such

proper findings of fact the order that ensues would not be one which is just

and equitable upon the evidence placed before the Tribunal, for Justice and

equity cannot be administered in a particular case apart from its own

particular facts.”

Considering all available materials we find that, the Learned Judge of the Provincial High

Court has not misdirected himself in regard to the burden of proof in this case.

Considering the 2nd question of law, for the reasons stated above we find that, the

Provincial High Court had not erred in its conclusion that, the Learned President of the

SC Appeal 69/2011 JUDGMENT Page 9 of 9

Labour Tribunal has failed to evaluate the evidence placed before it and Provincial High

Court had properly evaluated the evidence placed before it.

Considering all, we are of the view that, the decision of the Provincial High Court is

correct. Accordingly, we dismiss the appeal and affirm the decision of the Provincial

High Court (Civil Appeal) dated 11th February 2011. We make no order for cost.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

PRASANNA JAYAWARDENA, PC, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

L.T.B. DEHIDENIYA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT