1

In the matter of an appeal under and in terms

of Section 5 (c) of the High Court of the

Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of

1990 as amended by Act No.54 of 2006.

P. R. Michael Gunaratne,

67, Hospital Road,

Ratnapura

(deceased)

PLAINTIFF

1(a) Omanthage Malkanthi Fernando,

22/28, Hospital Road

Ratnapura.

1(b) Pathberiya Ranasinghege Kasun

Irosha Ranasinghe,

1(c) Pathberiya Ranasinghege Kavidu

Ashan Ranasinghe,

SUBSTITUTED PLAINTIFFS

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

SC / APPEAL / 83 / 2013

SC / HCCA / LA / 113 / 2013

High Court (Civil Appeal)

SP / HCCA / RAT / 81 / 2010 [F]

DC Ratnapura 19229/Possessory

2

Vs.

Delkadura Danapala Mudiyanselage

Sarathchandra Bandara,

17, Hospital Road

Ratnapura.

DEFENDANT

AND

1(a) Omanthage Malkanthi Fernando,

22/28, Hospital Road

Ratnapura.

1(b) Pathberiya Ranasinghege Kasun

Irosha Ranasinghe,

1(c) Pathberiya Ranasinghege Kavidu

Ashan Ranasinghe,

SUBSTITUTED PLAINTIFFS

APPELLANT

Vs.

3

Delkadura Danapala Mudiyanselage

Sarathchandra Bandara,

17, Hospital Road

Ratnapura.

DEFENDANT RESPONDENT

AND NOW

Delkadura Danapala Mudiyanselage

Sarathchandra Bandara,

17, Hospital Road

Ratnapura.

DEFENDANT RESPONDENT -

APPELLANT

Vs.

1(a) Omanthage Malkanthi Fernando,

22/28, Hospital Road

Ratnapura.

1(b) Pathberiya Ranasinghege Kasun

Irosha Ranasinghe,

4

1(c) Pathberiya Ranasinghege Kavidu

Ashan Ranasinghe,

SUBSTITUTED PLAINTIFFS

APPELLANTS RESPONDENTS

BEFORE : Priyantha Jayawardena PC. J,

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J &

Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J

COUNSEL : Chathura Galhena with Dhareni

Weerasinghe for the Defendant

Respondent Appellant.

Anuruddha Dharmaratne with Indika

Jayaweera for the Substituted Plaintiff

Appellant Respondents.

ARGUED ON : 17/05/2022

DECIDED ON : 29/02/2024

5

A. H. M. D. Nawaz, J.

1. The quintessential issue that arises in this case is whether a possessory

action would afford a remedy when a Plaintiff was only disturbed but not

ousted from the land in his occupation. When this matter came up for

argument, both Counsel proceeded to condense the pith and substance of

their rival contentions in the following question of law.

Did the Civil Appellate High Court err in law by holding that a possessory

action can be filed in law if the Plaintiff is not physically dispossessed

and/or ousted from the corpus?

2. The judgements of the District Court of Ratnapura and the Civil Appellate

High Court of Ratnapura which are in contra distinction to each other have

both reached different conclusions on identical facts that were established

in the case.

3. It becomes important to ascertain the proved facts in this case for the

purpose of answering the question of law that has been formulated as above.

The original Plaintiff who has since been substituted by the substituted

Plaintiff Appellant Respondents (the substituted Plaintiffs) instituted this

action seeking a declaration that the Defendant Respondent Appellant

(the Defendant) disturbed their peaceful possession of improvements that

they had made to the land as depicted and described in two survey plans

given in the schedule to the amended plaint. The substituted Plaintiffs also

prayed for ejectment of the Defendant and those who were holding under

him from the said portion of land described in the schedule to the amended

plaint. As the original Plaintiff had passed away during the pendency of this

6

action in the District Court of Ratnapura, the 1 (a) to 1 (c) substituted

Plaintiffs stepped into his shoes and prosecuted the said action through their

amended plaint dated 27.06.2007. The original answer of the Defendant did

not even contain a prayer but it is an amended answer filed seven months

afterwards that contained a prayer for a dismissal of the plaint. It appears

that even this amended answer was rejected by Court. However, it bears

repeating that the Defendant failed to describe in his abortive pleadings by

way of a schedule, the land he allegedly possessed.

4. The substituted Plaintiffs took out a commission to survey the corpus in

dispute and the parties agreed to abide by the survey plan prepared by a

commissioned surveyor called Prasanna Rodrigo bearing no.2007/61 and

dated 5 June 2007. At the trial it was only the substituted 1 (a) Plaintiff

namely the widow of the original Plaintiff and the commissioned surveyor

who gave evidence to buttress the case of the Plaintiffs and it has to be noted

that the Defendant did not elect to give evidence or call evidence or mark

any documents.

5. After trial the learned District Judge of Ratnapura dismissed the action of the

substituted Plaintiffs. On appeal to the Civil Appellate High Court the High

Court Judges allowed the appeal of the Plaintiffs and set aside the judgment

of the District Court holding in favor of the substituted Plaintiffs in the end.

It is against the judgment of the Civil Appellate High Court dated 13.02.2013

that the Defendant Respondent Appellant has preferred this appeal to

this Court.

6. As the above summary of facts and chronology indicates, the action filed by

the substituted Plaintiff Respondents displays the elements of a possessory

7

action and the evidence given by the 1 (a) substituted Plaintiff namely

Malkanthi Fernando shows that the Defendant had disturbed the possession

of the Plaintiffs by obstructing the further improvement of the land

undertaken by them but the fact remains that the Plaintiffs were not

physically dispossessed or ousted. The evidence of Malkanthi Fernando [1

(a) substituted Plaintiff] is quite unequivocally unambiguous that the

original Plaintiff and the substituted Plaintiffs were obstructed in their

peaceful enjoyment of possession of the buildings and improvements in their

control and custody but there is irrefragable evidence that there was no

ouster of the Plaintiffs from the land they occupied. Confronted with these

established facts, the learned District Judge of Ratnapura by his judgment

dated 24.06.2010 dismissed the plaint of the Plaintiffs solely on the ground

that the Plaintiffs had not proved the requirement of dispossession an

ingredient that the learned District Judge classified as an indispensable

component of Section 4 of the Prescription Ordinance.

7. When the substituted Plaintiffs took the matter on appeal to the Civil

Appellate High Court of Ratnapura, the learned High Court Judges set aside

the judgement of the court a quo and declared that the proved facts in the

case do support the view that the obstruction of the Plaintiffs by the

Defendant in their peaceful possession and enjoyment of the improvements

and further development thereof would come within the statutory

requirement of dispossession.

8. Mr. Chathura Galhena the learned Counsel for the Defendant Respondent

Appellant strenuously argued that Section 4 of the Prescription Ordinance

entails the proof of dispossession and restoration of possession upon proof

of such dispossession and thus in such a situation the Plaintiffs in this case

8

could not maintain an action for a possessory remedy because they were not

physically dispossessed. It was the argument of the learned Counsel that the

use of the words dispossession and restoration of possession in Section

4 of the Prescription Ordinance is indicative of the fact that the Plaintiffs in

this case must prove their ouster by the Defendant and such an element of

proof is absent from the facts and circumstances of this case.

9. Admittedly there is ample evidence upon the pleadings and testimony

offered in the case that the Defendant did not physically defenestrate the

Plaintiffs from the land in their occupation. There was though an illegal entry

with the view to obstructing the Plaintiffs and preventing them from further

constructing the improvements that they had already been making from

time to time and according to the argument of the learned Counsel for the

Defendant, these established facts would not lend themselves to a finding of

dispossession. It was the contention of the learned Counsel for the Defendant

that the word dispossession in Section 4 required a literal interpretation and

thus only an overt act of ouster would afford the foundation for a possessory

remedy.

10. On the other hand, Mr. Anuruddha Dharmaratne the learned Counsel for the

substituted Plaintiff Appellant Respondents argued that even

disturbance or obstruction to possession would in appropriate

circumstances amount to dispossession and this has been the cursus curiae

in cases such as Perera v. Wijesuriya (1957) 59 NLR 529.

11. I must observe at the outset that the curial interpretation that has been

placed on Section 4 of the Prescription Ordinance has not been exclusively

confined to the literal words of the statutory provision. The fact that Roman-

9

Dutch law principles have been imported into the law of Sri Lanka pertaining

to possessory remedies is traceable to the very words of Section 4 itself. It

behoves us in such circumstances to recall that development vis--vis

Section 4 of the Prescription Ordinance.

Analysis of the statutory provision introducing possessory remedies

into the law of Sri Lanka.

Section 4 of the Prescription Ordinance

12. The substantive law governing the availability of possessory relief in respect

of immovable property is embodied in Section 4 of the Prescription

Ordinance No.22 of 1871. According to the Section;

It shall be lawful for any person who shall have been dispossessed of any

immovable property otherwise than by process of law, to institute

proceedings against the person dispossessing him at any time within one

year of such dispossession. And on proof of such dispossession within one

year before action brought, the Plaintiff in such action shall be entitled

to a decree against the Defendant, for the restoration of such possession

without proof of title.

Provided that nothing contained shall be held to affect to the other

requirements of the law, as respects possessory cases.

13. Upon a reading of the above provision it becomes clear that the principles

regulating the grant of a possessory remedy are not confined to the very

words of the statutory provision. The proviso to Section 4 makes it clear that

the relevant Roman - Dutch common law principles will continue to be

10

applicable by virtue of the proviso. In order to arrive at the right decision on

the interpretation contended for by both Counsel, a brief analysis of the

common law possessory interdicts which form the fulcrum of Section 4 of

the Prescription Ordinance is warranted.

Roman and Roman - Dutch law possessory interdicts

14. The three principal Roman law interdicts were the uti possidetis, utrubi and

unde vi. The uti possidetis apply to immovable property when there was

disturbance without actual deprivation of possession. The remedy was

available to the actual possessor in order to ensure the retention of property

except when possession had been acquired vi clam vel precario in which

event the remedy was available to the other.

15. Similarly, the interdict utrubi applied when there was disturbance of

possession of movable property. Acquisition of possession nec vi nec clamnec

precario was a requirement of this remedy and the procedure was the same

as that for the interdict uti possidetis.

16. The unde vi was the only interdict available for the recovery of possession

when dispossession was effected by the use of force. It applied not only to

land but also be quaeque ibi habuit.

17. Analogous remedies were available to a possessor in the Roman - Dutch law.

The mandament van maintenue resembles the interdict uti possidetis, and the

mandament van complainte and the mandament van spolie were similar to

the interdict unde vi of the Roman law.

11

18. Disturbance of possession was protected by the mandament van maintenue.

The applicant for such a relief had to give a concise account of his possession

and of the disturbance caused by the other party. Proof of positive

disturbance was not essential as the remedy was granted even in the case of

apprehended disturbance. The mandament van complainte applied to both

disturbance and dispossession of property. The applicant had to prove that

he possessed the property:

a) ut dominus ;

b) quietly and peaceably ;

c) for a year and a day ; and

d) that the ouster or disturbance took place within the year in which

the action was instituted.

19. As the above indicates, the proceeding to obtain possession is termed a

mandament, or writ of immission (mandament van immissie), which is

scarcely ever used except in the case when one co-heir is ousted of his

possession by another.

20. The instant action filed by the Plaintiffs to retain quiet possession would

come within the Roman - Dutch law remedy of a mandament van maintenue.

To found this writ, a possession obtained neither secretly, nor by force, nor

on condition of quitting on first notice, is necessary on the part of the

applicant.

21. Thus, a common law interdict to protect possession from disturbance has

always been available and upon an examination of both the substantive

provision of Section 4 and its proviso, it is manifest that the ambit of Section

4 of the Prescription Ordinance is sufficiently wide to include within its

12

scope the different categories of possessors and varying situations dealt with

in the common law. It has been customary for our Courts to refer continually

and to apply the Roman - Dutch law requirements via the proviso. It is in

these circumstances that Basnayake, CJ in Perera v Wijesuriya (supra)

clearly stated that the word dispossession in Section 4 could also be

treated as embracing disturbance of possession as well - see Rowell

Appuhamy v. Moises Appu (1899) 4 NLR 225; Contra Pattirigey Carlina

Hamy v. Mugegodagey Charles De Silva (1883) 5 S.C.C 140.

22. It is interesting to note that the tenor of the long line of judgements in Sri

Lanka is in favour of an extended scope of applicability for this provisional

remedy. This would suffice to dispose of the argument of the Counsel for the

Defendant that the requirement of dispossession had not been proved

because there had been no physical eviction from the land. In order to

succeed in a possessory action, there is no such requirement to establish

deprivation of possession at all times. It is sufficient if disturbance of

possession is proved.

23. In Edirisuriya v Edirisuriya (1975) 78 N.L.R.388 the Counsel for the

Defendant had made the same argument as his counterpart in this case -

namely the requirement of dispossession had not been proved because there

had been no physical eviction from the land. Justice Vythialingam, however,

rightly pointed out that the need to establish deprivation of possession

would be satisfied if the possessor was deprived from exercising his right of

possession. This interpretation of the term dispossession may be traced to

Perera v. Wijesuriya (supra) which case was cited with approval by

Vythialimgam J.

13

24. I must say that dispossession may be by force or by not allowing the

possessor to use at his discretion what he possesses whether it is done by

sowing, or ploughing or by building or repairing something or by doing

anything at all by which they do not leave the free possession of the person

who was dispossessed.

25. As Vythialingam J. held in Edirisuriya v Edirisuriya (supra) (with

Samerawickrame A.C.J. and Walpita J. agreeing)

The essence of the possessory action lies in unlawful dispossession

committed against the will of the plaintiff and neither force or fraud is

necessary. Dispossession may be by force or by not allowing the

possessor to use at his discretion what he possesses.

26. Moreover, dicta from cases like Changarapillai v. Chelliah (1902) 5 N.L.R.

270 and Sameem v. Dep (1954) 55 N.L.R 523 which stressed the policy

considerations underlying this remedy, are also worth taking cognizance of.

27. Thus, the Courts have inclined towards a wider applicability of this remedy

by adopting a liberal interpretation of the word dispossession and the

overarching consideration appears to be the need to prevent a breach of the

peace by the use of self-help. Consistently, this provisional remedy in terms

of section 4 of the Prescription Ordinance should be assured of a wide scope

of applicability. Moreover, by its very nature, this is a tentative remedy

which does not in any way prejudice the Defendants right to bring a rei

vindicatio on proof of title.

14

28. As I have demonstrated, the difference between the judgments of the District

Court and the Civil Appellate High Court has revolved around the word

dispossession and the error of the court a quo has been the failure to

equiparate dispossession on the one hand, and disturbance of possession on

the other hand, and treating them separately. For purposes of Section 4 of

the Prescription Ordinance, both these acts would fall within the term

dispossession in appropriate circumstances.

29. I answer the question of law in the negative and proceed to set aside the

judgment of the District Court dated 24.06.2010 and affirm the judgment of

the Civil Appellate High Court dated 13.02.2013. The appeal of the Defendant

Respondent Appellant is thus dismissed.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Priyantha Jayawardena, PC. J

I agree, Judge of the Supreme Court

K. Kumudini Wickremasinghe. J

I agree, Judge of the Supreme Court