SC Appeal No. 41/2016 JUDGMENT Page 1 of 11

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for Special

Leave to Appeal from the Judgment of the

High Court of Gampaha and exercising

Criminal (Appellate) Jurisdiction in case No.

32/14 on 24.11.2014

Officer-in-Charge,

Kirindiwela Police Station,

Kirindiwela.

PLAINTIFF

Vs.

Rupassara Pedige Shamal Indunil

Ruapassara,

No. 92, Happitiya,

Wathurugama.

ACCUSED

AND BETWEEN

Rupassara Pedige Shamal Indunil

Ruapassara,

Case No. S.C. Appeal No. 41/2016

S.C. (S.P.L.) L.A. No. 02/2015

High Court of Gampaha Case No.

32/14

MC Pugoda Case No. 10620

SC Appeal No. 41/2016 JUDGMENT Page 2 of 11

No. 92, Happitiya,

Wathurugama.

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

1. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney-Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

2. Officer-in-Charge,

Kirindiwela Police Station,

Kirindiwela.

PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENTS

AND NOW BETWEEN

Rupassara Pedige Shamal Indunil

Ruapassara,

No. 92, Happitiya,

Wathurugama.

ACCUSED-APPELLANT-APPELLANT

Vs.

1. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney-Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

SC Appeal No. 41/2016 JUDGMENT Page 3 of 11

BEFORE: JAYANTHA JAYASURIYA, PC, CJ.

S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J. AND

A. L. SHIRAN GOONERATNE, J.

COUNSEL: Chula Bandara with W. V. S. B. Gunawardhana instructed by S. Lakshika

Samarakoon for the Accused-Appellant-Appellant.

Induni Punchihewa, SC for the Attorney-General.

WRITTEN

SUBMISSIONS:

1st and 2nd Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent on 23rd March 2018

Accused-Appellant-Appellant on 27th September 2022 and 10th July

2023.

ARGUED ON: 06th September 2024.

DECIDED ON: 20th November 2024.

2. Officer-in-Charge,

Kirindiwela Police Station,

Kirindiwela.

PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT-

RESPONDENTS

SC Appeal No. 41/2016 JUDGMENT Page 4 of 11

THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

1. The background to this case arises from the conviction of the Appellant, one Rupassara

Pedige Shamal Indunil Ruapassara (hereinafter referred to as the Appellant), in the

Magistrate Court of Pugoda by judgment dated 28th June 2013 on two counts: first, the

offence of housebreaking and theft punishable under sections 443 and 396 of the Penal

Code and, second, retention of stolen property punishable under section 394 of the

Penal Code.

2. The Appellant preferred an appeal to the High Court of Gampaha, and by judgment

dated 24th November 2014, the learned High Court Judge acquitted the Appellant of

the 1st count but upheld the conviction of the Appellant on the 2nd count. Subsequently,

by petition dated 5th January 2015, the Appellant prayed for special leave to appeal

before this Court. On 26th February 2016, this Court granted special leave to appeal on

the following question of law set forth in Paragraph 16(d) of the petition:

Did [the] Judgments of the Learned Provincial High Court Judge of Gampaha and

the Additional Magistrate of Purged erred [sic] in law by failing to take into

consideration that the alleged statement made by the Appellant to the Police,

marked 4 is dated 24.06.2010 which is long before the Appellants arrest?

3. The factual matrix underlying the Appellants preliminary convictions pronounced by

the learned Additional Magistrate commences with a complaint received by the

Kiridiwela Police Station from one E. M. H. Kumara Dissanayake (PW01), the virtual-

complainant, on 04th December 2009 which subsequently led to the Appellants arrest

by an Officer-in-Charge attached to the Kirindiwela Police Station, IP Lionel Senanayake

(PW05) on 04th July 2010.

SC Appeal No. 41/2016 JUDGMENT Page 5 of 11

4. A statement1 by the Appellant was recorded by a Police Constable, subsequent to which

certain jewellery items, and later, a mobile phone, were discovered in the Appellants

residence.

5. The Appellant contests the authenticity of 4 on two grounds. First, the Appellant

categorically denies having made such a statement. Second, the Appellant seeks to cast

doubt on the legitimacy of 4, citing a discrepancy in dates: the statement is dated 24th

June 2010, whereas the Appellants arrest occurred on 4th July 2010. This temporal gap,

the Appellant argues, raises a question as to why the arrest did not follow promptly after

the recording of such a statement.

6. Before analysing the merits of the Appellants case, it is pertinent to trace the trial, the

evidence led and the findings of, firstly, the learned Additional Magistrate and,

subsequently, those of the learned High Court Judge.

7. In the trial before the Magistrate Court, the Appellant pleaded not guilty to the charges,

and the following witnesses were called on behalf of the prosecution: the Complainant

(PW01), wife of PW01, IP Pathmina Illangakoon (PW02), AAN Kamal Adhikari (PW03)

Investigating Officer IP Shaminda Perera (PW04), and the Arresting Officer (PW05).

8. PW05, in giving evidence, categorically stated the following: a complaint was received

from PW01 in respect of a housebreaking and theft in December 2009, and subsequent

to investigations, the Appellant was arrested on 4th July 2010. He further stated that, the

Appellants statement was recorded by one P.C. 39184 Sirisena. Subsequent to the

recording of such statement, certain jewellery items and eventually a mobile phone were

found in the possession of the Appellant, more specifically in his residence, and

produced to the respective police station.

1 Marked 4.

SC Appeal No. 41/2016 JUDGMENT Page 6 of 11

9. Thereafter, the Appellant was identified in the dock, the stolen items, too were identified,

and the relevant portion of the Appellants statement, admissible under s27 of the

Evidence Ordinance, was marked as 4.

10. It is evident upon perusal of the cross-examination of PW05, that the dates pertaining

to the arrest, recording of the statement, or the authenticity of such statement, were not

questioned or challenged by the defence. In fact, the Appellant did not even raise a

challenge or present a denial to the fact that the statement was recorded.

11. Accordingly, the Learned Additional Magistrate, finding the Appellant guilty on both

counts, pronounced a sentence of 8 months imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 1,000/-

(failing to pay which would result in an additional month of imprisonment) for the 1st

count and, further, a term of 1 year imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 1500/- (failing to pay

which would result in additional two months of imprisonment).

12. When the Appellant preferred an appeal to the High Court of Gampaha, the learned

High Court Judge, by judgment dated 24th November 2014, acquitted the Appellant of

the 1st count but upheld the conviction of the Appellant on the 2nd count. In the

judgment, the learned High Court Judge draws attention to the well-known

presumption codified in s114(a) of the Evidence Ordinance, which reads as follows:

114. The court may presume the existence of any fact which it thinks likely to have

happened, regard being had to the common course of natural events, human

conduct, and public and private business in their relation to the facts of the particular

case.

The Court may presume:

SC Appeal No. 41/2016 JUDGMENT Page 7 of 11

(a) that a man who is in possession of stolen goods soon after the theft is

either the thief or has received the goods knowing them to be stolen, unless

he can account for his possession;.

13. The learned High Court Judge reasons that, in failing to adduce evidence to reasonably

explain how the goods that form the subject of the theft came to be in his possession,

the Appellant has failed to rebut the evidence of the prosecution to prove that he did

not commit the offences he is accused of, namely the offence of retaining stolen

property under s394 of the Penal Code.

14. The learned High. Court Judge considered, amongst other considerations, the fact that

the prosecution had led the evidence of the virtual complainant, the officers who

investigated the complaint and closed the case. When the defence was called, the

Appellant neither gave evidence nor called any witnesses to offer an explanation as to

his possession of the stolen articles. Accordingly, the learned High Court Judge took the

view that, in the absence of such explanation, a presumption against the Appellant has

been raised, and was not successfully rebutted.

15. The Appellant disputes the operation of the above presumption on the basis that the

statement, 4, upon which the stolen goods were recovered, is dated prior to his arrest

and, further, as a result, further raises doubts as to why his arrest did not occur earlier.

16. The written submissions of the 1st and 2nd Plaintiff-Respondents-Respondents

(hereinafter referred to as the Respondents) dated 23rd March 2018 reiterate the

narration of events presented in the evidence of PW05; the Appellant was arrested on

04th July 2010 following a complaint, and a statement was recorded on the same day

soon after the Appellants arrest.

SC Appeal No. 41/2016 JUDGMENT Page 8 of 11

17. It is hardly a revelation that the Respondents clarify the discrepancy in the date to be a

clerical oversight, which is supported by the submission of the relevant excerpt from the

Original Information Book.2 R3, of which 4 is a reproduction, clearly reflects the

recorded date as 04th July 2010. In addition, the Respondents have submitted an

affidavit3 confirming this fact by PW05. The Appellant objects to the submission of both

R3 and R4 in his additional written submissions dated 10th July 2023 on the basis that a

party to an action is not permitted to submit any new documents not previously

presented to a lower court, and the Respondents submission of the extract and affidavit

thus place the Appellant in a position of disadvantage by not affording him an

opportunity to examine and cross-examine this particular evidence.

18. Having established the relevant facts, my task now is to analyse them and render an

opinion. While the issue before this Court is elementary and arguably requires minimal

deliberation, it remains the duty of this Court to consider earnestly any grievances

alleging a violation of rights or an error in law. However, it is evident from the

circumstances of this case that the Appellant seeks to exploit a mere clerical error in an

attempt to evade the legal consequences of his actions. Although such an oversight is

regrettable and warrants disapproval, it does not afford the accused a basis to

circumvent accountability for his unlawful conduct.

19. When this case was heard before the Magistrate Court, the Appellant elected to remain

silent on the belief that the prosecution had failed to prove the charges against him

beyond reasonable doubt. This includes the failure to cross-examine or raise a challenge

to the evidence of PW 05 pertaining to dates with respect to the Appellants arrest or

recording of his statement.

2 Marked R3. 3 Marked R4.

SC Appeal No. 41/2016 JUDGMENT Page 9 of 11

20. Further, the Respondents have satisfied to this Court that at the instance evidence

relating to the date of arrest and recording of the statement was tendered, the Original

Information Book was available to the perusal of the learned Magistrate and the defence

in open court. In such instance, the Appellant cannot credibly contend that the

Respondents are precluded from submitting documents which merely confirm the

unchallenged evidence that the Appellant, was, in fact, arrested on 04th July 2010, and

his statement was recorded thereafter a minuscule typographical inconsistency in the

nature presented in this case is not, in my view, a material error capable of extinguishing

the strength of the evidence posed against the Appellant in establishing his guilt.

21. For the purposes of completeness, I will briefly deal with the Appellants challenge to

the application of s114 of the Evidence Ordinance. It is trite law that a man in possession

of stolen goods following the theft raises the presumption that he is the thief or received

the goods knowing them to be stolen unless he can account for his possession. The

Appellant, when presented the opportunity in the Magistrate Court, did not present any

evidence to offer an explanation to his possession nor did he dispute the evidence of

the prosecution and therefore failed to rebut such a presumption. I am inclined to agree,

as a result, with the Respondents position, and the subsequent opinions of the Learned

Additional Magistrate and Judge of the High Court, that the case against the Appellant

has been proved upon sufficient, adequate and uncontradictory evidence,

notwithstanding the discrepancy in the dating of the Appellants recorded statement

arising from a mere typographical mistake common in the act of manual data entry.

22. The Respondents have cited a line of authorities in the written submissions dated 23rd

March 2018 in support of the position that evidence not challenged in cross-

examination can be considered to be an undisputed fact and, in given circumstances,

can lead to an inference of admission of that fact.

SC Appeal No. 41/2016 JUDGMENT Page 10 of 11

23. In the Court of Appeal judgment, P.V. Hemalatha Kulasiri v Republic of Sri Lanka,4

His Lordship Sisira De Abrew J opined:

In my view, when an item of evidence is led in a criminal trial through a reliable

witness and the opportunity to challenge such an item of evidence is not availed of

by the opposing party it is justifiable to conclude that he does not do so for the reason

that, if challenged, it would be unfavourable to the opposing party.

24. His Lordship Sisira De Abrew J cites the Indian judicial decision in Sarwan Singh v State

of Punjab5 in support of his reasoning, in which the Supreme Court held that:

It is a rule of essential justice that whenever the opponent has declined to avail

himself of the opportunity to put his case in cross-examination it must follow that

the evidence tendered on that issue ought to be accepted.

25. Likewise, the Appellants failure, or rather, election to fail to challenge the evidence of

the prosecution renders the belated complaint of the Appellant only upon appeal to be

futile; this Court cannot assist an accused whose silence at the trial stage has been

correctly interpreted to infer an admittance by the accused of the evidence presented

against him. Manifestly, even in a situation where the erroneously dated recorded

statement was not presented, the Learned Additional Magistrate and learned Judge of

the High Court would still be correct in their respective findings that the charges against

the Appellant on the second count have been proven beyond reasonable doubt by the

prosecution.

26. In agreement with such findings, I conclude that there is no merit to the Appellants

case, and accordingly dismiss the appeal.

4 CA Minutes dated 01st October 2007. 5 AIR 2022 SC 3652.

SC Appeal No. 41/2016 JUDGMENT Page 11 of 11

27. The learned Magistrate is directed to implement the sentence as ordered by the High

Court of Gampaha.

Appeal Dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

JAYANTHA JAYASURIYA, PC, CJ.

I agree.

CHIEF JUSTICE

A. L. SHIRAN GOONERATNE, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT