1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for Special

Leave to Appeal in terms of Article 128 of

the Constitution of the Republic of Sri Lanka

1. Wijesiri Gunawardane

No. 122/05, Indipokunagoda, Tangalle.

1st Respondent-Respondent-Petitioner-

Petitioner-Appellant

2. Lanka Deepani Muthukumarana

No. 129, Beliatta Road, Tangalle.

2nd Respondent-Respondent-Petitioner-

Petitioner-Appellant

3. Mahanama Dissanayakalage

Sumanalatha

No. 117/23, Beliatta Road, Tangalle.

5th Respondent-Respondent-Petitioner-

Petitioner-Appellant

Vs.

1. Chandrasena Muthukumarana

(deceased)

Pearlin Hotel, Tangalle.

4th Respondent-Appellant-Respondent-

Respondent-Respondent

SC Appeal No. 111/2015 with

SC Appeal No. 113/2015 and

SC Appeal No. 114/2015

2

1A. Asith Nimantha Muthukumarana

No. 127, Beliatta Road, Tangalle.

Substituted 4A Respondent-Appellant-

Respondent-Respondent-Respondent

2. Officer-in-Charge

Police Station, Tangalle.

Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent-

Respondent- Respondent

3. Palliyaguruge Nandasiri

No. 122/1, Indipokunagoda, Tangalle.

3rd Respondent-Respondent-Petitioner-

Respondent- Respondent

4. Urban Council, Tangalle.

Added 6th Respondent-Respondent-

Respondent- Respondent

5. Hon. Attorney-General

Attorney-General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

Added 7th Respondent-Respondent-

Respondent- Respondent

Parties of:

(SC Appeal No. 111/2015

SC/ (SPL) LA. No. 190/14

CA (PHC) APN No. 107/09

Provincial High Court of Hambantota Case No. HCA/13/2008

MC Tangalle Case No. 63486)

3

Muththettuwagama-Athiralalage

Jayarathna

No 27/2, 3rd Lane, Rathmalana.

Accused-Appellant-Petitioner-

Petitioner-Appellant

Vs.

1. Officer in Charge

Special Crimes Investigations Unit,

Mount Lavinia.

2. Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondents-Respondents-

Respondents-Respondents

Parties of:

(SC Appeal No. 113/2015

SC/ (SPL) LA. No. 185/14

CA (PHC) APN No. 185/2010

Provincial High Court of Colombo Case No. MCA/123/2009

MC Mount Lavinia Case No. 39758)

4

Dr. (Mrs.) Ama Weeratunga

No. 368/18, Pipeline Road,

Thalangama North.

Virtual Complainant-Petitioner-

Petitioner-Appellant

Vs.

Sepala Ekanayake

No. 369B, Pipeline Road,

Thalangama North.

Accused-Appellant-Respondent-

Respondent-Respondent

1. Officer in Charge

Police Station, Thalangama.

2. The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondents-Respondents-

Respondents-Respondents

Parties of: (SC Appeal No. 114/2015

SC/ (SPL) LA. No. 178/14

CA (PHC) APN. No. 204/2006)

Provincial High Court of Avissawella Case No. 69/2005

MC Kaduwela Case No. 36421)

5

Before: Buwaneka Aluwihare, PC. J.

Vijith K. Malalgoda, PC. J.

L.T.B. Dehideniya, J.

Counsel: Niranjan de Silva with Kalhara Gunawardena for the 1st, 2nd and 5th Respondent-Respondent-Petitioner-Petitioner-Appellants in SC Appeal 111/2015. Saliya Peiris PC with Lisitha Sachintha for the substituted 4A Respondent-Appellant-Respondent-Respondent-Respondent in SC Appeal 111/2015. Amila Palliyage with Eranda Sinharage for the Accused-Appellant-Petitioner-Petitioner-Appellant in SC Appeal 113/2015. Anil Silva PC with Dhanaraja Samarakoon for the virtual complainant-Petitioner-Petitioner-Appellant in SC Appeal 114/2015. Amila Palliyage with Eranda Sinharage for the Accused-Appellant-Respondent-Respondent-Respondent in SC Appeal 114/2015. Rohantha Abeysuriya Senior DSG for the Attorney General. Argued on:

04.07.2018 Decided on:

27.05.2020

6

JUDGEMENT

Aluwihare PC. J.,

Introduction

1. The Petitioner-Appellants (hereinafter referred to as “Appellants”) have come before

this court challenging an order made by the Court of Appeal on 02.09.2014 upholding

a preliminary objection which resulted in the refusal of their Revision applications.

2. At the outset of the hearing of this matter, the learned counsel representing the

respective parties agreed to abide by a single judgement in all three appeals.

TheaIssue

3. The Court granted special leave to appeal on the following question of law;

“Having failed to exercise the right to file an appeal in terms of Section 9

of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990

as amended, could a person invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court

of Appeal referred to in Article 138 of the Constitution of the Republic of

Sri Lanka in order to canvass a decision made by a Provincial High Court

exercising its appellate powers?”

4. The question which this Court is invited to answer is as above. For the purposes of

this judgment, it would not be necessary to narrate all the facts antecedent to the

question. Suffice it to say, that the Appellants have filed revision applications in the

Court of Appeal against judgments made by the High Courts of the respective

Provinces, whereupon the applications were dismissed in limine on the basis that the

Court of Appeal is not vested with revisionary jurisdiction over judgments and orders

made by the High Court in-the-exercise-of-its-appellate-powers.

5. The question of law elaborated above, inquires whether Section 9 of the High Court

of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990, (hereinafter also referred to

as “the Act”) could result in ousting the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal

7

in respect of orders, judgments and sentences given by a Provincial High Court in the

exercise of its appellate jurisdiction.

6. Section 9 of the said Act reads;

“Subject to the provisions of this Act or any other law, any person aggrieved by,

(a) a final order, judgment, decree or sentence of a High Court established by Article

154P of the Constitution in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction vested in it by

paragraph (3)(b) of Article 154P of the Constitution or Section 3 of this Act or any

other law, in any matter or proceeding whether civil or criminal which involves a

substantial question of law, may appeal therefrom to the Supreme Court if the High

Court grants leave to appeal to the Supreme Court ex mero motu or at the instance of

any aggrieved party to such matter or proceedings.”

(b) a final order, judgment or sentence of a High Court established by Article 154P of

the Constitution in the exercise of its jurisdiction conferred on it by paragraph (3)(a),

or (4) of Article 154P of the Constitution may appeal therefrom to the Court of

Appeal.” (emphasis added)

7. For the reasons set out in this judgement the said question of law is answered as

follows; Section 9 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19

of 1990 as amended, does not oust the Revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal

in respect of decisions made by a Provincial High Court exercising its appellate

powers. Therefore, the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal referred to in

Article 138 of the Constitution of the Republic of Sri Lanka can be invoked in order

to canvass a decision made by a Provincial High Court exercising its appellate powers.

The Reasoning

8. The crux of the Respondent’s argument is that by virtue of Section 9 of the High Court

of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990, the Court of Appeal has no

‘appellate’ powers over matters where the High Court has exercised ‘its appellate’

powers. It was the contention on behalf of the Respondents, that Section 9 of the said

8

Act has vested that power in the Supreme Court, thereby completely ousting the

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal in respect of such matters. They contend that the

specific use of the term ‘appeal’ in Section 9 of the Act, indicates that the legislature

only intended to vest appellate jurisdiction with the Supreme Court in respect of such

matters where the High Court has exercised its appellate powers, and not revisionary

jurisdiction.

9. They seek to fortify this contention by referring to Article 138 of the Constitution

which uses the term ‘subject to any law’. Accordingly, their contention is that under

Section 9, there is only one recourse, which is the right of appeal to the Supreme

Court; if a litigant fails to utilize the provision, they cannot seek to circumvent the

procedure by resorting to a revisionary step. The Respondents have cited the cases

Merchant Bank of Sri Lanka v. Wijewardena S.C. Appeal 81/2010 [2010 BLR 233]

and Australanka Exporters Private Ltd v. Indian Bank (2001) 2 SLR 156 in support of

the said contention. Both these cases had dealt with the issues pertaining to appeals

arising out of matters where the Provincial High Court had exercised its original

jurisdiction, whereas the case before us raises issues with regard to its appellate

jurisdiction. Therefore, I am of the opinion that these decisions do-not-have-a-direct-

bearing-on-the-matter-at-hand.

10. The above argument is firstly premised on the assumption that the revisionary

jurisdiction and the appellate jurisdiction are one and the same. It is only if the former

is a subset of the latter, could the taking away of the appellate power results in

automatically suspending the revisionary powers. However, historically, it has been

the opinion of our Courts that the revisionary jurisdiction is distinct from appellate

jurisdiction. One basic distinction would be that while the appellate rights are

statutory, the exercise of revisionary power is discretionary. Although revisionary

jurisdiction shares characteristics with the appellate jurisdiction, they are not one and

the same.

9

11. In Mariam Beebee v. Seyed Mohamed (1965) 68 NLR 36 at page 38, the Supreme

Court observed that, “The power of revision is an extraordinary power which is quite

independent of and distinct from the appellate jurisdiction of this Court. Its object is

the due administration of justice and the correction of errors, sometimes committed

by this Court itself, in order to avoid miscarriages of justice. It is exercised in some

cases by a Judge of his own motion, when an aggrieved person who may not be a

party to the action brings to his notice the fact that, unless the power is exercised,

injustice will result.” This was later approved by a Divisional Bench in Somawathie

v. Madawela (1983) 2 SLR 15 and in Gunarathna v. Thambinayagam (1993) 2 SLR

355.

12. Furthermore, time to time, Courts in Sri Lanka have observed that an appellant could

invoke the revisionary jurisdiction even when there is a right of appeal available

(vide Attorney General v. Podisingho (1950) 51 NLR 385) and when there is no right

of appeal available (vide Sunil Chandra Kumar v. Veloo (2001) 3 SLR 91) or when

the said right of appeal has been exercised (vide K. A. Potman v. Inspector of Police,

Dodangoda (1971)74 NLR 115). This in itself is sufficient evidence to sustain the

claim that appellate jurisdiction and revisionary jurisdiction are two distinct

jurisdictions.

13. Article 154P(3)(b) of the Constitution which confers appellate powers on the High

Court of the Provinces itself makes separate reference to the term ‘Appellate and

Revisionary jurisdiction’. Accordingly, there can be no confusion that appellate and

revisionary-powers-are-two-distinct-powers.

14. Where this is the case, i.e. that the appellate and revisionary jurisdiction are two

separate jurisdictions, the next question that needs to be answered is whether the

removal of one jurisdiction could result in the negation of the other? Or, in the

context of the present appeal, whether the ‘express provision of the right of appeal

ousts the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal’. Here again I observe that

historically our Courts have considered these two jurisdictions to be complementary

10

to each other and not necessarily antagonistic. This is amply demonstrated by the

tendency of the Courts to allow revisionary applications irrespective of the right of

appeal.

15. In Podisingho (supra) at page 390, the Supreme Court observed that “the powers of

revision of the Supreme Court (under the Courts Ordinance) are wide enough to

embrace a case where an appeal lay but was not taken”. In Potman (supra) at page

115, it was stated that “although the Supreme Court would be extremely hesitant

and cautious before it makes any order in revision which is contrary to an order

which it has already made upon appeal, relief would be granted in a case of an

obvious error of fact based on an all important item of evidence not having been

brought to the notice of Court at the hearing of the appeal”. In Veloo (supra) at

pages 102 and 103, the Court stated that “Revision is a discretionary remedy, it is

not available as of right. This power that flows from Art. 138 is exercised by the

Court of Appeal, on application made by a party aggrieved or ex mero motu, this

power is available even where there is no right of appeal.”

16. Thus, it is clear that the existence of right of appeal does not uniformly and blanketly

result in undermining the revisionary jurisdiction. The right of appeal, is no doubt,

a determining factor which the Court takes into account when considering a

revisionary application. However, having recourse to an appeal does not ipso facto

act as an ouster of the revisionary jurisdiction. On the contrary, it is the Court’s

prerogative to decide, at its discretion, to refuse a revisionary application where it

appears that the existence of a parallel right of appeal does not give rise to an

exceptional circumstance. Thus, where these jurisdictions are separate but

complementary to each other, a negation or the express provision of right of appeal

doesanotaresultainaousting-the-revisionary-jurisdiction.

17. I pause at this point to emphasize that the above construction must not be confused

as a pronouncement giving untrammeled and unfettered revisionary jurisdiction to

the Court of Appeal. The Appellants in their written submissions have sought to

11

argue to this effect. They have cited Atapattu v. People’s Bank (1997) 1 SLR 208,

where Justice Mark Fernando prudently observed that an ouster clause in an

ordinary law will not prevail over the Constitutional provision conferring writ

jurisdiction on the Superior Court. However, I am of the view that the position

enunciated in that case cannot be blindly applied to the case at hand as, unlike Article

140, Article 138 expressly refers to the words “subject to the provisions of any law”.

18. The said Article 138 of the Constitution reads;

“138. (1) The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise subject to the provisions of the

Constitution or of any law, an appellate jurisdiction for the correction of all errors in

fact or in law which shall be [committed by the High Court, in the exercise of its

appellate or original jurisdiction or by any Court of First Instance], tribunal or other

institution and sole and exclusive cognizance, by way of appeal, revision and restitutio

in integrum, of all causes, suits, actions, prosecutions, matters and things [of which

such High Court, Court of First Instance] tribunal or other institution may have taken

cognizance.” (emphasis added)

19. In this regard I tend to agree with the decision in Weragama v. Eksath Lanka Wathu

Kamkaru Samithiya (1994)1 SLR 293, where it was held (at page 299) that “the

Jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal under Article 138 is not an entrenched

jurisdiction, because Article 138 provides that it is subject to the provisions "of any

law"; hence it was always constitutionally permissible for that jurisdiction to be

reduced or transferred by ordinary law…” I also observe that this distinction

between Article 140 and Article 138 was appreciated by Justice Mark Fernando in

Atapattu (supra) where his Lordship stated that “Where the Constitution

contemplated that its provisions may be restricted by the provisions of Article 138

which is subject to "any law" (at page 223).

20. However, an attendant concern that arises at this point is whether the phrase

“subject to the provisions of any law” in Article 138 must be interpreted to mean

‘express provisions’ or whether even an implied ouster could fall within the said

12

words. The answer to this question is as much about Constitutional interpretation-

as-it-is-about-the-nature-of-the-revisionary-jurisdiction.

21. At the outset, it must be borne in mind that the Revisionary Jurisdiction of the Court

of Appeal is a Constitutional mandate. Its genesis lies in Article 138 of the

Constitution. There is no question that the Constitution is the supreme law of the

land (vide In re reference under Article 125(1) for the Constitution (2008) BLR 160

SC). In those circumstances, any ouster or restriction of a Court’s jurisdiction which

is founded on the Constitution, in so far as it is permitted under the Constitution,

must be made in express language. In Re the Nineteenth Amendment to the

Constitution (2002) 3 SLR 85, a bench of 7 judges unequivocally opined that “This

manifests a cardinal rule that applies to the interpretation of a Constitution, that

there can be no implied amendment of any provision of the Constitution” (at page

110). Therefore, it is only right and befitting that this Court insists that every

provision which restricts or modifies a Court’s Constitutional mandate are express

and are set out in no uncertain terms.

22. In the context of all the peripheral questions that I have inquired into above, I

proceed to examine whether, as contended by the Respondent, Section 9 of the High

Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990 could result in ousting

the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal in respect of orders, judgments

and sentences given by a Provincial High Court in the exercise of its appellate

jurisdiction.

23. It is clear that Section 9 of Act No. 19 of 1990 follows the scheme of Article 154P of

the Constitution. It stipulates the appeals in respect of final orders, judgments or

sentence decided under Article 154P(3)(a) and 154P(4) must be directed to the

Court of Appeal, while appeals in respect of final orders, judgments or sentences

decided under Article 154P(3)(b) must be directed to the Supreme Court.

13

24. I-also-wish-to-draw-attention-to-Section-11-of-the-said-Act-which-reads;

“(1) The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise, subject to the provisions of this Act

or any other law, an appellate jurisdiction for the correction of all errors in fact or in

law which shall be committed by any High Court established by Article 154P of the

Constitution in the exercise of its jurisdiction under paragraph (3)(a), or (4) of Article

154P of the Constitution and sole and exclusive cognizance by way of appeal, revision

and restitution interim of all causes, suits, actions, prosecutions, matters and things

of which such High Court may have taken cognizance: Provided that, no judgment,

decree or order of any such High Court, shall be reversed or varied on account of any

error, defect, or irregularity which has not prejudiced the substantial rights of the

parties or occasioned a failure of justice.” (emphasis added)

25. Section 11 in my opinion is an elaboration of Section 9(b) of the same Act, by virtue

of which right of appeal in respect of orders, judgments and sentences given in the

Provincial High Court’s original jurisdiction is vested in the Court of Appeal.

26. The contention of the Respondents is that Section 9 of the Act read together with

Section 11 of the same Act, rules out the Court of Appeal’s revisionary powers in

respect of decisions arrived under Article 154P(3)(b); i.e. orders, judgments and

sentences given in the exercise of Provincial High Court’s appellate jurisdiction. To

put it simply, they argue that there can only be an appeal from an instance where

theaHighaCourt-has-exercised-appellate-jurisdiction.

27. Respondents further argue that the Court of Appeal’s revisionary powers are

specifically referred to in Section 11 of the Act, which limits itself to an order,

judgment or sentence given by the Provincial High Court pursuant to Article

154P(3)(a) and (4), exercising its original jurisdiction. They submit that the absence

of any reference to Article 154P(3)(b) in Section 11, is illustrative of the legislative

intent to oust the Court of Appeal’s revisionary jurisdiction with regard to Provincial

High Court’s appellate jurisdiction.

14

28. The strength of this argument depends on the maxim expressio unius est exclusio

alterius which means that the express mention of one thing implies the exclusion of

another. However, it is my considered opinion that this maxim does not have absolute

universal application. It is no doubt a widely used aid of interpretation. Nevertheless,

as observed in Somawathie v. Madawela and others (1983) 2 SLR 15 at page 29,

quoting Colquhoun v. Brooks (1888) 21 QBD 52, 65, “It is often a valuable servant,

but a dangerous master to follow in the construction of statutes or documents. The

exclusio is often the result of inadvertence or accident, and the maxim ought not to

be applied when its application, having regard to the subject matter to which it is to

be-applied,-leads-to-inconsistency-or-injustice.”

29. Particularly in relation to the revisionary jurisdiction, which exists to remedy

miscarriage of justice, greater care must be exercised when employing the maxim.

As I observed earlier, the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal is a

Constitutional mandate which, undoubtedly is subject to the provision of statutory

law. Nevertheless, owing to its genesis in the Constitution, any restriction or

modification which the Legislature seeks to introduce must be introduced by way of

express wording. The omission to refer to ‘revisionary jurisdiction’ in Section 9 of

Act No. 19 of 1990 cannot be taken as reducing the Court of Appeal’s plenitude of

powers under Article 138. Nothing less than an express removal of these powers

would be required to achieve such a result.

30. This is particularly because the revisionary jurisdiction, unlike the appellate

jurisdiction, does not depend on a parallel statutory right. It is well established in our

law that an appellant cannot prefer an appeal against an order, judgment or sentence

unless there is a ‘right’ created by statute. As Justice Jameel stated in Martin v.

Wijewardena (1989) 2 SLR 409, at page 419, “Article 138 is only an enabling Article

and it confers the jurisdiction to hear and determine appeals to the Court of Appeal.

The right to avail of or to take advantage of the jurisdiction is governed by several

15

statutory provisions in various legislative enactments.” An appeal could only result

pursuant to the intersection of a forum jurisdiction and right of appeal.

31. In contrast, the Revisionary Jurisdiction is a remedy which lies at the discretion of

the court. It does not require a concomitant right in this regard. There only needs to

be provision conferring the forum jurisdiction. Revision is a discretionary remedy; it

is not available as of right. This power that flows from Article 138 of the Constitution

is exercised by the Court of Appeal, on application made by a party aggrieved or ex

mero motu, this power is available even where there is no right of appeal.

32. The Court of Appeal has on a previous occasion specifically dismissed an attempt to

restrict the revisionary jurisdiction to a corresponding statutory right. It was

observed “The Petitioner in a Revision application only seeks the indulgence of Court

to remedy a miscarriage of justice. He does not assert it as a right. Revision is available

unless it is restricted by the Constitution or any other law” (vide Veloo (supra) at

page 103). Although the Supreme Court is not bound by the said decision, I see no

reason to disagree with the principle enunciated there. In my opinion, if the

revisionary jurisdiction was also to be subject to a statutory right there would not be

any difference between the two jurisdictions.

33. Since the revisionary jurisdiction is not dependent on a concomitant statutory right,

I fail to observe how the maxim expressio unius est exclusio alterius could be applied

to the present circumstances. If historically, a Court needed only the forum

jurisdiction to take cognizance of a revisionary application, the assertion that the

provision of only the right of appeal in Section 9 and the failure to mention ‘revision’

in the same Section, ousts the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal, cannot

be sustained. Indeed, there was never an ‘omission’ in the first place.

34. I must not be miscomprehended as advocating an unfettered conferment of

revisionary jurisdiction on the Court of Appeal. For reasons adumbrated above, such

a construction extending unfettered revisionary jurisdiction cannot stand, in view of

16

the clear reference to ‘subject to the provisions of any law’ in Article 138 of the

Constitution. However, the only way in which the restriction or an ouster could be

introduced in this regard, is by way of an ‘express removal’ of the same and not by

resorting to purported or implied omissions. In fact, the Legislature where it intended

to oust the revisionary jurisdiction has expressed the same in unequivocal terms.

35. This is gleaned from Section 37 of the Arbitration Act No. 11 of 1995;

“(1) Subject to subsection (2) of this Section, no appeal or revision shall lie in respect

of any order, judgment or decree of the High Court in the exercise of its jurisdiction

under this Act except from an order, judgment or decree of the High Court under this

Part of this Act.”

Section 13 of the Transfer of Offenders Act No. 5 of 1995;

“The sentence of imprisonment imposed in any specified country upon any offender

who is a citizen of Sri Lanka shall not be subject to any appeal or revision in any court

in Sri Lanka, notwithstanding the fact that the order, decision or judgment imposing

such sentence is deemed to be an order, decision or judgment imposed by a court of

competent jurisdiction in Sri Lanka.”

36. Therefore, I hold that Section 9 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special

Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990 as amended, does not oust the Revisionary Jurisdiction

of the Court of Appeal in respect of decisions made by a Provincial High Court

exercising its appellate powers.

37. At the hearing, the counsel for the Respondents drew our attention to many

pragmatic complications that could arise with such a construction. As observed by

the Court in Gunaratne v. Thambinayagam (1993) 2 SLR 355 at page 361, “if the

multiplicity of litigation in this sphere is felt to be an anomaly, it is a matter for the

legislature” to resolve by way of amendment. This Court cannot, in the guise of

interpretation, usurp the legislative function to give effect to what many would

17

believe a more desirable outcome. Such concerns must be resolved by resorting to

the democratic process of the country.

38. In those circumstances, I answer the question of law in the affirmative.

Appeals allowed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

JUSTICE VIJITH K. MALALGODA PC.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

JUSTICE L.T.B. DEHIDENIYA

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT