==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the maƩer of an appeal under and in terms of SecƟon 31DD of the Industrial Disputes Act, as amended, read together with SecƟon 9 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990, as amended. SC Appeal No. 46/2020 SC Spl LA ApplicaƟon No. 311/2018 High Court of Colombo Case No.

WP/HCALT/COL/27/2017 Labour Tribunal Case No. 33/970/2011

Arangalage Sandya Damayanthi, No. 189, Madelgamuwa, Gampaha.

APPLICANT

vs.

1. Arpico Homes Ltd 2. Richard Peiris & Company PLC Both of No. 310, High Level Road, Nawinna, Maharagama.

RESPONDENTS

And between

1. Arpico Homes Ltd 2. Richard Peiris & Company PLC Both of No. 310, High Level Road, Nawinna, Maharagama.

RESPONDENTS – APPELLANTS

2

vs. Arangalage Sandya Damayanthi, No. 189, Madelgamuwa, Gampaha. APPLICANT – RESPONDENT

And now between 1. Arpico Homes Ltd 2. Richard Peiris & Company PLC Both of No. 310, High Level Road, Nawinna, Maharagama.

RESPONDENTS – APPELLANTS – APPELLANTS

vs. Arangalage Sandya Damayanthi, No. 189, Madelgamuwa, Gampaha. APPLICANT – RESPONDENT – RESPONDENT Before: Vijith K. Malalgoda, PC, J Achala Wengappuli, J Arjuna Obeyesekere, J Counsel: Faisz Musthapha, PC with Keerthi Tillekeratne for the Respondents – Appellants – Appellants

Viran Fernando for the Applicant – Respondent – Respondent Argued on: 25th October 2022 WriƩen Tendered on behalf of the Respondents – Appellants – Appellants on Submissions: 13th June 2020

Tendered on behalf of the Applicant – Respondent – Respondent on 4th August 2020 Decided on: 28th May 2024

3

Obeyesekere, J

The 2nd Respondent – Appellant – Appellant [the 2nd Respondent] is a public listed

company. The 1st Respondent – Appellant – Appellant [the 1st Respondent]

[collecƟvely, the Respondents] is a subsidiary of the 2nd Respondent. By leƩer dated

13th February 2006 [R1] signed by the Chief ExecuƟve Oﬃcer of the 2nd Respondent,

the Applicant – Respondent – Respondent [the Applicant] was appointed as a Legal

Oﬃcer of RPC Homes (Pvt) Ltd [the predecessor of the 1st Respondent], with eﬀect

from 6th March 2006. The Applicant was assigned to the Legal and Secretarial Division

of the 2nd Respondent on 1st June 2007, where she was required to report to her

immediate superior oﬃcer, that being the Head of the Legal and Secretarial Division

[Head/LSD].

First show cause leƩer and suspension of the services of the Applicant

On 13th August 2009, the Applicant was served with a show cause leƩer [R2] containing

six charges, numbered as 1(a), (b), (c), 2(a), (b) and 3, alleging inter alia that the

Applicant had failed to aƩend to the duƟes entrusted to her by the Head/LSD and that

the conduct of the Applicant had undermined the authority of the Head/LSD. The

Applicant had responded to R2 by her leƩer dated 28th August 2009 [R3] denying the

allegaƟons contained therein. The explanaƟon in R3 having been rejected, the services

of the Applicant were suspended with half pay by leƩer dated 7th September 2009 [R4].

Clause 15 of R1

There are two clauses in the Contract of Employment R1 that are the focus of the

quesƟon of law that needs to be determined in this appeal, and hence I shall refer to

them at the outset. The ﬁrst is Clause 15(a), which reads as follows:

“You shall serve the company exclusively, faithfully and diligently and shall obey,

observe and perform all lawful direcƟons, whether wriƩen or oral, that may be

given to you from Ɵme to Ɵme on behalf of the company.” [emphasis added]

The second is Clause 15(c), which provides as follows:

4

“You shall not either directly or indirectly, engage or be concerned in any other

employment or in any advisory capacity or otherwise or in any commercial or

business pursuit or undertaking, corporate, private or otherwise, in any form or

capacity whatsoever either in your own name as principal or agent or otherwise

save and except the business concern or concerns of Richard Peiris & Company

Limited and its subsidiaries or associate Companies although investment in shares

quoted in the open market shall not be deemed as contravening the

aforemenƟoned condiƟons.” [emphasis added]

The second show cause leƩer

Having suspended the services of the Applicant, the 2nd Respondent had issued an

amended show cause leƩer on 17th November 2009 [R5], containing the following

addiƟonal charges numbered as 4(a) and (b), 5(1), 5(2)(a) and (b), and 6:

“4(a) You have in violaƟon of Clause No. 15 of your leƩer of appointment dated

13th February 2006 engaged in private Notarial pracƟce during the

subsistence of your contract of employment in this company and uƟlised

your duty hours and working Ɵme in order to make a monetary gain to

yourself.

4(b) By engaging in private Notarial pracƟce whilst in employment of this

company, you have abused faciliƟes provided to you by the company for

oﬃcial purposes by uƟlising them for your personal beneﬁt to engage in

private Notarial pracƟce and to derive an income therefrom.

5(1) You have engaged in the aforemenƟoned improprieƟes as an AƩorney-at-

Law and Notary Public and also in the capacity of Legal Oﬃcer of the

Company and acted to the prejudice and detriment of the Management by

devoƟng your working hours to engage in private work for your personal

beneﬁt.

5(2) You have acted to the detriment of the Company both as to its credibility

and image and further aƩempted to cause ﬁnancial loss by commiƫng the

following acts of misconduct:

5

(a) You have acted rashly and negligently by your improper performance

of duƟes with regard to your failure to register the Mortgage Bond

bearing No. 585 dated 1st March 2009 aƩested by you and thereby

acted to the detriment of the Management.

(b) You have also failed and neglected to hand over the Supplementary

Agreement – RPC Polymers (Pvt) Limited dated 20th August 2009,

aƩested by you, despite the undertaking given by you to hand over a

copy to the Board of Investment of Sri Lanka and thereby acted to the

prejudice of the Management.

6 As an AƩorney-at-Law holding a pivotal post of trust and conﬁdence cum

loyalty and ﬁdelity you have acted in an inconsistent and unbecoming

manner thereby forfeiƟng the trust and conﬁdence reposed in you.”

Charge Nos. 4 and 5(1) arise from Clauses 15(a) and (c) of R1 and can be summarised

as follows:

(a) The Applicant had engaged in a notarial pracƟce in violaƟon of Clauses 15(a) and

(c) of her contract of employment [Charge No. 4(a)];

(b) Such notarial pracƟce had been carried out during duty hours [Charge Nos. 4(a)

and 5(1)];

(c) In the process, the Applicant had abused the faciliƟes provided to her by the 2nd

Respondent [Charge No. 4(b)];

(d) The Applicant has made a monetary gain [Charge No. 4(a)], derived an income

[Charge No. 4(b)] and beneﬁƩed personally [Charge No. 5(1)] by engaging in such

notarial pracƟce. I must state that although diﬀerent terminology has been used,

the allegaƟon was that the Applicant had derived an income by engaging in a

notarial pracƟce outside of her employment with the Respondents;

(e) The conduct of the Applicant is detrimental to the interests of the Respondents

[Charge No. 5(1)].

6

These charges too were denied by the Applicant by her response dated 27th November

2009 [R6]. A domesƟc inquiry was accordingly conducted on the charges referred to in

R2 and R5.

TerminaƟon of the services of the Applicant By leƩer dated 30th August 2010 [R7], the Applicant was informed by the 2nd

Respondent that:

(a) The Inquiry Oﬃcer has found her guilty of Charge Nos. 1(a),(c) and 3 in R2, and

Charge Nos. 4(a), 5(2)(a) and (b) and 6 introduced by R5;

(b) She had “forfeited the trust and conﬁdence reposed in you which is the pivotal

foundaƟon of the contract of your employment.”;

(c) Her services are being terminated with eﬀect from the date of her suspension,

having “considered not only the seriousness of your conduct but also the standing

and reputaƟon of the company and the fact that you held a highly responsible

post involving trust, conﬁdence, loyalty and ﬁdelity.”

The report of the Inquiry Oﬃcer was not made available to the Applicant, nor tendered

in evidence at the Labour Tribunal. Although the ﬁndings of the Inquiry Oﬃcer were

contradictory to one another and is a maƩer that I would refer to later, it must be noted

that being exonerated of Charge Nos. 4(b) and 5(1) meant that the allegaƟons that, (a)

the Applicant carried out a notarial pracƟce during oﬃce hours, (b) she abused the

faciliƟes granted by the Respondent, (c) she gained monetarily, and (d) her conduct

was detrimental to the interests of the Respondents, had not been proved before the

Inquiry Oﬃcer.

Labour Tribunal and the High Court

Aggrieved by the terminaƟon of her services, the Applicant ﬁled an applicaƟon in the

Labour Tribunal in terms of SecƟon 31B of the Industrial Disputes Act, alleging that the

said terminaƟon of her services was unfair, unreasonable and disproporƟonate. The

answer of the Respondents having been ﬁled, the Respondents led the evidence of six

witnesses, while the Applicant gave evidence on her behalf and led the evidence of

one other witness. At the conclusion of the inquiry, the Respondents informed the

7

Labour Tribunal that they would not pursue Charge Nos. 1 – 3 but instead limit their

case against the Applicant to Charge Nos. 4(a) and (b), 5(1) and 5(2) arising from R5,

even though the Applicant had not been found guilty of Charge Nos. 4(b) and 5(1) by

the Inquiry Oﬃcer.

Having carefully evaluated the evidence, the Labour Tribunal by its Order delivered on

24th July 2017 found that the terminaƟon of the services of the Applicant was

unjusƟﬁed, and ordered that a sum of Rs. 900,000 amounƟng to four months’ salary

for each year of service or part thereof, be paid to the Applicant as compensaƟon. The

appeal lodged by the Respondents to the Provincial High Court of the Western Province

holden in Colombo [the High Court] was dismissed by the High Court by its judgment

delivered on 1st August 2018.

QuesƟon of law

DissaƟsﬁed with the judgment of the High Court, the Respondents sought and

obtained from this Court special leave to appeal on the following quesƟon of law:

“Did the Labour Tribunal and the High Court err in law by failing to appreciate

that the Applicant violated the express condiƟons sƟpulated in her leƩer of

appointment and had acted in breach of her contract of employment which

jusƟﬁed terminaƟon?”

There are three maƩers that I must menƟon at this stage.

The ﬁrst is that although Charge No. 6 related to a loss of conﬁdence and ﬁdelity, and

the leƩer of terminaƟon had stated that the Respondents had lost conﬁdence in the

Applicant and formed part of the reasons for the terminaƟon of the services of the

Applicant, the Respondents had not pursued this maƩer either before the Labour

Tribunal or the High Court. Furthermore, even though the Respondents sought special

leave to appeal on eight quesƟons of law, none of those related to the terminaƟon

possibly being jusƟﬁed on the basis that the Respondents had lost conﬁdence in the

Applicant.

8

The second is that the above quesƟon of law relates only to one aspect of Charge No.

4(a), namely that the Applicant had acted in violaƟon of Clauses 15(a) and (c) by

engaging in a private notarial pracƟce.

The third is that in terms of Clauses 15(a) and (c), during her employment with the 2nd

Respondent, the Applicant could not work for anyone else, either directly or indirectly,

or be engaged in any business or pursuit, private or otherwise in any form or capacity,

whatsoever. The language used to explain the intenƟon of the Respondents could not

have been clearer than this. To do so would be to act in violaƟon of the contract of

employment. Subject to certain reservaƟons to which I shall advert to later in this

judgment, both the Labour Tribunal and the High Court have concluded that the

Applicant had acted in breach of Clauses 15(a) and (c) of her contract of employment

by engaging in a private notarial pracƟce. Thus, the scope of the above quesƟon of law

can be narrowed down to a consideraƟon of the circumstances in which the Applicant

is said to have breached Clauses 15(a) and (c) of her contract of employment, and

whether the terminaƟon of her services was jusƟﬁed in such circumstances.

Background to the issuance of the ﬁrst charge sheet R2

Mr. Viran Fernando, the learned Counsel for the Applicant, submiƩed that the issuance

of the two charge sheets R2 and R5 were actuated by malice and for that reason the

background circumstances that culminated in R2 and R5 are relevant in determining

whether the terminaƟon of the services of the Applicant was jusƟﬁed.

On 2nd June 2009, just two months prior to the issuance of the ﬁrst charge sheet, there

had been a verbal altercaƟon between the Applicant and the Head/LSD. The Applicant

had reported this incident to the Chief OperaƟng Oﬃcer of the 2nd Respondent through

the Group Human Resources Oﬃcer by an internal memorandum dated 4th June 2009

[A79], which reads as follows:

“I refer to the discussion I had with you on the evening of Tuesday 2nd June 2009

and my subsequent reminder made on 3rd June 2009 in this regard.

I reported for work around 8.30 am on Tuesday 2nd June 2009. Around 9.45 am I

leŌ the Secretarial Department and was unable to keep [the Head/LSD] informed

9

of my leaving the oﬃce room as she was not in her seat at the Ɵme. I was however

remaining within the Company premises.

I returned to my seat around 10.15 am and noƟced that there was a missed call

on my mobile from the [the Head/LSD]. The ﬁrst quesƟon she asked me was

‘where were you?’ Instead of giving me a chance to talk and listen to my

explanaƟon, she started scolding, insulƟng and cursing me, raising her voice while

criƟcising my day-to-day work and self discipline which ﬁnally turned out to be a

very personal and vicious aƩack on me. I too was compelled to raise my voice. She

used many degrading words and conƟnued her scathing aƩack against me for

about an hour. I eventually kept silent.

As a result of this unpleasant incident menƟoned above, I am undergoing mental

agony and trauma and personal embarrassment as a result of the unprofessional

and unbecoming behaviour of [the Head/LSD] which was not only witnessed by

Ms. Champa who was seated in the room but was also heard across Commercial,

Accounts and the Treasury Divisions of the Company as well.”

On the same day, the Head/LSD issued a memorandum to the Applicant, with copy to

the Group Human Resources Oﬃcer [R27], alleging that the Applicant had failed to

aƩend to certain duƟes entrusted to her, and requested that a copy of the said leƩer

be placed in the personal ﬁle of the Applicant. Mr. Fernando submiƩed that unƟl this

incident on 2nd June 2009, there had been no complaints with regard to the work of

the Applicant, either by the Head/LSD or by any other person within the Respondents.

While the Applicant had denied the contents of R27 by a memorandum dated 15th June

2009 [A80], she had assured the Management that, “I will aƩend to any other work

assigned to me” and “will do my best for the company in the future, too.” Such

assurances do not seem to have calmed the waters, so to say, for the Head/LSD by a

further memorandum dated 7th August 2009 [A81] controverted the contents of A80,

made several other allegaƟons, and concluded as follows:

“In the circumstances, it is quite clear you have failed to comply with my advice

and instrucƟons given to you in my memo of 4th June 2009 which has to be dealt

with severely. I wish to bring the above to the noƟce of the Head of Group HR for

him to take appropriate acƟon.”

10

Although the contents of A81 were replied to by the Applicant’s memorandum dated

9th August 2009 [A82], it appears that the damage had already been done, as the ﬁrst

show cause leƩer R2, incorporaƟng the incidents of insubordinaƟon and derelicƟon of

duty complained of by the Head/LSD in R27 and A81, was issued by the Head, Group

Human Resources of the 2nd Respondent on 13th August 2009. This was followed by the

leƩer of suspension R4 on 7th September 2009.

Mr. Fernando drew the aƩenƟon of this Court to a legal opinion dated 27th June 2011,

tendered by an external Counsel of the 2nd Respondent [A75] while the inquiry before

the Labour Tribunal was proceeding. Mr. Fernando submiƩed that A75 conﬁrms the

allegaƟon made by the Applicant that the issuance of the show cause noƟces and the

charge sheets were done in bad faith. While it is only an internal document, I must

refer to it as, as correctly submiƩed by Mr. Fernando, it gives context to his submission

that the Respondents acted in bad faith.

The relevant parts of A75 read as follows:

“This case comes up for inquiry on 5th July 2011. I need not emphasise to you the

importance of this case which if not handled diplomaƟcally would boomerang on

the company and the Chairman himself.

In this case, we have hardly a leg to stand on. The inquiry oﬃcer who held the

disciplinary inquiry has adverted to the fact that Sandya Damayanthi is the

vicƟm of a vendeƩa arising out of a personal feud.

Should the disciplinary proceedings including the inquiry oﬃcer’s report [be]

summoned by the applicant Sandya Damayanthi, or the Inquiring Oﬃcer is called

upon to give evidence the management would be in an embarrassing posiƟon

where its enƟre bona ﬁdes and credibility would stand impugned.” [emphasis

added]

A75 probably explains why the Respondents did not provide a copy of the report of the

Inquiry Oﬃcer either to the Applicant or to the Labour Tribunal. Taking into

consideraƟon the totality of the above circumstances, and in parƟcular the decision of

the Respondents at the end of the inquiry before the Labour Tribunal not to pursue

Charge Nos. 1 to 3 in R2, which were based on the above incidents in R27 and A81, I

11

am inclined to accept the submission of Mr. Fernando that the enƟre exercise that

culminated with the terminaƟon of the services of the Applicant was actuated by bad

faith.

But, that by itself does not exonerate the Applicant from the allegaƟon that she

engaged in an independent notarial pracƟce whilst being employed by the 2nd

Respondent. Prior to examining in detail the transgression of Clauses 15(a) and (c) by

the Applicant, I would like to consider two judgments of this Court on whether an

employee could have mulƟple employers, or oﬀer one’s professional services to a third

party whilst being employed.

The Ceylon Bank Employees Union v Bank of Ceylon

The ﬁrst is the judgment in The Ceylon Bank Employees’ Union v Bank of Ceylon [79(1)

NLR 133]. Before referring to the ﬁndings reached by Sirimane, J, I shall brieﬂy refer to

the facts of that case in order to give context to the said ﬁndings. The employee in that

case, on whose behalf the Union insƟtuted acƟon, was N. Devarajah. In terms of Clause

3 of the service agreement, Devarajah had undertaken that he “will give my whole

Ɵme and aƩenƟon to the discharge of my duƟes and will observe the rules and

regulaƟons from Ɵme to Ɵme made by the Bank for the guidance of its employees.” It

was alleged that Devarajah operated a money exchange business called ‘Om Parasakthi

Exchange’ that was engaged in the business of encashing Government, CorporaƟon

and post-dated cheques. Devarajah was interdicted for the alleged breach of his

contract of employment on 13th February 1966, and aŌer a domesƟc inquiry, his

services were terminated.

Although Devarajah stated that the business was owned by his wife and two others

and not by him, the Labour Tribunal found that, “The totality of the evidence suggests

that the workman acƟvely parƟcipated in the business of the Om Parasakthi Exchange.

Alabdeen, Thambirajah and the workman’s wife were all ﬁgureheads. The workman

had abused his posiƟon by using conﬁdenƟal informaƟon before cashing of cheques.

The workman had also employed himself in some other occupaƟon while in the services

of the bank, what is more, in an occupaƟon which has violated the secrecy concerning

customers’ accounts.” [emphasis added]

12

In these circumstances, the Labour Tribunal held that the respondent bank was

jusƟﬁed in terminaƟng the services of Devarajah as there was overwhelming evidence

which proved that the workman had commiƩed acts of serious misconduct by violaƟng

the terms and condiƟons of his contract of services.

Sirimane, J observed that, “there was overwhelming evidence that the business Om

Parasakthi Exchange though registered in the name of the appellant’s wife was really

his business and it was he who actively ran the said business, his wife having nothing

whatever to do with it and being merely his nominee. The appellant had even admitted

in a Magistrate’s Court case that it was his business registered in the name of his wife.

On the evidence led the finding that the business ‘Om Parasakthi Exchange’ was that

of the appellant and run by him was irresistible and the President could have come to

no other conclusion.”

This Court thereafter went on to hold as follows, at page 137:

“There can be no doubt that the words ‘My whole time and attention’ must be

read subject to an implied limitation, but I am unable to agree with learned

counsel for the appellant when he submits that this clause does not prevent the

appellant from, carrying on another occupation outside normal office hours, i.e.

the whole time required for bank work (like overtime, etc.). If this contention is

correct it means that ‘My whole time and attention’ in the above clause must be

read ‘My whole time and attention during normal office hours,’ the whole of the

time required for bank work as stated above. It is an implicit condition of service

in any contract that the workman must devote the whole of the normal office

hours to his work. I think clause (3) referred to above goes far beyond that and it

seems to me that it lays down that the workman will not engage himself in any

other gainful employment. In any ordinary contract of service without a condition

like clause (3) the workman must devote the whole time for which he is paid (that

is his normal working hours) in furtherance of his master’s interest and not his

own. This was indeed what was held in the case of Wessex Dairy Limited vs.

Smith (1953) 3 K.B. 80, cited by learned counsel for the appellant. This case does

not help in the decision of the instant case as the condition imposed by clause (3)

goes beyond the normal contract of service and stipulates something more. In my

view a reasonable construction of the words in this clause would mean that the

13

workman must not devote any part of his time to any other gainful

employment. This does not mean that the workman, for instance, cannot have a

poultry run at his home and sell some eggs or grow flowers for sale as a hobby

during his spare time, but it certainly prevents him from engaging himself in

some parallel business profession or other employment. The question whether

any such engagement falls into the former or latter category is one of fact and

must depend on the circumstances of each particular case. This type of

stipulation is not uncommon as the same type of condition applies even to public

servants who are prohibited from engaging in any other business without

permission. The respondent Bank has made the conditions of this clause quite

clear when it sent out a circular (R3) in 1952 to be brought to the notice of all its

employees. This circular recited clause 3 and prohibits any gainful employment

except with the sanction of the Board of Directors. The circular also required every

employee to make a declaration that they were not so gainfully employed or if

they were how long it would take to discontinue such employment.” [emphasis

added]

The rule that once in employment, an employee cannot engage in any other business

or employment has been made crystal clear by Sirimane, J. In that case, the fact that

Devarajah carried out a business similar in nature to and in compeƟƟon with that of

his employer during oﬃce hours, giving rise to a possible conﬂict of interest, and in the

process breaching secrecy and conﬁdenƟality provisions, had weighed heavily in

arriving at the conclusion that the terminaƟon of the services of Devarajah was

jusƟﬁed.

The above judgment was delivered in 1976 at a Ɵme when, as referred to by Sirimane,

J a person may have used his spare Ɵme to rear poultry or engage in gardening etc.,

more as a hobby and the sale of its produce was not seen as that person engaging in a

business. 50 years later, the list of acƟviƟes that a person could engage in his spare

Ɵme has certainly expanded to persons in employment plying taxis or carrying out

delivery or similar services outside their working hours. While such acƟvity may appear

harmless on the face of it, it may not be so if, for example, the primary employment of

such person is with a delivery or courier company and the private business is derived

as a result of his work with his primary employer.

14

The list of examples that I could think of where a conﬂict of interest can arise as a result

of having mulƟple employers is endless. One may even say that it is permissible for a

soŌware developer working for a soŌware development company to engage on a

freelance basis and oﬀer his services in developing soŌware during his non-working

hours, liƩle realising that the soŌware developed as a freelancer may have been for a

compeƟtor whose soŌware was developed by such person or another developer

working for such persons’ employer.

Thus, I must emphasise that, as stated by Sirimane, J the facts and circumstances of

each case, including factors such as whether the secondary employment can give rise

to a conﬂict of interests or a breach of secrecy or conﬁdenƟality provisions, would

certainly be the determining factor in deciding if the terminaƟon of the services of an

employee who engages in parallel employment without having obtained the approval

of the primary employer is jusƟﬁed.

Coats Thread Lanka (Pvt) Limited v Samarasundera

A view diﬀerent to that expressed by Sirimane, J was expressed by this Court in Coats

Thread Lanka (Pvt) Limited v Samarasundera [(2010) 2 Sri LR 1]. In that case, the

respondent was employed by the appellant company as a work study assistant at the

Ɵme his services were suspended on allegaƟons of fraud, pending a full inquiry being

conducted. During the course of the inquiry, it transpired that while under suspension,

the employee had obtained employment elsewhere. Clause 16(c) of the contract of

employment provided that, ‘You will not be able to enter into any acƟviƟes similar to

that for which you are employed by this company or obtain employment elsewhere

while in service with us.’ Upon this revelaƟon the employer considered the employee

as having repudiated his contract of employment on his own accord and voliƟon.

This Court, while observing that the extent of the prohibition and the time period

within which the prohibition is operative are important considerations in ascertaining

the reasonableness of this clause, held as follows, at pages 7 and 8:

“Covenants of this nature are upheld where they operate to protect the legitimate

interests of the employer, for instance where there is a risk of trade secrets being

divulged by an employee.

15

Does clause 16(c) withstand the test of reasonability? Clause 16(c) envisages a

blanket prohibition whilst the worker is in the service of the employer.

Our courts have dealt with a similar issue in The Ceylon Bank Employees’ Union

v. The Bank of Ceylon. In the said case Sirimane, J in interpreting a clause to the

effect that “I will give my whole time and attention to the discharge of

duties” held the clause to mean that the workman must not devote any part of

his time to any other gainful employment, except with respect minor dealings in

his spare time.

In the said case the worker concerned was one holding a responsible position and

who was privy to confidential information. In light of the above clause it may be

justified in limiting his employment and his sources of income. However I do not

think that Sirimane, J intended this to be the general rule. A person is entitled to

seek employment with multiple employers so as to maximize his monthly

income. Where such employment impacts adversely on the quality of his work,

appropriate action may be taken at that stage. Therefore I am of the view that

such concerns of the employer cannot restrict a person’s reasonable right to seek

employment at multiple establishments.

Selwyn’s Law of Employment (9th Ed page 381) offers assistance on the point of

an employee taking additional employment. He too suggests that it may be a

ground for dismissal if such employment has an adverse effect on the employers

business. The cases of Nova Plastics Ltd v. Frogat and Hall Fire Protection Ltd v.

Buckley are illustrative of this point.

Hence I hold that the second limb of clause 16(c) prohibiting employment

elsewhere as being void. This position is further justified as the appellant in this

case was employed as a mere work study assistant as opposed to a manager or

a similar high position in the organisational hierarchy. …

… As noted earlier, the right to seek secondary employment is subject to the

important condition that such employment takes place outside the usual working

hours of his primary place of employment.” [emphasis added]

16

In reaching its conclusion that the laƩer part of Clause 16(c) which prohibited

employment elsewhere while sƟll in employment with the primary employer was void,

this Court appears to have been inﬂuenced by the fact that the employee took up

employment elsewhere aŌer his services were suspended, and the fact that the

employee was only holding the post of a work study assistant.

I regret that I am unable to agree with the view expressed in Coats that the second

limb of Clause 16 is void, for the reason that its conclusion is based on the judgment in

Nordenfelt v Maxim Nordenfelt [(1894) AC 535]. That was a case on restraint of trade

in its classic sense, dealing with possible future employment with a compeƟtor or in

compeƟƟon with the former employer. Clause 16 from Coats was not such a clause

and had an important qualiﬁcaƟon, in that the prohibiƟon applied only while the

employee was in service with the employer, and not aŌer the employee had leŌ the

employer. Clauses 15(a) and (c) of R1 in the present appeal are not restraint of

employment clauses, and were applicable only while the Applicant was employed with

the Respondents.

I am also unable to agree with the view expressed in Coats that a person is enƟtled to

seek employment with mulƟple employers, as it can give rise to a plethora of issues

including conﬂict of interest, breach of conﬁdenƟality and secrecy. It is paramount that

each and every employee, irrespecƟve of the post he or she holds, be loyal to his or

her employer. In The Associated Newspapers of Ceylon Limited v M.S.P. Nanayakkara

[SC Appeal No. 223/2016; SC minutes of 6th December 2022], this Court held that while

“trust is one of the core features of an employer – employee relaƟonship … the trust

and conﬁdence that an employer must have in an employee is encapsulated in the duty

of ﬁdelity that an employee owes his employer. As observed in Finlay Rentokil (Ceylon)

Ltd v A. Vivekananthan [(1995) 2 Sri LR 346], an employee owes a duty of ﬁdelity to his

employer during the period of his contract of employment. This duty is one of good

faith and loyalty, and will require the employee to serve his/her employer faithfully and

to avoid situaƟons of conﬂict or any appearance of any conﬂict between their own

interests and that of their employer.”

I am therefore inclined to follow the view expressed by Sirimane, J that whether a

breach of a clause that prevents an employee from having mulƟple employers would

jusƟfy terminaƟon or not, even where such person did so aŌer his services were

17

suspended, would depend on the facts and circumstances of each case, leaving it to a

Court or Tribunal to consider the breach of such a clause in the background

circumstances of that parƟcular case.

Transgression of Clauses 15(a) and (c) by the Applicant

This brings me to the most important aspect of this appeal, that being the nature of

the transgression that the Applicant had commiƩed.

Charge No. 4(a) related to the Applicant engaging in a private notarial pracƟce, in

violaƟon of Clauses 15(a) and (c) of R1, and uƟlising her duty hours and working Ɵme

in order to make a monetary gain to herself. There were two connected charges to

Charge No. 4(a), namely:

(a) Charge No. 4(b), which alleged that the Applicant had ‘abused faciliƟes provided

to you by the Company for oﬃcial purposes by uƟlising them for [her] personal

beneﬁt to engage in private Notarial pracƟce and to derive an income therefrom,’

and

(b) Charge No. 5(1), which alleged that the Applicant devoted her ‘working hours to

engage in private work for [her] personal beneﬁt.’

Importantly, the Applicant was not found guilty of these two connected charges, thus

narrowing down the scope of Charge No. 4(a) to one of acƟng in breach of Clauses

15(a) and (c). The quesƟon of law that is now before us leaves out the ﬁnancial gain

aspect of the said charge. Therefore, what remains of Charge No. 4(a) is that the

Applicant engaged in private Notarial pracƟce during the subsistence of her contract

of employment, in violaƟon of Clauses 15(a) and (c) of R1. Bearing that in mind, I shall

now consider the explanaƟon oﬀered by the Applicant with regard to Charge No. 4(a)

in order to determine if the transgression of Clauses 15(a) and (c) would jusƟfy

terminaƟon.

The Applicant stated that she was admiƩed as an AƩorney-at-Law in the year 2000 and

had executed around 500 deeds of transfer, mortgages and other instruments

[collecƟvely referred to as instruments] at the Ɵme she joined the 1st Respondent in

March 2006. She stated further that she had executed another 100 instruments or so

18

during her period of service with the Respondents, most of which were for the

Respondents or related transacƟons of the Respondents.

The Respondents produced four instruments that the Applicant had executed between

4th June 2009 and 31st July 2009 [R9 to R12] for parƟes not connected with the

Respondents, and cross examined the Applicant on similar instruments that the

Applicant had executed during the period of her employment with the Respondents

that were referred to in the monthly lists [R13 to R16] submiƩed by the Applicant to

the Land Registry.

The Applicant admiƩed that she executed deeds and other instruments for parƟes

other than the Respondents during her employment with the Respondents. The above

documents relied upon by the Respondents establish that fact. The Labour Tribunal

and the High Court have also held so, thus leading to the conclusion that the Applicant

acted in breach of Clauses 15(a) and (c) of R1.

Not being in a posiƟon to controvert the fact that she had in fact engaged in a notarial

pracƟce without having obtained the approval of the Respondents, the Applicant in

her evidence took up the posiƟon that Clauses 15(a) and (c) do not prevent her from

engaging in her profession as a notary while being employed, and for that reason there

was no breach of Clauses 15(a) and (c). The Labour Tribunal appears to have taken the

view that the Applicant had no choice but to have agreed to Clauses 15(a) and (c), as

it formed part and parcel of the contract of employment, and that in any event, the

knowledge that she had gained was by virtue of her being an AƩorney-at-Law, and not

by virtue of her employment. The High Court appears to have agreed with the

Applicant when it stated that while Clauses 15(a) and (c) had been breached, the

Applicant cannot be prevented from exercising her professional right by a contract of

employment where such acƟvity does not aﬀect the business and commercial interests

of the Respondents.

I am afraid I cannot agree either with the Applicant, the Labour Tribunal or the High

Court on this issue. A person is oﬀered employment in view of the experƟse,

knowledge and qualiﬁcaƟons that such person already possesses, and is renumerated

accordingly. Once a person assumes employment with a parƟcular employer, he or she

must devote their working hours for the beneﬁt of the employer, and cannot uƟlise the

remaining Ɵme to serve another employer or to engage in any other business or

19

professional acƟvity of whatever nature, unless of course he or she has obtained the

consent of the employer or unless such acƟvity is in furtherance of a hobby, as referred

to by Sirimane, J. To hold otherwise would mean for example that a legal oﬃcer

aƩached to a legal ﬁrm, company or corporaƟon could engage in his or her profession

as an AƩorney-at-Law, while also being employed.

Both the Labour Tribunal and the High Court have failed to appreciate that

employment with the Respondents was not forced on the Applicant, and that as

admiƩed by the Applicant, the eﬀect of Clauses 15(a) and (c) was explained to her by

the Head of the Human Resources Division at the Ɵme of execuƟon of the Contract of

Employment. R1 therefore reﬂects a meeƟng of minds and is a consensual agreement

to the terms thereof. While in terms of SecƟon 41(1) of the Judicature Act, “Every

aƩorney-at-law shall be enƟtled to assist and advise clients”, R1 embodies a choice that

the Applicant made that her professional services as an AƩorney-at-Law be engaged

by the Respondents and no one else, as long as the Applicant was in their employment.

Serving two employers or mulƟple employers or paymasters can lead to a possible

conﬂict of interest, a breach of loyalty, conﬁdenƟality and secrecy that an employee

must maintain at all Ɵmes, and can even lead to an allegaƟon of unethical conduct on

the part of an employee. In this background, the Applicant ought to have sought and

obtained the consent of the Respondents to engage in a notarial pracƟce outside her

employment. Her failure to do so cannot be condoned.

I should perhaps refer to the judgment of this Court in Land Reform Commission v

Grand Central Limited [(1981) 1 Sri LR 250] where the then AƩorney General appeared

in the Court of Appeal and marked his appearance for the Land Reform Commission as

a private Counsel and not in his oﬃcial capacity as AƩorney General. He was denied a

right of audience as the Court of Appeal was of the opinion that the AƩorney General

cannot appear for a liƟgant in his private capacity and can only enter an appearance, if

at all, in his oﬃcial capacity as AƩorney General. Chief JusƟce Samarakoon having

stated that, “I cannot but agree with the judgment of the Court of Appeal that there

are constraints on the AƩorney-General engaging in private pracƟce in the civil law as

well as the criminal law” stated further that, “No man can serve two masters. For

either he will hate the one and love the other or he will hold to one and dispose the

other.” [emphasis added]

20

MiƟgaƟng factors urged by the Applicant

This brings me to the aforemenƟoned quesƟon of law, and more parƟcularly whether

the breach of R1 demands that the services of the Applicant shall be terminated.

The Applicant took up the following posiƟons in her evidence before the Labour

Tribunal:

(a) At least one party to each transacƟon was known or related to her or her

husband, and she executed the said instruments as a favour to such friend or

relaƟve;

(b) There were two instruments which she had executed on behalf of her previous

employer as she had been paid for such services prior to her joining the 1st

Respondent;

(c) She did not receive any payment for the above instruments that she executed,

but she did charge for instruments executed aŌer her services were suspended

in September 2009. Although the Applicant had been cross examined extensively

by the AƩorney-at-Law for the Respondents, no suggesƟon had been made that

she received payment for the services rendered by her in aƩending to the

instruments executed up to the suspension of her services;

(d) None of the above instruments were executed during oﬃce hours and were

aƩended to by her either in the evenings aŌer 6.30 or during the weekends,

without causing any obstrucƟon to her regular work with the Respondents;

(e) She did not visit the Land Registry to carry out a Ɵtle search and that work was

carried out by independent third party legal clerks;

(f) She has not disclosed any conﬁdenƟal informaƟon to a third party while

execuƟng the said instruments;

(g) None of the said instruments were executed for compeƟtors of the 2nd

Respondent.

21

Findings of the Labour Tribunal and the High Court

Having held that the Applicant had breached Clauses 15(a) and (c), the Labour Tribunal

had gone on to hold that the Applicant was not guilty of any misconduct that jusƟﬁes

terminaƟon, for the following reasons:

(a) The Respondents had failed to demonstrate that the Applicant uƟlised her

working hours with the Respondents to execute the said instruments;

(b) The smooth and eﬃcient funcƟoning of the Legal Division of the Respondents has

not been aﬀected by the Applicant engaging in such notarial work;

(c) There is no evidence that the Applicant has divulged any conﬁdenƟal informaƟon

of the Respondents, to a third party.

These ﬁndings of fact are supported by the evidence that was available to the Labour

Tribunal, and it is for this reason that the High Court had aﬃrmed the said Order.

Having carefully considered:

(a) The evidence led before the Labour Tribunal, and more parƟcularly the above

evidence of the Applicant which the Respondents failed to contradict;

(b) The above ﬁndings of the Labour Tribunal;

(c) The fact that the Applicant was not engaged in an exercise which was in

compeƟƟon with or parallel to the business of the Respondents, but was only

execuƟng instruments mostly for friends and family;

(d) The fact that her notarial pracƟce had not given rise to any conﬂict of interest or

that she had not divulged any conﬁdenƟal informaƟon of the Respondents to any

third party;

(e) The circumstances of this case, and in parƟcular the background to the issuance

of the ﬁrst charge sheet R2;

22

(f) The explanaƟon of the Applicant as to the circumstances in which the impugned

instruments were executed;

(g) The fact that the Applicant had a clear record of 4 ½ years of service with the

Respondents; and

(h) The fact that the Respondents did not quesƟon the integrity, loyalty, and honesty

of, and trust in the Applicant, and did not pursue this appeal on the basis that it

had lost conﬁdence in the Applicant,

I would answer the quesƟon of law as follows – “Even though the Applicant had

breached Clauses 15(a) and (c) of her contract of employment, in the given

circumstances of this case, such breach does not jusƟfy the terminaƟon of her services

by the 2nd Respondent.”

I must also state that this dispute could have been resolved by the issuance of a simple

leƩer of warning but was blown out of proporƟon and escalated to the terminaƟon of

the services of the Applicant, due to the animosity between the Head/LSD and the

Applicant.

The order of the Labour Tribunal and the judgment of the High Court are accordingly

aﬃrmed, and this appeal is dismissed. I make no order for costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT Vijith K. Malalgoda, PC, J I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT Achala Wengappuli, J I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT