1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Leave to Appeal under Section 5C of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990 as amended by Act No. 54 of 2006.

SC Appeal No. 44/2019 SC/HCCA/LA No. 267/2018 WP/HCCA/LA/GAM No. 65/2017 D.C. Pugoda Case No. 1245/L

1. Dilipan Thyagarajah,

No.92, Kynsey Road, Colombo 08.

2. Dhara Levers alias Dhara Alycia Levers,

No. 47, Graham Heights, Kingston 08, Jamaica.

Plaintiffs

Vs.

1. Liyanage Dilshan Keerthi Prasanna,

No. 40,44, Church Road, Colombo 02.

2. Merennage Kingsley de Costa,

No. 6, Somadevi Road, Kirulapone Avenue, Colombo 05.

3. Niluka P. Withanachchi,

The Registrar of Lands,

2

Land Registry, Gampaha.

Defendants

And

1. Dilipan Tyagarajah,

No.92, Kynsey Road, Colombo 08.

2. Dhara Levers alias Dhara Alycia Levers,

No. 47, Graham Height, Kingston 08, Jamaica.

Plaintiff-Petitioners

Vs.

1. Liyanage Dilshan Keerthi Prasanna,

No. 40,44, Church Road, Colombo 02. 2. Merennage Kingsley de Costa,

No. 6, Somadevi Road, Kirulapone Avenue, Colombo 05. 3. Niluka P. Withanachchi,

The Registrar of Lands, Land Registry, Gampaha.

Defendant-Respondents

And Now Between

3

1. Dilipan Tyagarajah,

No.92, Kynsey Road, Colombo 08.

2. Dhara Levers alias Dhara Alycia Levers,

No. 47, Graham Height, Kingston 08, Jamaica.

Plaintiff-Petitioner-Petitioners

Vs.

1. Liyanage Dilshan Keerthi Prasanna,

No. 40,44, Church Road, Colombo 02. 2. Merennage Kingsley de Costa,

No. 6, Somadevi Road, Kirulapone Avenue, Colombo 05. 3. Niluka P. Withanachchi,

The Registrar of Lands, Land Registry, Gampaha.

Defendant-Respondent-Respondents

Before: Justice Buwaneka Aluwihare, PC

Justice A.H.M.D. Nawaz

Justice A.L. Shiran Gooneratne

4

Counsel: Harsha Soza, PC with Anuruddha Dharmaratne for the Plaintiff-Petitioner-Appellants.

Upali Abeywickrema with Kithsiri Liyanage for the 2nd Defendant-Respondent-Respondent.

Argued on: 01/12/2021

Decided on: 16/06/2022

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

The Plaintiff-Petitioner-Petitioners (hereinafter sometimes referred to as “the

Plaintiffs”), by Plaint dated 10/10/2013 and later an Amended Plaint dated 23/01/2014,

filed action in the District Court of Pugoda, No. 1245/L, inter-alia, seeking a

declaration of title in respect of the property described in the schedule to the Plaint, in

favour of the estate of the deceased Kumaraj Chitranjan Nadarajah, ejectment of the

Defendant-Respondent-Respondents (hereinafter referred to as “the Defendants”), their

servants and agents from the estate of the deceased, and an annulment of Deed No.

3496 dated 03/08/2009 and Deed No. 175 dated 08/08/2011, which the Plaintiffs claim

to be fraudulently executed. The Defendants raised preliminary objections to the

maintainability of the action on the basis that 2nd Plaintiff had failed to file a valid Power

of Attorney. Thereafter, the Plaintiffs filed an Amended Plaint dated 26/01/2017.

The learned District Judge, who overruled the objections raised by the Defendants and

accepted the said Amended Plaint dated 26/01/2017, however, made order dated

23/10/2017 striking out the name of the 2nd Plaintiff from the action, on the basis that

no cause of action has accrued to the 2nd Plaintiff. The said Order of the District Judge

was upheld by the Judges sitting in appeal by order dated 05/07/2018 in

WP/HCCA/LA/GAM/65/2017. Aggrieved by the said Order, the Plaintiffs are seeking,

5

inter alia, to set aside the said judgment of the Gampaha High Court of Civil Appeal

dated 05/07/2018 and the Order dated 23/10/2017 made by the learned District Judge

of Pugoda and to permit both Plaintiffs to participate at the trial and prosecute their

case. It is contended that the 2nd Plaintiff is a necessary party to this action for the

complete and effectual adjudication of all questions of law and fact, involved in this

case and to prevent a multiplicity of actions, and any injustice and prejudice being

caused to the 2nd Plaintiff.

This Court by its Order dated 06/02/2019, granted Leave to Appeal on the questions of

law stated in paragraph 16 (a), (b) and (c) of the Petition of Appeal dated 08/08/2018,

which are set out below-

“ a) Have the learned Judges of the High Court of Civil Appeals of the Western

Province Holden in Gampaha erred in law by failing to appreciate and consider

that an executor’s conveyance was not necessary for the 2nd Plaintiff-Petitioner

to jointly institute this case with the 1st Plaintiff-Petitioner?

b) Did the learned Judges of the High Court of Civil Appeals of the Western

Province Holden in Gampaha err in failing to appreciate and consider that the

admission of the said Last Will No. 1890 to probate vested the 2nd Plaintiff-

Petitioner with title to the property in suit?

c) Did the learned Judges of the High Court of Civil Appeals of the Western

Province Holden in Gampaha err in not considering that the 2nd Plaintiff-

Petitioner is a necessary party to this case for the complete and effectual

adjudication of all questions involved in this case?”

District Court Colombo Case No. DTS/00315/10, was filed in the matter of the Last

Will No. 1890 of the said deceased Kumaraj Chitranjan Nadarajah. The parties to the

present action are not at variance that the said Last Will No. 1890 was proved and

admitted to probate and that the property in question formed part of the estate of the

deceased testator. The 2nd Plaintiff, the niece of the deceased Kumaraj Chitranjan

6

Nadarajah, is said to be the beneficiary of the property in question, probated under the

Last Will No. 1890. The District Court issued probate of the Will to the executor, the

1st Plaintiff, to administer the estate of the deceased Kumaraj Chitranjan Nadarajah. (A

copy of the said Last Will No. 1890 has not been produced, while a copy of the said

probate dated 23/06/2011 is in the Brief in this case).

The Court sitting in appeal in WP/HCCA/GAM/65/2017 held that the identity of the

2nd Plaintiff has been settled before the trial judge and that the proceedings of the said

testamentary case are ongoing and as such it is the duty of the probate holder to protect

and administer the estate. However, due to the absence of an executor’s conveyance in

favour of the 2nd Plaintiff, that Court held that there is no cause of action arising to the

2nd Plaintiff against the 1st and 2nd Defendants and therefore, the 2nd Plaintiff is not a

necessary party to this case. That Court also held that the 1st Plaintiff as the executor,

could alone protect and safe guard the interests of the 2nd Plaintiff.

The position of the Plaintiffs is that an executor’s conveyance is not necessary for the

2nd Plaintiff to jointly institute the case with the 1st Plaintiff and that the admission of

the said Last Will No. 1890 to probate vests the 2nd Plaintiff with title to the property

in suit.

In Malliya vs. Ariyaratne 65 NLR 145, having analyzed the scope of the applicability

in Ceylon of the English law of executors and administrators, and cited the earlier dicta

in extenso in order to show the development of the law, Basnayake, C.J. stated (at page

154)-

“ a) that the executor has power over both movable and immovable property and may

sell the property left by the testator in accordance with the directions in the Will.

b) that the immovable property specially devised vests not in the executor but in

the heir to whom it is devised subject to the executor’s right to have recourse to

it in its due order for the payment of the testator’s debts.

7

c) that the executor’s assent or a conveyance by him is not necessary to pass title

to heirs appointed in the will or the heirs at law.

d) that the executor has power to sell the property left by the testator for the

payment of his debts, but that power must be exercised with due regard to the

provisions of our law.”

Prior to the aforesaid judgment; in Silva vs. Silva (1907) 10 NLR 234, the Supreme

Court, in a case of an intestacy, held, that,

“Title to immovable property belonging to the estate of a deceased person does not

vest in the administrator of the estate of such person; and a conveyance by the heir

of the deceased without the concurrence or assent of the administrator is valid,

subject to the right of the administrator to deal with the property for purposes of

administration”.

In this case, Hutchinson C.J., observed that, “the personal representative retains the

power to sell the property for the purposes of administration but his non-concurrence

in the conveyance by the heirs does not otherwise affect its validity”.

This position was reiterated in Horne vs. Marikar (1925) 27 NLR 185, where Schneider

J. held (at page 188), that, “It is settled law that title to immovable property belonging

to the estate of a person dying intestate does not vest in the administrator but passes to

his heirs, but that the administrator retains the power to sell the property for the

purposes of administration. See Gopalsamy vs. Ramasamy Pulle (1911) 14 N. L. R.

238 and Silva vs. Silva (Full Bench). (1907) 10 N. L. R. 234”

Accordingly, it is clear that the grant of probate does not confer title of the property of

the deceased testator on the executor appointed by order of Court to administer the

property of the deceased testator. The title of the property of the deceased testator vests

with the heirs and a conveyance by the executor is not essential to pass title of the

property owned by the deceased to his devisee under his Last Will.

8

Therefore, the trial Court and the Court sitting in appeal erred in law in their finding

that an executor’s conveyance is necessary to pass title to the 2nd Plaintiff, as a devisee

under the Last Will of the deceased.

Accordingly, the questions of law stated in paragraph 16(a) and (b) are decided in

favour of the Plaintiff-Petitioner-Petitioners.

The Appeal Court in its impugned Order dated 05/07/2018, finds that, even though the

probate has been issued, title to the properties have not been transferred to the

beneficiaries listed in the Last Will and therefore, only the executor appointed therein

has the right to file and seek remedies from the Defendants. This seems to be the basis

in which the Court decided that there is no cause of action accrued to the 2nd Plaintiff

against the Defendants and therefore, the 2nd Plaintiff’s name should be struck off and

the case be allowed to proceed.

As observed earlier an executor’s conveyance is not necessary to pass title to the devisee

to whom the property is devised. The averments in the Plaint are for a declaration of

entitlement to the testator’s estate admitted to probate, the annulment of the aforesaid

deeds and to evict the Defendants from possession of the probated land.

The definition of cause of action contained in Section 5 of the Civil Procedure Code,

“is the wrong for the prevention or redress of which an action may be brought and

includes the denial of a right, the refusal to fulfil an obligation, the neglect to perform

a duty and the infliction of an affirmative injury”.

The Plaintiffs filed action in the District Court of Pugoda, inter alia, seeking, to assert

their status in the estate of the deceased, in accordance with the said Last Will No. 1890

and the probate order granted by Court. The 2nd Plaintiff is a necessary party to fully

enforce the obligations vested in the executor and the rights claimed in this case. Also,

the 2nd Plaintiff is entitled to be a party to the action to evict the Defendants in

possession and to recover the land in suit, more fully described in the schedule to the

Plaint. Therefore, the 2nd Plaintiff is a necessary party in this case.

9

Accordingly, the question of law as set out in paragraph 16 (c) is also decided in favour

of the Plaintiff-Petitioner-Petitioners.

As such, the decision to strike off the name of the 2nd Plaintiff-Petitioner-Petitioner, by

the Judgment of the High Court of Civil Appeal dated 05/07/2018, and the Order of the

District Judge of Pugoda dated 23/10/2017, are set aside. The learned District Judge is

directed to accept the Amended Plaint dated 26/01/2017 and allow both Plaintiff-

Petitioner-Petitioners to participate at the trial and to prosecute their case.

Appeal allowed. No costs ordered.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Buwaneka Aluwihare PC. J.

I agree

Judge of the Supreme Court

A.H.M.D. Nawaz J.

I agree

Judge of the Supreme Court