IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal to the Supreme Court under and in terms of Section 5c (1) of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990 as amended by High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No.54 of 2006. Somadasa Alahapperuma, 8th Milepost, Jandura Panamura.

Plaintiff S.C. Appeal No.126/2011 S.C.(HCCA)LA No. .30/2011 Vs. SP/HCCA/RAT/407/2007 D.C. Embilipitiya, Case No. 6002/P 1. Kankanam Gamage Kusumawathie, No.84, Hospital Road, Embilipitiya. 2. Seetha Wickramasinghe, 8th Milepost, Jandura Panamura. Defendants And Somadasa Alahapperuma, 8th Milepost, Jandura Panamura.

Plaintiff-Appellant Vs.

S.C. Appeal No. 126/2011

2

1. Kankanam Gamage Kusumawathie, No.84, Hospital Road, Embilipitiya. 2. Seetha Wickramasinghe, 8th Milepost, Jandura Panamura. Defendant-Respondents AND NOW BETWEEN Somadasa Alahapperuma, 8th Milepost, Jandura Panamura. Plaintiff-Appellant- Appellant [Now deceased] Alawatta Gamage Dyawathie, Kadjugaha Koratuwa, Rannawala, Urugamuwa. Substituted-Plaintiff- Appellant - Appellant Vs. 1. Kankanam Gamage Kusumawathie, No.84, Hospital Road, Embilipitiya. 2. Seetha Wickramasinghe, 8th Milepost, Jandura Panamura. Defendant-Respondent- Respondents

S.C. Appeal No. 126/2011

3

BEFORE : VIJITH K. MALALGODA, P.C., J. E.A.G.R. AMARASEKARA J. ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J. COUNSEL : Ranjan Suwandaratne PC with Anil Rajakaruna & Ineka Hendavitharana for the Substituted- Plaintiff-Appellant- Appellant. Chathura Galhena with Namal Madushanka for the 2nd Defendant-Respondent-Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 03rd December, 2021 DECIDED ON : 22nd August, 2024 ********** ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

This is an appeal arising out of a judgment pronounced by the District

Court of Embilipitiya in a partition action instituted by the Substituted-

Plaintiff- Appellant-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Plaintiff)

seeking to partition Punchigoda Watta between him and the 1st Defendant-

Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the 1st Defendant), as

pleaded in his 2nd amended plaint, a land which is in an extent of 2 Acres 1

Rood and 27.5 Perches The Plaintiff specifically averred in the said amended

Plaint that the 2nd Defendant- Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter referred

to as the 2nd Defendant) has no rights whatsoever over the corpus. The 1st

Defendant, in her Statement of Claim, admitted the pedigree pleaded by the

plaintiff and his share allocation. The 2nd Defendant, on her part, claimed

acquisition of prescriptive title over the corpus against the Plaintiff as well

as the 1st Defendant.

S.C. Appeal No. 126/2011

4

At the conclusion of the trial, the District Court dismissed the

Plaintiffs action and accepted the 2nd Defendants claim of acquisition of

title by prescription. Being aggrieved by the said judgment, the Plaintiff

preferred an appeal to the High Court of Civil Appeal holden in Ratnapura.

The High Court of Civil Appeal, by its judgment dated 14.12.2010,

dismissed the Plaintiffs appeal, who then sought Leave to Appeal from this

Court against that judgment.

This Court, after hearing the parties on 16.09.2011, granted Leave to

Appeal against the judgment of the High Court of Civil Appeal on following

questions of law:

a. Have the learned Judges of the High Court of the

Sabaragamuwa Province Holden at Ratnapura [ exercising

Civil Appellate Jurisdiction] erred in law by arriving at the

finding that the Plaintiff did not want to set out a

comprehensive pedigree and holding against him on that

ground?

b. Have the learned Judges of the High Court of the

Sabaragamuwa Province Holden at Ratnapura [ exercising

Civil Appellate Jurisdiction] erred in law by arriving at the

finding that the learned trial Judge was correct in dismissing

the Plaintiffs action whilst holding that he 2nd Defendant

has prescribed to the land?

At the hearing of the instant appeal, on behalf of the Plaintiff, the

learned Presidents Counsel submitted that the finding of the High Court of

S.C. Appeal No. 126/2011

5

Civil Appeal that the Plaintiff did not want to produce certified copies of the

handful of deeds which he has referred to in the Plaint including the deed which he

alleges to transfer shares of the land to the [1st] defendant is a factually

erroneous one. This contention was advanced by the learned Counsel on the

premise that the Deed No. 66, on which the Plaintiff relied on to establish a

part of devolution of his title, was referred to in the recital of another Deed

No. 2389, which in fact was tendered as P3. Learned Presidents Counsel

therefore submitted that the said reference in P3 should suffice to establish

that specific part of devolution of title of the Plaintiff, although Deed No. 66

was not produced at the trial. He also contended that similarly the extracts

from the Land Registry (P5) which contain a reference to Deed No. 5527

should suffice in establishing his devolution of title as pleaded, although

that conveyance too was not proceeded. He therefore contended that the

Plaintiff has established the chain of his title to the corpus, which commenced

from its original owner S.K. Appuhamy Gunaratne as he had tendered all

relevant deeds in order to establish that he is entitled to his share from the

corpus.

The parties, after marked an admission regarding the identity of the

corpus, proceeded to trial on a total of 15 points of contest. The 1st and 2nd

points of contest were framed to the effect whether S.K. Appuhamy Gunaratne

was the original owner of the corpus and if that point is answered in the

affirmative, whether his rights are devolved as per the pedigree pleaded by

the Plaintiff. The 2nd Defendant suggested a total of nine points of contests.

The 10th point of contest, suggested by the 2nd Defendant, was to the effect

that whether she and her predecessors have acquired prescriptive title to the

S.C. Appeal No. 126/2011

6

corpus upon being in its exclusive and uninterrupted possession, adverse to

the interests of the Plaintiff and the 1st Defendant, since 1979.

The Plaintiff, in setting out his devolution of title, averred that the

original owner of the corpus was one S.K Appuhamy Gunaratne, who, by

execution of Deed No. 66, transferred his title in favour of Wickramaratne

Arachchige Podi Appuhamy on 03.05.1957, who in turn re-transferred his

rights back to S.K Appuhamy Gunaratne by Deed No. 2389 on 09.05.1960.

Upon the death of S.K. Appuhamy Gunaratne, title to the corpus was passed

onto his only daughter Sumanawathie Palihakkara nee Gunaratne, who

thereafter transferred her rights over same to the Plaintiff by Deed of

Transfer No. 781 (P4) on 20.04.1995. The Plaintiff too transferred an

undivided share of the corpus to Kankanam Gamage Kusumawathie, the 1st

Defendant, by execution of Deed No. 5527 on 14.05.1997.

The present action was instituted by the Plaintiff on 21.11.1997 after

about six months since the execution of Deed No. 5527, naming the 1st

Defendant and the 2nd Defendant as parties. The 1st Defendant did not

contest the Plaintiffs claim and only sought allocation of her share from

the corpus. The 2nd Defendant totally denied paragraph 3 to 10 of the

amended plaint of the Plaintiff, which sets out the devolution of title and his

entitlement to share allocation. She averred that the said devolution of title

and the pedigree on which he relies on, is totally a false and misleading

statement.

After trial, the District Court answered the 1st point of contest

suggested by the Plaintiff as not proved, while the 2nd point of contest was

answered in the negative, before proceeding to dismiss his Plaint. The High

S.C. Appeal No. 126/2011

7

Court of Civil Appeal, in its impugned judgment, affirmed the dismissal of

the Plaintiffs Plaint as it held that the devolution of title pleaded by the

Plaintiff is false and, more importantly, the Deed of Transfer No. 781 (P4),

on which he relied on to establish devolution of his title, the transferor

Sumanawathie Palihakkara stated, in describing the mode of her acquisition of

title to the corpus in its recital, relied on a Grant made by the Land Reform

Commission and thereby totally deviating from the claim of her paternal

inheritance, as pleaded in the Plaint.

In view of the first question of law on which this Court granted leave,

it is helpful if a brief reference is made to the evidence presented before the

trial Court by the Plaintiff, through which he tried to establish the

devolution of title, which he had pleaded in the Plaint. It is the evidence of

the Plaintiff that Sumanawathie Palihakkara nee Gunaratne, being the eldest

daughter of S.K Appuhamy Gunaratne, became entitled to the corpus in its

entirety upon her fathers death. Despite the assertion in the Plaint that she

was the only daughter of S.K Appuhamy Gunaratne, the Plaintiff, in his

evidence, changed her status from the only daughter to the eldest

daughter of the original owner. The 2nd Defendant, during her cross

examination of the Plaintiff, marked a contradiction 2V1 on this evidence,

as it is inconsistent with the devolution of title pleaded by the Plaintiff.

The Deed of Transfer No. 2389 (P3) was executed in favour of

Sidurupitiye Kapurallage Appuhamy Gunaratne by Wickramaratne Arachchige

Podi Appuhamy. Plaintiff claimed that Sidurupitiye Kapurallage Appuhamy

Gunaratne is the original owner of the corpus and all of his rights over it , by

paternal inheritance, were devolved on his only daughter Sumanawathie.

The 2nd Defendant also marked Deed No. 696 of 26.02.1958 as 2V2. In the

S.C. Appeal No. 126/2011

8

said Deed 2V2, Sidurupitiye Kapurallage Appuhamy Gunaratne had gifted an

undivided share of the land called Punchigoda to his daughter Sidurupitiye

Kapurallage Asilin Karunawathie a.k.a, Kamala Seneviratne.

Thus, the Deed 2V2 indicated that the said original owner had another

daughter by the name of Sidurupitiye Kapurallage Asilin Karunawathie a.k.a,

Kamala Seneviratne and a share of Punchigoda land had been gifted to her.

Interestingly in this Deed of Gift 2V2, the donor Sidurupitiye Kapurallage

Appuhamy Gunaratne imposed a condition that the said donee could transfer

title to the land gifted by him only among her brothers, namely, Sidurupitiye

Kapurallage Charles Gunaratne, Sidurupitiye Kapurallage Midudasa Gunaratne

and Sidurupitiye Kapurallage Sumathipala Gunaratne. In the circumstances,

upon the death of Sidurupitiye Kapurallage Appuhamy Gunaratne, it is

apparent that not only Sumanawathie Palihakkara nee Gunaratne became

entitled to the corpus in its entirety, but she may have had to share her

entitlement to the corpus with all her siblings, including Sidurupitiye

Kapurallage Asilin Karunawathie a.k.a, Kamala Seneviratne, who too may have

become co-owners to the same with her. The Plaintiff, in order to succeed in

his devolution of title to the corpus, should have established that

Sumanawathie Palihakkara nee Gunaratne is the only legitimate child of

Sidurupitiye Kapurallage Appuhamy Gunaratne, enabling the trial Court to

hold that only she is entitled to paternal inheritance, which fact he did not

establish with positive evidence. In the absence of such evidence, the trial

Court is unable to determine that Sumanawathie Palihakkara nee Gunaratne is

the sole heir to Sidurupitiye Kapurallage Appuhamy Gunaratne or there was

co-ownership after her fathers demise.

S.C. Appeal No. 126/2011

9

In these circumstances, the contention of the Plaintiff that the trial

Court should have left a certain portion of undivided shares unallotted

cannot succeed. This is because, in the absence of any such evidence, the

trial Court is unable to decide the extent of the land she might have inherited

since her fathers death or whether she is left with any residual entitlement

over the said land, after she conveyed her purported entitlement with the

execution of Deed of Transfer No. 781 (P4) to the Plaintiff.

The Plaintiff, in support of his claim, tendered an extract of a Folio

No. G154/17 from the Land Registry (P5). The extract P5 refers to land

called Meddakande Liyedde Pallekella, whereas the preliminary plan described

the land to be partitioned as Punchigoda Watta and not Meddakande Liyedde

Pallekella. The said extract also indicates Sidurupitiye Kapurallage Appuhamy

Gunaratne had transferred share each of the said land to his two daughters

Sidurupitiye Kapurallage Asilin Karunawathie Gunaratne and Sidurupitiye

Kapurallage Sumanawathie Gunaratne by execution of Deeds of Gift Nos. 696

and 697 on 26.02.1958.

Despite the fact of claiming paternal inheritance to a sole heir in the

Plaint, the Plaintiff relied on P4, to establish his devolution of title from

Sidurupitiye Kapurallage Sumanawathie Gunaratne. Perusal of the recital of the

Deed P4, reveals that the transferor, Sidurupitiye Kapurallage Sumanawathie

Gunaratne, said to have derived title from a Grant made by the Land Reform

Commission. There is no mention of any paternal inheritance, which the

Plaintiff pleaded in the devolution of his title in the said Deed P4. Even with

regard to the declaration by Sidurupitiye Kapurallage Sumanawathie Gunaratne

that she derived her title to the land by virtue of a Grant by Land Reform

Commission, not a single document was tendered by the Plaintiff before the

S.C. Appeal No. 126/2011

10

trial Court in that regard. He conceded during cross examination by the 2nd

Defendant that no copy of the Gazette notification of the Grant was

tendered to Court or at least he requested one from his predecessor in title,

Sidurupitiye Kapurallage Sumanawathie Gunaratne.

Compounding the multitude of serious discrepancies that already

exists in the Plaintiffs case, he used several names in reference to the land

to be partitioned without satisfying the Court that they all referred to one

and the same land. The name of the land stated in the preliminary plan is

different to the name of the land described in the title deed P3 relied upon

by the Plaintiff. The preliminary plan and the schedule to the Plaint referred

to a land called Punchigoda Watta. In the Deed No. 2389 (P3), the land was

referred to as Punchigoda whereas Deed No. 781 refers to a land called

Punchigoda Watta. The copy of the Land Registry Folio (P5) he had

tendered to Court refers to a land called Meddakande Liyedde Pallekella.

The boundaries to the land, described in P3, had a public road to its

north, a stream called Phimbiyagaha Ara to its east, another stream called

Hulanda Oya to the south and the Village Council Road to the west.

Importantly, the Deed No. 781 (P4), on which the Plaintiff claimed he

acquired title to the corpus, depicts public roads to its northern and western

boundaries as in P3, but instead of the two streams that formed the eastern

and southern boundaries of the land described in P3, the description of P4

indicates that these two sides share common boundaries with State lands.

These boundaries did not correspond to boundaries as shown in the

Preliminary Plan either. Furthermore, the land described in Folio (P5),

where the Plaintiffs title Deed, the 1st Defendants Deed and Lis Pendense

were registered, does not indicate it had Ara and Oya to any of its

S.C. Appeal No. 126/2011

11

boundaries. The said Folio also does not show any link to the Folio in which

Deed No. 2389 (P3) is registered and the Plaintiff failed to tender any such

document. Even if the Plaintiffs purported title Deed No. 781 (P4) does not

refer to the vendee of Deed No. 2389, S.K. Appuhamy Gunaratne as the

source from whom the vendor in P4 had derived her title, in fact the said

Folio refers to a Grant of Land Reform Commission. Thus, P4 contradicts

the chain of title as pleaded by the Plaintiff in his evidence. If the fact that

such a Grant was made by the said Commission is the source of title relied

on by Sidurupitiye Kapurallage Sumanawathie Gunaratne to confer title on the

Plaintiff, he alone cannot deny the truth of that claim made by his own

predecessor in title, without calling her to give evidence. She, undoubtedly

is the most suitable witness who could provide best evidence on that

particular fact. In addition, when the Plaintiff tendered Deeds marked as P3

and P4, the 2nd Defendant objected and were marked subject to proof. The

2nd Defendant reiterated her objection at the close of the Plaintiffs case.

Thus, the Deeds marked P3 and P4 had not been proved before the trial

Court.

It is noted that the Plaintiff had tendered several other Folios, along

with P5, but in considering the description of the lands, it appears that these

extracts were not relevant for the instant matter as they related to different

lands, and they contain no cross reference to the corpus. However, one of

them relates to a land called Lekam Panguwe Punchigoda and shows

Sidurupitiye Kapurallage Appuhamy Gunaratne had transferred share of a

314-acre land to the predecessor in title referred to in the Plaintiffs Deed

(P4), namely Sidurupitiye Kapurallage Sumanawathie Gunaratne. This fact

indicates the possibility of Land Reform Commission releasing some extent

S.C. Appeal No. 126/2011

12

of land back to the predecessor in title of the Plaintiff, Sidurupitiye

Kapurallage Sumanawathie Gunaratne. Thus, there could be some truth in the

claim of said Sidurupitiye Kapurallage Sumanawathie Gunaratne in her

recitation to Deed of Transfer in favour of the Plaintiff. In the circumstances,

even if it is considered that the original ownership commenced from a

settlement or a Grant made by the Land Reform Commission, the Plaintiff

failed to prove that the land sought to be partitioned had the said

Commission as one of its previous owners, either through Folio (P5) or by

means of any other reliable evidence.

Thus, the trial Court should not have considered P3 and P4. Even if

one considered them to be proved, there was no evidence placed before the

trial Court that the land surveyed in the preliminary plan is the land belong

to the so-called original owner in the Deed No. 2389 (P3), and it is the same

land the title of which had been transferred through the Deed No. 781 (P4)

to the Plaintiff. Mere fact that the parties admitted the identity of the corpus

at the commencement of the trial makes no difference to the Plaintiffs case,

for it is for him to establish before Court that he had an entitlement to a share

of that land derived upon the devolution of title he had pleaded before that

Court. What was admitted by the parties is the identity of the land under

dispute and not the Plaintiffs entitlement to any title or a share of that land.

Hence, the Plaintiffs devolution of title is not established and for that

reason his action must fail.

In view of the above considerations, reference to Deed No. 66 in the

Deed 2389 does not take the Plaintiffs case any further as he contended

before this Court. The Plaintiff failed to offer any clarification in respect of

S.C. Appeal No. 126/2011

13

any of the serious discrepancies that had the potential of defeating his

devolution of title presented before the District Court in the instant partition

action, where the Court is imposed a statutory duty to undertake an

investigation of title of each party, before arriving at a conclusion.

In view of these glaring defects in the Plaintiff's case, the dismissal of

his Plaint by the District Court is amply justified and accordingly the

affirmation of that conclusion by the High Court of Civil Appeal could not

be faulted. Thus, the alternative contention advanced by the learned

Presidents Counsel, that the trial Court could have retained a portion of the

land unallotted if it found that certain parts of the devolution of title pleaded

by the Plaintiff is not proved, without dismissing the Plaint is also rejected.

Turning to consider the 2nd Defendants claim of acquisition of

prescriptive title, the trial Court, answered the point of contest No. 15,

suggested by her on acquisition of a prescriptive title, in the affirmative and

held that she established her claim to the corpus in its entirety. The High

Court of Civil Appeal, having observed that neither the Plaintiff nor the 1st

Defendant ever possessed the corpus, and that the 2nd Defendant had been

in its possession for a long time adverse to the title of its owner, affirmed the

conclusion reached by the lower Court on point of contest No. 15.

The learned Presidents Counsel for the Plaintiff, as another

alternative to his contention presented on the dismissal of the Plaint,

submitted that the evidence only points to a part of the corpus being

possessed by the 2nd Defendant and, both Courts erred in holding with her

that she had established her adverse possession over the entirety of the

corpus.

S.C. Appeal No. 126/2011

14

The preliminary plan No. 1277 and its report, P4(a) and P4(b), indicate

that the land that lies to the east of the corpus belongs to the 2nd Defendant.

On the corpus there were 40 old coconut trees, as observed by the surveyor,

who also observed 3 old jack trees. Both the Plaintiff and the 2nd Defendant

claimed them. The surveyor also observed a pepper planation of about 2- 3

years old and 10 banana clusters, all of which were claimed by the 2nd

Defendant, along with a hut standing on that land. The portion of the land

covered by pepper plantation was depicted as Lot No. 2 of the plan, whereas

the remaining portion was depicted as Lot No. 1. The 2nd Defendant claimed

her rights to the plantation as well as to the old trees and to the entirety of

the corpus. The surveyor conceded that no physical boundaries were in

existence separating the two lots, as shown in the preliminary plan.

In her evidence, the 2nd Defendant claimed that her husband cleared

the land, which was lying adjoining to their land in 1969 and planted

coconut and jack trees. She claimed that for the past 18 years a Dansela was

conducted during Wesak season on that land with her blessings, and she

enjoyed produce of the land without any interruption from any party.

During her cross examination, the 2nd Defendant said after her husband

developed the land, a gentleman from Attanagalla called Seneviratne, said

that it is their land but gave his blessing for them to continue with their

occupation. She also admitted that she operated a hopper boutique for some

time on that land. When suggested, the 2nd Defendant said Sumanawathie

Gunaratne may have been in possession before 1969, as there was a papaya

plantation, but not after.

She also conceded that Appuhamy Gunaratne had two daughters and

they had several lands in the area but insisted that none of them ever

S.C. Appeal No. 126/2011

15

possessed the corpus, and she never asked for permission to possess the land

from Kamala Seneviratne.

The Plaint is dated 21.09.1997 and Deed No. 781 (P4) was executed in

1995. Deed No. 2389 (P3) was executed in 1960 and there is a remarkable

paucity of evidence as to the status of the corpus between 1969 and 1995 on

behalf of the Plaintiff. Strangely, the Plaintiff, despite the 2nd Defendants

point of contest on prescription, did not even refer to the fact as to who

possessed the corpus and in what manner. Apparently, it was the Plaintiff

who disputed her possession of the corpus for the first time on 20.04.1995,

and that too after the execution of Deed No. No. 781 (P4). The parties

admitted that a complaint was made to the police by the Plaintiff over an

incident of felling of trees. This is the only challenge to the 2nd Defendants

claim of adverse possession since 1969 and prompted the Plaintiff to

institute the instant partition.

The explanatory clause in Section 3 of the Prescription

Ordinance speaks of acknowledgement of a right existing another person.

There is clear and cogent evidence that she was in uninterrupted possession

of the corpus since 1969. There was no evidence that Sumanawathie

Gunaratnes was ever in possession of the same at any point of time since

1969. In view of the 2nd Defendants evidence that she was aware Appuhamy

Gunaratnes daughters had several lands in the area and none of them ever

made any claim to the corpus by disputing her continued possession at any

point of time and she was not a co-owner with Gunaratnes, as pleaded by

the Plaintiff in his pedigree are factors that could be considered indicative

of adverse possession. The 2nd Defendant did not commence her possession

in 1969, in a subordinate character as an agent, lessee, or a licensee of

S.C. Appeal No. 126/2011

16

Plaintiff or of any of his predecessors in title. During cross examination, the

2nd Defendant admitted that a gentleman from Attanagalla called Seneviratne,

and his wife had permitted her occupation of the corpus at a subsequent

point of time . This incident taken place long after her husband had cleared

the land and cultivated it for years. In view of the evidence regarding Kamala

Seneviratnes act of granting permission, the Plaintiff had taken up the

position that the 2nd Defendant could not succeed in her claim of

prescription, in her failure to establish she possessed the corpus ut dominus

after she was allowed to be in possession by Seneviratne. Neither Seneviratne

nor his wife had intervened in the instant partition action. It is clear that the

2nd Defendants claim of prescription was made against the Plaintiff and the

1st Defendant, as she had tacked on her husbands adverse possession, in

support of her position that she had continued uninterrupted possession

adverse against their interests.

Clearly the evidence adduced by the 2nd Defendant points to a

reasonable inference that she possessed the corpus in a character

incompatible with the Plaintiffs title per Tillekeratne v Bastian (1918) 21

NLR 12 (at p.18).

In view of the said position taken up by the Plaintiff on the evidence

of the 2nd Defendant regarding Seneviratnes permission, it is relevant to

insert a quotation from Professor G.L. Peiris, Law of Property (Vol. 1, at p.110)

where it was stated that [A]dverse possession was held at one time to entail

possession ut dominis, but this view has not found favour in several opinions by

the Privy Council, and it may now be taken for granted that possession ut dominus

is not necessarily required in Sri Lanka for purposes of prescriptive possession.

S.C. Appeal No. 126/2011

17

In view of the considerations referred to in the preceding paragraphs,

I am more inclined to hold with the submissions of the learned Counsel for

the 2nd Defendant that his client had presented cogent and uncontradicted

evidence on a balance of probability that she and her predecessors

possessed the corpus uninterruptedly and adverse to the Plaintiff, the 1st

Defendant for well over 30 years.

In view of the said finding, I proceed to answer both questions of law

in the negative. The judgments of the District Court as well as the High

Court of Civil Appeal are accordingly affirmed.

The appeal of the Plaintiff is dismissed, and the 2nd Defendant is

entitled to cost of this appeal.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT VIJITH K. MALALGODA, P.C., J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT E.A.G.R. AMARASEKARA J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT