SC.Appeal No.114/2017

1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Special

Leave to Appeal under and in terms of Section

9(a) of the High Courts of the Provinces

(Special Provisions) Act No.19 of 1990 reads

with Article 128 of the Constitution.

SC. Appeal No.114/2017

SC.(SPL) LA Application No.262/15

High Court of Kurunegala Case

No.29/13 Appeal

Magistrate’s Court of Wariyapola

No.84309/2011

Edmange Sampath Amarasiri,

Pahala Minuwangete,

Minuwangete.

Accused-Appellant-Petitioner

Vs.

Officer-in-Charge

Police Station,

Wariyapola.

Complainant-Respondent-Respondent

Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondent-Respondent

SC.Appeal No.114/2017

2

BEFORE : SISIRA J. DE ABREW, J.

K.T. CHITRASIRI, J. &

L.T.B. DEHIDENIYA, J.

COUNSEL : Saliya Pieris PC with Thanuka Nandasiri for the

Accused-Appellant-Petitioner.

Varunika Hettige DSG for the Respondent-

Respondent.

ARGUED &

DECIDED ON : 07.02.2018.

SISIRA J. DE ABREW, J.

Heard both Counsel in support of their respective cases. The Accused-

Appellant in this case was convicted for the offence under Section 344 of the

Penal Code. He was sentenced to 2 months simple imprisonment

suspended for 5 years. He was also ordered to pay a fine of Rs.1000/- . In

default of the fine, he was sentenced to one month’s simple imprisonment.

Being aggrieved by the said judgment of the learned Magistrate, the

Accused-Appellant appealed to the High Court. The High Court by his

judgment dated 28.10.2015 affirmed the conviction and the sentence. Being

aggrieved by the said judgment of the High Court the Accused-Appellant has

appealed to this Court. This Court by its order dated 07.06.2017 granted

Leave to Appeal on questions of law set out in paragraph 16( c), (d), (e) and

(f) of the Petition of Appeal dated 02.12.2015 which are set out below.

( 1) Whether both the prosecution witnesses Kariyawasam

Ranathungalage Mangalika Wijekirthi and Kariyawasam

Ranathungalage Chandra Wijekirthi are not credible witnesses

and therefore the conviction and sentence cannot stand on such

evidence?

(2) Whether the learned Magistrate has erred in holding that there

was no motive on the part of the virtual complainant to falsely

SC.Appeal No.114/2017

3

implicate the Petitioner, despite there being ample evidence to

show that the virtual complainant was objecting to her land

being taken to widen the village roadway?

(3) Whether the tainted, unsteady and improbable evidence of the

prosecution witness Kariyawasam Ranathungalage Mangalika

Wijekirthi cannot be strengthened by the corroboration of her

sister who was not an independent witness?

(4) Whether both the learned High Court Judge and the learned

Magistrate erred in law by shifting the burden of proof to the

Petitioner?

The facts of this case may be briefly summarized as follows,

The Accused-Appellant who was the Grama Sevaka of the area went to the

Complainant’s house in order to make some inquiries about an expansion of

the road. In the compound of the Complainant, the Accused-Appellant

exposed his person to the Complainant. Soon after this incident, the

Complainant ran into the house of her sister and brought the sister to the

compound. When the Complainant and the sister both were present in the

compound, the Accused-Appellant again exposed his person to both women.

The Complainant and her sister have given this evidence. The evidence of

the Complainant has therefore been corroborated by the sister.

The Accused-Appellant too gave evidence in the witness box. Accused-

Appellant denied the position. However, Accused-Appellant admitted that

he went to the compound of the Complainant in order to make some

inquiries with regard to an expansion of the road. He, in his evidence takes

up the position that there was an altercation between him and the

Complainant with regard to the taking of complainant’s land for the

expansion of the road. He has made an entry in his diary to this effect,

marked V1. The learned President’s Counsel for the Accused-Appellant

submits that the evidence of the Accused-Appellant has been wrongly

rejected by the Learned Magistrate. I now advert to the above contention.

SC.Appeal No.114/2017

4

If the Accused’s evidence creates a reasonable doubt in the prosecution

case, the Accused is entitled to be acquitted. In Queen Vs. Kularatne 71

NLR page 529, this Court observed the following rules with regard to a

dock statement of an Accused,

1. If the dock statement of the Accused is believed it must be acted

upon.

2. If the dock statement creates a reasonable doubt about the case for

the prosecution, the defence must succeed.

The above rules are also applicable to the evidence given by an accused

person in the witness box.

The most important question that must be decided in this case is whether

the evidence of the Accused-Appellant creates a reasonable doubt in the

prosecution case. Although, the Accused takes up the position that there

was an altercation between him and the Complainant, he has failed to make

a complaint to the Police or to his superiors with regard to the said

altercation. The Accused-Appellant takes up the position at page 53 that if

there was an altercation of this nature he should have complained it to the

Divisional Secretary of the area. He admits that he had not done so. He

further admits that he did not complain to the Police. He has failed to give

any reason as to why he did not complain to the Police. We have examined

his entry made in the diary which was marked “V1”. In the said diary he

admits that he visited the place of the Complainant. But he has not

produced any document or any decision of the government relating to the

expansion of the road. When we examine the said entry we are unable to

find that there was any request by the villagers to expand the road. When

we consider all the above evidence, we feel that the evidence of the Accused-

Appellant does not create any reasonable doubt in the prosecution case. We

also hold that the rejection of the evidence of the Accused-Appellant by the

Magistrate is correct.

SC.Appeal No.114/2017

5

Considering all the evidence led at the trial, we hold that the prosecution

has proved its case beyond reasonable doubt. In view of the conclusion

reached above, we answer the questions of law raised by the Accused-

Appellant in the negative. For the above reasons, we affirm the judgment of

the High Court Judge and the Magistrate and dismiss this appeal.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

K.T. CHITRASIRI, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

L.T.B. DEHIDENIYA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Mks