==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 15

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal under

Article 128(2) of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic

of Sri Lanka.

S.C. Appeal No: Rajakaruna Mudiyanselage

49/2024 Leelawathie,

Mudungoda,

SC/SPL/LA No: Kiralogama.

194/2023 PETITIONER

CA Writ Application No. Vs.

CA(Writ) 306/19 1. Director General,

Mahaweli Authority,

No. 500,

T.B. Jaya Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

2. Resident Project Manager

(Land),

Resident of RPM (Land),

Thambuththegama.

3. Commissioner of Lands,

Land Commissioner’s

Department,

Colombo 07.

Page 2 of 15

4. Registrar of Lands,

Land Registry,

Anuradhapura.

5. Rajakaruna Mudiyanselage

Padmawathi,

Mudungoda,

Kiralogama.

6. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

AND NOW BETWEEN

Rajakaruna Mudiyanselage

Leelawathi,

Mudungoda,

Kiralogama.

PETITIONER-APPELLANT

Vs.

1. Director General,

Mahaweli Authority,

No. 500,

T.B. Jaya Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

2. Resident Project Manager

(Land),

Resident of RPM (Land),

Thambuththegama.

Page 3 of 15

3. Commissioner of Lands,

Land Commissioner’s

Department,

Colombo 07.

4. Registrar of Lands,

Land Registry,

Anuradhapura.

5. Rajakaruna Mudiyanselage

Padmawathi,

Mudungoda,

Kiralogama.

6. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS-RESPONDENTS

Before : Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

: Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

: Sampath K. B. Wijeratne, J.

Counsel : Priyantha Alagiyawanna with Sauri Senanayake

instructed by Sachini Maheshika for the Petitioner-

Apppellant.

: Vijithsingh instructed by Dinesh de Silva for the 5th

Respondent-Respondent.

Page 4 of 15

: Chaya Sri Nammuni, DSG with Hashini Opatha,

SSC, for the 1st to 4th and 6th Respondent-

Respondents.

Argued on : 06-08-2025

Written Submissions : 09-09-2025 (By the Petitioner-Appellant)

: 16-05-2024 (By the Petitioner-Appellant)

: 10-09-2025 (By the 1st to 4th and 6th Respondent-

Respondents)

: 25-10-2024 (By the 1st to 4th and 6th Respondent-

Respondents)

: 17-09-2025 (By the 5th Respondent-Respondent)

: 19-09-2024 (By the 5th Respondent-Respondent)

Decided on : 21-11-2025

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

This is an appeal preferred by the petitioner-appellant (hereinafter referred to

as the appellant) on the basis of being aggrieved of the judgment pronounced

by the Court of Appeal on 31-05-2023, wherein the Writ Application preferred

by the appellant was dismissed.

This is a matter where the appellant sought a mandate in the nature of a Writ

of Certiorari to quash the nominations in the documents marked as P-8, P-9

and P-10 along with her petition, and also a mandate in the nature of a Writ

of Mandamus as prayed for in the petition.

The Court of Appeal from the impugned judgment refused to grant the said

reliefs and dismissed the Writ Application without costs for the reasons set

out in the said judgment.

Page 5 of 15

When this appeal was considered for the granting of leave to appeal by this

Court on 14-03-2024, leave was granted by this Court on the following

questions of law.

1. Have their Lordships of the Court of Appeal misdirected themselves

in law and/or in fact when they failed to consider that as per section

48A(2) of the Land Development Ordinance, irrespective of the fact

that the original allotee or the selected prospective permit holder had

died prior to the issuance of a permit, his spouse is only entitled to

life interests as provided by section 48A(2) of the Land Development

Ordinance, and the spouse has no right to make any nomination?

2. Have their Lordships of the Court of Appeal misdirected themselves

in law and/or in fact when they failed to identify that once a land is

reserved under a person’s name, even if the said person passes

away, the spouse is entitled only to life interest?

3. Have the Honourable Judges of the Court of Appeal misdirected

themselves to law and/or in the fact when they failed to identify that

as per the scheme of the Land Development Ordinance, when there

was a nomination from the original allotee selected and/or

prospective permit holder, his nomination is valid and shall prevail

irrespective of the fact that he has died prior to the issuance of the

permit?

4. Whether Nandawathie had succeeded as a permit holder and not as

a life interest holder in 1980 upon a death of Punchirala, in terms of

Section 26 Rule 1 of the Sale of State Land (Special Provisions) Act

No. 43 of 1973?

5. Whether in terms of Section 19(2) of the Land Development

Ordinance, the permit could have been issued to Punchirala as he

had died in 1980?

6. In the circumstances, whether Nandawathie had become the original

permit holder in terms of the Land Development Ordinance

Page 6 of 15

inasmuch as she could not have been issued of the permit in terms

of Act No. 43 of 1973?

When this matter was taken up for argument, it was agreed by the parties

that this matter could be argued together with SC Appeal No. 48/2024, since

the facts and the circumstances, and the law that should be considered are

similar. It was agreed that a single judgment can be pronounced, but the

questions of law that need determination in relation to both the matters

should be answered separately.

At the hearing of the appeal on 06-08-2025, this Court heard the submissions

of the learned Counsel, and also had the benefit of considering the pre-

argument as well as post-argument written submissions in relation to their

respective stands taken up before the Court.

Although the parties agreed to have a single judgment, it is my view that it

would be prudent to pronounce two separate judgments in view of the slight

variations as to the facts and the questions of law under which the two

appeals were argued, which would in my view provide better clarity.

The appellant has gone before the Court of Appeal on the basis of being the

daughter of the deceased Rajakaruna Mudiyanselage Punchirala and the

claimed legal successor of the subject matter of the application under the

provisions of the Land Development Ordinance (LDO).

It has been her position that her father Punchirala developed three plots of

paddy land situated at Eppawala with the consent of the Mahaweli Authority

(referred to as Lot 492, Lot 467, and Lot 491), and therefore, the Mahaweli

Authority conveyed the said lands to Punchirala as per the land ledger and

the State Land permits issued in that regard. It was her position that the said

three lands were conveyed and allocated to her father in the year 1979 under

the provisions of LDO (the documents marked P-2 and P-2A filed together with

the petition before the Court of Appeal).

It has been her position that it is she who further developed the land Lot 467

with the consent of her father and other siblings, and even after her father’s

death on 29-10-1980, it was she who cultivated and possessed the said lands.

Page 7 of 15

She has contended that her mother Nandawathie fell ill in the year 2008 and

requested that she should leave the land she was cultivating, which resulted

in finding out that her mother had been issued with a permit to the said Lot

467 and also a State Grant in terms of section 19(4) of the LDO in relation to

the land.

It has been her position that upon further inquiry, she found out that in the

land permits issued to her father in relation to the earlier mentioned three

lands, her father’s name has been struck off and her mother’s name has been

entered as the permit holder [(documents marked P-7 and P-6) and (permit

no. 407/D5/To44/02 alias 467)].

It has been her position that as a result, her mother has obtained the land

grants in relation to the said lands under her name and has nominated the

5th respondent as her successor in relation to land lot 467, which she termed

as an illegal nomination.

Claiming that it is she who is entitled to succeed to the land given to her father

under the permit as the nominee of her father in terms of the LDO, she has

prayed for a mandate in the nature of a Writ of Certiorari to quash the

documents marked P-8, P-9 and P-10. She has prayed for a mandate in the

nature of a Writ of Mandamus, directing the 1st to 3rd respondents named in

the Court of Appeal petition that her name should be entered as the nominee

or successor of the land mentioned in the land grant marked P-5 and the

corresponding land ledger marked P-7 as per the regulations in the LDO. She

has also prayed for a Writ of Mandamus directing the 4th respondent to delete

the nomination registered in the land registry.

The Court of Appeal in the impugned judgment has determined that the

earlier mentioned Punchirala, the father of the appellant, has been selected

to alienate the State Lands mentioned in the petition in terms of the Sale of

State Lands (Special Provisions) Law, and since he has passed away before

any permit could be issued to him, the said permits had been issued to his

widow Nandawathie, and that was the reason for the deletion of Punchirala’s

name and substituting the name of Nandawathie in the said land permits.

Page 8 of 15

It has been the view of the Court of Appeal that accordingly, the State Grants

in terms of section 19(4) of the LDO have been properly granted to

Nandawathie, and it is she who has the right to nominate her successor.

It has been determined that there was no basis for the Court of Appeal to

issue Writs in the nature of Certiorari and Mandamus, while holding that the

appellant is not entitled to the reliefs sought.

At the hearing of this appeal, the learned Counsel for the appellant

strenuously argued that in terms of section 48A(2) of the LDO, irrespective of

the fact that the original allotee/selected prospective permit holder had died

prior to the issuance of the permit or not, his spouse is only entitled to life

interest and the spouse has no right to make any nomination. It was his

contention that even if the grants were being issued in terms of section 19(4)

of the LDO, the positions still remain the same.

It was his position that in terms of section 2 of the LDO, the term ‘permit-

holder’ should mean any person to whom a permit has been issued and

includes a person who is in occupation in any land alienated on a permit

although no permit has actually been issued. Therefore, it was his position

that Punchirala’s spouse Nandawathie to whom the grant has been issued in

terms of section 19(4) can only have life interest, where she would not have

the power to dispose or nominate a successor.

The learned Counsel heavily relied on the judgment of Obeyesekere, J.

pronounced in the case of Jayathilaka Vs. Divisional Secretary Kuruwita

and Others (2021) 2 SLR 430 and the judgment pronounced by the Supreme

Court on 09-11-2023 in SC Appeal 166/2017 where Samayawardhena, J.

has extensively discussed the legal effects of a permit and a grant issued in

terms of section 19(2) and 19(4) of the LDO.

The position taken up on behalf of the respondents was that since the original

allocation of the lands to Punchirala was made in terms of the Sale of State

Lands (Special Provisions) Law No. 43 of 1973, although the said Law has

later been repealed, the Law that should be considered as applicable in

Page 9 of 15

relation to the issuing of permit to Nandawathie instead of Punchirala should

be that and not the LDO.

It was the position of the learned Counsel that section 26 of the said Law is

the relevant provision under which the relevant authority has decided to

change the name of the allotee of the lands in question after the death of the

original allotee, and accordingly, permits issued in terms of section 19(2) and

the grants issued under section 19(4) have been issued in the name of

Nandawathie in terms of the LDO. It was submitted on behalf of the

respondents that since Nandawathie was the original permit holder, it is she

who has the right to nominate the successor in terms of the LDO, and the

nomination is legal and valid before the law.

Having considered the above factual matrix and the legal arguments advanced

before the Court, it is my view that the central question that needs

consideration would be whether Nandawathie, the mother of the appellant, is

the person who was given the original permit or the permit has been given

only on the basis that she is the widow of the original allotee or permit holder,

and if not, whether she has any right to nominate a successor on her own

motion as she has done in this particular occasion.

It is clear that when the father of the appellant, namely Punchirala, was

selected for the sale of the State Lands mentioned in the petition, the said

selection was done on 21-09-1979 in terms of Sale of State Lands (Special

Provisions) Law of No. 43 of 1973 (P-2). It is undisputed that the said

Punchirala passed away on 20-10-1980 before being issued with a permit or

a grant in terms of the said Law.

The document marked P-7, the relevant land ledger establishes the fact that

the ledger in relation to this land has been prepared in the name of

Nandawathie on the basis that Punchirala has passed away.

Although the Sale of State Lands (Special Provisions) Law has been repealed

on 05-05-1981 by the Amendment Act No. 27 of 1981 of the LDO, there

cannot be any doubt that the applicable law at the time Punchirala passed

away in relation to the allocation of the lands to him has been the Sale of

Page 10 of 15

State Lands (Special Provisions) Law. It may be the very reason why the

relevant authority has decided to insert Nandawathie’s name in the land

ledger having considered the applicability of section 26 of the Law in relation

to the devolution of title in case of a death of a permit holder or holder of a

grant although there was no permit.

It appears that since the Sale of State Lands (Special Provisions) Law stands

repealed from the 05-05-1981, when the permit was finally issued on 12-12-

1984, it has been issued in terms of section 19(2) of the LDO. The grant in

respect of the questioned land has also been issued to the said Nandawathie

in terms of section 19(4) of the LDO (the document marked P-5). The said

grant has been issued on 17-01-2002.

Therefore, it is my considered view that when the land permit in terms of

section 19(2) of the LDO was issued in the name of Nandawathie, the permit

has not been issued on the basis that she was the widow of the original permit

holder Punchirala, but on the basis that she is the person who should get the

permit since the original allotee Punchirala was never issued with a permit in

terms of either the Sale of State Lands (Special Provisions) Law or LDO, due

to the fact that he has passed away in the year 1980.

It is therefore clear that the said Nandawathie has been issued with the

corresponding grant in terms of section 19(4) of the LDO on the same basis.

Accordingly, I am of the view that the said Nandawathie had the legal right to

nominate her successors and to nominate the 5th respondent as shown in the

documents marked P-8 and P-9.

It needs to be noted that the case relied on by the appellant, namely the case

of Jayathilaka Vs. Divisional Secretary, Kuruwita and Others (supra), was

not a case where similar facts as in this case had been considered. In the said

case, the permit under the provisions of the LDO has been issued in the name

of one Rathran Hami and the said Rathran Hami had nominated Pahala

Gamaethiralalage Jayathilaka as his successor in the permit itself. Upon the

death of the said Rathran Hami, his spouse Gunarathne Manike has

Page 11 of 15

succeeded to the said land in terms of section 48A(1) of the LDO as amended

by Amendment Act No. 27 of 1981.

It has been an admitted fact that the only entitlement that the said

Gunarathne Manike had to the land was by virtue of being the surviving

spouse of the original permit holder. The said Gunarathne Manike has been

granted the permit to the land in terms of section 19(4) of the LDO and she

has in turn, based on the strength of the grant in her favour, has nominated

one of her other daughters as the successor to the said land.

The question before the Court is whether it is the nominee of the original

permit holder, namely Jayathilaka, or the nominee of the Gunarathne Manike

who had a grant in her favour as the wife of the original permit holder who

should be considered as the successor of the land upon the death of the said

Gunarathne Manike.

It was under that context the Court of Appeal has considered the provisions

of section 48A(2) of the Ordinance in determining that such a spouse shall be

entitled to a grant of that land, but the said spouse would not have the power

to nominate a successor to that land. It was held that it would be the

successor nominated by the original permit holder who can succeed to the

land mentioned in the grant accordingly.

However, the facts of the matter before this Court are quite different, although

it may look somewhat similar.

As I have stated previously, the relevant document submitted to the Court of

Appeal clearly demonstrates the fact that the mother of the appellant, namely

Nandawathie, has not been given the grant on the basis of being the spouse

of the permit holder, but the said Nandawathie is the permit holder.

It is my view that there is no basis to argue that section 48A(1) or 48A(2)

should be the provision applicable when it comes to nominating a successor

to the land in question.

Page 12 of 15

It is clear that Nandawathie, being the permit holder on her own right, has

been granted the relevant permit in terms of section 19(4) of the LDO.

The relevant section 19(4) of the Ordinance reads as follows,

19(4). A permit-holder shall be issued a grant in respect of the land

which he is in occupation

(a) Where he has paid all sums which he is required to pay

under subsection (2);

(b) Where he has complied with all the other conditions

specified in the Schedule to the permit; and

(c) Where he has been in occupation of, and fully developed,

to the satisfaction of the Government Agent

(i) irrigated land, for a period of three years, or

(ii) high land for a period of one year:

Provided, however, that the Land Commissioner may issue a grant

before the expiry of the aforesaid period where the permit-holder

satisfies him that the failure to issue such grant before the expiry

of such period would adversely affect the development of such

land.

For the aforementioned reasons, I find that the learned Judges of the Court

of Appeal were correct when it refused to issue Writs in the nature of Certiorari

and Mandamus as sought by the appellant, though the Court has not

considered the relevant legal provisions and its applicability to the matter at

hand in detail.

However, it needs to be emphasized that the granting of a Writ is a

discretionary remedy that would be afforded to a party only upon the

discretion of the Court. In such an instance, the conduct of a party who seeks

such a Writ is also immensely relevant.

It is well settled law that a Writ would not lie if the party is guilty of laches or

due to unnecessary delay and in similar circumstances.

Page 13 of 15

In the case of Biso Menika Vs. Cyril de Alwis and Others (1982) 1 SLR, it

was stated that;

Per Sharvananda, J., citing Lord Greene stated,

“A Writ of Certiorari is issued at the discretion of the Court. It cannot be

held to be a Writ of right or one issued as a matter of course. But exercise

of this discretion by Court is governed by certain well-accepted principles.

The Court is bound to issue a Writ at the instance of a party aggrieved

by the order of an inferior tribunal except in cases where he has

disentitled himself to the discretionary relief by reason of his own

conduct, like submitting to jurisdiction, laches, undue delay or waiver. As

Lord Greene M.R. in Rex Vs. Stafford Justices (1940) 2 K.B 33 at page 43

stated,

“Now, in my opinion, the Order, for the issue of Writ of Certiorari

is, except in cases where it goes of course, strictly in all cases a

matter of discretion, It is perfectly true to say that if no special

circumstance exists and if all that appears is a clear excess of

jurisdiction, then a person aggrieved by that is, entitled ex debito

justitiae to his Order. That merely means this, in my judgment, that

the Court in such circumstances will exercise its discretion by

granting the relief. In all discretionary remedies it is well known

and settled that in certain circumstances - I will not say in all of

them, but in a great many of them - the Court, although nominally

it has a discretion, if it is to act according to the ordinary principles

upon which judicial discretion is exercised, must exercise the

discretion in a particular way and if a Judge at a trial refuses to

do so then the Court of Appeal will set the matter right. But when

once it is established that in deciding whether or not a particular

remedy shall be granted the Court is entitled to inquire into the

conduct of the applicant, and circumstances of the case, in order to

Page 14 of 15

ascertain whether it is proper or not proper to grant the remedy

sought, the case must in my judgment be one of discretion.”

The proposition that the application for Writ must be sought as soon as

injury is caused is merely an application of the equitable doctrine that

delay defeats equity and the longer the injured person sleeps over his

rights without any reasonable excuse the chances of his success in a Writ

application dwindle and the Court may reject a Writ application on the

ground of unexplained delay.”

The appellant has filed her action before the Court of Appeal on the 23rd day

of July 2019. The appellant being the daughter of Punchirala and

Nandawathie and the claimed occupier of the said land, it is hard to believe

what she has stated in her petition that she came to know only in 2008 after

her mother fell ill that the said grant had been issued in favour of her mother

Nandawathie. In my view, given the facts of the matter, she should have

known that fact from the very outset.

Even if she came to know about the grant and the nomination made by her

mother in 2008 in favour of her other sibling, namely the 5th respondent, she

has come before the Court of Appeal seeking to quash the said nomination by

way of a Writ more than 10 years after the said finding, as claimed in her

petition.

Although she has attempted to justify the said delay by stating that she

complained to the relevant authorities in order to get the nomination

cancelled and get her name approved as the successor, which resulted in the

delay, I find no basis to agree.

For the aforementioned reasons, I answer the questions of law formulated by

the Court in the following manner,

1. Considering the matter in terms of section 48A(2) of the LDO, it does

not arise as Nandawathie was the person to whom the permit has

been granted.

2. Punchirala has been named as the allotee of the land and had

passed away before he was issued with a permit, and the relevant

Page 15 of 15

law applicable to the allotment at the time of his death was the Sale

of State Lands (Special Provisions) Law and the question of life

interest of the spouse would not arise.

3. No.

4. Yes.

5. No.

6. Yes.

Based on the above answers to the considered questions of law, the appeal is

dismissed as I find no merit in the same.

The parties shall bear their own costs of the appeal.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Sampath K. B. Wijeratne, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court