IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal underArticle 128(2) of the Constitution of theDemocratic Socialist Republic of SriLanka.

Hon. Attorney- General,Attorney-Generals DepartmentColombo 12SC/Appeal/ 21/ 2021SC (Spl.) L.A. No 210/2019CA Case No. 238-239/13HC Kegalle Case No. 2438/06

COMPLAINANT

Vs.

1. Poththegodage Anula

Chandralatha2. Andawalage Nimal Sarath

Kumara

ACCUSED

AND BETWEEN

1. Poththegodage Anula

Chandralatha2. Andawalage Nimal Sarath

Kumara

ACCUSED-APPELLANTS

Vs.

1

Hon. Attorney- General,Attorney-GeneralsDepartmentColombo 12

COMPLAINANT- RESPONDENTS

AND NOW BETWEEN

Andawalage Nimal Sarath Kumara

2ndACCUSED APPELLANT-APPELLANT

Vs.

Hon. Attorney- General,Attorney-GeneralsDepartmentColombo 12

COMPLAINANT- RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT

Poththegodage Anula Chandralatha

1ST ACCUSED- APPELLANT- RESPONDENT

BEFORE:MURDU N.B. FERNANDO, PC, J.K.KUMUDINI WICKREMASINGHE, J.MAHINDA SAMAYAWARDHENA, J.

COUNSEL:Srinath Perera, PC with Miss. Angela and RahulJayathillake for the 2nd Accused- Appellant- Appellant.

Azard Navavi, DSG for theComplainant-Respondent-Respondent.

2

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS: Written Submissions by the 2nd Accused-Appellant- Appellant on 29.06.2021

ARGUED ON:26.05.2022

DECIDED ON:27.09.2023

K. KUMUDINI WICKREMASINGHE, J.

The application for special leave to appeal was preferred by the 2nd AccusedAppellant Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Appellant) against thejudgment of the Court of Appeal dated 10.05.2014 affirming the convictions andthe sentences imposed against the 1st and 2nd Accused Appellants and dismissingtheir Appeal. Aggrieved by which the 2nd Accused Appellant Appellant appealedto the Supreme Court.

Accordingly, this Court by order dated 22.02.2021 granted Special leave toappeal on the following questions of law:

1. That the Hon. High Court and the Hon. Judges of the Court of Appeal

failed to take into consideration and properly evaluate the items ofevidence led on behalf of the parties at the trial.2. This being a case based on circumstantial evidence, the Hon. High Court

Judge and the Hon. Judges of the court of appeal failed to properlyconsider and correctly apply the relevant principles applicable to such acase in order to arrive at a decision in the said case.3. The Hon. High Court Judge and the Hon. Judges of the Court of Appeal

failed to evaluate the evidence led against each accused in this case,separately, in arriving at a decision against each such accused.

Two Accused namely, Poththegodage Anula Chandralatha who was the 1stAccused (1st Accused Appellant Respondent) and Andawalage Nimal SarathKumara who was the 2nd Accused (2nd Accused Appellant Appellant) wereindicted in the High Court of Kegalle under section 296 of the Penal Code readwith section 32 of the Penal Code, for committing murder of one Ajith KithsiriRuwan Kumara. Both Accused, upon the charge in the indictment being readover and explained to them, pleaded not guilty to the said charge. Both Accusedopted to try the case without a jury and the trial commenced on 25.11.2013. The

3

prosecution called 7 witnesses and closed its case after marking P1 to P6 asproductions. When the defense was called both Accused gave dock statementsdenying the charge.After the conclusion of the trial, the Learned High CourtJudge convicted both the Accused for committing murder as per the indictmentand imposed the death sentence as required under section 296 of the Penal Code.

The facts of the case briefly are as follows,

As per the evidence given by Prosecution Witness Thilakarathna (PW1), on thedate in question the witness had visited the house of the 1st Accused AppellantRespondent around 6:30 pm to consume illicit alcohol (Kasippu). The witnessstated that he had seen the deceased who was the husband of the 1st AccusedAppellant Respondent lying on a partially built wall in close proximity to thehouse of the 1st Accused Appellant Respondent. The witness claimed that whenhe inquired about the condition of the deceased, the 1st Accused AppellantRespondent replied asking him to mind his own business. The witness stated thatthe 2nd Accused Appellant Appellant was present a few feet away from the 1stAccused Appellant Respondent at that time and that both of them had asked thewitness not to leave the premises. The witness stated that at around 9:00 or 9:30pm he saw the 2nd Accused Appellant Appellant carrying the body of thedeceased, closely followed by the 1st Accused Appellant Respondent. Whenquestioned during the Examination in chief on what the witness had observedwhen the body of the deceased was carried by the 2nd Accused AppellantAppellant, the witness stated he had observed that the deceaseds neck had beendisplaced and stated that . After which thetwo accused had proceeded to dispose of the body of the deceased into the toiletpit located at the premises of the 1st Accused Appellant Respondent. When thewitness was questioned on the events that he had witnessed the witness stated inresponse that . Thereafter, the 2ndAccused Appellant Appellant had placed timber planks and laid fertiliser bags ontop of the pit in order to cover the pit.

According to the evidence of the Investigative Officer J R Seneviratne (PW9) the1st Accused Appellant Respondent had made a complaint to the Police that herhusband had disappeared. The formal investigation into the incident commencedon 03.05.1999. The Investigating Officer claimed that on information received byinformants and persons who visited the town, the property of the 1st AccusedAppellant Respondent was searched. On the search of the property the officermade observations of a toilet pit, which was situated within the said property. The

4

officer stated that he commenced investigations regarding a toilet pit in thecompound of the house where the deceased had lived with the 1st AccusedAppellant Respondent, after a statement had been recorded from the 1st AccusedAppellant Respondent. Following which, the body of the victim was discovered.A section 27 statement of the Evidence Ordinance has been led in evidence bythe Prosecution which stated that . The officer further stated that witness PW1 was arrested onsuspicion but he was not named as an accused.

Dr. Prassana Bandara Dissanayake (PW7), the Judicial Medical Officer gaveevidence with regard to the post-mortem examination of the body of thedeceased, conducted by him. He observed that there were 10 injuries on the bodyof the deceased.The first injury was a stab injury which in his opinion wascaused by an axle and that was fatal. He stated that the 3rd and 4th injuries couldhave been caused as a result of falling. He stated that there were serious injurieson the head that may have been caused by a blunt weapon like a stone.

According to the evidence of the S. I. Thilakaratne Nissanka (PW14), a stone hadbeen recovered in terms of a section 27 statement of the Evidence Ordinancemade by the 2nd Accused Appellant Appellant., stating that . However, the recovered stone has not been produced in evidence at thetrial.

The Deceased and the 1st Accused Appellant Respondents daughter K.V.Tharusha Chathurika Kithsiri (PW2) gave evidence. She stated that on the16.04.1999 morning, she had asked her mother, the 1st Accused AppellantRespondent about the whereabouts of her father (the deceased) to which hermother had replied stating that he had gone for work. The witness stated that shedid not observe anything along the footpath; however, she saw her motherremoving some earth with red colour powder. The witness stated that sheinquired from her mother what the red colour powder was and she stated that herfather had left after having a row with her and hitting her with bricks.

Having considered at length the evidence of witness PW1, the evidence of thedaughter witness PW2 and the evidence provided by the Police officersinvestigating the incident, the Learned High Court Judge decided against both the1st Accused Appellant Respondent and the 2nd Accused Appellant Appellant.Considering the conduct of the two Accused, the method thereof have adopted indisposing the body, to their conduct soon after, amount to the one and only

5

conclusion that can be arrived by court is that both of them have committed themurder of the deceased.

Being aggrieved by the judgement of the High Court, the 1st Accused AppellantRespondent and the 2nd Accused Appellant Appellant had appealed to the Courtof Appeal complaining inter alia that the Learned High Court Judge misdirectedherself when admitting the evidence under section 27 of the Evidence Ordinance,the evaluation of the evidence given by PW1 is bad in law, the Learned HighCourt Judge misdirected herself by anticipating a reasonable explanation from thesaid Appellant when the prosecution had failed to establish a prima facie caseagainst the 1st Accused Appellant Respondent, the Learned High Court Judgefailed to evaluate the medical evidence against the sole eye witness testimony andthe Learned High Court Judge has not properly considered and evaluated theevidence against the 2nd Accused Appellant Appellant.

The Honourable Judges of the Court of Appeal upon perusal of the evidenceconcluded that on the 1st ground of appeal that the evidence under section 27 ofthe Evidence Ordinance is unsafe to act upon. The Honourable Judges of theCourt of Appeal thereafter considered the 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th grounds of appealtogether as it was all in relation to the credibility of evidence given by witness(PW1). The Honourable Judges of the Court of Appeal observed that the LearnedHigh Court Judge had placed a heavy reliance on the evidence provided by PW1to hold the 1st Accused Appellant Respondent and the 2nd Accused AppellantAppellant guilty. PW1 was initially a suspect in this case however, no evidencewas provided on the circumstances that led to his arrest. The Learned Counsel forthe Appellants questioned the belatedness of the statements given to the police byPW1. The Honourable Judges of the Court of Appeal observed that not a singlequestion had been put forth towards the witness for the belatedness of making thesaid statement. The witness, however, in his evidence had offered an explanationas to why he could not make a statement to the Police soon after the incident hadtaken place, as the 1st Accused Appellant Respondent and the 2nd AccusedAppellant Appellant had repeatedly threatened him and asked him to refrain fromgiving any information about the incident. Further, PW1 had seen both the 1st

Accused Appellant Respondent and the 2nd Accused Appellant Appellant at thecrime scene at or about the time the crime was committed, he observed that thedead body was held by the 2nd Accused Appellant Appellant who was closelyfollowed by the 1st Accused Appellant Respondent and dumped into the toiletpit. PW1 has stood by this position in both the examination in chief and

6

cross-examination and the Honourable Judges of the Court of Appeal observedthat there was no motive on part of PW1 to implicate the Appellants in this crime.

The Honourable Judges of the Court of Appeal upon evaluation of the evidenceconcluded that there was no inconsistency in the lack of credibility with regard tothe evidence given by PW1 and that the Learned High Court Judge was correct inaccepting the said evidence. The Honourable Judges of the Court of Appealupheld the conviction and sentence of the Learned High Court Judge, dismissingthe appeal.

Being aggrieved by the decision of the Court of Appeal, the 2nd AccusedAppellant Appellant by Petition dated 17.06.2019 sought Special Leave toAppeal from this Court. Accordingly, this Court granted Special Leave to Appealfrom the aforementioned judgement of the Court of Appeal.

The Learned Counsel for the 2nd Accused Appellant Appellant submitted thatthere were no eyewitnesses to this case and it was purely based on thecircumstantial evidence. The witness PW1 had been arrested by the police as asuspect, however later on named as a witness of the prosecution. 4 contradictionshad been marked on behalf of the Appellant during the cross-examination of thewitness of PW1 but the Learned Trial Judge has failed to properly evaluate thosecontradictions. The Learned Counsel further submitted that even though evidencehas been led by the Prosecution that several productions were recovered on thestatement of the appellant, but failed to mark the said production in the course ofthe trial. No Government Analysis Reports were marked. Only a section 27statement under the Evidence Ordinance has been marked in evidence against theAppellant without even the productions being produced.

The Learned Counsel for the 2nd Accused Appellant Appellant submitted that theonly evidence available against the appellant is that he assisted in the disposal ofthe body and that a stone on which there is said to have been a few strands of hairhad been recovered on a Section 27 statement however the stone or strands ofhair had not been produced in court and there was no expert evidence placedbefore the court that the said strands recovered by the Police. The LearnedCounsel for the 2nd Accused Appellant Appellant further submitted that thedaughter of the 1st Accused Appellant Respondent, witness PW2 (K. V. TharushaChathurikaKithsiri) commenced giving evidence on 25.11.2013, at theconclusion of the proceedings she had been released on Rs.10,000/- bail and thatthis amounts to pressure/fear being put on the witness.

7

I will now proceed to address the first question of law namely that The LearnedHigh Court Judge and the Hon. Judges of the Court of Appeal failed to take intoconsideration and properly evaluate the items of evidence led on behalf of theparties at the trial

In order to address and answer the first question of law I must first evaluate theevidence led at the trial. The evidence led included the testimony of the PW1Thilakarathna and PW2 Chathurika Kithsiri, the testimony of the investigatingPolice Officers and the testimony of the JMO who conducted the Post MortemExamination. The Learned High Court Judge had placed heavy reliance on thetestimony of PW1 and PW2. PW1 in his testimony stated the manner in whichthe 2nd Accused Appellant Appellant along with the 1st Accused AppellantRespondent had disposed of the body of the deceased by putting the body into thetoilet pit situated on the property of the 1st Accused Appellant Appellant. Basedon the testimony of the investigating Police Officer (PW9), who stated that, thesearch of the property which led to the discovery of the body of the deceased inthe toilet pit was initiated based on information that he received from informants.The testimony of evidence provided by the Police Officer (PW14) investigatingthe offense stated that following a statement made to him by the 2nd AccusedAppellant Appellant that a stone had been discovered with strands similar tohuman hair seen on that stone. It is important to note however that this stone hasnot been produced to the court for the purposes of examination nor has any expertevidence been led on the ground that the strands of hair alleged to be caught onthe stone came from the body of the deceased or of the fact if the hair on thestone was even human hair.

Based on the evidence of the Judicial Medical Officer (PW7) who conducted thepost-mortem inquiry there were 10 injuries on the body, the 1st injury was mostlikely caused as a result of a stabbing and was fatal. He explained that there wereother injuries that could have been caused either by a blunt object or as a result offalling. The Judicial Medical Officer further stated that there were serious injuriescaused to the head of the deceased, he stated that it is difficult to adduce theextent of the injuries without conducting an examination of the brain however hetestified that these injuries were grave injuries caused to the head most likely by ablunt object.

The Police Officer who investigated the incident (PW9) stated in his evidencethat the investigation commenced on 03.05.1999 after 3 complaints were made tohim by the 1st Accused Appellant Respondent regarding the disappearance of her

8

husband. PW9 in his testimony stated that based on information received byinformants he became suspicious of the 1st Accused Appellant Respondent anddecided to search her property. After which he observed a toilet pit covered withwooden planks and fertiliser bags stacked on top of it situated within the propertybelonging to the 1st Accused Appellant Respondent. The witness stated hebecame suspicious upon such observation and recorded a statement from the 1stAccused Appellant Respondent and based on her statement, the body of thedeceased was recovered. However, the Honourable Justices of the Court ofAppeal correctly observed that, the part of the statement that led to the discoveryof the body is dated 05.04.1999 marked 1, which is almost one month prior tothe date the investigation had been initiated as stated by PW9 in his testimonybefore court. The testimony of PW9 reflects the correct date of discovery of thebody which he stated to be 03.05.1999.The true copy of the extract of theInformation Book of Ruwanwella Police is dated 05.04.1999 which could be atyping error.However, I agree with the reasoning of the Learned Justices of theCourt of Appeal for not acting upon the section 27 statement of the EvidenceOrdinance (This could have been clarified by the Learned High Court Judgeduring the trial stage).

Thus, the main evidence that remains is the evidence led against the two Accusedare the statements made by the Witnesses PW1 and PW2. Justice Jayasuriya inSumansena V Attorney General [1999] 3 Sri L.R. at 137 observed that In ourlaw of evidence the salutary principle is enunciated that evidence must not becounted but weighed and the evidence of a single solitary witness if cogent andimpressive could be acted upon by a court of law. Section 134 of the EvidenceOrdinance sets out that no particular number of witnesses shall, in any case, berequired for the proof of any fact. Their Lordships in the above judgement areof the view that a person may be convicted even on the evidence of one witness.

In the case of the Attorney General V. Sandanam Pitchi Mary Theresa [2011]2 Sri LR 292 Supreme Court held; Credibility is a question of fact and not law.Appellate Judges have repeatedly stressed the importance of Trial Judgesobservation of the demeanor of witnesses in deciding questions of fact. Demeanorrepresents the Trial Judges opportunity to observe the witness and hisdeportment. The Learned High Court Judge in her judgement states that she isconvinced of the truthful nature of the witnesss testimony of PW1, by observingthe demeanor of and deportment of the witness despite being subjected to a longand protracted cross-examination.

9

In the case of Kotuwila Kankanamalage Premalal Leonard Perera vAttorney General [SC/Appeal/220/2014] decided on 09.11.2018 at page 05 theSupreme Court observed that It is evident that a Magistrate will only act on theevidence of a witness if the witness is a credible witness and the credibility istested mainly on the demeanor or deportment of a witness after applying severaltests such as probability/ improbability, spontaneity, belatedness, consistency/inconsistency, and/or interestedness/ disinterestedness/. It is apparent that theLearned High Court Judge and the Honourable Judges of the Court of Appealhave carefully analysed, evaluated, and weighed the evidence that was led in thetrial and was convinced that the testimonies of these two witnesses in Court werecogent and truthful in nature.

I am of the view that the prosecution has established a strong case withincriminating and cogent evidence against the Accused Appellants. Under thesecircumstances the evidence of the 2nd Accused Appellant Appellant (the dockstatement denying any and all involvement in the incident) had failed to createany reasonable doubt in the prosecution case.

Now I will proceed to address the second question of law namely that Thisbeing a case based on circumstantial evidence, the Learned High Court Judge andthe Hon. Judges of the Court of Appeal failed to properly consider and correctlyapply the relevant principles applicable to such a case in order to arrive at adecision in the said case.

The rule regarding circumstantial evidence and its effect, has been stated byChief Justice Shaw in the American Case of Commonwealth v Webster [1850]5 Cush. 295, 59 Mass. 295 the following words which have been referred to inSeetin v The Queen [1965] 68 NLR 316 at 322. Where probable proof isbrought of a statement of facts tending to criminate the accused, the absence ofevidence tending to a contrary conclusion is to be considered though not aloneentitled to much weight, because the burden of proof lies on the accuser to makeout the whole case by substantive evidence. But when pretty stringent proof ofcircumstances is produced tending to support the charge, and it is apparent thatthe accused is so situated that he could offer evidence of all the facts andcircumstances as they exist, and show, if such was the truth, that the suspiciouscircumstances can be accounted for consistently with his innocence and he failsto offer such proof, the natural conclusion is that the proof, if produced, insteadof rebutting, would tend to sustain the charge

10

This view has been reiterated in the case of King vs. Abeywickrama [1943] 44NLR 254 where it was held that In order to base a conviction on circumstantialevidence the Jury must be satisfied that the evidence was consistent with the guilt of theaccused and inconsistent with any reasonable hypothesis of his innocence.

Based on the evaluation of the evidence, the prosecution case hinges entirely onthe testimony of Thilkaratne (PW1) in which he stated that he witnessed the 2ndAccused Appellant Appellant followed by the 1st Accused Appellant Respondentdispose of the body of the deceased into the toilet pit.

In the case of Bhojraj v Sita Ram [1935] AIR, 193 PC 60 at 62 Lord Roche setout the real test for accepting and rejecting a testimony of a witness based ontestimonial trustworthiness stating that How consistent is the story with itself(consistency per se). How does it stand the test of cross-examination? (Stabilityunder cross-examination) How far it fits in with the rest of the evidence and thecircumstances of the case (inconsistency inter se). It is important to note thatPW1 has maintained the same position in his testimony throughout the trial.

In order to convict an Accused person on the basis of circumstantial evidence it isthe duty of the court to be satisfied that the facts proved are consistent with theguilt of the accused and that the facts proved exclude every other possibility otherthan the guilt of the accused. In the case of Gunawardena v the Republic[1981] 2 SLR 315 CA it was held that Each piece of circumstantial evidence isnot a link in a chain for if one link breaks the chain would fail. Circumstantialevidence is more like a rope composed of several cords. One strand of rope maybe insufficient to sustain the weight but three stranded together may be quitesufficient.

In the case of Hanumant vs State of M.P [1952] AIR SC 343; 1953 Cri LJ 129have laid down the following conditions which must be fulfilled before a caseagainst an accused based on circumstantial evidence can be said to be fullyestablished;

(i) The circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn shouldbe fully established. The circumstances concerned must or should and not may beestablished;

(ii) The facts so established should be consistent only with the hypothesis of theguilt of the accused, that is to say, that should not be explainable on any otherhypothesis except that the accused is guilty;

11

(iii) The circumstances should be conclusive;

(iv) They should exclude every possible hypothesis except the one to be proved.

(v) There must be a chain of evidence so complete as not to leave any reasonableground for the conclusion consistent with the innocence of the accused and mustshow that in all human probability the act must have been done by the accused.

I am of the view that these conditions are fulfilled in the present case which issolely dependent on circumstantial evidence. The Prosecution has proved its caseaccording to the aforesaid measurements which are used on a case based oncircumstantial evidence. When considering the cumulative effect of the evidenceled in the present case, such as; the witness PW1s testimony of how the 2ndAccused Appellant Appellant and the 1st Accused Appellant Respondent haddisposed of the body of the deceased which indicates that the 2nd AccusedAppellant Appellant played a participatory role, PW2 witnessed her motherremoving some earth with some red powder-like substance from the footpath andthe testimony of the PW14 where he discovered a stone with human-like hairattached to it are all strands of evidence when considered together are sufficientto ascertain guilt on part of the both the Accused as all of these actions amount tothe concealment of the crime that they are accused of committing.

Now I will proceed to answer the third question of law, namely that The LearnedHigh Court Judge and the Hon. Judges of the Court of Appeal failed to evaluatethe evidence led against each accused in this case, separately, in arriving at adecision against each such accused.

In terms of evidence led against each accused, the evidence that is mostsignificant is the testimony of Thilakarathna PW1. The evidence given by PW2the 1st Accused Appellant Respondents daughter corroborates certain aspects ofthe testimony provided by Thilakarathna. Further based on the statementprovided by the 2nd Accused Appellant Appellant to the investigating PoliceOfficer (PW14) a stone had been discovered with hair similar to human hairattached to it, however, no expert evidence regarding this stone uncovered bysuch statement had been led in the trial. Therefore, the relevancy of its contentscannot be given any evidentiary value.

Thus, as reiterated above the main evidence against each accused is the testimonyof the two witnesses PW1 and PW2. It can be contended however that thetestimony provided by PW2 does not imply guilt on part of the 2nd Accused

12

Appellant Appellant as she claimed that she only saw her mother (the 1stAccused Appellant Respondent) clearing what looked like a red earth-likesubstance from the pathway approaching the house. Therefore the main evidenceinferring the involvement of the 2nd Accused Appellant Appellant of crime is thetestimony of PW1.

It is important to note that even though witness PW1 had been arrested onsuspicion he had never been charged with the commission of the offence andhence was never on the footing of an accomplice. This position has beenreiterated in the testimony of the investigating Police Officer (PW9). Thereforethe testimony of witness PW1 does not fall within the footing of section 133 ofthe Evidence Ordinance of Sri Lanka.

It has been raised by the Learned Counsel for the 2nd Accused AppellantAppellant that the witness PW1 was first arrested as a suspect but later named asa witness for the prosecution and that 4 contradictions have been marked in thetestimony of the witness during the cross-examination on the witness and that thelearned Trial Judge had failed to properly evaluate those contradictions. TheLearned High Court Judge in her Judgement states that the accused was arrestedas an accomplice and upon receiving a pardon has become a witness for the state.This contradicts the evidence provided by the Ruwanwella OIC Jayalath RalalageSenivartane (PW9) in which he stated that the witness was arrested on suspicionbut never named as an accused.

With regard to the contradictions marked in the testimony of the witness PW1,the Learned High Court Judge in her judgement stated that when a witness isgiving evidence about an occurrence that took place in the year 1999 in 2013there will be discrepancies as a witness is not expected to have a photographicmemory. Even though there were contradictions and lacunas in the testimony ofwitness PW1 those contradictions are not material because his stance remainedunchanged throughout the cross-examination process. Therefore, the LearnedJudge of the High Court was of the opinion that there was no reasonable doubtraised on testimony provided by the witness. I am in agreement with the stance ofthe Learned High Court Judge.

In C.D. Fields Law Relating to Witnesses 2nd Edition, on page 208 the Authorobserves as follows There is nothing in law to justify the proposition thatevidence of a witness, who happens to be cognizant of a crime, or who made noattempt to prevent it, or who did not disclose its commission, should only be

13

relied on to the same extent as an accomplice. The real question in such a casewas the degree of credit to be attached to the testimony of such a witness and thatdepends on all the facts and circumstances of the particular case.

In the case of Karunartne v Attorney General [2005] 2 Sri L R. 236, JusticeJagath Balapatabendi observed that Where evidence is generally reliable, muchimportance should not be attached to the minor discrepancies and technicalerrors. Such as the contradictions that were drawn from PW1 testimony whichcan be expected when a long period of time has elapsed since the incident andgiving evidence in court.

It was also raised that the statement from the witness was belated. Whenquestioned as to his delay in reporting to the Police the witness stated that he wasrepeatedly threatened by the 1st Accused Appellant Respondent and 2nd AccusedAppellant Appellant to remain quiet and not to disclose what he saw to anyone.He has given a reasonable explanation for making a belated statement. In the caseof Gamage Prabhath Janaka Nayana Priyantha Perera v Attorney General[CA/107/2012] decided on 27.05.2016 at page 6, Justice A.H.M.D Nawaz of theCourt of Appeal observed that Why the witness did not reveal a dastardly act orotherwise is a fact for him or her to explain and in fact if the explanation isplausible and credible the Court must act on the testimony albeit belated. If theexplanation offered for the delayed statement is plausible and acceptable and theCourt accepts the same as plausible, there is no reason to interfere with theconclusion made by the trial court for accepting the belated testimony.

The witness avowed that he had no relationship with the deceased. The witnessclaimed that he was acquainted with the 1st Accused Appellant Respondent as hewould visit her premises to consume Kasippu. The witness claimed he wasacquainted with the 2nd Accused Appellant Appellant whom he had met a fewtimes at the house of the Accused Appellant Respondent when he called over toconsume illicit alcohol (Kasippu). The Investigating Police Officer (PW9)avowed that the witness PW1 was never arrested on suspicion and was nevernamed as an accomplice. In the absence of ill will towards the AccusedAppellants or affection with the deceased the nature of the witness's statementalbeit belated, I find that the reason given by the witness for belatedness plausibleand acceptable.

The 2nd Accused Appellant Appellant in his defence at the trial made a dockstatement saying . . In

14

the case of Rex v Cochrane and Others [1814] Gurneys Report 479, the courtheld that No person accused of a crime is bound to offer any explanation of hisconduct or of circumstances of suspicion which attach to him; but, nevertheless ifhe refuses to do so where a strong prima facie case has been made out, and whenit is in his own power to offer evidence, if such exists, in explanation of suchsuspicious circumstances which would show them to be fallacious and explicableconsistently with his innocence, it is a reasonable and justifiable conclusion thathe refrains from doing so only from the conviction that the evidence sosuppressed or not adduced would operate adversely to his interest.

In Krishantha de Silva v The Attorney-General [2003] 1 Sri LR 162, it washeld thata prima facie case was made against the accused. It is noted thateven though the accused made a statement from the dock he was silent as to whathappened after the deceased was placed on the bed. I am of the view that thestatement of the accused that he did not know anything about the incident cannotbe accepted. An accused person is entitled to remain silent but when theprosecution has established strong and incriminating evidence against him he isrequired to offer an explanation of the highly incriminating circumstancesestablished against him. Accordingly, the court tends to apply Ellenboroughdictum in such situations.

In The King v Wickremasinghe [1941] 42 NLR 313, it was held that in theabsence of an explanation, the court was entitled to form the opinion that theaccused was directly responsible. There is a strong and prima facie case againstthe 2nd Accused Appellant Appellant in the present case. Nevertheless, the 2ndAccused Appellant Appellant has failed to adduce any evidence or to call anywitnesses to prove his innocence. The only evidence adduced by the 2nd AccusedAppellant Appellant is the dock statement claiming his innocence however, notprovided any explanation nor evidence thereafter.

Thus, in my opinion, the evidence available against the 2nd Accused AppellantAppellant is strong and incriminating; incompatible and inconsistent with theinnocence of the 2nd Accused Appellant Appellant and consistent with his guilt.There is consistent and cogent evidence against the 2nd Accused AppellantAppellant. The Honourable Judges of the Court of Appeal stated that there is noreason to doubt the evidence of PW1 as there is no inconsistency nor lack ofcredibility regarding the evidence. The cumulative effect of all the circumstantialevidence led at the trial is the guilt of the 1st Accused Appellant Respondent andthe 2nd Accused Appellant Appellant. Therefore, it is evident that the 2nd

15

Accused Appellant Appellant voluntarily participated in the disposal of the deadbody of the deceased and played a participatory role as it is most unlikely for aninnocent person to partake in the disposal of a dead body to which he has noconnection whatsoever. Accordingly, the only conclusion that could be arrived aton such evidence is that the 2nd Accused Appellant Appellant is guilty of theoffence charged.

Therefore, considering all of the above factors in this appeal of the 2nd AccusedAppellant Appellant, I am of the view that the Learned High Court Judge and theHonourable Judges of the Court of Appeal had arrived at a correct conclusionthat the prosecution had proved the case against the 1st Accused AppellantRespondent and the 2nd Accused Appellant Appellant beyond a reasonabledoubt.

Accordingly, I answer the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd questions of law on which special leaveto appeal has been granted in the negative. For these reasons, the Judgment of theCourt of Appeal and that of the High Court of Kegalle are affirmed. The Appealof the 2nd Accused Appellant Appellant is hereby dismissed.

Judge of the Supreme Court

MURDU N.B. FERNANDO, P.C., J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

MAHINDA SAMAYAWARDHENA, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

16