1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

In the matter of an application under the Articles 17

and 126 of the Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

1. Jayasinghe Herath Mudiyanselage Kusum

Indika Jayasinghe,

No. 14, 3rd Lane,

Dharmasoka Mawatha, Aruppola, Kandy.

2. Jayasinghe Herath Mudiyanselage Swetha

Arundathi Jayasinghe,

No. 14, 3rd Lane,

Dharmasoka Mawatha, Aruppola, Kandy.

Petitioners

Vs.

1. Secretary,

Ministry of Education,

Isurupaya, Battaramulla.

2. I. Withanachchi,

Principal,

Mahamaya Girls College, Kandy.

3. Y.M.T. Kumarihamy,

Principal, Sangamitta Girls School, Matale.

SC/FR Application No. 38/17

2

(Chairman, Board of Appeals and Objections)

4. H.M.P.K. Nawaratne,

Vice Principal,

Kingswood College, Kandy.

(Member, Board of Appeals and Objections)

5. K.P.C. Kurukulasuriya,

Secretary,

Mahamaya Girls College, Kandy.

6. S.A.R.A. Senaweera,

Mahamaya Girls College, Kandy.

7. T.S. Kodikara, Agent for School

Development Society, Mahamaya Girls

College, Kandy. (Member, Board of Appeals

and Objections)

8. S.D. Nawaratne, Member of Old Girls Union,

Mahamaya Girls College, Kandy. (Member,

Board of Appeals and Objections)

3rd to 8th Respondents are members of the

Board of Appeals and Objections

9. C.L. Mabopitiya (minor)

10. M.S. Jayaratne (Guardian for the 9th

Respondent)

3

Both of No. 66/32A, Rajapihilla Mawatha,

Kandy.

11. N.D.H. Hettiarachchi (minor)

12. G.C.H. Hettiarachchi (Guardian for the 11th

Respondent)

Both of No. 199 B1/1,

Rajapihilla Mawatha, Kandy.

13. W.S.A.V. Abhimani (minor)

14. W.S.A.D.D. Senarathne (Guardian for the 13th

Respondent)

Both of No. 16/1, Tekkawatta, Tennakumbura,

Kandy.

15. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12.

Respondents

Before : Priyantha Jayawardena PC, J

: A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J

: Achala Wengappuli, J

Counsel : S.N. Vijithsingh for the Petitioners.

: Rajitha Perera, DSG for the Respondents.

Argued on : 15th February, 2024

Decided on : 29th February, 2024

4

Priyantha Jayawardena PC, J

Facts of the case

The instant application was filed challenging the refusal to admit the 2nd petitioner to Grade 1 of

Mahamaya Girls College, Kandy, for the Year 2017. The 1st petitioner has made the application to

admit the 2nd petitioner to the said school based on the children of occupants in close proximity

to the school category.

The 1st petitioner stated that the scheme of admission to Grade 1 of National Schools for the Year

2017 was published by the Ministry of Education in Circular No. 17/2016 dated 16th of May, 2016.

As per Clause 6.0(a)(i) of the said scheme, 50% of the vacancies in Grade 1 of a school would be

filled by children of occupants in close proximity to the school.

The 1st petitioner further stated that he, his spouse and his daughter, the 2nd petitioner, reside at No.

14, 3rd Lane, Dharmasoka Mawatha, Aruppola, Kandy. He stated that he has been living in the said

premises since his childhood. Further, he purchased the said premises in the year 2001 by Deed of

Transfer bearing No. 41054 dated 15th of February, 2001 and the 2nd petitioner was born in the said

residence.

Furthermore, the 1st petitioner stated that he submitted an application to admit the 2nd petitioner to

Grade 1 of Mahamaya Girls Collage in the Year 2017 under the children of occupants in close

proximity category. Further, he is qualified to apply under the occupants category as he was

residing in the said house for over 21 years. The 1st petitioner stated that the distance from their

residence to the nearest boundary of Mahamaya Girls College is 1.2 km.

The 1st petitioner stated that the 2nd respondent requested him to attend an interview on the 22nd of

September, 2016, by letter dated 24th of August, 2016. At the interview, the relevant documents

were examined and the 2nd petitioner was given only 85 marks out of 100.

Furthermore, under Clause 6.1 (III)(a) of the Circular, out of 50 marks, 5 marks are deducted for

each school in closer proximity to the petitioners residence than the school under consideration.

However, the 1st petitioner stated that instead of deducting only 10 marks from 50 for the schools

situated closer to the residence of the 1st petitioner namely, D.S. Senanayake Vidyalaya and

5

Dharmasoka Vidyalaya, further 5 marks were deducted by including Hemamali Vidyalaya as a

school closer to his house than Mahamaya Girls College. Hence, 15 marks were deducted from

50. In total, the 2nd petitioner was given 85 marks out of 100 instead of 90 out of 100.

It was further stated that the said Hemamali School is situated far away from the 1st petitioner's

residence, across the Udawatta Kele Sanctuary. Moreover, Clause 6.0(f) of the said Circular states

that marks should not be deducted if there are rivers, lagoons, marshy lands, forest etc. that restrict

access between a residence and a school in close proximity.

The 1st petitioner stated that on the 7th of October, 2016, the provisional list of selected students

and the waiting list were displayed on the notice board of the Mahamaya Girls College and the

names of 85 children were displayed as selected students. The 2nd petitioner's name was displayed

as No. 5 in the waiting list.

Being aggrieved by the decision not to admit the 2nd petitioner to Mahamaya Girls College, the 1st

petitioner forwarded an appeal to the 2nd respondent dated 17th of October, 2016. Further, the 2nd

respondent by her letter dated 19th of December, 2016, informed the 1st petitioner that the cut off

mark was 85. However, though the 2nd petitioner's mark is same as the cut off mark, her name was

displayed on the waiting list.

Thereafter, on the 10th of December, 2016, the final list of selected students and the names of the

students in the waiting list were displayed on the notice board of the Mahamaya Girls College.

Accordingly, 85 names were displayed as selected students and the 2nd petitioner's name was

displayed as No. 3 in the waiting list.

The 1st petitioner stated that he has a legitimate expectation that the 2nd petitioners name would

be included in the final list of selected students as Mahamaya Girls College was close to his

residence.

Moreover, as the 2nd petitioner was not admitted to Mahamaya Girls College, he sent a letter to the

2nd respondent requesting necessary action to be taken to admit the 2nd petitioner to Year 1 of the

Mahamaya Girls College. However, he did not receive a response to the said letter.

6

In the circumstances, the petitioners stated that the refusal by the respondents to admit the 2nd

petitioner to Mahamaya Girls College is arbitrary, capricious, unreasonable and against the

legitimate expectation of the petitioners. Thus, it was stated that the Fundamental Rights

guaranteed to the 2nd petitioner under Article 12(1) of the Constitution was violated by the

respondents.

After the application was supported by the counsel for the petitioner, this court granted leave to

proceed with the said application under Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

Statement of Objections of the 2nd respondent

The Principal of Mahamaya Girls College, Kandy, the 2nd respondent, filed objections and stated

that D.S. Senanayke Vidyalaya, Dharmasoka Vidyalaya and Hemamali Vidyalaya are schools

closer to the residence of the petitioners than Mahamaya Girls College, Kandy. Therefore, in terms

of Clause 6.0(f) read with Clause 6.1(III)(a) of the School Admission Circular No.17/2016, a total

of 15 marks was deducted from 50, for schools in closer proximity to the petitioners residence.

Moreover, Clause 8.3(b) of the School Admission Circular No.17/2016 states that in the event

several applicants obtain the same marks, those applicants are required to be ranked in the order

of proximity to the school, with those living closest to the school ranking higher than those who

live further away from the school. Accordingly, all applicants who obtained 85 marks were ranked

according to their proximity to the school and the first five applicants closest to the school were

included in the final list, while the remaining applicants were placed in the waiting list. The 2nd

petitioner was placed third in the waiting list.

Further, as two applicants selected for admission to Mahamaya Girls College, Kandy declined to

attend the said school, the two applicants who were placed first and second in the waiting list were

admitted to Grade 1 of Mahamaya Girls College, Kandy. Accordingly, the 2nd petitioner became

the first on the waiting list. However, as there were no vacancies left in Grade 1 of Mahamaya

Girls College, Kandy, the 2nd petitioner was not admitted to the school.

7

Hence, the 2nd respondent stated that the respondents acted according to law and have not infringed

the Fundamental Rights of the petitioners.

Did the proximity calculation adhere to the Circular?

It is common ground that the 2nd petitioner was allocated 85 marks out of 100 on the basis that

there were three schools in closer proximity to her residence.

Clause 6.0 (f) of the Circular No. 17/2016 dated 16th of May, 2016, states that when calculating the

distance from ones residence to the school, the aerial distance should be taken. Further, marks

should be deducted for each school that falls within the distance stipulated by the said Circular

applicable to student admission. The said Circular states that if it is not possible to travel to a school

due to a natural cause such as rivers, lagoons, marshes, forests, etc., then the marks should not be

deducted.

Clause 6.0 (f) of the Circular states;

"$ , - 1 3 :; < = - "$

> A C , H>3JK L;3M O3

>PQ 1 -1 S UM . C;KW > (Y [) ]3^

=`; = Y L (YH

133 ; L) 1 C c Q e M

MQ = Pf g h i. ; ] Q e M jkl

1 S 3 > (: , o, pK q;, ]r 3 ")

3 st s ; Pf g UM .

A careful consideration of the map produced marked as 2R7 by the petitioners, shows that

Udawatta Kale Sanctuary lay between Hemamali Vidyalaya and the residence of the petitioner.

Clause 6.0 (f) of the Circular states that even though the distance is calculated using the aerial

distance, if the path to the school is blocked by a natural cause such as a sanctuary (forest), then

marks shall not be deducted for that school. Therefore, the respondents cannot deduct 5 marks on

the basis that Hemamali Vidyalaya is closer to the residence of the petitioners. Hence, the 2nd

petitioner is entitled to 90 marks out of 100.

8

Conclusion

In the aforementioned circumstance, the 2nd petitioner is entitled to an additional 5 marks as

Hemamali Vidyalaya cannot be taken into consideration in deducting marks. Thus, the 2nd

petitioner is entitled to 90 marks out of 100 in the children of occupants in close proximity

category. However, the 2nd petitioner was not admitted to the school alleging that she did not obtain

the required marks to gain admission to Mahamaya Girls College, Kandy.

In view of the above, I am of the opinion that the petitioners have established the violation of their

Fundamental Rights guaranteed under Article 12(1) of the Constitution by the respondents.

Further, the respondents have violated their Fundamental Rights guaranteed under Article 12(1) of

the Constitution.

In the circumstances, I direct the respondents to admit the 2nd petitioner to a suitable grade in

Mahamaya Girls College, Kandy within two weeks from the receipt of this judgment, and to pay

a sum of Rs. 100,000/- to the petitioners.

I further direct the Registrar of this court to send copies of this judgment to the respondents to act

in terms of the law.

Judge of the Supreme Court A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J

I agree

Judge of the Supreme Court

Achala Wengappuli, J

I agree

Judge of the Supreme Court