==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application in terms of

Articles 17 and 126 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Thilina Rajapaksha,

No. 109/10/1B,

Amarasinghe Mawatha,

Naramminiya Road,

Kelaniya.

Petitioner

SC FR Application No. 90/2021

V.

1.⁠ K.G. Ravindra Kumara,

Police Sergeant (34971),

Police Station,

Alawwa.

2. B.M.S.S. Wijebandara,

Police Sergeant (30472),

Police Station,

Alawwa.

3. Police Officer 87445, (Police

Constable Jayasundera),

Police Station,

Alawwa.

2

4. M.M.H. Jayatillake,

Chief Inspector of Police,

Officer-in-Charge,

Police Station,

Alawwa.

5. Chandrasena Bandara,

Assistant Superintendent of Police,

ASP’s Office, Kurunegala.

6. C.D. Wickremaratne,

Former Inspector General of Police,

C/o Inspector General of Police,

Police Headquarters,

Colombo 01.

6A. Deshabandu Tennekoon,

Former Inspector General of Police,

C/o Inspector General of Police,

Police Headquarters,

Colombo 01.

6B. Priyantha Weerasuriya,

Inspector General of Police, Police

Headquarters,

Colombo 01.

7. Samanthi Mihindukula,

Former Secretary of the National

Police Commission,

C/o Secretary,

National Police Commission,

Block No. 9, BMICH Premises,

Bauddhaloka Mawatha,

3

Colombo 07.

7A. Thamara D. Perera,

Former Secretary of the National

Police Commission,

C/o Secretary,

National Police Commission,

Block No. 9, BMICH Premises,

Bauddhaloka Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

7B. Thanuja N. Fernando,

Secretary,

National Police Commission,

Block No.9, BMICH Premises,

Bauddhaloka Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

8. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondents

Before : P. PADMAN SURASENA, CJ.

K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J.

SAMPATH B. ABAYAKOON, J.

Counsel : Shyamal A. Collure with Prabhath S. Amarasinghe

instructed by A.P. Jayaweera for the Petitioner.

Anura Meddegoda, PC with Ashani Kankanange,

4

Prabodhinee Nissanka instructed by Hashini

Ratnayake for 1st to 3rd Respondents.

Induni Punchihewa, SC for the 4th to 8th Respondents.

Argued on : 26.09.2025

Decided on : 22.10.2025

K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J

The Petitioner in this application is originally from Polgahawela but resided

temporarily at the above-captioned address and was the Executive

Presenter/Producer (Current Affairs) of ‘Neth FM’, a private radio station located

in Colombo 03. He alleges that the 1st to 4th Respondents, who are officers

attached to the Police Station of Alawwa subjected him to grave humiliation

committed several acts of violence and torture, as well as illegally arrested and

unlawfully detained him. Accordingly, he alleges that the Respondents violated

fundamental rights guaranteed to him under Articles 11, 12(1), 13(1), 13(2) and

14(1)(g) of the Constitution. This Court granted leave to proceed for the alleged

violations of Articles 11, 12(1) and 14(1)(g).

At argument stage Counsel for the Petitioner submitted that he will only pursue

the alleged infringement of Article 11 against the 1st, 2nd and 3rd Respondents,

and the alleged infringement of Article 12(1) also only against the same

Respondents. Further, Counsel informed this Court that he will not pursue the

alleged infringement of Article 14(1)(g) against any of the Respondents.

The Facts

According to the Petitioner he left his hometown, Polgahawela on 01.03.2021 to

head back to Colombo on his motorcycle bearing Registration No. NW BET 1298.

Around 1.00 p.m. as he approached Walakumbura, Alawwa area, he was

signaled to stop the motorcycle by the 1st and 2nd Respondents. According to the

5

Petitioner, the incident occurred as he overtook a car which had its left rear

signal switched on, indicating it was going to turn left.

The Petitioner states that upon stopping his motorcycle on the side of the road,

he was asked to furnish his driving license by the 1st and 2nd Respondents. The

said Respondents had claimed that the Petitioner overtook a vehicle crossing

the white line on the road. The Petitioner has furnished his driving license but

denied the said traffic offence on the premise that there was ample room within

the boundaries of the carriage way for a safe overtaking. The Petitioner claims

that he started videoing the incident from one of his mobile telephones when

the Respondents persisted on the charge.

The Petitioner claims that one of the Respondents told him that he would be

charged with having failed to ride the motorcycle on the left-side of the road;

and the other informed him that a charge of reckless or negligent riding will also

be added and proceeded to verbally abuse him. At this point, the Petitioner

claims that he informed the 1st and 2nd Respondents that he would report this

to the higher officials of the Police.

According to the Petitioner, the 1st and 2nd Respondents have asked him to stop

filming and then proceeded to assault him and verbally abuse him. The

Petitioner has refused to stop filming the scene on the premise that he was a

“media-person”. However, the Petitioner claims that he was severely assaulted

on the road by both the 1st and 2nd Respondents.

As per the Petitioner’s recollection, his helmet, cap and face mask had come off

as a result of the brutality of the assault. He also claims that he was

momentarily blinded due to the same. At this point, according to the Petitioner,

ongoing vehicles and pedestrians also crowded to observe the incident.

Thereafter, the Petitioner had contacted the 4th Respondent, and the Petitioner

was informed that two more Police Officers would arrive at the scene to mitigate

it. Following this, the 3rd Respondent has arrived at the scene and has indicated

that the Petitioner’s bags should be checked for any possession or

transportation of drugs or cannabis.

6

The 1st to 3rd Respondents have then again assaulted the Petitioner, with the 3rd

Respondent pressing his shoe to the Petitioner’s neck while the other two kicked

him. The Petitioner was then hand cuffed and taken to the Police Station of

Alawwa in a three-wheeler by the 1st Respondent. While in the three-wheeler,

the Petitioner claims that the 1st Respondent had, over the phone, stated to

someone that they would cause the Petitioner to be imprisoned by introducing

some substance.

At the Police Station, the Petitioner has been asked to furnish his Media

Accreditation Card. He further states that he was not given a temporary driving

license even though his driving license was taken into custody.

The Petitioner has asked permission to contact his Office in Colombo but was

initially denied permission. Later, upon contacting the Office, the Deputy

Inspector-General of the Police Ajith Rohana has spoken to the Petitioner

through the 4th Respondent and advised him to admit himself to the Hospital.

Following this the 4th Respondent has apologized to the Petitioner and further

requested him not to draw any media attention to the incident and had taken

him to the Hospital.

The Petitioner was initially taken to the Regional Hospital of Alawwa and then

transferred to the Teaching Hospital of Kurunegala, where he realized his gold

chain was missing. He received treatment until 06.03.2021 for the abrasions he

sustained on the forehead, the back of the neck, the chest, the upper lip and

below the eye.

The Acting Magistrate had visited the Hospital on 03.03.2021 and had

remanded the Petitioner until 08.03.2021 and later released him on surety bail

on the same day. Subsequently, the Petitioner was discharged from the Hospital

on 06.03.2021. The Petitioner states that the Medico Legal Report (MLR) marked

“P23” indicates 10 injuries, out of which 8 were abrasions and a tender (dental).

The 9th injury was a grievous injury as it was a dental fracture. The Petitioner

maintains that the said MLR is consistent with the history given by the

Petitioner.

The Petitioner further states that the 4th Respondent has instituted action

7

against the Petitioner in the Magistrate’s Court of Polgahawela under the case

bearing No. B 233. Further, to the best of his knowledge, another case bearing

No. B. 280 has also been instituted in the same Magistrate’s Court.

As per the copies of case B233/2021 (44786/MT) submitted, the Petitioner has

been charged for using criminal force to deter a public servant in terms of

Section 344 of the Penal Code, negligent driving in terms of Section 151(3) of

the Motor Traffic Act, failing to drive on the left side in terms of Section 148(1)

of the Motor Traffic Act and obstructing the vehicles coming from the opposing

side of the adjacent carriage way in terms of Section 148(5) of the Motor Traffic

Act.

In these circumstances, the Petitioner alleges that on the totality of the facts

and circumstances as herein described, the 1st to 6th Respondents in this case,

subjected him to grave humiliation committed several acts of violence and

torture, as well as illegally arresting and unlawfully detaining him. Accordingly,

it is the Petitioner’s position that the Respondents have violated his

Fundamental Rights guaranteed under Articles 11, 12(1), 13(1), 13(2) and

14(1)(g) of the Constitution.

However, as mentioned in the 2nd paragraph of this judgment, this Court will

only consider the violations of Articles 11 and 12(1) of the Constitution.

In response, the 1st to 3rd Respondents have submitted that they deny the

allegations made by the Petitioner.

According to the Respondents, the 1st and 2nd Respondents, while on duty on

02.03.2021 near Walakumbura, Alawwa, observed that the Petitioner was

violating the Motor Traffic Act. He was allegedly driving at an excessive speed

and overtaking some vehicles by crossing the white line on the center of the

road.

The Respondents claim that the Petitioner was asked to produce his driving

license and the other relevant documents following which a temporary license

was issued. The Respondents further claim that at this point the Petitioner

resisted the issuance of a spot fine and turned abusive towards the Police and

8

proceeded to push the 1st Respondent to the ground.

The Respondents claim that the national identity card and the media identity

card had discrepancies in terms of their numbers and name. Upon inquiring

about the discrepancies, the Petitioner had become even more aggressive and

abusive towards the Respondents and proceeded to video record the incident.

Upon informing the 4th Respondent about the incident, the 3rd Respondent and

another Police Officer were sent to the scene. The Respondents have then

detained the Petitioner and taken him into custody for using criminal force on

a public officer with the intention of preventing or deterring the discharge of

duty. The Petitioner was taken to the Alawwa Police Station with great difficulty

in a three-wheeler.

In relation to the injuries sustained by the Petitioner, the position taken up by

the Respondents is that the Petitioner behaved violently and unruly and that

the injuries were self-inflicted by knocking his head against the three-wheeler

and that the contents of the MLR marked “P23” and the Petition do not

corroborate.

Alleged Violation of Fundamental Rights

In the case of Velmurugu v. The Attorney General and Another [1981] 1 SLR

406, it was held that the standard of proof that is required in cases filed under

Article 126 of the Constitution for infringement of Fundamental Rights is proof

by a preponderance of probabilities as in a civil case and not proof beyond

reasonable doubt.

It was further held in Gunawardene v. Perera and Others [1983] 1 SLR 305

at 313 by Soza J. that;

“…It is generally accepted that within this standard there could be

varying degrees of probability. The degree of probability required

should be commensurate with the gravity of the allegation sought to

be proved. This court when called upon to determine questions of

infringement of fundamental rights will insist on a high degree of

probability as for instance a court having to decide a question of fraud

9

in a civil suit would. The conscience of the court must be satisfied that

there has been an infringement.”

Alleged violation of Article 11

Article 11 of the Constitution of Sri Lanka states:

“No person shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or

degrading treatment or punishment.”

Furthermore, Article 11 is an unqualified and non-derogable right as per

Athukorala J. in Sudath Silva v. Kodituakku Inspector of Police and Others

[1987] 2 SLR 119 at 126:

“…It prohibits every person from inflicting torturesome, cruel or

inhuman treatment on another. It is an absolute fundamental right

subject to no restrictions or limitations whatsoever. (…) The

police force, being an organ of the State, is enjoined by the

Constitution to secure and advance this right and not to deny, abridge

or restrict the same in any manner and under any circumstances (...)

It is therefore the duty of this court to protect and defend this right

jealously to its fullest measure with a view to ensuring that this right

which is declared and intended to be fundamental is always kept

fundamental (...) This court cannot, in the discharge of its

constitutional duty, countenance any attempt by any police officer

however high or low, to conceal or distort the truth induced, perhaps,

by a false sense of police solidarity.”

[Emphasis mine]

This Court, in assessing the claim of Article 11 violation in this instant case,

takes the following facts into consideration.

Petitioner claims that he was assaulted and the injuries sustained by him that

are shown in the MLR marked “P23” are inflicted by the assault by the 1st to 3rd

Respondents.

The version presented by the said Respondents is that they did not assault the

10

Petitioner in the manner described by him. However, it is their position that the

Petitioner knocked his head on a three-wheeler and that the injuries were self-

inflicted.

When considering the injuries mentioned in the MLR, it is clear that all these

injuries cannot be self-inflicted. Further, one injury is even a grievous injury as

it is a dental fracture which required extensive treatment. Therefore, it is clear

that the 1st to 3rd Respondents caused the said injuries as stated by the

Petitioner.

Further, the Medical Officer who examined the Petitioner has stated that these

injuries are consistent with the history given by the Petitioner.

In these circumstances, I declare that the Fundamental Rights guaranteed to

the Petitioner by Article 11 have been violated by the 1st to 3rd Respondents of

the instant case.

Alleged Violation of Article 12(1)

Article 12(1) of the Constitution of Sri Lanka states:

"All persons are equal before the law and are entitled to the equal

protection of the law."

The interpretation of Article 12 has expanded over the years as beyond its literal

meaning. This is evident in the case of Wijerathna v. Sri Lanka Ports

Authority [SC/FR/ 256/2017 S.C. Minutes of 11 December 2020] as follows:

“…The concept of ‘equality’ was originally aimed at preventing

discrimination based on or due to such immutable and acquired

characteristics, which do not on their own make human being

unequal. It is now well accepted that, the ‘right to equality’ covers a

much wider area, aimed at preventing other ‘injustices’ too, that are

recognized by law. Equality is now a right as opposed to a mere

privilege or an entitlement, and in the context of Sri Lanka a

‘Fundamental Right’, conferred on the people by the Constitution, for

the purpose of curing not only injustices taking the manifestation of

11

discrimination, but a host of other maladies recognized by law. While

all Fundamental Rights are of equal importance and value, the ‘right

to equality’ reigns supreme, as it can be said that, all the other

Fundamental Rights stem from the ‘right to equality’. The ability of

human beings to live in contemporary society (as opposed to merely

existing), and develop and reap the fruits of social, scientific, economic

and political developments, is based on their ability to exercise fully

the ‘right to equality’. Similarly, for human civilizations may they be

national or international, to reap the full benefits of knowledge, skills,

experience, talents and wisdom that people possess, people of such

societies must enjoy the ‘right to equality’.”

Further, in the case of Ariyawansa and Others v. The People’s Bank and

Others [2006] 2 Sri LR 145 at 152 Bandaranayake J. stated that,

“The concepts of negation of arbitrariness and unreasonableness are

embodied in the right to equality as it has been decided that any

action or law which is arbitrary or unreasonable violates equality.”

Thus, considering the unreasonable and arbitrary conduct of the 1st to 3rd

Respondents and their treatment of the Petitioner without adhering to the due

legal procedures affects the equal protection guaranteed to the Petitioner under

Article 12(1) of the Constitution. Whereby I hold that Article 12 (1) of the

Constitution was violated by the 1st to 3rd Respondents against the Petitioner.

Declarations and Compensation

In the above premise, I declare that the fundamental rights that have been

guaranteed to the petitioner under Articles 11 and 12 (1) of the Constitution

were violated by the 1st to 3rd Respondents.

As per Article 126(4) of the Constitution, the Supreme Court is empowered to

grant such relief as it may deem just and equitable in the circumstances in

respect of any petition referred to it under Article 126(2). Therefore, in the

circumstances of this case, considering the injuries, the discomfort and the

losses that were suffered by the Petitioner due to the arbitrary acts of the

12

Respondents, I order the 1st to 3rd Respondents to pay a sum of Rs. 25,000 each,

from their personal funds, totaling to a sum of Rs. 75,000 to the Petitioner

within the period of two months from the date of this judgment.

Further, the Honourable Attorney General is directed to cause the conduct of a

criminal investigation into the incident, upon the completion of which, consider

the institution of criminal proceedings against the Respondents.

Application is Allowed

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

P. PADMAN SURASENA, CJ.

I agree

CHIEF JUSTICE

SAMPATH B. ABAYAKOON, J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT