==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Sunil Sirimanne,

Koratuhena Road,

Badugama, Matugama.

Applicant

SC APPEAL NO: SC/APPEAL/131/2019

SC LA NO: SC/SPL/LA/341/2018

HCA NO: HC/Rev/18/2016

LT NO: LT/18/KT/509/16

Vs.

1. Manager,

Brave Guard Security and

Investigations Services,

No. 194, Sri Jayawardenapura

Mawatha, Welikada, Rajagiriya.

2. Deputy Chief Security Officer,

Bank of Ceylon, Kalutara Branch,

Kalutara.

Respondents

AND

Deputy Chief Security Officer,

Bank of Ceylon, Kalutara Branch,

Kalutara.

2nd Respondent-Petitioner

2

SC/APPEAL/131/2019

Vs.

Sunil Sirimanne,

Koratuhena Road,

Badugama,

Matugama.

Applicant-Respondent

Manager,

Brave Guard Security and

Investigations Services,

No. 194, Sri Jayawardenapura

Mawatha, Welikada,

Rajagiriya.

1st Respondent-Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

Deputy Chief Security Officer,

Bank of Ceylon, Kalutara Branch,

Kalutara.

2nd Respondent-Petitioner-

Appellant

Vs.

Sunil Sirimanne,

Koratuhena Road,

Badugama, Matugama.

Applicant-Respondent-Respondent

3

SC/APPEAL/131/2019

Manager,

Brave Guard Security and

Investigations Services,

No. 194,

Sri Jayawardenapura Mawatha,

Welikada,

Rajagiriya.

1st Respondent-Respondent-

Respondent

Before: Hon. Justice Murdu N.B. Fernando, P.C.

Hon. Justice E.A.G.R. Amarasekara

Hon. Justice Mahinda Samayawardhena

Counsel: D.W. Johnthasan with Malani Gallage for the 2nd

Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant.

Kushan Illangatilleke for the Applicant-Respondent-

Respondent.

Hafeel Farisz for the 1st Respondent-Respondent-

Respondent.

Written Submissions:

By the 2nd Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant on 02.09.2020

By the Applicant-Respondent-Respondent on 11.06.2020

and 04.01.2021

By the 1st Respondent-Respondent-Respondent on

06.01.2021

Argued on: 20.01.2023

Decided on: 07.03.2024

4

SC/APPEAL/131/2019

Samayawardhena, J.

The applicant-employee filed an application dated 08.01.2016 in the

Labour Tribunal of Kalutara under section 31B of the Industrial Disputes

Act, No. 43 of 1950, as amended, naming two employers as respondents,

alleging unlawful termination of his services from 20.02.2015. At the

material time, he was attached to the Matugama branch of the Bank of

Ceylon as a junior security officer of Brave Guard Security & Investigation

Services (Private) Limited. The 1st respondent is the Manager of Brave

Guard Security & Investigation Services (Private) Limited, while the 2nd

respondent is the Deputy Chief Security Officer at the Bank of Ceylon,

Kalutara branch.

The applicant stated in his application that following a minor altercation

between him and two Bank officers of the Matugama branch, the

management of the Bank informed him not to report for duty until he

was transferred to another place. Subsequently, the applicant informed

the 1st respondent of this situation. The 1st respondent then informed

the applicant that his services had been terminated, effective from

31.03.2015.

The applicant in his application to the Labour Tribunal sought

reinstatement. In the alternative, he sought reasonable compensation in

lieu of reinstatement.

The 1st respondent in his answer took up the position that the Brave

Guard Security & Investigation Services (Private) Limited did not

terminate the services of the applicant but the applicant vacated the post

on his own. He has further stated that, in any event, the 1st respondent

is willing to employ the applicant in any Bank or any other institution at

any moment.

5

SC/APPEAL/131/2019

The 2nd respondent in his answer took up the position that he was not

the employer of the applicant. On that basis, he moved that he be

discharged from the proceedings before fixing the main matter for the

inquiry.

In the replication filed in response to the answer of the 1st respondent,

the applicant stated that he applied for leave from 16.02.2015-

20.02.2015 upon the request of the 2nd respondent, and thereafter he

was asked not to report for duty by the 2nd respondent until the complaint

received from the Matugama branch was inquired into. He further stated

that when he inquired this from the 1st respondent, the 1st respondent

informed him that he should sort out the question of re-employment with

the 2nd respondent, and there was nothing the 1st respondent could do

about it. This implies that the applicant did not consider the offer of re-

employment by the 1st respondent as genuine. It is not clear why the

Labour Tribunal did not try to settle the matter at that point.

In the replication filed in response to the answer of the 2nd respondent,

the applicant stated that the approval of leave, transfers, termination of

services etc. were carried out with the knowledge and under the control

of the 2nd respondent.

It is against this backdrop, the 2nd respondent had moved that he be

discharged from the proceedings forthwith as he was not the employer of

the applicant.

The Labour Tribunal in its order dated 29.06.2016 refused to discharge

the 2nd respondent from proceedings at that stage stating that it can be

decided at the end of the main inquiry.

The revision application filed against this order was dismissed by the

High Court by order dated 04.09.2018.

6

SC/APPEAL/131/2019

Hence this appeal by the 2nd respondent.

Section 31B(1)(a) of the Industrial Disputes Act enacts that a workman

or a trade union on behalf of a workman who is a member of that union,

may make an application in writing to the Labour Tribunal for relief or

redress in respect of the termination of his services by his employer.

Section 48 of the Industrial Disputes Act provides broad definitions for

the terms “employer” and “workman”.

“employer” means any person who employs or on whose behalf any

other person employs any workman and includes a body of

employers (whether such body is a firm, company, corporation or

trade union) and any person who on behalf of any other person

employs any workman;

“workman” means any person who has entered into or works under

a contract with an employer in any capacity, whether the contract is

expressed or implied, oral or in writing, and whether it is a contract

of service or of apprenticeship, or a contract personally to execute

any work or labour, and includes any person ordinarily employed

under any such contract whether such person is or is not in

employment at any particular time, and includes any person whose

services have been terminated.

In addition, the objective of adding a party to a legal proceeding is not

necessarily to seek relief. If a person whose presence is necessary to

effectively and completely adjudicate upon the matter before the court,

he can be made a party (Susil Perera v. Kelly [2002] 3 Sri LR 163).

On the facts and circumstances of this case, the 2nd respondent is a

necessary party. The 1st respondent does not consent to release the 2nd

respondent accepting that the 1st respondent was the employer of the

7

SC/APPEAL/131/2019

applicant at the material time. Nor does the 1st respondent accept that

he terminated the services of the applicant.

The 2nd respondent refers to the control test as a method of resolving this

issue. Such matters cannot be addressed at this stage of the case. If

necessary, those matters should be raised during the main inquiry,

which is yet to commence.

The control test, integration test, economic reality test, mutuality of

obligation test, dominant impression test etc., have been formulated

mainly to decide whether a person is an employee or an independent

contractor. The matter in issue in this case is somewhat different. In any

event, such tests have no conclusive effect. The determination of the

employer and employee depends on the unique facts and circumstances

of each individual case. In this process, labels, designations, particular

terms used by parties in their correspondence, the admissions made by

parties therein etc. are, more often than not, misleading and not binding.

Who is the employer of the applicant is a question of fact. When the

applicant cites two employers, and the Industrial Disputes Act gives

broader definitions to the terms “employer” and “workman”, the Labour

Tribunal could not have decided on the purported preliminary question

before the commencement of the inquiry. That can only be done after the

inquiry.

The two questions upon which leave has been granted are as follows:

(1) Did the High Court and the Labour Tribunal err in failing to

consider that the employment of the applicant by the 1st

respondent has been admitted both by the applicant and the 1st

respondent?

8

SC/APPEAL/131/2019

(2) Did the High Court err in failing to consider that the Labour

Tribunal order was made without considering the control test

applicable to employees?

I answer both questions in the negative.

I affirm the orders of the Labour Tribunal and the High Court and dismiss

the appeal. Due to the unwarranted application made by the 2nd

respondent on 16.03.2016, which was pursued all the way up to the

Supreme Court, the applicant faced an almost 8-year delay in progressing

with his case before the Labour Tribunal. The 2nd respondent shall pay

Rs. 100,000 to the applicant as costs of this appeal.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Murdu N.B. Fernando, P.C., J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

E.A.G.R. Amarasekara, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court