==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of a Rule in terms of Section 42(2) of the Judicature Act No. 2 of 1978 against read with the Supreme Court (Conduct of and Etiquette for Attorneys-at-law) Rules 1988, against Jayathunga Patabendige Susil Priyantha Jayatunga, Attorney-at-Law.

S.C. Rule No.03/2024 The Registrar, Supreme Court of Sri Lanka, Supreme Court Complex, Colombo 12. Complainant Vs.

Jayathunga Patabendige Susil Priyantha Jayatunga, Attorney-at-Law, No.294A, Kotupathgoda Road, Kumbuke West, Gonapola.

Respondent

BEFORE : ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

ARJUNA OBEYESEKERE, J.

SAMPATH B. ABAYAKOON, J.

S.C. Rule No. 03/2024

2

COUNSEL : J.P.S.P. Jayathunga, Respondent, appears in person,

Ms. Kanishka de Silva Balapatabendi DSG, with Sabrena Ahamed, SSC for the Hon. Attorney General.

Chathura Galhena for the Bar Association of Sri Lanka.

INQUIRED ON : 17th September, 2025

ORDER ON : 05th February, 2026

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

The Rule in respect of which this inquiry conducted was served on

Jayatunga Patabendige Susil Priyantha Jayatunga, Attorney-at-Law, (hereinafter

referred to as the Respondent) on 16.01.2025, and was read out to him by the

Registrar of this Court along with a Sinhala translation. The Respondent pleaded

not guilty to the Rule. The inquiry into the Rule against the Respondent

commenced and concluded on 02.09.2025.

During the inquiry into the Rule No. 3/24, the Registrar of the Supreme

Court and the Respondent presented evidence under oath. The Respondent was

afforded an opportunity to tender his closing submissions in written form, after

perusing the proceedings conducted on that day, but were issued to him

subsequently by the Registry. This opportunity was provided to the Respondent,

with a view to provide him with sufficient time to effectively address this Court

of the defence put up by him as he was produced from remand custody. The

opportunity afforded by this Court to the Respondent was fully utilised by him

S.C. Rule No. 03/2024

3

by submitting several sets of written submissions from time to time to the

Registry of this Court.

The circumstances that led to the issuance of the said Rule on the

Respondent are set out below albeit briefly.

The Respondent filed a petition No. SC/SPL/LA/112/2023 on 20.04.2023

before this Court, by which he sought to impugn the order of the Court of

Appeal dated 09.03.2023, pronounced in Case No. COC/02/2023. This was

following an action filed in the District Court by the Respondent.

The petition No. SC/SPL/LA/112/2023 was to be supported on 30.01.2024

before a division of this Court for the consideration of granting Special Leave to

Appeal against the impugned order. The Respondent, being the petitioner in that

application, appeared in person. During the process of supporting the said

petition, this Court requested a certain clarification from the Respondent, who

then sought further time to respond to same. The matter was accordingly re-

scheduled to be resumed on 20.03.2024 before the same division of this Court.

The Respondent thereafter filed another petition dated 12.03.2024, in the

case of SC/SPL/LA/112/2023, which was already taken up for support, but

without obtaining leave of Court, prior to filing of same.

On 20.03.2024, when the said matter was taken up for the resumption of

the Respondent’s submissions in support, he made several serious accusations to

the Judges who constituted that division of this Court and demanded they recuse

themselves from taking part in any further proceedings. The actions of the

Respondent led to the issuance of a Rules No. 3/24 and 5/24.

S.C. Rule No. 03/2024

4

Distinct to the several acts that were attributed to the Respondent in

Rule No. 05/2024, the instant Rule (Rule No. 3/2024) attributes following acts

to the Respondent, when he appeared before this Court on 20.03.2024, in

support of the said SC/SPL/112/2023;

i. When the matter SPL/LA/112/2023 was taken up for

resumption of proceedings enabling the Respondent to offer the

clarifications that were sought by the Court on 30.01.2024, he

informed that the Justices who constituted that particular

division of this Court are prevented from hearing that

application as he filed a case against those Justices in the

Magistrate’s Court on the previous day,

ii. The Respondent, by a letter addressed to the Registrar of this

Court on 14.03.2024, named nine Justices of this Court and

falsely, dishonestly and without any basis alleged that they

have acted maliciously against him and requested case Nos.

SPL/LA/08/2023, SPL/LA/110/2023 and SPL/LA/112/2023,

that were pending before this Court not to be listed before any

of them,

iii. The Respondent has refused to offer any clarifications sought

from him by this Court, despite the repeated directions to do so,

persisting with his position that they recuse themselves since

he has instituted criminal proceedings against them,

iv. The Respondent has persisted on with his claim by repeating

that the Judges should have recused themselves from further

hearing and, even though the Court provided an opportunity for

him to satisfy Court why it should desist to charge him for

contempt of Court and initiate disciplinary action on his refusal

to offer any clarifications, he offered none,

S.C. Rule No. 03/2024

5

Therefore, it was alleged in Rule No. 3/24 that;

(a) the said conduct amounts to acts of deceit and malpractice

which warrants suspension from office or removal from office

under Section 42(2) of the Judicature Act No. 2 of 1978,

(b) by reason of the aforementioned conduct you have failed to

act with courtesy, respect and fairness towards fellow

members of the profession in professional matters and

committed a breach of Rule No. 56 of the Supreme Court

(Conduct of an Etiquette for Attorneys-at-Law) Rules 1988

made under Article 136 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka;

(c) by reason of the aforesaid conduct which cannot be

countenanced you have conducted yourself in a manner

which would reasonably be regarded as disgraceful or

dishonourable of Attorneys-at-Law of good repute and

competence and have thus committed a breach of Rule No.

60 of the said Supreme Court Rules;

(d) by reason of the aforesaid acts and conduct, you have

conducted yourself in a manner which is inexcusable and

such as to be regarded as deplorable by your fellows in the

profession and have thus committed a breach of Rule No. 60

of the said Supreme Court Rules;

(e) by reason of the aforesaid acts and conduct, you have

conducted yourself in a manner unworthy of an Attorney-at-

Law and have thus committed a breach of Rule No.61 of the

said Supreme Court Rules.

During the inquiry into Rule No. 3/24, the Respondent admitted the

multiple acts that were attributed to him in that Rule. He offered an explanation

S.C. Rule No. 03/2024

6

to his offending conduct referred to therein. According to him, whilst acting in

the manner described in the Rule, he was incapable of knowing the nature of the

act, by reason of unsoundness of mind, (“ ta fj,dfõ uu tal lr, ;sfhkjd’ ta whym;a

udkisl fi!LH ;;ajhla hgf;a tal flrekd lsh,d ;uhs ug oeka ye.ZS hkafk’ fudlo idOdrK

nQoaêu;a mqoa.,hl+ fkdlrk l%sZhdj,a uu lr,d ;shkjd lsh,d oeka n,mqjdu ug f;afrkjd’) Thus,

in retrospect, the Respondent now attributes his offending acts to a mental

condition that said to have prevailed in his mind during that particular point in

time, which he preferred to describe as “ ta fj,dfj ysgmq udkisl;ajh”.

This he made by placing heavy reliance on an assessment made by Dr.

C.T.K. Fernando, the Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist, attached to National

Institute of Mental Health, on his mental condition. Dr. C.T.K. Fernando, indicated

his clinical findings of an assessment conducted on the Respondent in his report.

The Respondent tendered that report to Court marked as V1.

In support of his defence of insanity, the Respondent also relied on two

other medical reports that were obtained by him from different Consultant

Psychiatrists, a few days after committing the acts referred in the Rule. One of

the two Consultant Psychiatrists is attached to Polonnaruwa General Hospital

while the other, apparently engaged in private practice in Colombo. The

Respondent was a resident in Polonnaruwa during that time. These reports were

tendered to Court marked V2 and V3 respectively.

Thus, it is clear that the Respondent relied on the specific defence of

insanity and thereby invoked the statutory provisions contained in Section 77 of

the Penal Code. In effect, the Respondent, therefore taken up the position that he

did not have the requisite mental element although he admitted in his evidence

that he did act in the manner as described in the Rule.

S.C. Rule No. 03/2024

7

Section 77 of the Penal Code is a statutory provision drafted and inserted

into the Penal Code, in the spirit of Mac Naughten Rules, recognising the defence

of insanity but “with some material modifications” (vide Principles of Criminal

Liability in Ceylon, Professor G.L. Peiris, at p.133). Section 77 states thus;

“[N]othing is an offence which is done by a person who, at the time of doing it, by reason

of unsoundness of mind, is incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that he is doing

what is either wrong or contrary to law.”

The position taken up by the Respondent is that he had no understanding

of the nature of his act, during the period of time relevant to the Rule, due to his

unsoundness of mind. The applicability of Section 77 of the Penal Code, invoked

by the Respondent in response to the Rule, must be examined carefully. Section

77 speaks of two scenarios by which a person, who is accused of committing an

offence, is fully discharged from imposition of any criminal liability for that act.

However, it must be noted here that, the Respondent relies on the first

scenario described in Section 77 by stating that at that point in time he was

incapable of knowing the nature of his acts by reason of unsoundness of mind.

Thus, if the Respondent is to be exonerated from imposition of any form of

liability attached to his acts that are referred to in the Rule, he must establish

before this Court that he was incapable of knowing what he was doing by reason

of his unsoundness of mind. He must establish that on a balance of probability,

vide judgments of the Court of Appeal in Perera v Republic of Sri Lanka (1978-

79) 2 Sri L.R. 84 Nandasena v Attorney General (2007) 1 Sri L.R. 237 and the

Court of Criminal Appeal in Barnes Nimalaratne v Republic of Sri Lanka (1975)

78 NLR 51.

S.C. Rule No. 03/2024

8

In this regard, the medical reports that were tendered before this Court

provide the most relevant and reliable evidence other than his oral testimony in

support of that defence.

The medical report V1 indicates that the Respondent was assessed by Dr.

C.T.K Fernando on 02.04.2024, in the presence of Dr. W.W.L.I. Fernando, at the

Forensic Psychiatry Clinic of the Prison Hospital, on a direction issued by this

Court. During the assessment, it was revealed that the Respondent had no past

history of presentation before any psychiatric service. He had no family history

of any mental illnesses either.

Dr. C.T.K Fernando states in that report that his assessment of the

Respondent revealed that the latter has “persecutory delusions against his wife

mainly, but he also developed persecutory delusions others are plotting against him.” In

addition, the Respondent was noted to have “grandiose delusion that he has superior

knowledge about law than any other individual”. Dr. C.T.K Fernando accordingly

concluded the assessment with a clinical interpretation that the Respondent has a

mental disorder identified by him as “bipolar affective disorder currently mania with

psychosis”.

The Respondent, in his written submissions invited attention of this Court

to the dicta of a judgment of the Court of Appeal pronounced in Nandasena v

Attorney General (supra), where Ranjith Silva J has held, in relation to the nature

of the burden cast on an accused, who relied on the defence of insanity, that (at

p. 239) “ [I]t is the burden of the accused to prove that he was incapable of (1) knowing

the nature of the act (2) that he is doing what is either wrong or contrary to law”. But

the factors by which an accused might sought to discharge his burden must be

clearly established and not merely set out in a “vague or desultory fashion”, the

S.C. Rule No. 03/2024

9

conclusions must not be based on inadequate material and must not be on

hearsay either, (vide judgment of Barnes Nimalaratne v Republic of Sri Lanka

(supra) at p. 55).

In order to consider the impact of “bipolar affective disorder currently mania

with psychosis” on the cognitive ability of the mind of the accused, it is necessary

to examine the medical report V1, in a more detailed manner. This is because, it

is for this Court to satisfy itself that the Respondent is entitled to the relief

afforded to a person of unsound mind, in terms of Section 77 of the Penal Code.

The Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist, who issued the said report on

02.04.2024, states under the heading “Mental State Assessment” that the features

that are referred to in his report are “suggestive of manic episodes”. In relation to

the responsibility of the impugned actions, the Consultant is of the view that the

Respondent would have been of “unsound mind at the time of the alleged offence”.

Understandably, this is a finding, on which the Respondent has now placed

heavy reliance. In this context, it must also be observed here that there is no

mention in V1 of an exact date of commission of any admitted act, referred to in

the Rule, which tends to support the position of the Respondent, that it was more

probable that he was under that mental condition, during that specific time

period.

The Rule was served on the Respondent only at a subsequent point of

time. Even if one were to act on V1, by giving the fullest weightage to its

findings, the mental illness of “bipolar affective disorder currently mania with

psychosis” that appears to have affected the mind of the Respondent, would occur

only intermittently. The Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist described such

intermittent instances as “manic episodes”. Thus, it is clear that there are intervals

S.C. Rule No. 03/2024

10

of clear comprehension that exists in between these intermittent “manic episodes”

and such episodes of clear comprehension might last for an unspecified period of

time. During the intervals that exists in between these maniac episodes, the

Respondent could act as a reasonably prudent member of the society. However,

this is not the only evidence placed before Court by the Respondent.

The Respondent also relied on two other medical reports issued by two

other Consultant Psychiatrists, whom he consulted on his own volition.

The document marked V2, was issued on 30.04.2024 by Dr. P.A.I.

Wijayanayaka, Acting Consultant Psychiatrist of Teaching Hospital Polonnaruwa.

This six-page document, consists of illegible handwritten notes made by the

Consultant. However, it is clear that it does not appear to contain any reference

to a specific diagnosis made by the Consultant of a particular mental illness that

afflicted the Respondent, consequent to the assessment conducted on him. Nor

did the Respondent invite attention of this Court to any such specific reference

made to that effect in that report. However, the evidence of the Respondent

indicated, during that consultation, he was verbally informed of by Dr. P.A.I.

Wijayanayaka that he need not be treated for any psychiatric illness.

The said alleged clearance of the Respondent of any mental impairment by

Dr. P.A.I. Wijayanayaka, prompted him to lodge a complaint to the Sri Lanka

Medical Council against Dr. C.T.K Fernando, who issued V1. The Respondent, by

a letter dated 06.06.2024 and addressed to that Council, complained that

although he was cleared of any mental impairment by Dr. P.A.I. Wijayanayaka,

when he consultation with the latter on 30.04.2024, a finding, quite different to

the one made by Dr. C.T.K Fernando, indicating he has “bipolar affective disorder

currently mania with psychosis”. The Respondent, further alleged that the said

S.C. Rule No. 03/2024

11

report was prepared by the Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist, based on false

information attributed to him, which he did not provide to the expert, during the

assessment session. Not only the Respondent challenged the validity of the

medical report V1, he has instituted a civil action against the said Consultant and

the other Psychiatrist, in the District Court Case No. DMR/620/24 on 12.06.2024

claiming damages from them, in a sum of Rs. 100,000,000.00.

In that action, the Respondent referred to his causes of action accrued to

him against Drs. W.W.L.I Fernando and C.T.K Fernando, which he describes as

follows;

“ lS¾;su;a kS;s{jrfhl= jQ meñKs,slreg udkisl fr`.hla we;s njg fÉ;kdkaú;j

wmydi lsrSu” lS¾;shg ydks lsrSu” udkisl fr`.sfhl= f,ig idjoH u;hla ck.;

lsrSug bv ie,iaùu” meñKs,slre úiska mjrd mj;ajdf.k hk kvq bosrshg mj;ajdf.k

hdug wkHdldrhlska ndOd meñKùug ls%hd lsrSu” meñK,slref.a kS;s{ jD;a;sh

iodld,sl j wysñ lsrSug W;aidy lsrSu” ldhslj iy udkislj ksfr`.S mqoa.,hl= jQ

meñKs,slre udkisl fr`.sfhl= f,i yqjd oelaùu hkdoS jeros isÿ lsrSu u.ska’ ”

Despite the fact that the Respondent placing heavy reliance on the findings

contained in V1 to impress upon this Court that he is a person of unsound mind,

he continues to maintain the said action filed against the Consultant Forensic

Psychiatrist, by affirming to the said cause of action in his Plaint, and thereby

asserting that V1 was issued by the said Consultant to make him, an “eminent

lawyer” (lS¾;su;a kS;s{jrfhl= jQ meñKs,slreg), a person with sound mental health,

being branded as a person with a serious mental illness. The Respondent did not

explain this obviously irreconcilable inconsistency in his evidence presented

before this Court, in support of his defence of insanity.

Remaining document to be considered by this Court is the one that was

marked V3 and with a title “Medical Report”.

S.C. Rule No. 03/2024

12

This is a report issued by Dr. Jayan Mendis, a Consultant Psychiatrist, when

he was consulted by the Respondent at Nawaloka Hospital on 07. 06.2024. In the

assessment of Dr. Mendis, the Respondent only “appears to be slightly disinhibited”

and found to be a “mildly overtalkative” person. However, Dr. Mendis was firm in

his opinion that “… no clear manic disturbance or depressive symptoms noted” on the

Respondent. The said assessment of Dr. Mendis significantly reduces the

probabilities of any manic episode occurring in the mind of the Respondent on

20.03.2024. The finding of “… no clear manic disturbance or depressive symptoms

noted” would therefore excludes the prospect of the Respondent, though appears

to be of a “slightly disinhibited” nature and a “mildly overtalkative” person, having

any impairment on his cognitive ability of mind, that made him incapable of

knowing the nature of the act he committed, by reason of unsoundness of mind.

The all-important question of fact that must be determined in this instance

is whether the Respondent has proved on a balance of probabilities that he was

incapable of knowing the nature of the act, by reason of unsoundness of mind,

when he did the acts indicated in the Rule as committed by him on 20.03.2024,

due to “bipolar affective disorder currently mania with psychosis”.

The inconsistencies in these medical reports, indicating different states of

his mind, have the effect of significantly reducing the weightage that could be

attached to the mental impairment referred to in V1. In view of the contents of

the other reports, particularly V3, there is no noticeable mental impairment noted

by the Consultant. The Respondent, who now wishes to rely solely on V1 in

support of his defence, a medical report which he found in the past to be

injurious to his good reputation as a legal professional with a sound mental

health, a report that prompted him to claim damages from its author by

S.C. Rule No. 03/2024

13

institution of civil action, has now become the only item of evidence, in support

of his claim of insanity.

This he said before this Court under oath. Similarly, the Respondent

affirmed in an affidavit, annexed to the Plaint, in the said action filed against Drs.

W.W.L.I Fernando and C.T.K Fernando that he is perfectly a sane person, who was

wrongly diagnosed by the two defendants, as a person with a mental condition

of “bipolar affective disorder currently mania with psychosis”. Thus, the Respondent

has taken two diametrically opposite positions in these two situations, where he

vouched under oath of what he affirms therein is the truth.

Which of these two irreconcilable positions could be accepted by this

Court as the truthful statement of the Respondent?

This Court has no expertise to medically determine whether the

Respondent is of unsound mind, in terms of Section 77 of the Penal Code, when

the acts referred to in the Rule were admittedly committed by him. It is for this

purpose the Court called for the expert opinion from the Consultant Forensic

Psychiatrist. The Respondent, whilst placing strong reliance on V1, also relies on

V2 and V3, which completely nullifies any indication of him having “bipolar

affective disorder currently mania with psychosis”. In view of these conflicting

medical reports, this Court is not in a position to make a positive pronouncement

either way on this question; whether the Respondent actually suffers from an

unsoundness of mind or that he is quite a normal person, who now pretends to

be of a person of unsound mind for tactical reasons. The contradictory positions

taken up by the Respondent on this vital issue made it impossible for this Court

to determine the relative probabilities of him having a manic episode, during the

acts, committed on 20.03.2024.

S.C. Rule No. 03/2024

14

In order to get over these two irreconcilable positions that has arisen with

regard to his defence, the Respondent sought to explain in his evidence before

this Court that he now realises that it was wrong for him to have challenged the

validity of V1. The Respondent, in spite of accepting the contents of V1 as one

that reflects his state of mind on the date specified in the Rule, nonetheless wants

to proceed with the action he already instituted against the Drs. W.W.L.I Fernando

and C.T.K Fernando, by indicating that he has no intention of withdrawing that

action. Thus, the aforementioned conduct of the Respondent poses a serious

credibility issue on the truthfulness of evidence that was presented before this

Court by him, in support of the defence of insanity.

It is already noted that the assessment made by Dr. C.T.K Fernando in V1 is

clearly at variance with the one made by Dr. Jayan Mendis in V3. The clearance of

the Respondent of having any mental disorder by Dr. P.A.I. Wijayanayaka , the

finding on which he proceeded to institute action, even goes beyond V3. This

difference of opinions expressed by three medial experts, who are eminently

qualified in the field of Psychiatry, could have been due to the degree of

accessibility to relevant information provided to them in these three instances. In

fact, Dr. C.T.K Fernando noted that there was “unavailability of collateral information

from a family member” during the session conducted by him. The Respondent did

not volunteer any information and was obviously resentful of the Court order,

calling for a report on his mental health condition.

All three reports indicate, that the assessment of the Respondent was made

on each of those instances, on the information gathered during the consultations.

Thus, the opinion of the experts would totally depend on the manner the

S.C. Rule No. 03/2024

15

Respondent presented himself before each of them, and conducted himself

during the respective assessment sessions, thus resulting in varying conclusions.

In order to arrive at a finding on the question of fact that whether the

Respondent was incapable of knowing the nature of the act, by reason of

unsoundness of mind, it is important to refer to the circumstances leading up to

the point of the issuance of the instant Rule, along with the other circumstances

that tends to indicate his mental state, subsequent to those indicated in the said

Rule, even though he admitted those acts.

The Respondent filed application No. CA Writ 635/2021 naming several

Respondents (including a Judge of the original Court, cited as the 1st Respondent

in that petition), and made several allegations against two sitting Justices of that

Court, over a District Court matter where he made certain allegations to another

Attorney. Thereafter, he filed another application (COC/02/2023) against the

said 1st Respondent, alleging Contempt of Court of Appeal, when the latter failed

to appear before that Court, at the time the application No. CA Writ 635/2021

was mentioned before that Court. The Court of Appeal, by its order dated

09.03.2023, refused to issue notice on the 1st Respondent judicial officer, in case

No. COC/02/2023.

The Respondent thereupon sought Special Leave to Appeal from this

Court in SC SPL LA 112/2023, impugning the said order made by the Court of

Appeal in COC/02/2023. The Respondent, after filing the petition in case No.

SC SPL LA 112/2023, appeared before this Court in person on 30.01.2024 in order

to support the said application. When this Court sought a clarification from him,

whether there was any direction made by the Court of Appeal directing the 1st

Respondent in CA Writ 635/2021 to appear before that Court personally, the

S.C. Rule No. 03/2024

16

Respondent moved for time and to have the matter re-fixed and thereby

allowing him to make further submissions on the next date i.e., 20.03.2024.

It is at that stage only the Respondent has filed the subsequent petition

along with an affidavit on 12.03.2024, making serious allegations against the

panel of three Justices before whom his application No. SC SPL LA 112/2023 was

partially supported.

On 20.03.2024, when case No. SC SPL LA 112/2023 was resumed before

this Court, the Respondent made serious allegations in open Court against the

panel of Justices who were hearing his application. Learned SDSG, who

appeared for the Hon. Attorney General, having witnessed the acts of the

Respondent, moved this Court to issue a show cause on the Respondent, why

this Court should not punish him for Contempt of Supreme Court.

The said chronology of events indicates that the circumstances under

which he conducted himself in the well of the Court, in addition to making

certain allegations in his additional petition addressed to this Court. The reason

for his offending conduct on 20.03.2024, is admittedly intended to compel the

three Justices not to resume the hearing of his application in SC SPL LA

112/2023, and to force them to recuse themselves from continuing with the

further hearing.

The intention of the Respondent, behind his conduct, is clearly reflected

from the narrative he provided to Dr. C.T.K Fernando, during his assessment on

02.04.2024, after a mere 13 days since 20.03.2024.

The Respondent has disclosed to the Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist that

(vide para 29 of V1);

S.C. Rule No. 03/2024

17

“kvqj .;a;d iqmarsï fl`Ü tfla’ ;arS fnkaÉ mek,a tlla ;uhs ysáfha’ uu ta ;=ka

fokdg úreoaOj wmrdO kvqjla oeïud l,ska fld<U ufyaia;ard;a Widúh ^wxl 01&’ Bg

miafia uf.a kvqj wyoaos uu lsõjd " Tn ;=uka,dg úreoaOj uu kvq od, ;sfhkafka

tal ksid uf. kvqj l;d lrkav neye fu Widúfha lsh,d"

This particular admission made to the Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist by

the Respondent made it implicitly clear that he was determined to compel the

three Justices to desist from resuming the hearing of the application No. SC SPL

LA 112/2023 on 20.03.2024, at whatever the cost. He has even taken the extreme

step of instituting a private Plaint in the Magistrate’s Court of Colombo against

the three Justices, and thereby expected to force them to recuse from taking part

in any further proceedings in that matter, which their Lordships would have

done in any other ordinary situation, in terms of applicable Judicial Ethics.

The said conduct of the Respondent therefore appears to be of a person,

who acted with a clear and a rational mind, especially in developing a strategy to

achieve his desired objective and by creating a situation that would force the

three Justices to recuse themselves from taking part in any further proceedings of

the case. The Respondent should be credited for executing each of the stages of

that strategy with meticulous care and acumen. If that in fact the case is, then the

Respondent has effectively designed a strategy in order to force the three Justices

not to proceed with the resumption of proceedings with the unfounded and

unsubstantiated allegation of bias in order to have his matter taken up before a

bench, which he perceives, that would act favourable to his cause.

Moreover, immediately after enlarging the Respondent on bail, he has

secured an interview with a private television presenter. During this interview,

he was afforded with yet another opportunity of repeating what he alleged in his

subsequent petition to reach out to a larger population of television viewers via

S.C. Rule No. 03/2024

18

audio-visual media. This action, in turn, has resulted in re-remanding the

Respondent.

In view of this reasoning, it appears to this Court that it is more probable

than not, that the Respondent at all times material to the Rule No. 3/24, have

acted with a rational mind, which is not clouded by any mental condition that is

capable of diminishing that ability. Clearly, there was no family history of mental

illnesses and prior to the incidents which resulted in presenting the charges, the

Respondent had no episodes of any mental incapacity at all.

Even if there was some temporary derangement, as assessed by Dr. C.T.K

Fernando, the evidence clearly supports a reasonable proposition that he may

have experienced such episodes only momentarily with long time intervals in

between them. But, when he acted contemptuously towards this Court on

20.03.2024, and in the absence of any material to satisfy this Court to the

contrary, it is more probable that he was acting rationally and was not under any

form of mental derangement, as confirmed by Drs. P.A.I. Wijayanayaka and Jayan

Mendis, Consultant Psychiatrists, who have had the benefit and the opportunity

of make assessment of the Respondent, who provided them with an unrestricted

flow of information. It is also relevant to note that it was foremost in the

Respondent’s mind to nullify the adverse impact made by V1 on his mental

health and therefore it is reasonable to infer that he did present himself before

the other two experts with that purpose in mind. This course of action adopted

by the Respondent further strengthens the position he had no mental defilement

in acting in the manner he did on 20.03.2024.

In this regard, it must be noted that all three Consultants have assessed the

mental condition of the Respondent solely by interviewing him and without

S.C. Rule No. 03/2024

19

having the benefit of any clinical reports obtained through investigative testing

procedures to assist them.

Furthermore, I derive support for aforementioned view from the reasoning

of the judgment of Dias J in The King v Jayawardene (1947) 48 NLR 497. This was

a situation where the accused, in support of his plea of insanity, has relied on the

evidence that his father, brother and sister had been insane; he himself in his

childhood had suffered from epileptic fits, that when the detection of his fraud

and his arrest became imminent his mental condition deteriorated to the extent

that he attempted to commit suicide and was subsequently adjudicated to be of a

person of unsound mind. But the evidence before Court also proved that during

the thirty years the accused had been a public servant, he had displayed no signs

of any mental aberration.

His Lordship, having considered the circumstances in support of the

defence of insanity by the accused, has held (at p. 503) that;

“[T]he modus operandi of the accused, as detailed by the learned Judge at

pages 51 and 52 of his judgment, clearly shows that the accused needed

considerable skill and mental acumen in order to falsify the books and

vouchers received by him during this period in order to deceive, not only

his station staff, but also the head office at Colombo. A person who was of

unsound mind and did not know the nature of his acts could not have

perpetrated this somewhat intricate fraud in the manner in which the

accused carried

Since Rule No. 3/24 was served on the conduct of the Respondent as an

Attorney-at-Law and thereby acting in violation of the Rules of the Supreme

Court (Conduct of and Etiquette of Attorneys-at-Law) 1988, made under Article

S.C. Rule No. 03/2024

20

136 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, it is

opportune at this stage to examine whether his offending conduct warrants any

determination by this Court in respect of exercising its power conferred under

Section 42(2) of the Judicature Act No. 2 of 1978, which states “ [E]very person

admitted and enrolled as an Attorney-at-Law who shall be guilty of deceit, malpractice

crime or offence may be suspended from practice or removed from office by any three

Judges of the Supreme Court sitting together.”

In the matter of a Rule against an Attorney-at-Law (2008) 1 Sri L.R. 275, it

has been held by S.N. Silva CJ (at p. 282) that “ … an objection to the participation of

a Judge should be only on firm foundation. Any frivolous objection that is taken would

only impede the due administration of justice, which may even amount to contempt of

Court.” In this instance, the Respondent has not only objected the Justices for

participating in the proceedings on a concocted set of allegations created by him,

also instituted a private prosecution, alleging criminal conduct attributed to their

Lordships, with the sole purpose of securing that the matter would not be taken

up for further support on that day.

In view of the foregoing, I agree with the submissions of the learned

Deputy Solicitor General, who assisted Court, made to the effect that “[T]he

question of the Respondent continuing to serve as an Attorney-at-Law is simply

untenable – not only because of his actions where he abused his privileged position as an

Attorney-at-Law- but also because of the danger to any clients that may retain him. His

actions would seriously prejudice his client’s interests.”

Dr A.R.B. Amerasinghe in his book titled Professional Ethics and Responsibility

of Lawyers, under the heading “[T]he Duty of Diligence” states (Chapter XIII, at

p.290); “[I]t is to be assumed that an attorney is mentally and physically fit to undertake

S.C. Rule No. 03/2024

21

the work. Where his mental or physical condition materially impairs his ability to act for

his client in a persevering, industrious, assiduous, attentive and careful manner, whether

the disability is natural or self-induced, for example from the use of intoxicants or drugs,

an attorney should not undertake a matter”.

In this instance, the Respondent represented himself and did not represent

a client, who obtained his professional services and as such the duty of diligence

might not carry the weight it ought to carry if it was a private client. But the

persistent conduct of the Respondent to have the bench re-arranged to fit into his

own liking, a clear act of attempted bench fixing, and adopting devious methods

in order to achieve that manifestly illegal objective, not only deserves the

strongest form of condemnation, but demands adequate punitive measures.

These measures taken by this Court should be adequate enough, not only to

indicate the strong determination of this Court not to leave room for any such

inference with its affairs and that it tolerates such conduct on the part of the

Respondent lightly, which also intended to provide clear warning to any other

person, who might entertain similar intentions.

Dr A.R.B. Amerasinghe, in this regard, states (ibid, at p. 10); [T]here is a

general, overall, obligation imposed by a prohibition against conducting oneself “in any

manner” which would be regarded as ‘disgraceful’, dishonourable’, ‘deplorable’ or

‘inexcusable’ or ‘unworthy’.” Learned author further added that (ibid) that the

phrase “in any manner” connotes not only professional misconduct to things done

in the pursuit of the profession, but “… to conduct occurring in circumstances

unconnected with the practice of law.”

With this wider interpretation in mind, and having considered the conduct

now admitted by the Respondent with an explanation he was unable to satisfy

S.C. Rule No. 03/2024

22

this Court with, we are of the considered opinion that the acts referred to in the

Rule are clearly qualifies to be termed as ‘disgraceful’, ‘dishonourable’, ‘deplorable’

or ‘inexcusable’ conduct on the part of the Respondent and thereby rendering him

unworthy to be invested with permission of this Court to practice law. The

Respondent was already suspended from practicing law by this Court at the

initial stage of these proceedings.

This Court therefore decides to disenroll Jayatunga Patabendige Susil

Priyantha Jayatunga as an Attorney-at-Law of this Court with effect from today,

i.e., 05.02.2026.

Accordingly, we issue an order on the Registrar of this Court, directing her

that the name of the Respondent, Jayatunga Patabendige Susil Priyantha Jayatunga,

be struck off from the Register, that contain names of Attorneys-at-Law, who are

permitted to practice law within Sri Lanka.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

ARJUNA OBEYESEKERE, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

SAMPATH B. ABAYAKOON, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT