1 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal to the Supreme Court in terms of section 09 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 90 of 1990 read with Article 128 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Office-in-Charge, Police Station, Kollupitiya. Complainant SC Appeal 76/2018 Vs,

SC/SPL/LA 55/2016 HC/MCA 140 /2013 Thusith Thilina Malagoda, MC Case No. 89640/11 No. 35, Ransive Lane, Colombo 06. Accused And Paleketiyage Samanthi Manohari Paleketiya, No. 49, Mahawa Road, Nikawaratiya. Appellant Vs, Office-in-Charge, Police Station, Kollupitiya. Complainant –Respondent Thusith Thilina Malagoda, No. 35, Ransive Lane, Colombo 06.

Accused–Respondent

2

Attorney General, Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12. Respondent

And now between Thusith Thilina Malagoda, No. 35, Ransive Lane, Colombo 06.

Accused-Respondent-Appellant Vs, Paleketiyage Samanthi Manohari Paleketiya, No. 49, Mahawa Road, Nikawaratiya. Appellant-Respondent Office-in-Charge, Police Station, Kollupitiya. Complainant –Respondent-Respondent Attorney General, Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12. Respondent-Respondent

Before: Hon. Justice Buwaneka Aluwihare PC Hon. Justice Vijith K. Malalgoda PC Hon. Justice Murdu N.B. Fernando PC

Counsel: Anil Silva PC with Nandana Perera for the Accused-Respondent-Appellant

Migara Doss with Ms. Lakmali Hemachandra for the Appellant- Respondent

Malik Aziz, SC for the Hon. Attorney General

3 Argued on: 12.12.2018 Decided on: 12.02.2019

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J

The Accused-Respondent-Appellant (herein after referred to as the Appellant) namely Thusith Thilina

Malagoda was charged before the Magistrate Fort on a charge under Section 345 of the Panel Code

which reads as follows;

“On or about 28.03.2011 at Mahanama Vidyalaya, R.A. de. Mel Mawatha, Colombo 03 within

the jurisdiction of this court did entre the workplace of Samanthi Manohari Palaketiya of

Mahawa Road, Nikaweratiya and kissed her face without her consent and with the intention

of outraging the modesty, and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 345 of

Penal Code as amended by Penal Code (amendment) Act No 22 of 1995.”

When the above charges were readout to the Appellant above named before the Learned

Magistrate, the Appellant pleaded not guilty to the said charge and the trial against him proceeded

before the said Magistrate’s Court. During the trial, the prosecution relied on the evidence of;

i) Palaketiyage Samanthi Manohari Palaketiya

ii) Sadarathdura Cyril Silva

iii) Chathura Ranjith Nissanka and

iv) Yakupitiyage Nandapala

When the learned Magistrate called for the defence, the Appellant gave evidence on oath and the

learned Magistrate on 27.06.2013 delivered the judgment acquitting the Appellant.

4 Being aggrieved by the said acquittal, the Complainant-Appellant-Respondent (hereinafter referred

to as the Respondent) or the victim before the Magistrate’s Court namely Palaketiyage Samantha

Manohari Palaketiya preferred an appeal to the High Court of the Western Province, holden in

Colombo with the sanction obtained from the Hon. Attorney General under the provisions of the

Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

The leaned High Court Judge, by his judgment dated 18.03.2016 allowed the appeal preferred by the

Respondent and convicted the Appellant (accused before the Magistrate’s Court) of the above

charge and referred the case back to the Magistrate’s Court for identification and sentence.

Being aggrieved by the said judgment of the learned High Court Judge, the Appellant had preferred a

Special Leave to Appeal application before the Supreme Court and when this matter was supported

before this court on 21.05.2018 for Special Leave, Court granted Special Leave on the following

questions of Law.

a) Is the judgment contrary to Law and against the weight of evidence led at the trial?

c) Did the learned High Court Judge fail to consider the propensity of the Complainant to

make allegations of improper sexual conduct and that therefore it was likely that the

Complainant may have falsely fabricated a case against the Petitioner?

d) Did the Learned High Court Judge fail to consider that the belatedness of making a

complaint considering the circumstances of this case which matter was rightly considered

by the learned Magistrate when acquitted the Petitioner?

As observed by me, the Appellant whilst challenging the judgment of the learned High Court Judge

had raised several grounds and some of those grounds can be summarized as follows;

i. Belated statement made to police

5

ii. Failure to complain the incident to the Principle of Mahanama College

iii. Complainant’s propensity to make false allegations of sexual harassment to absolve

herself from her own wrongdoings

iv. The complainant never wanted an inquiry into the incident

v. Can the Appellant be convicted based on sole unreliable testimony of the Complainant

When considering the appeal before this court, it is important to note that the present appeal is

lodged against the reversal of the findings of the trial Judge by the learned High Court Judge, and it is

an accepted legal principle that the Appellate Courts are reluctant to interfere with the findings of

the trial court unless the said decision is against the weight of the evidence led before the trial judge.

This position was considered by G.P.S. de. Silva (J) in the case of Alwis Vs. Piyasena Fernando (1993)

1 Sri LR 120 at 122 as follows;

“It is well established that findings of primary facts by a trial judge who hears and sees

witnesses are not to be lightly disturbed on appeal”

The main reason as to why the Appellate Courts are reluctant to interfere with the findings of the

trial court, is the advantage of the Trial Judge of seeing the lay witnesses who testify before the trial

court and the fact that the trial judge is possessed with the demeanor and deportment of the witness

in deciding the trial before him. However as revealed before us, the learned Magistrate before whom

the evidence for the prosecution case was led had been transferred and the case for the defence was

taken up before the new Magistrate after adopting the evidence for the prosecution case.

In the said circumstances, the learned State Counsel who represented the Hon. Attorney General

submitted that the learned Magistrate who delivered the judgment in the trial court was deprived

6 with the demeanor and deportment of the prosecution witnesses including the main witness for the

prosecution, the Respondent before this court, Palaketiyage Samanthi Manohari Palaketiya.

As observed by me, the learned High Court Judge was mindful of the above legal requirement and

had referred to the role of an Appellate Judge in an appeal as follows;

“w,aúia tosrsj mshfiak m%kdkaÿ ^1993 ^1& Y%S ,xld kS;s jd¾:d 119& yd m%ldYhg m;a kvq

;Skaÿ .kkdjla u.ska ;yjqre jQ ffk;sl ;;ajh kï isoaêuh lreKq iïnkaOfhka

;SrKh lrkq jia wNshdpkdêlrKhlg jvd uq,a wjia:d wêlrKh jvd;a fhda.H

;;ajhl isák nj;a" uq,a wjia:d wêlrK ;Skaÿjl isoaêuh lreKq iïnkaOfhka

t<fUk ,o ;SrK wNshdpkfhaoS fjkia lrkq ,nkafka kï th b;d ie,ls,af,ka yd

m%fõYfuka l<hq;= nj;ah' tfia jqjo fuu wNshdpkhg wod, fldgqj ufyaia;%d;a

wêlrKfha 89640$11 ork kvqj i,ld ne,SfïoS" tu kvqfõ meñKs,af,a ish¿u idCIs

tla ufyaia;%d;ajrfhla bosrsfha o" bka wk;=rej ú;a;sfha kvqj muKla" ;Skaÿj

m%ldYhg m;a lsrSug fhÿk ufyaia;%d;ajrhd bosrsfha oS fufyhjd we;s neõ fmkS hhs'

ta wkqj ;Skaÿj m%ldYhg m;a lsrSug fhÿk ufyaia;%d;ajrhd yg meñKs,af,a idCIs

ÿka iajNdjh iy ú,dYh ksrSCIKh lsrSfï wjldYhla ,eî fkdue;s w;r" yqfola

j¾;d .; igyka wkqj muKla tu ks.ukhg t<ö we;' ta wkqj i,ld n,k l,

fuu wêlrKhg jvd isoaêuh lreKq iïnkaOfhka jvd;a fydoska ;SrKh lsrSfï

;;ajhla fuu kvqfõ ufyaia;%d;ajrhd fj; ;sî fkdue;s nj fmkS hhs' Bg hg;aj

fuu kvqfõ lreK uu i,ld n,ñ ”

In the above circumstances, I can’t find fault with the decision of the learned High Court Judge to

interfere with the findings of the learned Magistrate if he had observed that the impugned decision

before the High Court was against the evidence led before the trial court.

In the said circumstance this court too has a duty to analyze the evidence and consider whether the

learned High Court Judge is correct in reversing the findings of the learned Magistrate.

As observed earlier in this judgment, the main grounds on which the Appellant challenged the High

Court findings, also needs this court to analyze the evidence led before the trial court.

7 Therefore it is important to consider the evidence given by the Complainant before the Magistrate’s

Court proceedings, namely Palaketiyage Samanthi Manohari Palaketiya, before considering the

specific issues raised by the Appellant.

The Complainant who was a music teacher at Mahanama College, Colombo 03 had complained of an

incident that took place during the school hours between 8.45-9.30 a.m. The Appellant too was a

teacher at the same school. According to the Complainant, the Appellant had walked in to her class

room when nobody was in and had made certain indecent proposals to which she did not agree and

requested him to leave. The Appellant who left the class room on her request had come back to the

class room again and had kissed her face. He once again left the class room when the Respondent

shouted at him. The Respondent immediately complained the said incident to one Cyril Silva who

was the Master-in-Charge of discipline at Mahanama College, over the phone. Said Cyril Silva had

requested the Respondent, not to complain the incident to anybody and to leave the school

obtaining half days leave. He further undertook to look into the matter internally to avoid any

adverse publicity to the school.

According to the Respondent, she had remained silent until 25th of April. The school holidays too had

intervened during this period. Around the 25th an officer from the Kollupitiya Police Station visited

the school on an anonymous complaint, questioned the Respondent about the incident that took

place on 28th March. The Respondent did not make a complaint to the police even on that day but,

finally decided to lodge a complaint with police on 11th May 2011 when pressure was brought on her

by several parties including the Old Boys Association and the Appellant himself, to settle the matter.

By this time an inquiry conducted by the Education Ministry, was also proceeding against the

Appellant.

8 The above position taken up by the Respondent was confirmed by witness Cyril Silva who received

the complaint on 28th Morning.

As revealed before us, the learned Magistrate who considered the above evidence had given his

mind to the delay in making the statement with the police and the failure by the Respondent to

complain the above incident to the Principle in the following manner.

“;jo meñKs,af,a idCIs wkqj fuu isÿùu isÿù we;af;a 2011.03.28 jk oskfhaoSh'

tfy;a me'id 01 iy me'id 04 idCIslrejkaf.a idCIsj,ska wkdjrKh jQfha óg

wod, meñKs,a, fmd,sia ia:dkh fj; lr we;af;a 2011'05'11 jk oskfhaoSh' tkï

udi 02lg wdikak ld,hla .; ùfuka miqjh' fujeks isoaêhla isÿjQfha kï ta

ms<sn|j wm%udoj fmd,Sishg meñKs,a,la lsrSug wiu;a jQfha wehso hk ielh

u;=fõ ' me'id 01 idCIsldrsh m%ldY lr isáfha tu isoaêh ;uka úiska me'id 03

idCIslreg tu oskfhau okajd isá njhs' me'id 03 idCIslre o idCIs foñka tu

lreKq ;yjqre lrk ,oS' tfy;a kvq úNd.fhaoS wkdjrKh jQfha me'id 03

idCIslre tosk ksjdvq oud ksjfia isá ;eke;a;l= njhs' me'id 01 idCIsldrsh

fuu w;jr isoaêh" ksjdvq ,nd ksjfia isá me'id 03 idCIslreg isÿjq oskfhau

oekqï oSug l%shd l, o tu wjia:dj jk úg mdif,a /oS isá úÿy,am;sjrhdg

fyda fjk;a n,Odrshl= yg fï ms<sn|j meñKs,a,la isÿ lr fkdue;' tu

wjia:dfõoS mdif,a fkdisá mqoa.,hl=g tu oskfhau oekqï oSu isÿ lrkjdg jvd

mdif,a isá úÿy,am;sjrhdg fï iïnkaOfhka oekqï oSula l< yelsj ;snqKs'

tfia fkdlsrSu ;=,ska o meñKs,af,a kvqj flfrys hï ielhla we;sfõ' ”

However the above issues were put before the Respondent when she was giving evidence before the

Magistrate and she had explained them in her evidence as follows;

“fuu isoaêfhka miafia uu mdif,ka jrejla ksjdvq od,d .shd' fï iïnkaOfhka

fmd,sishg meñKs,a,la lf,a keye' isrs,a i¾ ug lsõjd ksjdvq od,d hkak fjk

lsis fohla lrkak tmd lsh,d' isrs,a i¾ fmd,sishg hkak tmd lshmq ksid

meñKs,a,la lf,a keye''''''''''''''' fuu isoaêh t,shg hkak fokak tmd uydkdu

úµd,hg le,,la lsh,d' tfy;a fomd¾Yjh w;r úu¾Ykhla isÿlf,a keye' Bg

9

miq wfm%a,a udifha ksjdvqfjka miafia tla oskhl fld,a,qmsáh fmd,sisfhka

mdi,g wdjd' ug isrs,a i¾ weú,a,d lsõjd uu lsisfohla lrkak tmd lsh,;a

wehs fmd,sishg meñKs,s lr,d fkao weyqjd' uu lsõjd uu meñKs,a,la lf,a

keye lsh,d' fmd,sisfha ks,OdrSka úiska udj fjka lrjdf.k uf.ka

lgW;a;rhla .;a;d' ug úÿyf,ka n,mEï wdjd fufyu isoaêhla jqfka keye

lsh,d fmd,sishg lshkak lsh,d'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''' Tjqka wfm%a,a 26 jk osk

uf.ka lgW;a;rhla .;a;d' uu lsõjdug wjYH jqúg meñKs,a,la lrkjd

lsh,d' ta wkqj ug mdif,ka t,a, jq fpdaokdj,a j,g uqyqK fokak fkdyels

;ek uu fmd,sishg .sys,a,d meñKs,a,la l,d' ta 2011 uehs 11 fjksod' isoaêh jQ

fj,dfõ meñKs,a,la fkdlf,a mdif,a kug le,,la isÿjkjd lsh,d b,a,Sula

lrmq ksid''''''' ”

Cross Examination (Page 48)

m%( tu meñKs,a, bosm;a lsrSug m<uqj ;uqkag rdcldrS lghq;= w;fr isÿ

jqkdh lshk fuu isoaêh iïnkaOfhka ;uka úÿy,am;s;=udg meñKs,a,la

bosm;a l,do keoao@

W( úÿy,am;s;=udg lsjqõ keye

(Page 59)

m%( ta wjia:dj jk úg ;uka ta yd*a fâ .;af;a ;uka mqoa.,sl jYfhka .kak

;sfhk ksido@ fya;=jla ksido@

W( úkhNdr .=rejrhd isrs,a is,ajd lshmq ksid

m%( isrs,a is,ajd lshmq ksid .shd lsh,d ;uhs lshkafka'

idCIsldrsh fï isÿùu iïnkaOfhka úÿy,am;sg oekqïoSula lf,a keye

W( Tõ

m%( úÿy,am;s iuÕ ;uka hïlsis wukdmhla ;snqKo@

W( uf.a ;snqfka keye úÿy,am;sf.a ;snqKd

m%( úÿy,am;sf.a wukdmhla ;snqK ksid ;uka lshkak bosrsm;a jqfka keye

10

W( Tõ

Re Examination (Page 65)

“ú;a;sfha kS;S{ uy;auhd yria m%Yak wikúg uf.ka weyqjd tu isoaêh isÿjk

wjia:dfú meñKs,a, lf,a úkhNdr .=rejrhdg lshd' úÿy,am;s;=udg meñKs,a,la

lf,a keoao lshd' úÿy,am;s;=ud;a tjeks fhdackdjla f.kdjd' fï jf.a m%Yak

fj,djg úÿy,am;s;=ud;a .kafka ud,f.dv i¾f.a me;a; ksid úÿy,am;s;=udg

lshd lsisu wjYH ^jevla& keye”

Even though the learned Magistrate had failed to consider the above evidence, the learned High

Court Judge had correctly considered the above evidence in his judgment.

In addition to the two main points referred to above, several other issues raised on behalf of the

Appellant including the Respondent’s propensity to make a false allegation against the Appellant was

well considered by the learned High Court Judge in his judgment. As further observed by the learned

High Court Judge the Respondent was subject to severe cross examination on behalf of the Appellant

but the Appellant had failed to establish any contradictions or omissions in her evidence.

Even though the learned President’s Counsel who represented the Appellant had taken up the

position that the Respondent is not a credible witness mainly due to the delay in making the

statement to police, coloured with the other deficiencies and therefore it is unsafe to act on her

evidence, I see no merit in the above argument and do agree with the findings of the learned High

Court Judge that, it is safe to act on the testimony of the Respondent.

When considering the matters referred to above, I observe that the decision of the learned High

Court Judge to interfere with the findings of the Magistrate by quashing the acquittal and convicting

the Appellant was a well-considered decision since the evidence led before the learned Magistrate

11 was contrary to the findings of the learned Magistrate. In the said circumstance I answer the

questions of law raised in the present appeal in negative and dismiss the appeal with costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court Justice Buwaneka Aluwihare PC I agree,

Judge of the Supreme Court Justice Murdu N.B. Fernando PC I agree,

Judge of the Supreme Court