1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

MMBL Teas (Pvt) Ltd.,

No. 300, Galle Road,

Colombo 3.

PLAINTIFF

SC Case No. SC/CHC/35/2008 Vs

Case No. HC Civil 191/2002 (1)

1. British Ceylon Produce Export

(Pvt) Ltd., No. 351/1, Dewanampiyatissa Mawatha, Colombo 10. 2. Abdul Hafeel Ahamed Abbas,

No. 619/12, Baseline Road, Colombo 09, Presently of No. 573, Sudarma Mawatha, Wanawasala, Kelaniya. 3. Najiur Rahman Abbas,

No. 619/12, Baseline Road, Colombo 09.

DEFENDANTS

AND NOW

MMBL Teas (Pvt) Ltd.,

No. 300, Galle Road,

Colombo 3.

PLAINTIFF-APPELLANT

2

Vs

1. British Ceylon Produce Export

(Pvt) Ltd., No. 351/1, Dewanampiyatissa Mawatha, Colombo 10.

2. Abdul Hafeel Ahamed Abbas,

No. 619/12, Baseline Road, Colombo 09, Presently of No. 573, Sudarma Mawatha, Wanawasala, Kelaniya.

3. Najiur Rahman Abbas,

No. 619/12, Baseline Road, Colombo 09.

DEFENDANT-RESPONDENTS

Before: Buwaneka Aluwihare, PC, J.

L. T. B. Dehideniya, J.

M. N. B. Fernando, PC, J.

Counsel: Prof. H. M. Zafrullah instructed by Varners for the Plaintiff-Appellant.

Dinesh de Alwis instructed by Ms. Amandi Jayasinghe for the Defendant-Respondent.

Argued on: 27. 08. 2018

Decided on: 17.12. 2021

3

Aluwihare PC,J.

Case Briefly Stated;

(1) The Plaintiff-Appellant [hereinafter referred to as the Plaintiff]

instituted action in the High Court of Colombo exercising Civil

jurisdiction against the three Defendant-Respondents [hereinafter

referred to as the Defendants].

(2) Plaintiff instituted the said action seeking judgement in a sum of Rs.

7,300,000/= plus legal interest. Plaintiff’s claim against the 1st

Defendant was upon a Promissory Note whilst the claim against the 2nd

and 3rd Defendants was upon a Guarantee Bond.

(3) The execution of both the promissory note [marked and produced as

P3] and the guarantee bond [marked and produced as P4] were not

disputed by the Defendants. In the answer, however, they denied

payment on P3 and P4 and made a claim in reconvention in a sum of

Rs. 15 million. The Plaintiff filing a replication denied the Defendants’

claim.

(4) By judgement dated 15th May 2008, the Learned High Court judge

dismissed the Plaintiff’s case and held further that the Defendants were

entitled to the reliefs prayed for in the answer. The present appeal

arises from the said judgement.

(5) Both parties had been engaged in the business of exporting tea. It

appears that, at the time relevant to the dispute in issue, there existed a

business relationship between the Plaintiff and the 1st Defendant.

4

The Plaintiff’s Case

(6) Witness Balasubramanium, a Director of the Plaintiff company

testifying stated that;

(a) The Plaintiff company had been set up for the export of tea and

was associated with the 1st Defendant company in this venture.

(b) The 1st Defendant company would secure orders for the export

of tea and the Plaintiff company would finance the purchase of

tea. The export of teas had taken place on letters of credit that

was assigned to the Plaintiff’s bank, which was instructed to

credit export proceeds to the Plaintiff’s account. The profits were

to be shared equally between the Plaintiff and the 1st Defendant.

(c) The operation had been quite straightforward, according to the

witness, upon the letter of credit being submitted to the bank, the

1st Defendant company places a firm order and the Plaintiff

Company purchases tea, which is delivered to the 1st Defendant

company for blending, packing and exporting.

(d) As far as the impugned transaction was concerned, a letter of

credit had been received by the Plaintiff’s bank for the export of

tea to Iran, and consequently a stock of tea had been purchased

by the Plaintiff from the auction and stored in the warehouse of

the 1st Defendant company. This consignment of tea, however,

had not been shipped due to a complaint by the buyer’s agent

relating to its inferior quality. As a result, the tea had been lying

in the stores of the 1st Defendant.

5

(e) The witness has alleged, that without any intimation to the

Plaintiff, the 1st Defendant had made arrangements to have the

consignment shipped to Dubai, without the customary letter of

credit being opened. On the Plaintiff making a query, the 2nd and

3rd Defendants had confirmed both verbally and in writing [P1],

that the payment would be made once the consignment of tea

reach Dubai.

(f) The Plaintiff, however, according to the witness, had not been

paid for the said consignment of tea.

(g) The witness had further stated that, as the payment was not

forthcoming, he requested for additional security for the

payment and consequently the 1st Defendant executed a

Promissory Note [P3] in favour of the Plaintiff for a sum of Rs.

7,300,000/= which was the Rupee value equivalent of US $

81,000, the value of the consignment of tea that was exported to

Dubai. In addition, a Guarantee Bond [P4] also had been given,

signed by 2nd and 3rd Defendants, assuring the payment. [Both

the Promissory Note P3 and the Guarantee Bond P4 are dated 2nd

July 2001]

(h) As, even by April 2002, the 1st Defendant company had not paid

the Plaintiff company the money due, in respect of the

consignment of tea exported to Dubai, a letter [P6] was sent by

the Plaintiff company presenting the Promissory Note [P3] and

requesting payment. The Defendants, however, had not paid the

money due on the Promissory Note, as requested. As such, ‘notice

of dishonour’ [P7] was sent to the 1st Defendant company, with

6

copies to the 2nd to 3rd Defendants, followed by the letter of

demand [P8].

(i) The witness under cross-examination stated that the Promissory

Note [P3] was executed nearly 5 months after the consignment of

tea was exported, because the export of this particular

consignment of tea had been quite contrary to the customary

practice as explained in paragraph (c) above.

(j) According to the Defendants, the Promissory Note P3 and the

Guarantee Bond P4 were given to raise funds to service the

pending export orders, which, however, had been denied by the

Plaintiff. The position taken up by the Plaintiff was that the

particular consignment was shipped on ‘consignment’ basis

instead of on ‘letters of credit’ which was the agreed procedure

between the parties and also without any intimation to the

Plaintiff.

(k) The Plaintiff alleges that it was due to this reason, that they

requested for security and the Defendants gave the Promissory

Note [P3] and the Guarantee Bond [P4] both of which were

executed subsequent to the shipment.

The Defendants’ version

(7) Mohamed Abbas, Director of the 1st Defendant Company, in his

testimony had taken up the position that they had an arrangement with

the Plaintiff company, for the Defendants to obtain orders for tea from

Iran and the Plaintiff to supply stocks of tea for export. The witness had

7

referred to these transactions as “L. C. orders”. The arrangement was,

for the Defendant company to obtain the orders [for tea] and the

Plaintiff to purchase the consignments of tea and export on letters of

credit assigned to the Plaintiff’s bank and the parties to share the profits

equally.

(8) When the third consignment [22,550 kg] was to be shipped, an agent

from the Iranian buyer had come down and having examined the tea,

had declared that the teas were below the quality they desired.

(9) In order to raise the quality of the teas, the 1st Defendant company had

blended the consignment of teas supplied by the Plaintiff with superior

quality teas and had obtained a fresh order to have the teas shipped to

Iran with a trans-shipment in Dubai. The teas so shipped could not

proceed beyond Dubai, due to an import restriction clamped by Iran

and the consignment had got stuck in Dubai which was the port of

trans-shipment. According to the Defendants’ witness, the Plaintiff had

given instructions to sell the consignment in issue, in Dubai.

(10) Witness Abbas [Director of the 1st Defendant Company] had written to

Seylan Bank on 3rd April 2001 and had put the bank on notice that the

Plaintiff company [MMBL Teas] had bought a consignment of 22,500

kg of tea and the said consignment was exported to M/s Al Ashraf

General Trading Company in Dubai, for onward transmission to Iran

[D34].

(11) It appears that the trade embargo or the ban on importing tea to Iran

had come into force in March 2001 [D33]. The probable reason for the

teas being sold to a buyer in Dubai instead of being shipped to Iran.

8

(12) Although it was claimed by the Defendants that they lost their goodwill,

credentials and reputation vis-à-vis the Iranian buyer in view of the

Plaintiff's conduct, namely supplying inferior quality teas, the actual

reason for the trade to come to a halt, appears to be the embargo on tea

imports to Iran.

(13) The defence witness also admitted that [in his testimony] the Plaintiff

demanded a “security” and the Defendants having agreed, gave a

Promissory Note for Rs. 7.3 million and executed a Guarantee Bond as

well.

(14) The defence witness had also admitted that, although the arrangement

between the Plaintiff and the 1st Defendant was to obtain orders on

letters of credit of foreign buyers in favour of the Plaintiff company, the

impugned consignment of teas was not exported on a letter of credit,

but on “consignment basis” and the witness admitted that the teas

belonged to the Plaintiff company and that the Defendants did not pay

the Plaintiff the value for the 22134 kg of teas that were exported. The

excuse given by the witness for such non-payment was that the

Defendants did not receive payment.

(15) The position taken up by the Defendants was that the Plaintiff company

had no financial strength to do exports and the Plaintiff company

sought the assistance of the 1st Defendant company, for the Plaintiff to

obtain funds from the [Seylan] bank. It must be noted that this assertion

of the Defendants was refuted by the Plaintiff. In the course of the

testimony, witness Balasubramanium had stated that the Plaintiff had

obtained “packing credit” from the bank in order to finance the

purchase of teas.

9

The Contention on behalf of the Plaintiff

(16) It was the contention of the learned counsel for the Plaintiff that:

(a) The Promissory Note and the Guarantee Bond are autonomous

documents and that it is settled law that such instruments cannot

be read subject to extraneous terms and conditions.

(b) That the learned trial judge was in error when he held that on

the evidence, that there was no consideration; whereas according

to the evidence led at the trial in fact “valuable consideration”

was in fact present.

(c) Allowing the counter claim [claim in reconvention] of the

Defendants was wrong, as the same is not in compliance with

Sections 43,44,45 and 46(2) of the Civil Procedure Code.

(17) In terms of section 85(1) the Bills of Exchange Ordinance, a Promissory

note is defined as;

“A promissory note is an unconditional promise in writing made

by one person to another signed by the maker, engaging to pay, on

demand or at a fixed or determinable future time, a sum certain in

money, to, or to the order of, a specified person or to bearer”.

(18) The learned counsel for the Plaintiff argued that the learned trial judge

had misdirected himself in concluding that the terms and conditions in

documents P3 [the Promissory Note] and P4 [Guarantee Bond] must be

interpreted together with the conditions set out in the document

marked P1, a letter sent by the 2nd Defendant, to the Finance Director of

the Plaintiff company. The learned Counsel further contended that the

Promissory Note [P3] cannot be subjected to extraneous terms and

10

conditions as they are autonomous documents and in any event the

letter P1 is merely a communication sent by the 2nd Defendant to the

Financial Director, stating, that the 1st Defendant company would pay

for the teas exported, no sooner the shipment reached the destination.

(19) The learned counsel, relied on the decision in the case of Cebora vs.

S.I.P (Industrial Products) Ltd. [1976] Lloyds Law Reports 271, where

it was held that “For some generations one of those certainties has been

that the bona fide holder for value of a bill of exchange is entitled , save

in truly exceptional circumstances, on its maturity to have it treated as

cash, so that in an action upon it the Court will refuse to regard either

as a defence or as grounds for a stay of execution any set off, legal or

equitable, or any counterclaim whether arising on the particular

transaction upon which the bill of exchange came into existence, or, a

fortiori, arising in any other way. This rule of practice is thus, in effect,

pay up on the bill of exchange first and pursue claims later.” [page

278-279].

It was contended on behalf of the Plaintiff that, to defeat a claim based

on a bill of exchange, the defence must relate to a total failure of

consideration, as a mere defect of title in the goods supplied will not

amount to a total failure of consideration.

(20) The position taken up by the Plaintiff referred to above, must be viewed

in the backdrop of the evidence led in the case and the background to

the execution of the Promissory Note [P3] and the Guarantee Bond [P4]

(21) The evidence was that both, the Promissory Note [P3] and the

Guarantee Bond [P4] was executed nearly five months after the teas

[the consignment in issue] were exported as the Defendants in

exporting the consignment, had deviated from the agreed practice.

11

(22) According to witness Balasubramanium, he became aware of the export

[of the consignment of teas in issue] only upon being informed by one

of his officers and when he made inquiries from the general manager

of the 1st Defendant company, Balasubramanium was assured that the

Plaintiff would be paid when the consignment reached Dubai. The

witness had further stated, that what was intimated to him was

confirmed in writing by P1, which is a letter voluntarily issued by the

Defendants, assuring payment.

(23) Both the Promissory Note [P3] and the Guarantee Bond [P4] had been

executed about 4 months after the letter [P1]. Witness

Balasubramanium testifying further had stated, as the Defendants had

defaulted in payment even after nearly 5 months after the teas were

shipped, he requested additional security against the payment due.

Thus, P1 is merely a communication that explains the circumstances

that led to the execution of P3 and P4 and has no bearing on the

Promissory Note [P3] or the Guarantee bond [P4].

(24) Hence, I hold that the trial judge misdirected himself in holding that

the Promissory Note [P3] and the Guarantee Bond [P4] must be

interpreted together with the ‘conditions’ stated in the letter P1. In fact,

there are no conditions in P1, but only an assurance by the Defendants

that the monies will be paid. The relevant portion of that letter [P1] is

reproduced below;

“REFERENCE 22,500 KILOS TEA WHICH WE HAVE EXPORTED THIS

WEEK, SHALL BE PAID NO SOONER THE GOODS REACHED THE

DESTINATION & WE UNDERTAKE TO ARRANGE WITH OUR BUYER TO

REMIT THE MONEY DIRECT TO YOUR ACCOUNT WITH SEYLAN

BANK CHATHAM ST, BRANCH”

12

(25) Accordingly, I hold that the conclusion reached by the learned trial

judge that P3 and P4 must be interpreted based on the conditions on P1

is erroneous. And further, I also hold, that the findings by the learned

trial judge that the Defendants are not liable to pay the Plaintiff due to

non fulfilment of certain events referred to in the letter P1, is also

erroneous.

(26) The learned counsel argued that in deciding the issues raised in the

case the learned trial judge has misdirected himself by treating as a

relevant factor the Defendant’s claim that the entire shipment

consisting of 22500 kg of tea, did not belong to the Plaintiff whereas

the issue before court was, the failure to honour the Promissory Note

[P3].

(27) The crux of the Plaintiff’s case was the failure on the part of the

Defendants to honour the Promissory Note [P3] drawn for Rs.7.3

million, which was the value of the teas supplied by the Plaintiff and

equivalent to the amount on conversion of 81,000 in US $ terms. The

2nd Defendant in his evidence has admitted this fact and the evidence is

reproduced below; [proceedings of 23-11-2007, pages 9 &10]

Q. You confirm that the value of the tea exported is in fact $ 81,000 less 4% commission? A. yes. Q. That was the value of the tea of the Plaintiff? A. yes. (28) With regard to the observation made by the learned trial judge; “that

the teas belonging to the Plaintiff could not have been sold at any stage”

[due to its inferior quality], it was contended on behalf of the Plaintiff,

that the defects in the quality of the goods supplied, do not amount to

‘no consideration or a total failure of consideration’. As such, it was

argued, that the defects in the quality of teas supplied cannot be used as

a defence to refuse payment on the Promissory Note [P3] and the

13

Guarantee Bond [P4]. It was further contended that the issue raised, in

the instant case as to the quality of the tea supplied, is irrelevant and

should not have been a factor in determining the liability of the

Defendants vis-à-vis the Promissory Note and the Guarantee Bond.

(29) To my mind, the quality [of teas] is subjective, in that, the goods may

appeal to one buyer and may not be so in respect of another. The fact

that by blending a mere 334 kg of tea with a stock of 22,500 kg of tea

was sufficient to raise the quality of the teas to such a degree that was

acceptable to a buyer is an indication that the state of the teas supplied

by the Plaintiff was of certain quality and therefore cannot be treated as

a case of total failure of consideration. According to the evidence of

witness Mohamed Ishan Abbas, a director of the 1st Defendant

company, the buyer rejected the tea because the quality was not ‘first

class’.

(30) In the case of Cebora [supra] the court observed “….bona fide holder

for value of a bill of exchange is entitled , save in truly exceptional

circumstances, on its maturity to have it treated as cash, so that in an

action upon it the court will refuse to regard either as a defence or as

grounds for a stay of execution any set off, legal or equitable, or any

counterclaim whether arising on the particular transaction upon which

the bill of exchange came into existence, or, a fortiori, arising in any

other way. This rule of practice is thus, in effect, pay up on the bill of

exchange first and pursue claims later.” [page 278-279] The court

went on to hold that, “...total failure of consideration is of course, in a

position: it affords a defence…and must be clearly distinguished from

allegations of delivery of goods with defects, when the pay first rule

applies.” [page 279]

14

(31) It was also held in the case of Brown Shipley & Co Ltd. v. Alicia Hosiery

Ltd. [1966] 1 Lloyd's Law Reports 668, “… judgment should be given

upon that bill of exchange as for cash and it is not to be held up by

virtue of some counterclaim which the defendant may assert, even… a

counterclaim relating to the specific subject-matter of the contract.”

[page 669]

(32) In the instant case, as referred to above, there had been a clear

arrangement agreed between the parties as to the procedure with

regard to the export of teas. The 2nd Defendant Abdul Hafeel Ahamed in

his evidence admitted the position taken up by the Plaintiff. He had

admitted that the previous shipments were based on letters of credit

and there were a few other shipments lined up, which too were on

letters of credit. He also admitted that, in relation to the first two

shipments, the Plaintiff had obtained ‘packing credit loans’ on the

strength of the letters of credit and the Plaintiff did not request the

Defendants for funds to effect the shipments nor did the 1st Defendant

company finance the shipments. The witness also admitted that when it

came to the consignment of teas in issue, they never bothered to inform

the Plaintiff that they were exporting the said consignment.

(33) Considering the foregoing, I hold that the Plaintiff was a bona fide

holder of the Promissory Note [P3] for value and the Plaintiff is legally

entitled to receive the sum stated in P3. Further, based on the ratio in

the case of Cebora [supra] I also hold that there were no ‘exceptional

circumstances’ and as such the Plaintiff was entitled to treat the

Promissory Note [P3] as cash, on its maturity.

15

(34) The 2nd and the 3rd Defendants being directors of the 1st Defendant

company, gave the Guarantee Bond [P4] in favour of the Plaintiff on the

very day the Promissory Note [P3] was drawn and for the identical sum

[Rs 7.3 million]. The Plaintiff asserts that the said amount is the monies

due to the Plaintiff for the teas supplied for export.

(35) It was argued on behalf of the Plaintiff that the reason for the

Defendants to draw the Promissory Note and the Guarantee Bond was

to dissuade the Plaintiff from filing legal action against the Defendants

for the recovery of the monies due to the Plaintiff.

(36) The contention of the Defendants was that the Guarantee Bond was

prepared in order to “comfort the Plaintiff” and as such the Plaintiff

cannot rely on the Guarantee Bond P4 to recover any monies from the

(2nd and 3rd) Defendants. This position was flatly rejected by the

witness Balasubramanium and the evidence does not disclose that there

was a necessity to “comfort” the Plaintiff. There is uncontroverted

evidence that the Plaintiff had an arrangement with its bank to obtain

“packing credit” to finance business operations and there is no

evidence whatsoever to suggest that the Plaintiff was facing any

financial difficulty to run its operations.

(37) When one considers the evidence placed before court and the

execution of the Promissory Note [P3] and the Guarantee Bond [P4] on

the same day for the identical sum, which in turn is the value of the

consignment of teas supplied by the Plaintiff to the 1st Defendant

company for export, it is clear that consideration was present in this

case.

(38) The learned counsel for the Plaintiff contended that, it is settled law,

with regard to Guarantee Bonds, that the 3rd party normally does not

16

personally provide consideration, and the Guarantee Bond is

enforceable at the request of the beneficiary of the bond.

(39) In this context, the position taken up by the Defendant does not appear

to have any merit and I hold that both the 2nd and 3rd Defendants are

under a legal duty to honour the Guarantee Bond P4.

Counter Claim by the Defendants

(40) The Defendants made a claim in reconvention [cross claim] for an

award of Rs.15 million as damages, which the learned High Court

Judge upheld. The counter claim was on the basis that, the Plaintiff

failed to purchase and provide stocks of ‘quality’ tea on a timely basis,

when the 1st Defendant received export orders and as a result the

Defendants sustained a loss both in reputation and goodwill from the

perspective of the foreign buyers.

(41) It was the contention of the learned counsel for the Plaintiff that there

was no legal basis for the award of damages and the claim ought to

have been disallowed in limine. The learned counsel based his

argument on two grounds;

(i) That the entire award of damages for the claim in reconvention

has been made without proof of such claim being established in

court,

And

(ii) That the damages for loss of goodwill, credentials and reputation

cannot be awarded in the law of contract and that these are heads

of liability where damages are claimed in the law of delict.

(42) With regard to (i) above, i.e., the Defendants’ ‘claim in reconvention’

for damages, the Plaintiff filed a replication denying the claim and had

17

taken up the position that the claim in reconvention is baseless and a

mere afterthought on the part of the Defendants. The Plaintiff’s

assertion was that the said claim was made in order to avoid liability on

their part.

(43) As referred to earlier, the learned trial judge had held that the

Defendants proved the counter claim mainly on the basis that the

evidence placed by the Defendants “has not been subjected to any cross

examination. Therefore, this court has no option other than to accept

the said evidence in respect of the loss caused”. In stating so, I presume

that the learned trial judge had relied on the rationale in the often-

quoted decision in Edrick de Silva vs. Chandradasa de Silva [1967] 70

N.L.R 169.

(44) I am, however, of the view that, failure to challenge evidence by cross

examination by itself may not be sufficient to hold that a particular fact

had been proved within the meaning of Section 3 of the Evidence

Ordinance. It might, however, be a factor to be taken into account in

accepting such evidence. Once the evidence is received, independent of

such reception, the court should give its mind to the evidence so

received, and consider whether such evidence is sufficient to establish

the fact, sought to be proved.

(45) In the case of Edrick de Silva [supra], their Lordships observed, [at page

174] “But where the plaintiff has in a civil case led evidence sufficient

in law to prove a factum probandum, the failure of the defendant to

adduce evidence which contradicts it adds a new factor in favour of the

plaintiff. There is then an additional " matter before the Court ", which

the definition in Section 3 of the Evidence Ordinance requires the Court

to take into account, namely that the evidence led by the plaintiff is

uncontradicted. [emphasis added].

18

(46) From the pronouncement in Edrick de Silva, [supra]it is abundantly

clear that the judgement does not detract from the legal requirement

that a party seeking to establish a fact must provide sufficient evidence

to satisfy court and the dictum in the said case can be applied only in

instances where the party has led evidence sufficient in law to prove

the fact and not otherwise.

(47) Section 3 of the Evidence Ordinance defining proof states; “a fact is said

to be proved when, after considering the matters before it, the court

either believes it to exist or considers its existence so probable that a

prudent man ought, under the circumstances of the particular case, to

act upon the supposition that it exists.” Thus, in the light of the

submissions made on behalf of the Plaintiff, it would be necessary to

consider, whether the evidence placed before the court by the

Defendants was sufficient in law to establish that they were entitled to

the damages claimed, within the meaning of Section 3 of the Evidence

Ordinance.

(48) Based on the assertions of the Defendants, the learned trial judge had

considered damages under three heads;

(1) the loss caused to the Defendants as a result of their stores being

used to store the stocks of tea purchased for exports.

(2) loss caused due to the cancellation of a consignment of tea and

(3) loss of goodwill and reputation.

(49) In the answer filed, the Defendants are silent with regard to sustaining

any loss due to the use of their stores to stock tea. That was the

arrangement arrived at between the parties. The only issue raised by

the Defendants with regard to storage is issue No. 19 which reads as

“Was the said stock of tea kept in the warehouse of the Defendants for

19

a period exceeding 6 months due to the aforesaid reason”. There is,

however, no ‘issue’ raised by the Defendants to the effect that the

Defendants had sustained any loss or damages as a result of the tea

lying in their stores.

(50) According to witness Balasubramanium, storage charges were paid

after the export proceeds were received and he had gone onto say that

in respect of the consignment of tea in issue, export proceeds were

never received by the Plaintiff and therefore storage charges were not

paid. [proceedings of 10th March 2005]

(51) The 2nd Defendant had admitted the above position taken by witness

Balasubramanium and had, in paragraph 76 of his affidavit averred

that “The undertaking given by us [Defendants] was that the full

proceeds of export will be remitted first to the Plaintiff’s account at

Seylan Bank Limited and then the profits realized, the amount paid by

us [Defendants] to upgrade the stale tea, the cost of packing materials,

labour charges, containerizing, transport and storage charges were to

be reimbursed by the Plaintiff.” [emphasis added]. Thus, it is clear by

their own admission that the reimbursement of storage charges was

contingent upon the remittance of sales proceeds to the bank account

of the Plaintiff, which never happened in the instant case.

(52) In the answer, the Defendants have averred that, a loss was caused due

to the Plaintiff not having adequate tea stocks for export when needed

and as a result, stocks had to be purchased at higher prices and in

addition the stocks of teas offered for export got rejected due to the

Plaintiff supplying inferior quality teas [Issues No. 30 and 31].

(53) With regard to the first aspect referred to above i.e. the Plaintiff not

having adequate stocks, the 2nd Defendant’s position was that the

20

Defendants made ‘no’ profits because the Plaintiff did not have

adequate stocks and the Plaintiff had to pay higher prices to purchase

tea. [paragraphs 22 and 23 of the 2nd defendant’s affidavit]. The 2nd

Defendant, however, does not speak of any ‘loss’ being caused to the

Defendants as a result.

(54) In paragraph 52 of the affidavit of the 2nd Defendant, he takes up the

position that the Iranian buyer demanded compensation in a sum of

US$ 21,690.00/-. Apart from the testimony, the Defendants have not

produced any evidence to establish that the Iranian buyer had made

such a demand. Although the Defendants had produced a series of

written communications between the said buyer and the Defendants

relating to the shipment of teas, there isn’t a single communication with

regard to claiming damages. All what the Defendants have produced, is

a letter which they claim, they sent to the Iranian buyer, allegedly

containing two cheques, each drawn for Rs. 867,600/ the Rupee

equivalent of US $ 21,690/-. Copies of the two cheques have also been

marked and produced as D29 and D29A respectively. Both are cash

cheques, drawn on the same day for the identical amount, i.e.,

Rs.867,600/-

(55) The Defendants did not produce any acknowledgment from the Iranian

buyer with regard to the receipt of any money paid as damages. It

appears highly unusual that in settling damages to an overseas business

partner, payment is made in Sri Lankan rupees. It is also unusual that

the payment is made by way of cash cheques and each drawn on the

same day for the identical amount.

(56) Although the 2nd Defendant had claimed that the Defendants lost an

estimated profit of Rs. 1,353,000/- due to the cancellation of the 5th

consignment owing to the Plaintiff’s failure to purchase teas, it is

21

apparent that the trade with Iran had come to a standstill due to the

ban of tea imports into that country, which had come into effect from

1st March 2001 and which had lasted for three years [D33].

(57) According to the 2nd Defendant the consignment of 22500 kg that is in

issue was shipped on the 8th of February to Dubai and when the

shipment reached Dubai the Iranian ban on tea imports had come into

effect. [Paragraphs 72 and 73 of the affidavit of the 2nd Defendant]

(58) Upon consideration and evaluation of the evidence placed by the

Defendants to substantiate their claim for damages, I am of the view

that the Defendants have failed to establish that they had sustained any

damages due to the acts of the Plaintiff, within the meaning of Section 3

of the Evidence Ordinance and I uphold the argument of the learned

counsel for the Plaintiff that the entire award of damages for the claim

in reconvention has been made without proof of such claim being

established in court. [Paragraph 44 (i) of this judgement]

(59) Accordingly, I set aside the findings of the High Court in relation to the

issues referred to below and answer the said issues in the following

manner: -

Issue No.1- Not proved

Issue No.2-Yes

Issue No.6-Yes

Issue No.14-Yes

Issue No.23-Not proved

Issue No.25- Not proved

Issue No.26-Not proved

Issue No.28-Not proved

Issue No.29-No

Issue No. 30-not proved

22

Issue No31. Not proved

Issue No.32-No

Issue No.33-Plaintiff is entitled to the relief as prayed.

Issue No.34 (c) Does not reveal a cause of action against the Plaintiff

Issue No.35. Yes

The findings of the learned trial judge in relation to other issues, which

are not contentious, are to remain undisturbed.

The learned High Court judge is directed to enter decree accordingly.

The Appellant is entitled to the costs of this appeal

Appeal allowed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

L.T.B DEHIDENIYA J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

MURDU FERNANDO PC, J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT