==== BLOCKS ==== 

1 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal to the Supreme Court under the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Assistant Commissioner of Labour District Labour Office, Haputhale Complainant SC Appeal 03/2019

SC SPL LA 234/2018 Vs, CA (PHC) 140/2014 HC Badulla: REV 49/2014 Stitches Private Limited, MC Bandarawela No. 72522L Kahagallawaththa, Udawelakotuwa, Diyathalawa With Respondent SC Appeal 03A/2019 And SC Appeal 03B/2019

SC Appeal 03C/2019 Stitches Private Limited, Kahagallawaththa, Udawelakotuwa, Diyathalawa Respondent-Petitioner Vs,

Assistant Commissioner of Labour District Labour Office, Haputhale

Complainant-Respondent

The Hon. Attorney General Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12. Respondent And

Stitches Private Limited, Kahagallawaththa, Udawelakotuwa, Diyathalawa Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant

2

Vs,

Assistant Commissioner of Labour District Labour Office, Haputhale

Complainant-Respondent-Respondent

The Hon. Attorney General Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12. Respondent-Respondent And now between Stitches Private Limited, Kahagallawaththa, Udawelakotuwa, Diyathalawa Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant-Appellant Vs,

Assistant Commissioner of Labour District Labour Office, Haputhale

Complainant-Respondent-Respondent-Respondent

The Hon. Attorney General Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12. Respondent-Respondent-Respondent

SC Appeal 03A/2019 SC SPL LA 235/2018 CA (PHC) 151/2014 Assistant Commissioner of Labour HC Badulla: REV 50/2014 District Labour Office, Haputhale MC Bandarawela No. 90311L Complainant Vs, Stitches Private Limited, Kahagallawaththa, Udawelakotuwa, Diyathalawa

Respondent

3

And

Stitches Private Limited, Kahagallawaththa, Udawelakotuwa, Diyathalawa Respondent-Petitioner Vs,

Assistant Commissioner of Labour District Labour Office, Haputhale

Complainant-Respondent

The Hon. Attorney General Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12. Respondent

And

Stitches Private Limited, Kahagallawaththa, Udawelakotuwa, Diyathalawa Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant

Vs,

Assistant Commissioner of Labour District Labour Office, Haputhale

Complainant-Respondent-Respondent

The Hon. Attorney General Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12. Respondent-Respondent

4

And now between Stitches Private Limited, Kahagallawaththa, Udawelakotuwa, Diyathalawa Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant-Appellant Vs,

Assistant Commissioner of Labour District Labour Office, Haputhale

Complainant-Respondent-Respondent-Respondent

The Hon. Attorney General Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12. Respondent-Respondent-Respondent SC Appeal 03B/2019 SC SPL LA 236/2018 CA (PHC) 152/2014 Assistant Commissioner of Labour HC Badulla: REV 51/2014 District Labour Office, Haputhale MC Bandarawela No. 90690L Complainant Vs, Stitches Private Limited, Kahagallawaththa, Udawelakotuwa, Diyathalawa

Respondent And

Stitches Private Limited, Kahagallawaththa, Udawelakotuwa, Diyathalawa Respondent-Petitioner

5

Vs,

Assistant Commissioner of Labour District Labour Office, Haputhale

Complainant-Respondent

The Hon. Attorney General Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12. Respondent

And

Stitches Private Limited, Kahagallawaththa, Udawelakotuwa, Diyathalawa Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant

Vs,

Assistant Commissioner of Labour District Labour Office, Haputhale

Complainant-Respondent-Respondent

The Hon. Attorney General Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12. Respondent-Respondent And now between Stitches Private Limited, Kahagallawaththa, Udawelakotuwa, Diyathalawa Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant-Appellant

6

Vs,

Assistant Commissioner of Labour District Labour Office, Haputhale

Complainant-Respondent-Respondent-Respondent

The Hon. Attorney General Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12. Respondent-Respondent-Respondent SC Appeal 03C/2019 SC SPL LA 237/2018 CA (PHC) 153/2014 Assistant Commissioner of Labour HC Badulla: REV 52/2014 District Labour Office, Haputhale MC Bandarawela No. 90754L Complainant Vs, Stitches Private Limited, Kahagallawaththa, Udawelakotuwa, Diyathalawa

Respondent And

Stitches Private Limited, Kahagallawaththa, Udawelakotuwa, Diyathalawa Respondent-Petitioner Vs,

Assistant Commissioner of Labour District Labour Office, Haputhale

Complainant-Respondent

The Hon. Attorney General Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12.

7

Respondent And

Stitches Private Limited, Kahagallawaththa, Udawelakotuwa, Diyathalawa Respondent-Petitioner-Appellan Vs,

Assistant Commissioner of Labour District Labour Office, Haputhale

Complainant-Respondent-Respondent

The Hon. Attorney General Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12. Respondent-Respondent And now between Stitches Private Limited, Kahagallawaththa, Udawelakotuwa, Diyathalawa Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant-Appellant Vs,

Assistant Commissioner of Labour District Labour Office, Haputhale

Complainant-Respondent-Respondent-Respondent

The Hon. Attorney General Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12. Respondent-Respondent-Respondent

8 Before: Justice Vijith K. Malalgoda, PC Justice A.H.M.D. Nawaz, Justice Achala Wengappuli,

Counsel: Upul Jayasuriya, PC with P. Radhakrishnan for the Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant-

Petitioner

Suranga Wimalasena, DSG for the Complainant-Respondent-Respondent-Respondent

and Respondent-Respondent-Respondent

Argued on: 03.10.2023

Decided on: 12.03.2024

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J

The Complainant-Respondent-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Complainant-

Respondent’) filed four separate certificates in the Magistrate’s Court of Bandarawela under section

38 (2) of the Employees’ Provident Fund Act No 15 of 1958 (as amended) against Stitches Private

Limited’ the Respondent-Petitioner-Appellant-Petitioner (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Petitioner’)

for the recovery of Employees’ Provident Fund dues for four separate periods referred to in those

certificates.

A representative of the Petitioner Company, K.M. Samarakoon had appeared on notice along with

Director Board Member Rajarathnam Vinodan and accepted the responsibility to pay the Employees’

Provident Fund contribution due in all four cases in instalments. (Journal Entry dated 03.04.2007)

In case No. 72522 Magistrate’s Court, Bandarawela which is presently in appeal before this court

bearing No. 03/2019, Rs. 24,57,414.90 was due as EPF arrears and accordingly sum of Rupees

200,000/- had been paid by the Petitioner up to 02.10.2007. Similarly, part payments were also made

in the other three cases as well. The learned President’s Counsel who represented the Petitioner in

all four cases and the Counsel for the Complainant-Respondent before this Court had agreed to abide

9 by the decision in SC Appeal 03/2019, and made submissions in the said case. I will only refer to the

matters that were reflected in the arguments in the instant judgment.

As revealed before us, the Petitioner had neither made any payment nor had appeared before the

court through its representative since 02.10.2007. The Court noticed the directors of the Petitioner

to appear before the Magistrate’s Court of Bandarawela. Later on, an application was made on behalf

of one of the directors, Anthony Ruwan Sanjeewa, the Court discharged the said party from the

proceedings considering that he is no longer a director of the Petitioner. After a long lapse, on

24.06.2014 the other Director Rajarathnam Vinodan appeared before the Magistrate’s Court of

Bandarawela and moved time to make payment. When the case was called on 05.08.2014, the Court

made an order to pay all dues within a period of one year (Journal Entry dated 05.08.2014) and the

matter was to be called on 30.09.2014.

However as revealed from journal entries, it appears that the party noticed had neither appeared

before the Court nor paid any money as agreed before the Court. On 14.10.2014 Court issued a

warrant on the party noticed and the warrant was re-called on 2014.11.17 when the said party was

produced before the Magistrate’s Court by the prison authorities.

In the meantime, four applications were filed before the Provincial High Court of the Uva Province

holden in Badulla invoking the revisionary jurisdiction of the said Court challenging the orders made

by the learned Magistrate Bandarawela in the four connected matters including Magistrate’s Court,

Bandarawela Case No. 72522.

When invoking the revisionary jurisdiction of the Provincial High Court of Uva Province the Petitioner

took up the position that under the provisions of the Employees’ Provident Fund Act No 15 of 1958

(as amended), the Commissioner of Labour is not empowered to file a certificate in the Magistrate’s

Court under section 38 (2) of the Act in the 1st instance without having first proceeded under sections

17 and 38 (1) of the Act. The Petitioner sought interim relief preventing the Magistrate from

proceeding with the cases filed before the Magistrate’s Court, which was initially granted but was

later revoked with the dismissal of the revision applications filed before the said Court.

The Petitioner challenged the said decisions of the Provincial High Court of Uva holden in Badulla

before the Court of Appeal, but the said applications were dismissed by the Court of Appeal.

10 The instant applications seeking special leave were filed challenging the decisions of the Court of

Appeal and this Court having considered the applications filed, had granted special leave on the

following questions of law.

1. Did the Court of Appeal err in law in holding that directors of a defaulting company are liable

under section 38 (2) of the Employees’ Provident Fund Act No 15 of 1958 (as amended)?

2. Did the Court of Appeal err in law penalizing the directors for the improper exercise of

discretion by the Commissioner?

3. At what state, the directors of a company will become liable for the nonpayment of the

Employees’ Provident Fund by a company, of which they are directors under the Employees

Provident Act No. 15 of 1958 as amended..?

When placing material before this Court the learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioner developed

an argument on two main issues. Firstly, the Petitioner heavily relied on the decision in the case of K

A Dayawathie Vs D S Edirisinghe1 and argued that the Commissioner of Labour cannot institute an

action in the Magistrate’s Court in the very first instance according to the provisions of the Employees’

Provident Fund Act, (as amended) whilst challenging the ambit of discretionary powers vested with

the Commissioner of Labour in deciding as to how he is going to recover EPF dues under the Act.

Secondly, the learned President’s Counsel argued that the learned Magistrate did not have the

jurisdictions under section 38 (2) to substitute the directors in place of the defaulting company named

in the certificate filed under section 38 (2) of the Act.

There are 3 sections under which default contribution could be recovered under the Employee’s

Provident Fund Act; namely sec 17, 38(1) and 38(2),

Sec 17 - Any moneys due to the Fund shall be recoverable, as a debt due to the State, by an

action in which proceedings may be taken by way of summary procedure. The provisions of

the Civil Procedure Code relating to actions of which the procedure is summary shall apply to

an action under this section

Sec 38(1) - Where an employer makes default in the payment of any sum which he is liable to

pay under this Act and the Commissioner is of opinion that recovery under section 17 of the Act

1 [S.C. (FR) No. 241/2008; S.C.M. 01.6.2009]

11

is impracticable or inexpedient, he may issue a certificate to the District Court and

.....................the court shall thereupon direct a writ of execution to issue to the Fiscal

authorising and requiring him to seize and sell all the property, movable and immovable, of the

defaulting employer, or such part thereof as he may deem necessary for the recovery of the

amount so due, and the provisions of sections 226 to 297 of the Civil Procedure Code shall,

mutatis mutandis, apply to such seizure and sale.

Sec 38(2) -Where an employer makes default in the payment of any sum which he is liable to

pay under this Act and the Commissioner is of opinion that it is impracticable or inexpedient to

recover that sum under section 17 or under subsection (1) of this section or where the full

amount due has not been recovered by seizure and sale, then, he may issue a certificate

containing particulars of the sum so due and the name and place of residence of the defaulting

employer, to the Magistrate having jurisdiction, which the sum shall be deemed to be a fine

imposed by a sentence of the magistrate.( Emphasis added)

When considering the procedures identified under the Act to recover dues from the defaulting

employers, it appears that the three procedures referred to are distinct remedies available to the

Commissioner.

When the recovery procedure is initiated under Section 38(2), the sum due from a defaulting

employer is considered a fine, and the failure to pay the fine results in imprisonment in accordance

with Section 291 of the Criminal Procedure Code Act. The procedure provided in Section 38 (2) differs

from the procedures prescribed in Sections 17(1) and 38(1) as the procedure prescribed in Section

38(2) is deterrent and speedy because of the punishment with imprisonment to the defaulters.

However, when looking at the ambit of the discretion available for the Commissioner of Labour in

deciding the procedure available for recovering EPF dues under the said provisions, there appears to

have been deference of opinion taken by Appellate Courts. One being the dicta of Thilakawardene J.

in Dayawathie’s case.2

The above three procedures are not alternative procedures for recovery. The legislature very

clearly has sets out the scheme step by step as to how the Commissioner becomes entitled to

use the procedures set out in Section 38(2) of the said Act. The 3rd Respondent has no

2 Ibid.

12

jurisdiction or power under the said statute to file a certificate in the Magistrates Court in terms

of Section 38(2) of the EPF Act without first proceeding under Section 17 and thereafter under

Section 38(1) of the said Act. [pg 8]

On the other side, there are several cases where the weight of authority of the Supreme Court is

clearly in favour of giving the Commissioner of Labour discretion on the procedure to be followed in

between sections 17, 38(1), and 38(2) of the Act.

In Jewelarts Limited v. The Land Acquiring Officer and others3 Sriskandarajah J. held that the

Commissioner of Labour has discretion in deciding between the procedures set out in sections 17,

38(1) and 38(2) of the Act. Similarly in Messrs Narthupana Tea & Rubber Co Ltd v. The Commissioner

of Labour4 Wimalaratne J. and Colin Thome J. held that there is no necessity for the Commissioner

to have first resorted to the other two remedies provided in sections 17 and 38(1) before he instituted

the proceedings in the Magistrates Court.

In Dayawathie’s case, the Supreme Court did not consider the provisions in section 38(4) of the Act

which states that the provisions of that section shall have effect notwithstanding anything in section

17 of the Act. Sub-section 4 to Section 38 was introduced by Act No. 24 of 1971. In amending section

38, as referred to above the legislature quite clearly states that the new section takes effect

notwithstanding the provisions in section 17.

When looking at sections 17,38 (1), 38(2) and section 38(4), it is quite clear that there is no necessity

at all for the Commissioner General of Labour to resort to Section 17 of the Act before filing a

certificate under Section 38(2) of the EPF Act. The said provisions are very clear, and it is for the

Commissioner to form an opinion that it is impracticable or inexpedient to recover the sums due

under Section 17 or Section 38(1) of the EPF Act. It is not for the defaulter to decide the required

statutory provisions under which the Commissioner is expected to proceed and recover the amount

in default.

3 [C.A./Writ/App/No.1126/2004; C.A.M. of 28.01.2009] 4 [SC Appeal 510/74; S.C.M. 13.03.1978]

13 In Chinthananda v. Assistant Commissioner of Labour,5 the Commissioner of Labour filed a certificate

in terms of Section 38(2) of the Act in the additional Magistrate Court of Matara for recovery of EPF

dues. After an inquiry, the Magistrate ordered that the sum due is deemed to be a fine imposed on

the employer. An appeal has been made to the Provincial High Court of the Southern Province, inter

alia, on the ground that the certificate had been filed under Section 38(2) without initially resorting

to Section 17 and Section 38(1). In this case, the High Court agreed with the decision of the Court of

Appeal in Agro Trading Lanka (Pvt) Ltd6 with regard to the option available to the Commissioner for

recovery of EPF dues. In the Chinthananda case, while delivering the judgment, the High Court

observed that “…..the decision in the Dayawathi case is not binding and decisions in Narthupana and

Agro Trading Lanka (Pvt) Ltd provide binding precedence on the issue.”7

Special leave was sought from the Supreme Court against the decision of the High Court on the basis

that the High Court had erred in law by concluding that it was unnecessary for the Commissioner to

resort to Sections 17 and 38(1) before invoking the jurisdiction of the Magistrate Court in terms of

Section 38(2). The Petition of the Employer further stated that the High Court had erred in law by not

taking cognizance of the law set out in Dayawathi’s case. However, TIlakawardane J. [with Sripavan J.

(as he then was) and Ekanayake J. agreeing] refused special leave to appeal. 8 This refusal of special

leave to appeal itself can be regarded as a decision which affirmed the discretionary power of the

commissioner of labour as per People’s Bank vs Kasthuriarachchi9 which expressed the view that the

refusal of leave itself is a decision.

A related question that would be raised in this situation is whether there is a need for the

Commissioner of labour to ascertain the practicability of recovering the alleged dues under Section

38(1) of the EPF Act before acting under Section 38(2). The EPF Act gives the option to the

Commissioner to decide whether it is impracticable or inexpedient to recover the defaulting EPF dues

under sec 17 or sec 38(1). However, the provisions do not clearly state whether the opinion should

be a well-founded opinion or an opinion based on assumption.10

5 S.C Spl.L.A No. 277/2012. 6 C.A.(Rev) No 1/2010 7 High Court Appeal No. 188/2008 (Matara). 8 SC (Special) l.A. 277/2012; S.C.M. of 04.04.2013 9 2011 BLR 62. 10 A Reflection on the Recovery Procedure of Contributions to Employees’ Provident Fund and Employees’ Trust Fund- A. Sarweswaran -pg 3

14 In answering an identical issue raised in the Court of Appeal,11 Anil Gooneratne J. held that;

We find that on a perusal of the above provisions that there is no necessity at all for the

Commissioner General of Labour to resort to Section 17 of the Act prior to filing a certificate

under Section 38(2) of the Statute. The above provisions are very clear and it is for the

Commissioner to form an opinion that it is impracticable or inexpedient to recover the sums

due under Section 17 or under Section 38(1) of the Employees' Provident Fund Ac.

In Yahala Kelle Estates Company (Pvt) Ltd case, 12Gooneratne, J. commented on the EPF Act as “This

is a piece of social legislation enacted to grant superannuation benefits for employees, and not a

statute enacted to delay the process and defeat the intention of the legislature.” Therefore, Courts

should not interfere with the formation of the opinion of the Commissioner unless the Commissioner

has formed the opinion with malafides or ulterior motives. 13

The certificate filed before the learned Magistrate was issued under the name of the body corporate.

Since in this case ‘employer named in the certificate’ was only the Stitches Pvt Ltd and not the

directors, the question arises as to who is liable for the failure of the company to act in accordance

with the EPF Act and if the liability could be imposed upon directors at what stage would the directors’

become liable.

Sec 10 of the EPF Act states as follows;

an employee to whom this Act applies shall, in respect of each month during which he works

in a covered employment, be liable to pay to the Fund a contribution of an amount equal to

eight per centum of his total earnings from that employment during that month.

Sec 40 of the EPF Act states as follows;

Where an offence under this Act is committed by a body of persons, then—

(a) if that body of persons is a body corporate, every director and officer of that body corporate,

(b) if that body of persons is a firm, every partner of that firm, and

11 CA. 234/2013 (Writ) C.A.M. of 13/12/2013 12 CA. 234/2013 (Writ) C.A.M. of 13/12/2013 13 A Reflection on the Recovery Procedure of Contributions to Employees’ Provident Fund and Employees’ Trust Fund (n 10).

15

(c) if that body of persons is a trade union, every officer of that trade union shall be deemed to

be guilty of that offence: Provided that a director or an officer of such body corporate, or a

partner of such firm or an officer of such trade union, shall not be deemed to be guilty of such

offence if he proves that such offence was committed without his knowledge or that he

exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.

The definition of the ‘Employer’ in terms of Section 47 of the Act reads as, “Any person who employs

or on whose behalf any other person employs any workman and includes a body of employers

(whether such body is a firm, company, corporation or trade Union)

The offences under the said EPF Act are contained in Sec 34 of the Act and the punishment for the

offence can be found in Sec 37.

Section 34: Any person who—

(a) contravenes any provision of this Act or of any regulation made thereunder;

(b) furnishes, for the purposes of this Act, any information which is, or any document the

contents of which are, or any part of the contents of which is, to his knowledge untrue or

incorrect;

(c) wilfully delays or obstructs the Commissioner or any other officer in the exercise of his

powers under section 32; or

(d) contravenes any direction made by the Commissioner in the exercise of his powers under

section 27,

shall be guilty of an offence under this Act

Section 37:

Every person who is guilty of an offence under this Act shall be liable, on conviction after

summary trial before a Magistrate, to a fine not exceeding one thousand rupees or to

imprisonment of either description for a term not exceeding six months or to both such fine

and imprisonment, and shall, in addition, be liable to a fine not exceeding fifty rupees for each

day on which the offence is continued after conviction.

16 It is important to consider the rules of interpretation in determining whether petitioners are liable,

qua directors of the offending company, to be summoned before a court in proceedings under section

38 (2) of the Act and sentenced to pay the sum in default by way of fine and serve a term of

imprisonment in lieu, if the fine remains unpaid.

The precise meaning of a provision can only be ascertained when the Statute is studied in its entirety

and not parts of the same in isolation. Therefore, to determine the purpose of the legislature, it is

necessary to have regard to the Act as a whole and not to focus attention on a single provision to the

exclusion of all others. In Brett v Brett14 Sir John Nicholl stated that ‘to arrive at the true meaning of

any particular phrase in a statute, that particular phrase is not to be viewed detached from its context

in the statute: it is to be viewed in connection with its whole context.’

The preamble to EPF Act states that "An act to establish provident fund for the benefit of certain

classes of employees and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.” However,

if the court were to hold directors of a body corporate do not fall within the ambit of the employer in

Section 38(2) of the EPF Act, then the establishment of the provident fund would be redundant.

Further, such an interpretation, would defeat the purpose of the Act and lead to absurdity.

In Ranasinghe and another v. The Commissioner of Labour and others15 Sisira De Abrew J. noted

that:

If the employer is a body corporate and if it does not comply with section 38(2) of the EPF Act,

how is the Magistrate going to implement the default sentence. In short, the question that

must be considered is: if the employer is a body corporate and the amount ordered by way of

a fine is not paid, who is going to be sent to jail. Obviously, the Magistrate cannot send the

body corporate to jail. If the contention that the directors of a body corporate cannot be sent

to jail as they have not committed an offence is accepted, then the amount set out in the

certificate cannot be recovered. Was this the intention of the legislature when it enacted

Section 38(2) of the EPF Act? Should Courts interpret Statute to frustrate the intention of the

legislature and the purpose of the Statute? The answer is clearly no.

14162 ER 456. 15 [CA(PHC) 69/2009; C.A.M. 27.01.2011]

17 In Colombo Apothecaries Ltd. and others v. Commissioner of Labour16 Ranaraja J. held that,

A default in making payments due as EPF contributions, makes the 'employer' at the relevant

time, liable for contravening the provisions of section 10 of the Act. As an alternative to

prosecution for such an offence under section 41 of the Act or civil proceedings under section

17 of the Act, the Commissioner is empowered to institute proceedings against the defaulting

employer for the recovery of contributions due under the provisions of section 38 (2). The

petitioners are thus liable, qua directors of the offending company, to be summoned before

court in proceedings under section 38 (2) of the Act and sentenced to pay the sum in default by

way of fine and serve a term of imprisonment in lieu, if the fine remains unpaid.

A statute is a communication between the parliament and the public and therefore it is very

important to identify the context even when the words are clear because there could be issues in

delivering the message. As statutory law is never enacted in a vacuum, when construing a legislations,

courts are entitled to consider the legal, social, economic aspects of the society in which the legislation

operates.

The historical setting of passing this Act can be traced back to the social and political changes that

took place in the country after gaining independence from the British colonial rule in 1948. One of the

major changes that occurred during that time was the emergence of strong labour movements that

demanded better working conditions, social security and economic democracy for the workers. These

labour movements were led by trade unions, political parties and progressive intellectuals who

advocated for a welfare state and a mixed economy

The EPF Act was introduced by T. B. Ilangaratne, who was the Minister of Labour and Social Services

who was also a prominent trade unionist who championed the cause of the working class. The Act

was passed by the Parliament on 15 April 1958 and came into effect on 1 June 1958. The Minister

noted in his speech while presenting the Bill “the scheme has been conceived primarily as a means of

providing retirement benefits to the employees at the time when due to advanced age, they are unable

to work.”17

16 [(1998) 3 Sri LL.R. 320 at 330] 17 60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 – 2010 < www.cbsl.gov.lk > accessed 23 October 2023

18 As correctly points out by Prof. Sarveswaran in his article, ‘A Reflection on the Recovery Procedure of

Contributions to Employees’ Provident Fund and Employees’ Trust Fund’ sometimes, the employers

who fail to make contribution to the EPF Fund may prefer to be imprisoned rather than attempting

to make the contributions to the Funds whereas the employees will prefer recovery of their dues

under the Fund to the imprisonment of their employers.

Moreover the imprisonment of employers without recovery of their contributions will defeat the

objective of the legislation which it was passed- that is providing social security to the employees after

their retirement. In this context, it could be observed that the utmost importance lies in the ability of

the state to be able to recover the dues from such defaulters rather than imposing sanctions of

punitive nature.

In the circumstances, it is clear that the Act had provided to add directors as parties to a proceeding

that is pending before a Magistrate’s Court under Section 38 (2) of the Act. Further, could be seen

that the directors of the company are liable to pay the amount in question if it is not recoverable from

the defaulting company.

For the above reasons, I hold that 'employer’ in Section 38(2) of the EPF Act includes directors of a

body corporate and it is lawful for the Magistrate to order the directors of a body corporate to pay

the amount set out in the certificate filed in terms of Section 38(2) of the EPF Act if it is not recoverable

from the Body Corporate.

The facts revealed that in the instant case, the plaint had never been amended to include the Directors

of the Petitioner Company and it is the director who came before the Magistrate’s Court and accepted

the liability to pay EPF dues to the employees of the Petitioner Company. Since then, a representative

was permitted to represent the Petitioner Company and when the Petitioner Company abundant the

case and defaulted to make the balance payment, the court notified the Director who had already

accepted the liability before the Magistrate’s Court. As per the Journal Entries, the director had once

again accepted liability and moved time to make payments. It is at this stage only the learned

magistrate ordered to recover the dues as a fine from the director of the Petitioner Company.

19 In the circumstances I answer all 3 questions of law as follows;

1. No

2. No

3. When it is not possible to recover from the company or the company defaults making the

payment

Appeal dismissed.

Accordingly, SC Appeals 3A, 3B, 3C also dismissed. No costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court Justice A.H.M.D. Nawaz, I agree, Judge of the Supreme Court Justice Achala Wengappuli, I agree, Judge of the Supreme Court