IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

1. Rajapaksha Mudiyanselage Jayathilaka

Rajapaksha,

2. Risanga Nelka Riyensi Rajapaksha,

Both of

Jayamani Kehelwathugoda,

Dewalegama.

Petitioners

SC APPEAL NO: SC/APPEAL/83/2021

SC LA NO: SC/HCCA/LA/356/2020

HCCA KEGALLE NO: SP/HCCA/KAG/31/2019 (F)

DC KEGALLE NO: 8106/SPL

Vs.

1. Mallawa Waduge Samantha,

No. 167/12, Udambewatta,

Olagama, Kegalle.

2. Maggoma Ralalage Upali Jayawansha,

No. 08, Dharmapala Mawatha,

Kegalle.

Respondents

AND BETWEEN

Maggoma Ralalage Upali Jayawansha,

No. 08, Dharmapala Mawatha,

Kegalle.

2nd Respondent-Appellant

2

SC/APPEAL/83/2021

Vs.

1. Rajapaksha Mudiyanselage Jayathilaka

Rajapaksha,

2. Risanga Nelka Riyensi Rajapaksha,

Both of

Jayamani

Kehelwathugoda.

Dewalegama.

Petitioner-Respondents

Mallawa Waduge Samantha,

No. 167/12, Udambewatte,

Olagama,

Kegalle.

1st Respondent-Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

Maggoma Ralalage Upali Jayawansha,

No. 08, Dharmapala Mawatha,

Kegalle.

2nd Respondent-Appellant-Appellant

Vs.

1. Rajapakshe Mudiyanselage Jayathilaka

Rajapaksha,

2. Risanga Nelka Riyensi Rajapaksha,

Both of

Jayamani

Kehelwathugoda,

Dewalegama.

Petitioner-Respondent-Respondents

3

SC/APPEAL/83/2021

Mallawa Waduge Samantha,

No. 167/12, Udambewatte,

Olagama, Kegalle.

1st Respondent-Respondent-Respondent

Before: P. Padman Surasena, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J.

Counsel: Sudarshani Cooray for the 2nd Respondent-Appellant-

Appellant.

Erusha Kalidasa for the Petitioner-Respondent-

Respondents.

Argued on: 21.02.2022

Written submissions:

by the 2nd Respondent-Appellant-Appellant on 10.01.2022.

by the Petitioner-Respondent-Respondents on 05.05.2022.

Decided on: 19.07.2023

Samayawardhena, J.

In accordance with the written settlement dated 07.12.2010, the dispute

was settled before the Debt Conciliation Board between the 2nd

respondent-appellant (appellant) as the creditor and the two petitioners-

respondents (respondents) as the debtors, in terms of which the

respondents agreed to pay Rs. 900,000 to the appellants on or before

06.06.2011 in order for the appellant to retransfer the property to the

respondents. This did not happen.

4

SC/APPEAL/83/2021

The respondents filed action against the appellant in the District Court

(more than five years after that date) on 08.09.2016 under summary

procedure in terms of section 43(1) of the Debt Conciliation Ordinance,

No. 39 of 1941, as amended, seeking enforcement of the settlement. One

of the objections taken up by the appellant creditor against the

maintainability of the action was that the respondent debtors cannot file

action in the District Court under section 43(1) of the Debt Conciliation

Ordinance as that section can only be invoked by a creditor, not by a

debtor.

Both the District Court and the High Court overruled this objection and

granted relief to the respondents. The High Court stated that the term

creditor in section 43(1) could include debtor as well. This Court

granted leave to appeal on the question whether the High Court erred in

law by interpreting section 43(1) of the Debt Conciliation Ordinance in

that manner.

Section 43 of the Debt Conciliation Ordinance reads as follows:

43(1). Where the debtor fails to comply with the terms of any

settlement under this Ordinance, any creditor may, except in a case

where a deed or instrument has been executed in accordance with

the provisions of section 34 for the purpose of giving effect to those

terms of that settlement, apply to a court of competent jurisdiction,

at any time after the expiry of three months from the date on which

such settlement was countersigned by the Chairman of the Board,

that a certified copy of such settlement be filed in court and that a

decree be entered in his favour in terms of such settlement. The

application shall be by petition in the way of summary procedure,

and the parties to the settlement, other than the petitioner shall be

named respondents, and the petitioner shall aver in the petition that

the debtor has failed to comply with the terms of the settlement.

5

SC/APPEAL/83/2021

(2) If the court is satisfied, after such inquiry as it may deem

necessary, that the petitioner is prima facie entitled to the decree in

his favour, the court shall enter a decree nisi in the petitioners favour

in terms of the settlement. The court shall also appoint a date, notice

of which shall be served in the prescribed manner on the debtor, on

or before which the debtor may show cause as hereinafter provided

against the decree nisi being made absolute.

(3) In this section court of competent jurisdiction means any court

in which the creditor could have filed action for the recovery of his

debt, if the cause of action in respect of that debt had not been

merged in the settlement; summary procedure has the same

meaning as in Chapter XXIV of the Civil Procedure Code.

Learned counsel for the respondents accepts that upon a plain reading

of this section it is clear that this section can only be invoked by a

creditor, not by a debtor. The respondents are debtors. However, learned

counsel submits thus: The Debt Conciliation Ordinance was originally

enacted to cover only simple loan transactions between a creditor and a

debtor, and therefore section 43(1) was intended to cover only a situation

where the debtor violates the settlement since in a simple loan

transaction there is no way the creditor can violate the settlement. The

Ordinance was amended by Act No. 20 of 1983 and Act No. 29 of 1999,

which extended its scope to include conditional transfers and outright

transfers under the purview of the Debt Conciliation Board. Once these

amendments were made, there should be a provision for the debtor also

to file an action in the District Court to have the settlement enforced when

the creditor violates the agreement; for instance, if the debtor pays the

money to the creditor in terms of the settlement but the creditor does not

retransfer the property.

6

SC/APPEAL/83/2021

Learned counsel submits that unless section 43(1) is interpreted allowing

the debtor also to file action in the District Court, it would result in great

injustice to the debtor because in the event the settlement is violated by

the creditor, the debtor will have to file a regular action in the District

Court to enforce the settlement whereas if the settlement is violated by

the debtor, the creditor can file action in the District Court under section

43(1) following summary procedure to have the settlement enforced. He

says this cannot be the intention of the legislature.

When the language of a material provision of a statute is plain, clear,

unambiguous and explicit and admits only one meaning, the question of

interpretation of the provision does not arise. The intention of the

legislature shall be deduced from the language used in the statute. In

such circumstances, the statute speaks for itself and no addition,

subtraction or extension to the text is necessary. It is only when words

are unclear, ambiguous and open to more than one construction, the

Court needs to go after the intention of the legislature. This is the first

canon of construction of statutes, which is known as the literal rule.

When section 43(1) clearly states that any creditor may apply to the

District Court in terms of that section, how can the District Court and

the High Court read into that section the word debtor to say that any

creditor or debtor may apply to the District Court in terms of that section.

It cannot be an oversight as learned counsel for the respondents sought

to suggest. For instance, section 14 specifically refers to both the debtor

and creditor when it comes to making an application to the Debt

Conciliation Board to effect a settlement of the debts. Suffice it to say that

creditor and debtor cannot be treated alike. However, the debtor is not

without a remedy. The debtor can file a regular action to have the

settlement enforced, if he so desires.

7

SC/APPEAL/83/2021

I cannot agree with learned counsel for the respondents when he states

that when the Ordinance was enacted in 1941 the legislature

contemplated only simple loan transactions between the creditor and the

debtor without any collaterals, but complicated loan transactions were

permitted to be entertained by the Debt Conciliation Board only after the

Debt Conciliation Ordinance Amendment Acts No. 20 of 1983 and No. 29

of 1999. Section 19 of the Debt Conciliation Ordinance was first amended

as far back as 1959 by Act No. 5 of 1959 whereby applications in respect

of debts purporting to be secured by conditional transfers of immovable

property were also allowed to be entertained. Thus, at least since 1959,

the Debt Conciliation Board has been entertaining applications other

than applications relating to simple loan transactions, but the legislature

did not think it fit or necessary to amend section 43(1) to include the

debtor in addition to the creditor. If the legislature thinks that, not only

the creditor but also the debtor should be allowed to make an application

under section 43(1), it is up to the legislature to amend the law.

I answer the question of law upon which leave to appeal was granted in

the affirmative and hold that only the creditor can file an action in the

District Court under section 43(1) of the Debt Conciliation Ordinance as

the law stands today. I set aside the judgment of the District Court and

the judgment of the High Court. The action of the respondents in the

District Court shall stand dismissed. The appeal of the 2nd defendant

appellant is allowed. I make no order as to costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

P. Padman Surasena, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

8

SC/APPEAL/83/2021

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court