IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Sri Lanka Savings Bank Limited,

No. 110, D.S. Senanayake Mawatha,

Colombo 08.

Plaintiff

SC APPEAL NO: SC/CHC/APPEAL/81/2014

CHC NO: HC (CIVIL) 283/2001

Vs.

01. Globe Investments (Private) Limited,

No. 233/8, Cotta Road, Colombo 08.

Presently at: No. 65/09,

Wickramasinghe Mawatha,

Battaramulla.

02. Nirmala Anura Fernando,

No. 233/8, Cotta Road, Colombo 08.

Presently at: No. 65/09,

Wickramasinghe Mawatha,

Battaramulla.

03. Estelita Rozobelle Dolores Fernando,

No. 233/8, Cotta Road, Colombo 08.

Presently at: No. 65/09,

Wickramasinghe Mawatha,

Battaramulla.

Defendants

AND NOW BETWEEN

2 SC/CHC/APPEAL/81/2014

Nirmala Anura Fernando,

No. 233/8, Cotta Road, Colombo 08.

Presently at: No. 65/09,

Wickramasinghe Mawatha,

Battaramulla.

2nd Defendant-Appellant

Vs.

01. Sri Lanka Savings Bank Limited,

No. 110, D.S. Senanayake Mawatha,

Colombo 08.

Plaintiff-Respondent

02. Globe Investments (Private) Limited,

No. 233/8, Cotta Road, Colombo 08.

Presently at: No. 65/09,

Wickramasinghe Mawatha,

Battaramulla.

1st Defendant-Respondent

03. Estelita Rozobelle Dolores Fernando,

No. 233/8, Cotta Road, Colombo 08.

Presently at: No. 65/09,

Wickramasinghe Mawatha,

Battaramulla.

3rd Defendant-Respondent

Before: Hon. Justice Priyantha Jayawardena, P.C.

Hon. Justice A.H.M.D. Nawaz

Hon. Justice Mahinda Samayawardhena

3 SC/CHC/APPEAL/81/2014

Counsel: Shivan Coorey with Manjula Fernandopulle for the 2nd

Defendant-Appellant.

Erusha Kalidasa for the Plaintiff-Respondent.

Argued on : 08.09.2022

Written submissions:

by the Plaintiff-Respondent on 26.03.2021 and 03.10.2022.

Decided on: 28.02.2024

Samayawardhena, J.

Introduction

The plaintiff filed this action against the three defendants in the

Commercial High Court of Colombo seeking to recover a sum of Rs.

19,810,648.00 together with interest at a rate of 32% per annum on a

sum of Rs. 12,574,121.12 with 1% Business Turnover Tax and 6.5%

National Security Levy. The 1st defendant, who is the borrower, is an

incorporated company and the 2nd and 3rd defendants are the guarantors

to the loan. The address stated in the summons for all three defendants

is No. 233/8, Cotta Road, Colombo 8 which appears to be the registered

address of the 1st defendant company. However, in the guarantee

agreement marked P9 the address of the 2nd and 3rd defendant

guarantors is given as No. 3, Torrington Avenue, Colombo 7. Summons

issued on the defendants to be served through the fiscal could not be

served on two occasions since the premises were reportedly closed but on

the third occasion on 10.05.2002 the fiscal reported personal service of

summons on all three defendants (in that the 2nd defendant reportedly

accepted his summons and that of the 1st defendant company). The

defendants did not respond to summons and the case was fixed for ex

parte trial and the judgment was delivered against all three defendants

4 SC/CHC/APPEAL/81/2014

as prayed for in the plaint. The ex parte decree was reportedly served on

all three defendants on 15.11.2002 in the manner the summons was

served. The plaintiff did not take steps until 2008 to make an application

for the execution of writ. The notice of the application for writ was

reported to have been served on a different person at a different address,

namely, the Manager of Rhythm Collection (Pvt) Ltd of No. 10/209, 4th

Floor, Union Place, Colombo 2.

The 2nd defendant filed an application in terms of section 839 read with

section 86(2) of the Civil Procedure Code by petition dated 19.10.2009

supported by affidavit and documents seeking to set aside the ex parte

judgment and decree on the basis that he did not reside at No. 233/8,

Cotta Road, Colombo 8 but was overseas at the time summons and

decree were reported to have been served on him.

At the inquiry into this matter the 2nd defendant gave evidence. He

produced two of his passports marked P1 and P2. He also called an officer

from the Department of Immigration and Emigration as a witness to

corroborate the fact that he had been overseas during the relevant period.

The plaintiff called the process server (commonly but erroneously known

as fiscal) to give evidence.

After the inquiry, the learned High Court Judge by order dated

29.08.2014 dismissed the application of the 2nd defendant on the basis

that the 2nd defendant had not shown on a balance of probability that

summons was not served on him on 10.05.2002 as the passports

tendered to Court did not corroborate that he was abroad on that day.

In respect of service of the ex parte decree on 15.11.2002, however, the

learned High Court Judge accepts that there is an endorsement on page

9 of the passport marked P2 that the 2nd defendant had left Sri Lanka on

14.11.2002. According to page 36 of the passport P2, there is an entry

5 SC/CHC/APPEAL/81/2014

stamp from Immigration Bangkok Thailand that the 2nd defendant had

been Admitted 15.11.2002 Until 12.02.2003. The exit stamp on page

36 of P2 indicates that the 2nd defendant Departed Thailand on

08.02.2003. Although there had been some confusion whether the

endorsement in relation to the period of 15.11.2002 to 12.02.2003

pertains to the visa or whether it is an endorsement made after the 2nd

defendant arrived in Thailand, the validity period of the visa (from

04.04.2002 to 03.04.2003) is separately available at page 35 of P2 and

hence there cannot be such confusion. It is clear that the 2nd defendant

was in Thailand when the fiscal reported to Court that he served the ex

parte decree personally on the 2nd defendant on 15.11.2002 at No. 233/8,

Cotta Road, Colombo 8.

The learned High Court Judge in the impugned order states that no

prejudice has been caused to the 2nd defendant due to this fact because

the 2nd defendants application to purge default was not objected to on

the basis that it was filed out of time.

Of the two passports, what is relevant to this case is P2. It has multiple

entries and it is not possible to clearly identify the 2nd defendants

movements during the relevant period from the said passport. The

evidence of the officer from the Department of Immigration and

Emigration is not helpful to ascertain the specific dates on which the 2nd

defendant had left Sri Lanka and returned to Sri Lanka during the

relevant period. The fact in issue is whether the 2nd defendant was abroad

on 10.05.2002, i.e. the date on which summons was reportedly served on

the 2nd defendant. The officers evidence was that the department had no

data in its system prior to 29.10.2002.

The fiscal had been cross-examined on the service of summons and

decree. It had been suggested to him that at the time the decree was

6 SC/CHC/APPEAL/81/2014

reported to have been served on the 2nd defendant, the 2nd defendant had

been abroad. His reply was that he has no recollection or personal

knowledge of those matters as they took place more than 10 years ago.

This is a direct appeal against the order of the Commercial High Court.

The grounds of appeal as set out in the petition of appeal are (a) the order

is contrary to law, (b) the order is against the weight of the evidence, (c)

the Court failed to properly evaluate the evidence, and (d) the Court erred

in law in holding that the summons and the decree were duly served on

the 2nd defendant.

Let me now consider the law relating to the application for setting aside

ex parte judgments and decrees in order to properly consider whether the

conclusion of the learned High Court Judge is justifiable.

When shall the defendant make the application to purge default?

In terms of section 84 of the Civil Procedure Code, upon the defendant

having been duly served with summons, if he fails to file answer or having

filed answer fails to appear on the trial date (in person or through his

recognised agent or Attorney-at-Law as provided for in section 24 of the

Civil Procedure Code) when the plaintiff appears, the Court shall fix the

case for ex parte trial. Section 84 reads as follows:

If the defendant fails to file his answer on or before the day fixed for

the filing of the answer, or on or before the day fixed for the

subsequent filing of the answer or having filed his answer, if he fails

to appear on the day fixed for the hearing of the action, and if the

court is satisfied that the defendant has been duly served with

summons, or has received due notice of the day fixed for the

subsequent filing of the answer, or of the day fixed for the hearing

of the action, as the case may be, and if, on the occasion of such

7 SC/CHC/APPEAL/81/2014

default of the defendant, the plaintiff appears, then the court shall

proceed to hear the case ex parte forthwith, or on such other day as

the court may fix.

After the ex parte trial, if the Court decides to enter judgment for the

plaintiff as prayed for or subject to modification, the ex parte decree

drawn up in terms of the judgment shall be served on the defendant.

Once the decree is served, in terms of section 86(2) of the Civil Procedure

Code, the defendant may with notice to the plaintiff make an application

within fourteen days of service of the decree to purge default. Section

86(2) reads as follows:

Where, within fourteen days of the service of the decree entered

against him for default, the defendant with notice to the plaintiff

makes application to and thereafter satisfies court, that he had

reasonable grounds for such default, the court shall set aside the

judgment and decree and permit the defendant to proceed with his

defence as from the stage of default upon such terms as to costs or

otherwise as to the court shall appear proper.

In terms of section 86(3), the application shall be made by petition

supported by affidavit.

It was held in Karunadasa v. Rev. Phillips [2003] 2 Sri LR 140 that the

language used in section 86(2) does not suggest that the defendant is

required to give notice of his application to the plaintiff simultaneously

with the filing of such application.

How to calculate fourteen days?

The period of fourteen days is referred to in several other sections of the

Civil Procedure Code.

8 SC/CHC/APPEAL/81/2014

Section 754(4), which deals with when a notice of appeal shall be

tendered against a judgment, states that it shall be tendered within a

period of fourteen days from the date when the decree or order appealed

against was pronounced, exclusive of the day of that date itself and of the

day when the petition is presented and of Sundays and public holidays.

Section 757(1) which deals with when an application for leave to appeal

shall be made against an order is couched in identical terms.

In contrast, section 86(2) which enacts that the application shall be

presented within fourteen days of the service of the decree does not

specify which days are excluded. Comparing the wording of section 86(2)

with the wording of sections 754(4) and 757(1), the intention of the

legislature is clear. In calculating fourteen days for the purpose of

purging default in terms of section 86(2), the date when the decree was

served, the date when the application to purge default is presented to

Court, Sundays and public holidays are not excluded. The word within

in section 86(2) means the application shall be presented to the Court

within the specified fourteen-day window and not beyond that period. In

the case of Flexport (Pvt) Ltd v. Commercial Bank of Ceylon Ltd

(SC/APPEAL/3/2012, SC Minutes of 15.12.2014) the Supreme Court

reached the same conclusion.

The Blacks Law Dictionary (6th Edition, pages 1602-1603) defines the

word within as when used relative to time, has been defined variously

as meaning anytime before; at or before; at the end of; before the expiration

of; not beyond; not exceeding; not later than.

Nevertheless, if the fourteenth day falls on a day on which the office of

the Court is closed, filing the application on the next day on which the

office of the Court is open would be in compliance with section 86(2).

9 SC/CHC/APPEAL/81/2014

In Fernando v. Ceylon Brewerys Ltd. [1998] 3 Sri LR 61, the decree was

served on the defendant on 03.02.1997 and he filed the application under

section 86(2) on 18.02.1997. The finding of the Court of Appeal that the

application to the District Court was late by one day was upheld by the

Supreme Court in The Ceylon Brewery Ltd. v. Jax Fernando, Proprietor,

Maradana Wine Stores [2001] 1 Sri LR 270.

Even though the word within is used in a section, if the section specifies

the days which shall be excluded within that period, the strict application

of the rule is relaxed. In other words, the specified days shall be excluded

notwithstanding the use of the word within. This can be understood by

reading the above quoted section 754(2) and the Supreme Court

judgment in Selenchina v. Mohamed Marikar [2000] 3 Sri LR 100 at 102.

What section 86(2) states is within fourteen days of the service of the

decree. The word used here is of, not from. Section 14(a) of the

Interpretation Ordinance, No. 21 of 1901, as amended, states for the

purpose of excluding the first in a series of days or any period of time, it

shall be deemed to have been and to be sufficient to use the word from.

Maxwell on The Interpretation of Statutes, 12th edition, page 309, states:

Where a statutory period runs from a named date to another, or

the statute prescribes some period of days or weeks or months or

years within which some act has to be done, although the

computation of the period must in every case depend on the intention

of Parliament as gathered from the statute, generally the first day of

the period will be excluded from the reckoning, and consequently the

last day will be included.

In the context of tendering a petition of appeal, section 755(3) states

Every appellant shall within sixty days from the date of the judgment or

10 SC/CHC/APPEAL/81/2014

decree appealed against present to the original court a petition of appeal.

It may be noted that the word used in this section is from, not of.

Hence it was held in the Divisional Bench decision of the Court of Appeal

in Jinadasa v. Hemamali [2006] 2 Sri LR 300 that the date of pronouncing

the judgment should be excluded from the computation of the time within

which the petition of appeal should be presented.

Section 8(1) of the Interpretation Ordinance states Where a limited time

from any date or from the happening of any event is appointed or allowed

by any written law for the doing of any act or the taking of any proceeding

in a court or office, and the last day of the limited time is a day on which

the court or office is closed, then the act or proceeding shall be considered

as done or taken in due time if it is done or taken on the next day thereafter

on which the court or office is open.

Fourteen days is a limited time given to a party to make the application.

It is in that context I stated that if the fourteenth day coincides with a

day when the office of the Court is closed, submitting the application on

the next day when the office is open would be sufficient compliance with

the time limit stipulated in section 86(2). This is in consonance with the

finding in Jinadasa v. Hemamali (supra) where the calculation of time was

done in relation to section 755(3).

Can the application be made before the service of the ex parte

decree?

Does the term within fourteen days of the service of the decree in section

86(2) mean that the defaulting defendant must make the application after

service of the decree? In other words, can the Court state that there is no

proper application filed in terms of section 86(2) when the application has

been filed between fixing the case for ex parte trial and before service of

the ex parte decree? The answer is in the negative.

11 SC/CHC/APPEAL/81/2014

Justice Weerasuriya in Coomaraswamy v. Mariamma [2001] 3 Sri LR 312

at 315 held the requirement for the party to make an application within

14 days of the service of the decree does not preclude the defendant to

make an application before service of the decree and for the Court to inquire

into such application after decree was served. This was followed by

Justice Somawansa in Ranasinghe v. Tikiri Banda [2003] 3 Sri LR 252.

Is the fourteen-day period mandatory?

The fourteen-day period within which the application to purge the default

shall be made is mandatory, not directory.

Provisions of statutes conferring private rights are in general construed

as being imperative and those creating public duties are construed as

directory. (Perera v. Perera [1981] 2 Sri LR 41)

N.S. Bindra Interpretation of Statutes, 13th Edition (2023), at page 464

quotes the following dicta expressed in Executive Engineer v. Lokesh

Reddy 2003 (4) KarLJ 151 with approval:

It is a well-settled principle that if an act is required to be performed

by a private person within a specified time, the same would

primarily be mandatory, but when a public functionary is required

to perform a public function within a timeframe, the same will be

held to be directory unless the consequences therefore are specific.

In The Ceylon Brewery Ltd. v. Jax Fernando, Proprietor, Maradana Wine

Stores (supra), Justice Fernando attributed the mandatory nature of the

fourteen-day period as an essential requirement for the proper invocation

of jurisdiction:

We are of the view that Section 86(2) of the Civil Procedure Code is

the provision which confers jurisdiction on the District Court to set

12 SC/CHC/APPEAL/81/2014

aside a default decree. That jurisdiction depends on two conditions

being satisfied. One condition is that the application should be made

within 14 days of the service of the default decree on the defendant.

It is settled law that provisions which go to jurisdiction must be

strictly complied with. See Sri Lanka General Workers Union Vs.

Samaranayake [1996] 2 Sri LR 265 at 273-274.

Vacating the ex parte decree by invoking the inherent jurisdiction

of Court

However, the above time limit shall be understood subject to the

condition that the defendant, although not admitting service of

summons, nevertheless admits service of the decree. If the defendant

does not admit service of both summons and decree, then the fourteen-

day period is inapplicable. In such a situation, the defendant can make

an application invoking the inherent jurisdiction of the Court under

section 839 of the Civil Procedure Code (perhaps read with section 86(2)

of the Civil Procedure Code) soon after he becomes aware that an ex parte

decree has been entered against him without his knowledge (despite the

fact that the application is made well beyond the fourteen-day period of

the alleged service of the decree).

Ittepana v. Hemawathie [1981] 1 Sri LR 476 is the leading case which

illustrates this position. In that case the wife came to know that her

husband had obtained a decree of divorce against her when she appeared

in the Magistrates Court on 09.03.1979 in her maintenance case. The

District Court had made the decree nisi absolute on 16.06.1978. The

District Court had concluded the divorce case as an inter partes

uncontested trial but the wife stated that despite what was stated in the

case record she had not filed proxy or instructed an Attorney-at-Law to

appear for her and consent to the a vinculo matrimonii decree being

13 SC/CHC/APPEAL/81/2014

entered against her. After inquiry, the District Court set aside the ex parte

decree and the Court of Appeal affirmed it. On appeal to the Supreme

Court, Justice Sharvananda (later C.J.) stated at page 484 that if decree

had been entered against a defendant without summons being served,

the decree is a nullity and the District Court can set it aside ex debito

justitiae (i.e. as a debt of justice or a remedy that can be invoked as of

right) in the exercise of the inherent jurisdiction of the Court.

Failure to serve summons is a failure which goes to the root of the

jurisdiction of the Court to hear and determine the action against the

defendant. It is only by service of summons on the defendant that

the Court gets jurisdiction over the defendant. If a defendant is not

served with summons or is otherwise notified of the proceedings

against him, judgment entered against him in those circumstances

is a nullity. And when the Court is made aware of this defect in its

jurisdiction, the question of rescinding or otherwise altering the

judgment by the Court does not arise since the judgment concerned

is a nullity. Where there is no act, there can be no question of the

power to revoke or rescind. One cannot alter that which does not

exist. The exercise of power to declare such proceedings or judgment

a nullity is in fact an original exercise of the power of the Court and

not an exercise of the power of revocation or alteration. The

proceedings being void, the person affected by them can apply to

have them set aside ex debito justitiae in the exercise of the inherent

jurisdiction of the Court.

The same conclusion was reached in several other cases including Perera

v. Commissioner of National Housing (1974) 77 NLR 361.

In Ittepanas case, in relation to the applicability of section 839, the

Supreme Court at page 485 stated:

14 SC/CHC/APPEAL/81/2014

Section 839 of the Code preserves the inherent power of the Court

to make such orders as may be necessary for the ends of justice or

to prevent abuse of the process of the Court. This section embodies

a legislative recognition of the inherent power of the Court to make

such orders as may be necessary for the ends of justice. The inherent

power is exercised ex debito justitiae to do that real and substantial

justice for the administration of which alone Courts exist.

The Supreme Court at the same page further fortified the exercise of

inherent power to undo injustice by the application of another principle

of law actus curiae neminem gravabit an act of the Court shall

prejudice no man. In this regard, Justice Sharvananda quoted the

following passage of the judgment of Lord Cairns in Rodger v. Comptoir

DEscompte de Paris (1871) 3 PC 465:

One of the first and highest duties of all Courts is to take care that

the act of the Court does no injury to any of the suitors, and when

the expression the act of the Court is used, it does not mean merely

the act of the primary Court, or of any intermediate Court of Appeal,

but the act of the Court as a whole; from the lowest Court which

entertains jurisdiction over the matter up to the highest Court which

finally disposes of the case. It is a duty of the aggregate of those

tribunals, if I may use the expression to take care that no act of the

Court in the course of the whole of the proceedings does an injury to

the suitors in the Court.

Knowledge of the case despite non-service of summons

There is some uncertainty as to whether the defendants knowledge of the

case, notwithstanding that summons was not served, will deprive the

defendant of invoking the provisions of section 86(2) with/or section 839

to vacate the ex parte decree.

15 SC/CHC/APPEAL/81/2014

This may be due to the obiter dictum of Justice Sharvananda in Ittepanas

case where it was held at page 486 It is to be noted that it was never the

position of the plaintiff that even though the defendant had not been served

with summons, she had become otherwise aware of the proceedings

against her and had acquiesced in or waived the irregularity or failure, in

which event there would not have been any failure of natural justice. This

shall not be misconstrued to say that service of summons is not

mandatory if the defendant had knowledge of the proceedings.

In terms of section 84 of the Civil Procedure Code, the Court shall fix the

case for ex parte trial if the Court is satisfied that the defendant has been

duly served with summons. If there is no due service of summons in

Form 16 of the first schedule to the Civil Procedure Code (together with

a copy of the plaint and annexures), the Court cannot fix the case for ex

parte trial against the defendant. The Court is clothed with jurisdiction

over the defendant only upon due service of summons on him. Knowledge

of the case by any other means is no substitute for the due service of

summons.

In Leelawathie v. Jayaneris [2001] 2 Sri LR 231, the plaintiffs filed action

for declaration of title to the land in suit and damages. They also sought

an enjoining order and an interim injunction in the plaint. Notice of

interim injunction was served on the defendants but not summons. This

happened by oversight. The Court entered ex parte judgment against the

defendants and the application to vacate the ex parte decree was refused.

The 1st defendant had filed objections to the application for interim

injunction. On appeal by the 1st defendant, one of the questions to be

decided was whether the 1st defendant could complain about the case

having been fixed for ex parte trial on non-service of summons when he

was fully aware of the case. Justice Wigneswaran at pages 236-237

16 SC/CHC/APPEAL/81/2014

emphasised service of summons as a condition precedent to fixing the

case for ex parte trial:

Unless summons in the Form No. 16 in the 1st Schedule to the Civil

Procedure Code issues, signed by the Registrar requiring the

Defendant to answer the plaint on or before a day specified in the

summons and is duly served on the Defendant there cannot be due

service of summons. In this case the original summons with attached

copies of plaint and affidavit tendered with the original plaint dated

05.10.1988 to be issued against the 1st-3rd Defendants are still in

the record unsigned by the Registrar. They had been duly tendered

on 05.10.1988 with the original plaint as per Court seal of that date.

What had been served on 1st-3rd Defendants were notices that

issued under the hand of the Registrar on 07.10.1988. Hence there

had been no service of summons on the 1st-3rd Defendants. Unless

summons were served on them, all the consequences of default in

appearance would not apply to them. There is no question of

implying or presuming that the Defendants were aware of the case

filed, since statutory provisions apply to service of summons and

unless the summons are duly served the other statutory

consequences for non-appearance on serving of summons, would not

apply to Defendants.

In Joyce Perera v. Lal Perera [2002] 3 Sri LR 8 also, there was no doubt

that there was no service of summons on the defendant but only service

of the order nisi in respect of the alimony pendente lite. In such

circumstances, Justice Nanayakkara held that service of summons on

the defendant is a fundamental and imperative requirement before a case

is fixed for ex parte trial by Court. The Court rejected the argument that

the appearance by the defendant in response to the order nisi and the

17 SC/CHC/APPEAL/81/2014

filing of objections along with the counter claim for alimony would

regularise the non-service of summons on the defendant.

In Dharmasena v. The Peoples Bank [2003] 1 Sri LR 122 the Supreme

Court gave purposive interpretation to the term duly served with

summons. The plaintiffs filed action against the defendant on

01.02.2002. Summons was issued returnable on 05.04.2002 but served

on the defendant only on 03.04.2002, two days before the case was to be

called for proxy and answer. On 05.04.2002 an Attorney-at-Law

appearing on behalf of the defendant informed Court that the proxy was

not ready and the Court granted a date (10.05.2002) for proxy and

answer. On 29.04.2002 the plaintiffs moved for an order for ex parte trial

on the ground that the defendant had failed to appear on 05.04.2002 and

the defendants Attorney-at-Law was not duly authorised to move for

time. The District Judge refused that application. On appeal, whilst

affirming the said order, Justice Fernando stated at page 124:

Ex parte trial can be ordered only if the court is satisfied that the

defendant has been duly served with summons. The question then is

whether the court shall proceed to hear the case ex parte even where

the summons is served so soon before the date for answer that it is not

reasonably possible for the defendant to prepare and file his answer.

The Code must be interpreted, as far as possible, in consonance with

the principles of natural justice, and the court can only be satisfied that

summons has been duly served where the Defendant has been

given a fair opportunity of presenting his case in his answer. If not, the

court has the power to give further time for answer even if the

Defendant does not ask. In this case summons was served at such short

notice that the Defendant hardly had time even to grant a proxy to an

attorney-at-law. An attorney-at-law having actual authority to appear

was entitled to move for further time to file a proxy, and any

18 SC/CHC/APPEAL/81/2014

irregularity in that regard was cured by the subsequent filing of a

proxy within the time granted by the court.

Onus of proof in a default inquiry

The fiscals report on any process (service of summons, ex parte decrees

etc.) is accompanied by an affidavit as stated in sections 371 and 372 of

the Civil Procedure Code. Such reports present prima facie evidence of

service on the defendant. In terms of illustration (d) to section 114 of the

Evidence Ordinance, the Court can presume that all official acts have

been done regularly. The burden of proof is on the defendant to rebut

that presumption by leading evidence. The right to begin the inquiry lies

with the defendant and not with the plaintiff. This is by application of

section 102 of the Evidence Ordinance which states that the burden of

proof in a suit or proceeding lies on that person who would fail if no

evidence at all were given on either side. Once the defendant discharges

that burden, the burden shifts to the plaintiff to lead evidence in rebuttal.

An important witness for the plaintiff in leading evidence in rebuttal is

the fiscal.

In the case of Sangarapillai & Brothers v. Kathiravelu, Vol II Sri Kantha

Law Reports 99 at 106, Justice Siva Selliah made the following

observation regarding the onus of proof in an inquiry into purging default.

Further, the District Judge has misdirected himself on the onus of

proof for the burden squarely lay on the defendant who asserted

that no summons was served on him to establish that fact and it

was wrong for the District Judge to require from the Plaintiff beyond

reasonable doubt of the service of summons on the defendant.

The above position of law was recognised in a series of cases including

Wimalawathie v. Thotamuna [1998] 3 Sri LR 1, Chandrasena v. Malkanthi

19 SC/CHC/APPEAL/81/2014

[2005] 3 Sri LR 286, Wijeratne v. Abeyratne [2008] BLR 193 and Malani

Aponso v. Karunawathi Aponso [2008] BLR 302.

In Selliah Ponnusamy v. Peoples Bank [2016] BLR 128, the Supreme

Court stated that once the defendant gives affirmative evidence that

summons was not served on him, the failure on the part of the plaintiff

to rebut such evidence by calling the fiscal as a witness warrants setting

aside the ex parte decree entered against the defendant.

Standard of proof

In an inquiry into vacating an ex parte judgment and decree, the standard

of proof expected from the defaulting defendant is not of a high degree. It

is a misconception that, in order to succeed at a default inquiry, the

defendant must prove that summons was not served on him. That is the

most common ground but not the only ground. The defendant can

successfully make an application under section 86(2) despite summons

being duly served on him if he can adduce reasons acceptable to Court

for his failure to appear in Court. In terms of section 86(2), the law

requires the defendant only to satisfy Court that he had reasonable

grounds for such default. Similar terms are used in section 87 when the

defaulter is the plaintiff. Whether or not what is elicited by way of

evidence constitutes reasonable grounds is a question of fact and not of

law. This needs to be decided on the unique facts and circumstances of

each individual case. The test is subjective as opposed to objective. The

Court shall view the issue with flexibility rather than rigidity in

considering whether the defendant discharged the burden expected of

him.

This is clear from a plain reading of section 86(2) of the Civil Procedure

Code.

20 SC/CHC/APPEAL/81/2014

Where, within fourteen days of the service of the decree entered

against him for default, the defendant with notice to the plaintiff

makes application to and thereafter satisfies court, that he had

reasonable grounds for such default, the court shall set aside the

judgment and decree and permit the defendant to proceed with his

defence as from the stage of default upon such terms as to costs or

otherwise as to the court shall appear proper.

In Sanicoch Group of Companies by its Attorney Denham Oswald Dawson

v. Kala Traders (Pvt) Ltd [2016] BLR 44 there was no issue that summons

was served on the company but the company was not represented in the

Commercial High Court. After ex parte trial, the Court entered judgment

for the plaintiff. At the inquiry into purging default, the sole witness called

by the company testified that there were only two directors of the

company and one director had been kidnapped and possibly murdered

and the other director who was the daughter of the missing director was

in Australia pursuing her studies and had never participated in the

affairs of the company. The wife of the missing director also lived overseas

and, due to death threats, stayed in temporary places such as hotels

during her short visits to Sri Lanka. The evidence of the sole witness was

that the company was in a state of collapse and there was no proper

person to take decisions on behalf of the company. The wife and the

daughter of the missing director did not give evidence. The High Court

refused to vacate the ex parte decree predominantly on the basis that

mismanagement of the affairs of the company would not constitute a

reasonable ground for purging default.

On appeal, the Supreme Court took the view that although the

mismanagement of a company cannot normally be considered a

reasonable ground, in the unique facts and circumstances of that case,

it was a relevant fact which should have been considered by the High

21 SC/CHC/APPEAL/81/2014

Court in favour of the defaulter. Whilst vacating the ex parte judgment,

Justice Gooneratne stated at page 48:

Section 86(2) of the Code contemplates of a liberal approach

emphasising the aspect of reasonableness opposed to rigid standard

of proof. That being the yardstick, the learned Judges order should

indicate with certainty that reasonable grounds for default had not

been elicited at the inquiry. Nor does the order demonstrate by

reference to evidence and provisions contained in Section 86(2), that

there was a willful abuse of the process or willful default which

would enable court to reject the Defendant-Petitioner-Appellants

case. This is essential in the background of undisputed facts

referred to in this judgment at the very outset. I cannot lose sight of

the fact that undisputedly the two Directors of the company who are

responsible and bound to take decisions on behalf of the company

were not available since one went missing and the other not resident

in Sri Lanka, which resulted in mismanagement of the affairs of the

company at the relevant time. In the context of the case in hand with

reference to evidence led at the inquiry, death threats to the family

which resulted in the Managing Director going missing and

suspected of being murdered would have had a serious adverse

impact on the rest of the family and their affairs with its business

establishment at the relevant period.

Ordinarily in the absence of a plausible explanation it is possible to

conclude that reasonable grounds had not been elicited as regards

the case in hand. If that be so, mismanagement of the company may

not be a reasonable ground, and this court would not have had a

difficulty in affirming the views of the learned High Court Judge.

However the facts placed before the High Court is an extreme and

an unavoidable situation where a court of law cannot ignore having

22 SC/CHC/APPEAL/81/2014

regard being had to the common course of events, human conduct

and public and private business in their relation to the facts of the

case in hand.

A genuine mistake as opposed to willful negligence made by a lawyer is

considered as a ground to purge default. In Kathiresu v. Sinniah (1968)

71 NLR 450, Chief Justice H.N.G. Fernando at page 451 stated:

The affidavit and the evidence are to the effect that the Proctor and the

plaintiff himself were absent on the trial date because the Proctor had

by mistake taken down the date of trial as 18th August, when in fact

the trial was fixed for 10th of August. It is clear from the order of the

District Judge that he has accepted this evidence as correct. He

nevertheless refused to set aside the decree nisi because he relied on

certain decisions in which the failure of a party to appear was due to

his own negligence. Counsel for the plaintiff has now referred us to a

case reported in 16 Times of Ceylon Reports, page 119, in which the

only reason for non-appearance was a mistake made by the parties

Proctor. The present case is on all fours with that.

We allow the appeal and send the case back to the District Court. The

District Judge will then fix a date, on or before which, the plaintiff will

deposit a sum of Rs. 150 as costs of the past proceedings. If this amount

is duly paid the District Judge will set aside the decree appealed from

and set the case down for trial. If the costs are not paid before the fixed

date, the decree under appeal will stand affirmed.

In the case of Ariyaratne v. Attorney-General [2015] BLR 33 the Supreme

Court regarded a slip of counsel as a ground to vacate ex parte orders.

In Ariyaratnes case the accused was convicted by the High Court and

when the appeal was taken up for argument in the Court of Appeal the

appellant being absent and unrepresented having been represented by

23 SC/CHC/APPEAL/81/2014

counsel previously, the Court of Appeal had proceeded to hear the appeal

ex parte and dismissed the same. In the Special Leave Application before

the Supreme Court, counsel filed an affidavit explaining his absence in

court in that he had erroneously and inadvertently taken down the wrong

date as the date for argument. Counsel tendered unreserved apology.

Allowing the appeal and setting aside the judgment of the Court of

Appeal, Justice Sripavan (as he then was) observed:

From the contents of the affidavit, I do not think that Counsel had

the intention to offend the dignity of the court or to abuse the process

of court. It is not always possible to lay down any rigid, inflexible or

invariable rule which would govern all cases of default by counsel.

Each case has to be considered on its own merits. If, however, the

default was in fact accidental and committed without any evil or

ulterior motive, latitude has to be given to counsel to plead his case.

The legal profession is a noble one and the mark of nobility includes

the straightforward habit of owning mistakes or errors and

apologizing to the opposite party and/or to court once such mistakes

or errors are realized. When counsel tenders an unreserved apology

and explained to the satisfaction of court, the circumstances under

which the mistakes or errors were committed, it may be appropriate

for the court to accept it. Once the counsel regrets his act, it is the

duty of court to make him feel that he is an essential link in the

administration of justice and that his apology is accepted with a

view that he will henceforth uphold the highest tradition with due

diligence and thereby uphold the prestige of court.

No counsel in my view should be punished for bona fide mistakes.

The learned counsel frankly admitted his default on 02.02.2009 for

reasons adduced in his affidavit. It appears to me that it was really

a slip on his part not to have taken the date of hearing correctly.

24 SC/CHC/APPEAL/81/2014

Slips of counsel have been held to be sufficient to set aside decrees

or dismissal for default.

Procedure

No specific procedure is laid down in the Civil Procedure Code for the

conduct of default inquiries whether the application is filed under section

86(2) or section 839. In De Fonseka v. Dharmawardena [1994] 3 Sri LR

49 it was held An inquiry on an application to set aside an ex parte decree

is not regulated by any specific provision of the Civil Procedure Code. Such

inquiries must be conducted consistently with the principles of natural

justice and the requirement of fairness. (vide also Wimalawthie v.

Thotamuna [1998] 3 Sri LR 1)

There are no hard and fast rules. In Inaya v. Lanka Orix Leasing Company

Ltd [1999] 3 Sri LR 197 at 200, Justice Jayasinghe observed that the

application to have an ex parte judgment and decree set aside can be

disposed of even without oral testimony. But, Justice Somawansa in Ravi

Karunanayake v. Wimal Weerawansa [2006] 3 Sri LR 16 at 25 opined

that leading oral evidence is preferable.

The question whether process was duly served and whether there were

reasonable grounds for the default etc. are questions of fact and therefore

it is not possible to successfully pursue an application to purge default

without oral evidence being led.

Analysis of evidence in light of the law

There cannot be any doubt that the report and the oral evidence of the

fiscal on the alleged personal service of the ex parte decree on 15.11.2002

on the 2nd defendant in respect of himself and the 1st defendant company

is false in the teeth of the passport entries which prove that the 2nd

defendant was in Thailand on that date. The learned High Court Judge

25 SC/CHC/APPEAL/81/2014

ignored this reasoning that the 2nd defendant suffered no prejudice from

the false evidence because the plaintiff did not object to the application

being filed after the fourteen-day period following the service of the ex

parte decree had elapsed. This approach of the learned High Court Judge

does not commend itself to me. The Court has not considered whether

the fiscal is a trustworthy witness on the question of service of summons

on the 2nd defendant. It is the same fiscal who claims to have served

summons on the 2nd defendant personally on 10.05.2002.

The evidence of the 2nd defendant is that the office at No. 233/8, Cotta

Road, Colombo 8 was closed during the relevant period and he was

abroad. I accept that the 2nd defendant could not prove by the entries in

the passport that he was abroad on 10.05.2002. The officer from the

Department of Immigration and Emigration could not assist Court in that

regard either since computer evidence was not available for that period.

In my view, the 2nd defendants failure to prove by independent evidence

that he was aboard on 10.05.2002 does not ipso facto conclusively prove

that summons was served on him on that day. Even if he were in Sri

Lanka, if the Court is not satisfied that summons was not served, the

Court can vacate the ex parte decree.

If the registered address of the 1st defendant company, No. 233/8, Cotta

Road, Colombo 8, was the residential address of the 2nd and 3rd

defendant, I cannot understand why they gave a different address for the

guarantee agreement.

Another point of concern arises: if the summons and the decree were

served properly, why did the plaintiff not promptly initiate the process of

taking out a writ?

Conclusion

26 SC/CHC/APPEAL/81/2014

On the facts and circumstances of the case, I take the view that the High

Court ought to have considered the application of the 2nd defendant

favourably and vacated the ex parte judgment and decree, thereby

allowing the 2nd defendant to contest the case. I am inclined to concur

with the primary argument presented on behalf of the 2nd defendant,

which asserts that the Commercial High Court did not properly evaluate

the evidence and imposed a higher burden of proof on the 2nd defendant

than what is required by the law. The 2nd defendant in my view has

satisfied Court that he had reasonable grounds for the default.

I set aside the order of the Commercial High Court dated 29.08.2014 and

vacate the ex parte judgment and decree entered against the 2nd

defendant. The Commercial High Court will now allow the 2nd defendant

to file answer and the trial will be conducted inter partes against the 2nd

defendant.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Priyantha Jayawardena, P.C., J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court