==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application in terms of Articles 17 and 126 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. SC (FR) Application No. 19/2009

Diyunuge Seetha Mathew, No. 116B, Rosmead Place, Colombo 7.

PETITIONER

Vs. 1. Land Reform Commission 2. Nimal G. Punchihewa

2A. Sampath Subasinghe Arachchi 2B. Nilantha Wijesinghe

Chairman, Land Reform Commission 1st – 2B Respondents at No. 475, Kaduwela Road, Battaramulla. 3. Hon. D. M. Jayaratne 3A. Hon. John Amaratunga 3B. Hon. Gayantha Karunathilaka 3C. Hon. Harin Fernando

Hon. Minister of Lands

4. Indrani Sugathadasa

4A. I.H.K. Mahanama

2

4B. R.A.K.K. Ranawaka

4C. R.A.N. Kumari

Senior Assistant Secretary (Lands) Ministry of Lands

3 – 4C Respondents at Ministry of Lands, “Mihikatha Medura”, No. 1200/6, RajamalwaƩa Road, BaƩaramulla.

5. Hon. D.M. Jayaratna 5A. Hon. Lakshman Kiriella 5B. Hon. Navin Dissanayake 5C. Hon. Dr.Ramesh Pathirana

Hon. Minister of PlantaƟon Industries, Ministry of PlantaƟon Industries, C Wing, 11th Floor, Sethsiripaya 2nd Stage, BaƩaramulla.

6. A.L. Hewage

6A. Thilak Mahanama 6B. Srimal Wijesekara

Chairman, State PlantaƟons CorporaƟon, No.21, Miraneeya Street, Colombo 12.

7. S.K. Rajapakse

7A. Danasiri De S. Daluwatte 7B. Wg. Cmdr. Buwaneka Abeysuriya

3

Chairman, Janatha Estate Development Board, No. 55/75, Vaxuhall Lane, Colombo 2.

8. Chairman, Metropolitan Resource Holdings PLC., Bogawanthalawa Tea Estate PLC., No. 02,85, Braybrook Place, Colombo 2.

9. R.D.S.A.W. Wickremasuriya

9A. Priyanka De Alwis 9B. Sumith Jayarathna

Chairman, Elkaduwa Plantations Ltd., “Janawatu Piyasa” No. 320, T.B. Jaya Mawatha, Colombo 10.

10. Sumith Abeysinghe

10A. Mahinda Siriwardana

Secretary to the Treasury, Ministry of Finance and Planning, Secretariat, Colombo 1.

11. Lalith Weeratunga

11A. E.M.S.B. Ekanayake,

Secretary to the President, Presidential Secretariat, Colombo 1.

12. Hon. AƩorney General,

Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

4

Before: S. Thurairaja, PC, J Achala Wengappuli, J Arjuna Obeyesekere, J Counsel: Uditha Egalahewa, P.C., with Amaranath Fernando for the Petitioner Dr. Sunil Cooray for the 1st and 2nd Respondents

Yuresha De Silva, Deputy Solicitor General for the 3rd – 7th and 10th – 12th Respondents Sanjeeva Jayawardena, PC with Dr. Milhan Ikram Mohammed for the 9th

Respondent Argued on: 3rd June 2024 Written Tendered on behalf of the Petitioner on 28th May 2013 and 8th October Submissions: 2024 Tendered on behalf of the 1st and 2nd Respondents on 9th April 2013

Tendered on behalf of the 3rd – 7th and 10th – 12th Respondents on 11th September 2024 Tendered on behalf of the 9th Respondent on 4th July 2024 Decided on: 20th February 2026 Obeyesekere, J (1) The PeƟƟoner ﬁled this applicaƟon on 12th January 2009 complaining that the refusal

by the Land Reform Commission [the 1st Respondent] to release to her 30 acres [A] of land from a larger land known as the BandarapolawaƩe – Muwandeniya Group is violaƟve of her fundamental rights guaranteed by ArƟcle 12(1) of the ConsƟtuƟon. Leave to proceed for the alleged violaƟon of ArƟcle 12(1) was granted on 22nd January 2009.

5

Facts in brief (2) The PeƟƟoner is the youngest of the eight children of the late D. Samson Rajapakse.

Together with another person by the name of Sena Kavikara, Samson Rajapakse owned and possessed the land known as the BandarapolawaƩe – Muwandeniya Group in extent of 880A by virtue of Deed No. 412 dated 30th March 1968. (3) The Land Reform Law No. 1 of 1972 [the LRC Law] introduced in August 1972

imposed a ceiling on the extent of agricultural land that a person could own. As provided in SecƟon 3(1) thereof, the maximum extent of agricultural land which may be owned by any person if such land consists exclusively of paddy land was twenty-ﬁve acres or if such land does not consist exclusively of paddy land, was ﬁŌy acres, so however that the total extent of any paddy land, if any, comprised in such ﬁŌy acres shall not exceed the ceiling on paddy land. (4) SecƟon 3(2) provided that any agricultural land owned by any person in excess of

the ceiling of ﬁŌy acres on the date of commencement of the LRC Law shall as from that date be deemed to vest in the 1st Respondent and be deemed to be held by such person under a statutory lease from the 1st Respondent. (5) In terms of SecƟon 18(1) of the LRC Law, the owner of the land who by then had

become a statutory lessee was required to make a statutory declaraƟon seƫng out the details of the land/s that he own/s and the land/s that he wishes to retain. It is admiƩed that the PeƟƟoner’s father made a statutory declaraƟon in respect of an extent of 427A 1R 29P of land out of the BandarapolawaƩe – Muwandeniya Group. (6) Based on such declaraƟon and acƟng in terms of SecƟon 19 of the LRC Law, the 1st

Respondent made a statutory determinaƟon published in GazeƩe Extraordinary No. 314/4 dated 25th April 1978, by which the PeƟƟoner’s father was alloƩed an extent of 43A 1R 12P out of the BandarapolawaƩe – Muwandeniya Group and a further extent of approximately 7A from three other lands owned by him.

6

Section 14 of the LRC Law (7) In terms of SecƟon 14(1) of the LRC Law:

“Any person who becomes a statutory lessee of any agricultural land under this Law may within three months from such date make an application to the Commission in the prescribed form for the transfer by way of sale, gift, exchange or otherwise of the entirety or portion of such agricultural land to any child who is eighteen years of age or over or to a parent of such person.” [emphasis added]. (8) This mechanism provided for in SecƟon 14 which enables a statutory lessee to make

an applicaƟon to the 1st Respondent seeking the approval of the 1st Respondent to transfer land that formed part of the statutory declaraƟon made by such statutory lessee to his children who are over 18 years of age or to his or her parent/s was commonly referred to as inter-family transfers. (9) The PeƟƟoner stated that she made an applicaƟon dated 24th November 1972 under

SecƟon 14 [P3] seeking the transfer of ﬁŌy acres out of the said land in her name. I must state that such an applicaƟon by the PeƟƟoner was misconceived in law since the PeƟƟoner was neither the owner of the land nor its statutory lessee. Be that as it may, it is admiƩed that the PlainƟﬀ’s father had made an applicaƟon under SecƟon 14 within the Ɵme period sƟpulated therein. (10) In terms of SecƟon 14(2), “The Commission may by order made under its hand grant

or refuse to grant approval for such transfer. Such order shall be made within one year of the date of applicaƟon under subsecƟon (1). Every such order shall be sent by registered post to the applicant under subsecƟon (1). Any such applicant aggrieved by the order may appeal to the Minister within three weeks of the receipt of such order. The receipt of the order shall be deemed to be eﬀected at the Ɵme at which leƩers would be delivered in the ordinary course of post.” [emphasis added] (11) It is clear that SecƟon 14(2) did not provide for either a minimum or maximum extent

of land that the 1st Respondent could approve to be transferred to children who were over the age of eighteen on the appointed date and/or to parent/s, with the discreƟon in that regard clearly being with the 1st Respondent. However SecƟon

7

14(2A) introduced by the Land Reform (Special Provisions) Act, No. 39 of 1981, which reads as follows, imposed an upper limit:

“From and after the date of enactment of this subsection, no statutory lessee shall be granted approval by the Commission under subsection (2) to transfer under subsection (1) any agricultural land in excess of one hundred and fifty acres in the aggregate;

Provided that the preceding provisions of this subsection shall not apply in respect of any agricultural land the possession of which, notwithstanding anything in this Law, has been handed over to any declarant or any member of the family of the declarant, under this section prior to the enactment of this subsection.” (12) Samson Rajapakse passed away on 19th April 1984 pending the decision of the 1st

Respondent on his applicaƟon under SecƟon 14(1). The PeƟƟoner admits that the 1st Respondent had granted approval by an Order dated 25th July 1986 to transfer an extent of 120A among the eight children of Samson Rajapakse. However, since Samson Rajapakse had passed away by then, the 1st Respondent had granted approval for his eldest son, who had obtained probate in his father’s testamentary case, to eﬀect the said transfer among all eight children. Accordingly, Deed No. 996 had been executed on 3rd March 1993. (13) In terms of SecƟon 14(3), “Any transfer eﬀected in accordance with the provisions of

an order made under subsecƟon (2) or such order as amended, varied or modiﬁed on appeal shall have the eﬀect of transferring right, Ɵtle or interest in property so transferred free of the statutory lease.” Thus, the PeƟƟoner and her seven siblings became the owners of 15A each out of the BandarapolawaƩe – Muwandeniya Group.

(14) There are three maƩers that I wish to advert to at this stage.

(15) The ﬁrst is that by the Ɵme approval was granted in 1986 to eﬀect the inter-family

transfer, SecƟon 14(2A) was in force, and thus, the maximum extent of land that could have been given to the children of Samson Rajapakse was 150A. The 1st Respondent has not however divulged its reasons to have restricted its approval to

8

120A. The second maƩer is that the decision of the 1st Respondent to grant approval for only 120A was not challenged either by way of an appeal to the Minister or through acƟon ﬁled in Court. Instead, the PeƟƟoner and her siblings took steps to eﬀect a transfer of their respecƟve shares in their names. The ﬁnal maƩer that I wish to advert to is that the 1st Respondent has deposited the compensaƟon due on the balance extent of land [264A 00R 29P] to the credit of the testamentary case of Samson Rajapakse. Thus, by 1986, the 1st Respondent had ﬁnalized its decisions on the extent of land in the BandarapolawaƩe – Muwandeniya Group that was declared by Samson Rajapakse. Claim for additional land (16) In 1997, that is eleven years aŌer the Order under SecƟon 14(2) was made by the 1st

Respondent and four years aŌer the deed relaƟng to the inter-family transfer had been executed, the PeƟƟoner claimed that she was enƟtled to receive 50A of land from the BandarapolawaƩe – Muwandeniya Group as she was over 18 years of age at the Ɵme the LRC Law came into being but had only received 15A. She stated further that the 1st Respondent had in fact alloƩed land parcels in extent of 50A to similarly circumstanced persons, but did not provide any further details in that regard. (17) I must state that much water has ﬂowed under the bridge since 1972. Having

released 163A 1R 12P to Samson Rajapakse and his family and a further extent of 56A for village expansion out of the extent of land of the BandarapolawaƩe – Muwandeniya Group that was vested with the 1st Respondent, the balance extent of land appears to have been transferred to the Janatha Estates Development Board in terms of SecƟon 27A of the LRC Law, who in turn has thereaŌer executed a long term lease in favour of the 9th Respondent, Elkaduwa PlantaƟons Limited. Thus, by the Ɵme the PeƟƟoner requested that she be granted an addiƟonal 35A, the said land was no longer owned by the 1st Respondent. In any event, the 1st Respondent had paid compensaƟon for the land vested with it, leaving the PeƟƟoner with no right to claim the land.

9

(18) The PeƟƟoner had thereaŌer made representaƟons to the Ministry of PlantaƟons

who in turn had informed the PeƟƟoner by leƩer dated 1st June 1998 that the maximum extent of land that could have been given to the children of Samson Rajapakse was 150A and if the PeƟƟoner is able to obtain the wriƩen consent of her seven siblings, a further extent of 30A can be released to the PeƟƟoner. The PeƟƟoner admits that she was able to secure the wriƩen approval of her siblings only on 25th June 2007. The PeƟƟoner had thereaŌer demanded that 30A be transferred to her but since the 1st Respondent did not accede to such request, the PeƟƟoner invoked the jurisdicƟon of this Court complaining that her fundamental rights guaranteed by ArƟcle 12(1) has been violated by the 1st Respondent and the State. Is the PeƟƟoner enƟtled to an addiƟonal 30 acres (19) This brings me to the core issue in this case, that being whether the PeƟƟoner, either

on her own right or together with her siblings, is enƟtled to an addiƟonal 30A of land. The principle argument presented at the hearing of this case by the learned President’s Counsel for the PeƟƟoner was twofold. The ﬁrst was that since the PeƟƟoner was over 18 years of age on the date of the LRC Law coming into force, she was enƟtled to 50A of land from the BandarapolawaƩe – Muwandeniya Group. The second was that in any event, she had a legiƟmate expectaƟon arising from the correspondence that the Ministry of PlantaƟons had with her that she would be alloƩed a further 30A, and that the refusal by the 1st Respondent to allot her the said extent of land is arbitrary. (20) With the total extent of land declared by Samson Rajapakse being 427A 1R 29P and

with 43A 1R 12P having been released to Samson Rajapkse, the remaining extent of land was 384A 0R 7P. Thus, even on a best case scenario, the PeƟƟoner could not have been given 50A as Samson Rajapakse had eight children and each of them were eligible to claim 50A. Be that as it may, if the PeƟƟoner was aggrieved by the decision of the 1st Respondent in 1986 to allot only 120A, she ought to have resorted to the remedy provided in SecƟon 14(2) of the LRC Law of making an appeal to the Minister, and if the necessity arose, of invoking the jurisdicƟon of this Court or the Court of Appeal. The PeƟƟoner did neither and instead acquiesced with such decision by

10

execuƟng a deed of transfer and accepƟng compensaƟon for the balance extent of land. I am therefore of the view that not only is there no legal basis for the PeƟƟoner to challenge such decision under SecƟon 14(2) or to claim any further land, the PeƟƟoner is also estopped from challenging the decision of the 1st Respondent, and/or claiming any further land from the BandarapolawaƩe – Muwandeniya Group.

(21) With regard to the present claim for 30A, I am of the view that the correspondence

that the Ministry of PlantaƟons exchanged with the PeƟƟoner cannot give rise to any form of legiƟmate expectaƟon on the part of the PeƟƟoner. I say so for two reasons. The ﬁrst is the land in issue was vested by operaƟon of law with the 1st Respondent and it is only the 1st Respondent that can give an assurance that 30A of land can be released. The second is that the balance land out of the BandarapolawaƩe – Muwandeniya Group is no longer with the 1st Respondent and hence, even the 1st Respondent could not have given any assurance to the PeƟƟoner that 30A of land out of the BandarapolawaƩe – Muwandeniya Group can be released to the PeƟƟoner.

(22) Even if one accepts the posiƟon of the PeƟƟoner that the Ministry of PlantaƟon

Industries held out that 30A of land can be released to her, that was in 1998 and the PeƟƟoner complied with the requirement of obtaining the consent of her siblings and conveyed that posiƟon to the Respondents in June 2007. With no acƟon having been taken by the 1st Respondent, the PeƟƟoner acƟng through her AƩorney-at-Law formally demanded that 30A be transferred through her leƩer dated 27th November 2008. This applicaƟon has been ﬁled in January 2009, which is outside the one month period sƟpulated in ArƟcle 126(2) of the ConsƟtuƟon. Thus, I am in agreement with the submission of the learned Counsel for the Respondents and the learned Deputy Solicitor General that this applicaƟon is liable to be dismissed on the ground that it has been ﬁled outside the one month Ɵme period.

(23) There is one maƩer that I wish to advert to prior to concluding. The seven siblings of

the PeƟƟoner ﬁled SC (FR) ApplicaƟon No. 381/2009 claiming that they too are enƟtled to 50A each. However, when this maƩer was taken up for hearing together with the said ApplicaƟon, the learned President’s Counsel for the PeƟƟoner informed that he would not be proceeding with that applicaƟon. I must state that

11

had that case been proceeded with, the reasoning in this judgment would apply in respect of the alleged enƟtlement claimed by the peƟƟoners in that applicaƟon, in addiƟon to that applicaƟon being liable to be dismissed for non-compliance with the provisions of ArƟcle 126(2). Conclusion (24) In the above circumstances, I am of the view that the fundamental rights of the

PeƟƟoner guaranteed by ArƟcle 12(1) have not been infringed by the Respondents. This applicaƟon is accordingly dismissed without costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT S. Thurairaja, PC, J I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT Achala Wengappuli, J I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT