==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

An appeal made in terms of Section 451 of the Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 as amended by Act No. 28 of 1988 against the Judgment in the High Court at Bar Case No. 7193/2014 dated 17.11.2015.

S.C. Case No. SC/TAB 01A-01F/2017

High Court Colombo Case No. 7193/2014

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Complainant

Vs.

1. Andravas Patabendi Ganendra De Vas Gunawardane

2. Bamunusinghe Arachchige Lakmina Indika Bamunusinghe

3. Atapattuge Gamini Sanath Chandra

4. Ananda Pathiranage Priyantha Sanjeewa

5. Dissanayake Mudiyanselage Kelum Rangana Dissanayake

6. Andravas Patabendi Ravindu Sameera De Vas Gunawardane

1st to 6th Accused

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Andravas Patabendi Ganendra De Vas Gunawardane

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

2

2. Bamunusinghe Arachchige Lakmina Indika Bamunusinghe

3. Atapattuge Gamini Sanath Chandra

4. Anantha Pathirage Priyantha Sanjeewa

5. Dissanayake Mudiyanselage Kelum Rangana Dissanayake

6. Andravas Patabendi Ravindu Sameera De Vas Gunawardane

1st to 6th Accused-Appellants

Vs.

The Hon. Attorney General Attorney General’s Department Colombo 12 Complainant-Respondent

BEFORE : VIJITH K. MALALGODA, PC., J. P. PADMAN SURASENA, J. E.A.G.R. AMARASEKARA, J. ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J. ARJUNA OBEYESEKERE, J. COUNSEL : Gamini Marapana, PC with Navin Marapana PC, Nandapala Wickramasooriya, Nishanthi Mendis, Kaushalya Molligoda and Uchitha Wickremasinghe for the 1st and 6th Accused-Appellants Darshana Kuruppu with Sajini Elvitigala, Sudarsha de Silva and Dineru Bandara for the 2nd Accused- Appellant. Anuja Premaratne, PC with Imasha Senadeera and Vivendra Ramesh for the 3rd Accused-Appellant Ranjan Mendis with Ms. Ashoka C. Kandambi, Shyamantha Bandara and Wishwa Jayaweera for the 4th Accused-Appellant.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

3

Anil Silva, PC with Asitha Vipulanayake, Nandana Perera and Dale Gunarathne for the 5th Accused- Appellant. Ms. Ayesha Jinasena, PC ASG with Ms. Varunika Hettige, SDSG, Rajinda Jayaratne, SC and Arindra Jayasinghe SC for the Hon. Attorney General. ARGUED ON : 12.09.2022, 20.09,2022, 26.09.2022, 30.09.2022, 10.10.2022, 12.10.2022, 14.10.2022, 17.10.2022, 21.10.2022, 27.10.2022, 31.10.2022, 11.11.2022, 14.11.2022, 15.11.2022, 22.11.2022, and 05.12.2022. DECIDED ON : 08th August, 2024 *********** ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

The 1st to 6th Accused-Appellants (1st to 6th Appellants), by their

individual petitions of appeal preferred to this Court, seek to set aside their

convictions entered by a High Court at Bar on several counts contained in the

charge sheet along with sentences imposed on them. The Attorney General

exhibited information before the High Court of Colombo on 12.03.2014, naming

the six Appellants, accusing them in a total of ten counts of committing

several offences. Chief Justice, by an order made under Section 450(3) of the

Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 as amended on 15.10.2014,

directed that the trial against the said Appellants be held before a High Court

at Bar without a jury.

The Appellants were served with a charge sheet by the High Court at

Bar on 31.03.2014, which contained the following counts against them:

1st count : conspiracy by all Appellants to commit the murder of

Mohammed Asamdeen Mohammed Shiyam on 22.05.2013,

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

4

2nd count : abduction of Mohammed Asamdeen Mohammed Shiyam by 2nd

and 5th Appellants, in order to commit his murder or

disposed of as to be put in danger of being murdered,

3rd count : the 1st Appellant aided and abetted the 2nd Appellant to

commit the said abduction,

4th count : the 1st Appellant aided and abetted the 5th Appellant to

commit the said abduction,

5th count : the 2nd to 5th Appellants for committing the murder of

Mohammed Asamdeen Mohammed Shiyam,

6th count : the 1st Appellant aided and abetted the 2nd Appellant to

commit the murder of Mohammed Asamdeen Mohammed

Shiyam

7th count : the 1st Appellant aided and abetted the 3rd Appellant to

commit the murder of Mohammed Asamdeen Mohammed

Shiyam,

8th count : the 1st Appellant aided and abetted the 4th Appellant to

commit the murder of Mohammed Asamdeen Mohammed

Shiyam,

9th count : the 1st Appellant aided and abetted the 5th Appellant to

commit the murder of Mohammed Asamdeen Mohammed

Shiyam,

10th count: the 1st Appellant aided and abetted the 6th Appellant to

commit the murder of Mohammed Asamdeen Mohammed

Shiyam

Trial against the Appellants commenced before the High Court at Bar

on 01.12.2014 and reached its conclusion with the delivery of the impugned

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

5

judgement on 27.11.2015. The prosecution called 113 witnesses and produced

a substantial body of oral and documentary evidence while the Appellants, in

addition to each of them making statements from the dock, called several

witnesses on their behalf.

With the pronouncement of the judgement, which contained 802 pages

in total, the High Court at Bar found the 1st to 6th Appellants guilty of 1st

count, 2nd and 5th Appellants guilty of 2nd count, 2nd to 6th Appellants guilty of

5th count and the 1st Appellant guilty of 3rd , 4th , 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th and 10th counts.

At the commencement of the hearing of their appeals before this Court,

the 1st to 6th Appellants identified their respective grounds of appeal and

presented them for consideration of Court in the following form.

The 1st and 6th Appellants complained that they were deprived of

substance of a fair trial due to the failure of the prosecution to disclose all

material that were gathered during investigations conducted by CID,

including CCTV footage and phone records of the deceased. It was contended

by the 1st and 6th Appellants that the prosecution “starved” them of vital

information by withholding them contrary to the dicta of the judgement of

Wijepala v The Attorney General (2001) 1 Sri L.R. 46 They also complained

that the High Court at Bar erred in relation to evaluation of accomplice’s

evidence, when it failed to apply the principle of law that their evidence lacks

credibility unless corroborated. It also erred in holding Anuradha is not an

accomplice totally ignoring the admission made by ASP Abeysekera that he is

and as such treating him as another ordinary lay witness.

These two Appellants further complained that the High Court at Bar

erred in relation to principles of circumstantial evidence, as that Court, in its

evaluation of phone records, held that the tower records corroborate the

contents of a conversation carried through a phone call whereas they only

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

6

indicate the identity of the two callers, and not the contents. In addition, the

High Court at Bar acted on highly prejudicial statements that were falsely

attributed to 1st and 6th Appellants on the basis that they are in fact true.

The 2nd to 5th Appellants indicated that they too associate themselves

with the ground of appeal raised by the 1st and 6th Appellants in relation to

accomplices, while presenting their own individual grounds for consideration

of Court.

The 2nd Appellant complained of an error committed by the High Court

at Bar when it failed to hold that the two accomplices’ evidence were not

corroborated, and it also failed to hold that the prosecution proved no motive

against him. He also complained that the High Court at Bar failed to consider

that the evidence presented against him is wholly inadequate to sustain the

convictions entered against him on counts 1, 2 and 5.

The 3rd Appellant’s complaint is that the High Court at Bar erred in

relation to the 1st count, when it failed to consider that one conspirator cannot

corroborate the other. He contended that the Court erred once more when

vital contradictions inter partes were not properly analysed but were acted

upon that evidence as a truthful and reliable account. He also complained

that the High Court at Bar failed to analyse the items of circumstantial

evidence in its proper perspective.

The 4th Appellant’s grievance is that the evidence presented against him

by the accomplices are insufficient to prove the accusation against him beyond

reasonable doubt as even if the prosecution case is placed at its best, it only

established that he merely acted as a driver, which is his form of employment,

upon being assigned to serve under the 1st Appellant.

It is the complaint of the 5th Appellant that the evidence presented by

the prosecution on tower records along with the narrative of the accomplices

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

7

were accepted by the High Court at Bar with all of its deficiencies, while his

valid explanation was unreasonably rejected by that that Court. the 5th

Appellant also complained that it appears the High Court at Bar had applied

two standards to evaluate the evidence of the prosecution and of the

Appellant’s.

In view of the wide spectrum of issues covered by these multiple

grounds of appeal, for the convenience of presentation, it is proposed to deal

with the common ground of appeal urged by all the Appellants, based on

accomplices and evaluation of their evidence at the outset of this judgment.

Remaining grounds of appeal that were relied upon by the 1st to 6th

Appellants shall be considered thereafter.

Among the oral evidence of 133 witnesses led by the prosecution,

evidence of prosecution witness No. 2, Mohammed Fausedeen Muflin and

prosecution witness No. 3, Gammedda Dadayakkara Koralage Krishantha

Vishwaraj Koralage assumes greater significance, as their names were also

included in the 1st count as co-conspirators, who allegedly conspired with the

1st to 6th Appellants to commit the murder of Mohammed Asamdeen Mohammed

Shiyam as well as in the 2nd count, which alleged that they abducted Shiyam

along with the 2nd and 5th Appellants, in order that he may be murdered or

may be so disposed of as to be put in danger of being murdered. The High

Court at Bar, at the conclusion of the trial against the Appellants, arrived at

the conclusion that the two witnesses Fausedeen and Krishantha had no

intention or knowledge that the deceased would be put to death, as alleged in

the 1st and 2nd counts.

Hence, it is understandable that all Appellants opting to challenge the

validity of their convictions on the basis that the said prosecution witnesses

Mohammed Fausedeen Muflin and Krishantha Koralage should have been

considered by the High Court at Bar as accomplices. On the said footing, the

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

8

1st and 6th Appellants mounted their challenge on the conviction on the

premise that the evidence of the said two witnesses should have been totally

rejected by the High Court at Bar, and in the unlikely event of it deciding to

accept that evidence for some reason, at least the Court should have insisted

on corroboration of their evidence on material particulars.

Learned Addl. SG in her reply strongly defended the conclusion

reached by the High Court at Bar that the evidence presented before that

Court clearly indicated that the two witnesses Mohammed Fausedeen Muflin

and Krishantha Koralage were not privy to the conspiracy of the 1st to 6th

Appellants and therefore could not be considered as accomplices to the

murder.

Learned President’s Counsel, who appeared for the 1st and 6th

Appellants, was critical of the said submission made by learned Addl. SG in

defending the said finding of the trial Court. He submitted that the

prosecution, having presented a case before that very Court on the basis that

both of them were in fact accomplices by including their names in the body of

counts 1 and 2 of the charge sheet and cannot take a totally different stance at

the stage of appeal. He further submitted that such an approach is contrary to

applicable law.

When queried by this Court, learned President’s Counsel for the 1st to

6th Appellants rightly conceded that it was for the High Court at Bar to

determine whether to treat Fausedeen and Krishantha as accomplices or not,

which it had decided in favour of the two witnesses. It is to be noted that the

decision of the Attorney General, to offer a conditional pardon under Section

256(1) of the Criminal Procedure Code, in itself does not make any suspect

who accepts such a conditional pardon, necessarily an accomplice for the

reason that it is the function of the trier of facts to determine that issue upon

the evidence presented before him. The decision to offer a conditional pardon

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

9

to a suspect is based on the material presented before the Attorney General by

the investigating officers. These materials may contain information book

extracts of the statement of witnesses, recorded under Sections 110 and 127 of

the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, notes of the investigators and of forensic

and ballistic reports etc. It is upon consideration of these materials, the

decision to offer a conditional pardon is made.

But a Court, in determining the question whether the testimony of such

a person, who received a conditional pardon, should be treated as that of an

accomplice, would take into consideration the evidence presented before it

under oath by all witnesses, whose testimony is challenged by cross

examination by those who are implicated by it. Unlike the material considered

by the Attorney General, the evidence presented before the Court are filtered

through different statutory provisions of the Evidence Ordinance for its

relevance and admissibility. The credibility of that evidence is also vigorously

tested.

The Court would therefore consider the body of evidence presented

before it in its entirety and arrive at a finding in light of judicial precedents,

which lay down applicable principles of law, as to whether the testimony of

the particular witness should be treated as that of an accomplice and whether

corroboration is needed before it accepts and acts on such testimony.

Before embarking on a long journey of considering the multiple

grounds of appeal, it is preferable that the factual narrative that had been

placed before the High Court at Bar is referred to at this stage. A more

detailed factual analysis of the evidence presented by the prosecution shall be

made further down in this judgment, when dealing with other grounds of

appeal. In that context and in order to minimise the instances of repetitive

reproduction of evidence, it is proposed at this stage to make a very brief and

a superficial reference of the evidence given before the High Court at Bar by

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

10

three key lay witnesses, which would facilitate the task of placing the said

detailed analysis in the proper perspective.

According to the prosecution, the chain of events that eventually led to

the murder of the deceased, had its genesis to an investment of Rs. 50 Million,

made by Fausedeen into a business owned by Shiyam. After some time, as his

investment failed to make the expected yield, Fausedeen wanted to withdraw

from that business and to have his share of investment returned. He felt his

business partner, the deceased, was adopting evasive tactics to avoid

returning his capital. Similarly, Fausedeen had invested around Rs. 18.5

Million with Krishantha Koralage. At that point of time, Krishantha was not in a

position to return that investment either. But Fausedeen was in an urgent need

of capital. When Fausedeen described his predicament to Krishantha, he

volunteered to speak to the 1st Appellant, whom he associated with almost as

a family member. The 1st Appellant was serving as the Senior DIG of Colombo

north at that time and functioned from his Peliyagoda office.

Krishantha, as promised, had arranged a meeting with the 1st Appellant

for Fausedeen. They met at the 1st Appellant’s private residence at Nedimala.

The 1st Appellant, in order to help Krishantha, agreed to intervene. It was the

understanding between Krishanta and Fausedeen that if the 1st Appellant could

secure the return of Rs. 50 Million from Shiyam, Fausedeen in return would

forgo the Rs. 18.5 Million due from Krishantha, provided that he meets the

police officer’s demand of Rs. 10 Million on his own.

The deceased was engaged in manufacturing footwear for local market

at his factory at Sarankara Mawatha. Krishantha arranged three visits to the

factory of the deceased with Fausedeen. First and second visits were to show

the 1st Appellant and 3rd Appellant of its location and the third was, on the

instructions of the 1st Appellant, arranged to ‘arrest’ the deceased. The attempt

to make an ‘arrest’ did not proceed as planned and, thereafter, on the

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

11

directions of the 1st Appellant, Krishantha wanted Fausedeen to bring the

deceased to a convenient location to facilitate his ‘arrest’.

Fausedeen brought the deceased to a point in Balapokuna Road as agreed.

Krishantha joined them and proceeded to a point in Kandewatta Road. At

Kandewatta, Fausedeen and Krishantha lured the deceased to walk up to a

double cab, in which the 2nd and 5th Appellants were waiting. After forcibly

taking the deceased in, Krishantha and the group proceeded in that vehicle

towards Biyagama. The double cab was owned and driven by Anuradha. The

deceased, having realised the reason for his ‘abduction’, agreed to transfer the

machines and stocks in lieu of returning Fausedeen’s capital. Krishantha, with

this turn of events, wanted to return to Nedimala to meet up with the 1st

Appellant to finalise the deal. They returned to Nedimala, did not meet the 1st

Appellant as expected, instead were joined by 3rd, 4th and 6th Appellants. A

T56 weapon was also brought in. Krishantha protested to 1st Appellant after

meeting the latter in person and conveyed that he does not wish to take any

further part in this affair. He was threatened to provide a van, which he did.

Krishantha went with the others up to a point near Biyagama.

Late in the night of 22.05.2013, the party of 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th

Appellants proceeded towards Biyagama in a van with the deceased.

Krishantha and Anuradha returned to Pita Kotte in the double cab on the

instructions of the 5th Appellant. On his way back Krishantha was told by the

5th Appellant that they would ‘finish’ the deceased off and to collect the van

from the 1st Appellant’s residence in the morning.

Following morning, naked body of Shiyam was recovered at Meepawita,

Dompe at about 6.15 a.m., with firearm injuries to his head. Krishantha

collected his van from Nedimala at the same time and was told by the 5th

Appellant the deceased was shot by them. A few days later Krishantha was

arrested by CCD along with Fausedeen. After investigations were taken over

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

12

by the CID, both of them made statements to a Magistrate and were offered a

conditional pardon by the Attorney General.

Learned President’s Counsel for the 1st and 6th Appellants extensively

addressed us on the point that the prosecution witnesses Fausedeen and

Krishantha Koralage should have been considered as accomplices. The 1st, 3rd

and 6th Appellants, in addition, have advanced the contention that the High

Court at Bar similarly erred when it failed to consider the evidence of the

prosecution witness Anuradha Edirisinghe as that of an accomplice. Learned

Counsel for all the Appellants, in their respective submissions, made

references to several items of evidence, which they relied on to impress upon

this Court that there were strong motives on the part of Fausedeen and

Krishantha entertained against the deceased and therefore both had actively

participated in his murder.

Since the main thrust of the Appellant’s contentions is based on the

attributes of an accomplice, it is prudent to examine the applicable principles

of law in that regard as the first step.

The Evidence Ordinance makes reference to the word “accomplice” in

two of its Sections but does not provide any definition for the same. Section

133 states “ [A]n accomplice shall be a competent witness against an accused person,

and a conviction is not illegal merely because it proceeds upon the uncorroborated

testimony of an accomplice.” The other reference is found in Section 114(b).

That Section, while dealing with evidence that may be considered as

presumptive, states “[T]he Court may presume that an accomplice is unworthy of

credit, unless he is corroborated in material particulars.”

In the absence of a statutory definition to the term accomplice, several

judicial precedents that were relied upon by the Appellants as well as the

State indicate that the appellate Courts have, over the years, laid down several

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

13

attributes of an accomplice, primarily following English common law

principles. In my view, before this Court proceeds to consider the contentions

advanced by the Appellants on attributes of an accomplices for its relative

merits, it is prudent to devote some space in this judgment to make at least a

notional reference to them, as laid down in those judicial precedents.

The applicability of English common law principles in dealing with

accomplices and their evidence was recognised in the latter part of the 18th

Century itself by Withers J, in observing that sections 133 and 114(b) of the

Evidence Ordinance are in conformity with the contemporary English

practices ( vide Anderson v Muttukarupen (1899) 3NLR 353). A similar view

was expressed by Wendt J , in The King v Loku Nona (1907) 11 NLR 4, when

he noted (at p. 13) “ … there was no difference, … between the Law of England and

our own Law as embodied in Sections 114 and 133 of the Evidence Ordinance.” The

decisions of the Supreme Court of India, also moulded in the English Common

law traditions too contributed to the formation of these attributes. In the

judgments of Peiris et al v Dole (1948) 49 NLR 142, The King v Piyasena

(1948) 49 NLR 389 and The Queen v Ariyawantha (1957) 59 NLR 241, superior

Courts of this country adopted the description of an accomplice, as given in

the judgment of Chetumal Rekumal v Emperor 1934) AIR 1934 Sind 185, by

O’Sullivan AJC. His Lordship stated that (at p. 187) “[A]n accomplice is one who

is a guilty associate in crime or who sustains such a relation to the criminal act that

he could be charged jointly with the accused.” However, Jayetileke J in The King v

Piyasena (ibid) added a word of caution in making such a determination by

inserting a quotation from Wharton's Criminal Evidence, 11th Ed, Volume II, at

page 1229, where learned author stated thus:

“The term cannot be used in a loose or popular sense so as to embrace

one who has guilty knowledge or is morally delinquent or who was even

an admitted participant in a related but distinct offence.”

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

14

This cautious approach was reiterated in the judgment of Peiris et al v

Dole (1948) 49 NLR 142, when the question, whether a particular person

ought to be treated as an accomplice, arose before that Court for its

consideration. In this instance, Basnayaka CJ, having stated that “ [I] should like

to say a word of caution against the tendency to make the word ‘accomplice’ bear, in

my opinion improperly, a larger meaning than is permissible in law”, quoted

Chandravarkar J from the judgment of Emperor v Burn 11 Bomb L.R. 1153,

where it was stated that “ " [N]o man ought to be treated as an accomplice on mere

suspicion unless he confesses that he had a conscious hand in the crime or he makes

admission of the facts showing that he had such hand. If the evidence of a witness falls

short of these tests, he is not an accomplice; and his testimony must be judged on

principles applicable to ordinary witnesses”.

The contention presented by the learned President’s Counsel for the 1st

and 6th Appellants is essentially founded on the premise that Fausedeen and

Krishantha in fact had all the attributes of accomplices. In this regard, learned

President’s Counsel referred to a section of the judgment of the High Court at

Bar, where the Court reasoned out why it decided that Fausedeen and

Krishantha could not be treated as accomplices. He challenged the factual and

legal validity of the conclusion reached by that Court.

It is an undeniable fact that the prosecution presented both Fausedeen

and Krishantha as “accomplices”, before the High Court at Bar. This is

primarily due to the inclusion of them in the body of counts Nos. 1 and 2.

The primary factor which contributed to the decision of the High Court at Bar

not to treat them as accomplices was due to the fact that the evidence

presented before it did not support a conclusion that either of them had any

intention or knowledge that Shiyam would be put to death. The conspiracy

was to commit murder of Shiyam and his abduction was for the purpose of

putting him to his death or to expose him to death. Intention to agree with

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

15

others to cause death of the deceased was integral to the 1st count. In relation

to the 2nd count, by which it was alleged that the deceased was abducted to

commit his murder, persons who abduct should entertain that purpose in

their minds at the time of abduction of the deceased. The Court was of the

view that the prosecution could not establish their complicity either to the 1st

count or to the 2nd count because a reasonable doubt exists whether any of the

two ‘accomplices’ had the intention to have Shiyam killed. In the absence of

such an intention they could not be treated as accomplices.

It is against this backdrop, I intend to consider the process of reasoning

that led to the impugned decision of the High Court at Bar that Fausedeen and

Krishantha had no intention or knowledge that the deceased would be put to

death, which effectively removed the tag ‘accomplice’ from them.

The manner in which the High Court at Bar had presented its reasoning

in the body of the judgment indicates that the Court, after setting out the law

applicable to conspiracy and accomplices, had proceeded thereafter to

examine the sequence of events as spoken to by the two witnesses Fausedeen

and Krishantha in tandem. It also considered that they made false statements

to investigators from time to time. The Court then extensively considered the

cross examination of these two important prosecution witnesses, along with

the inconsistencies as well as the omissions that were highlighted off their

evidence. Importantly, the Court also considered several suggestions that

were put across to those witnesses by the 1st to 6th Appellants, who denied

some of the acts and utterances that were attributed to them by those

witnesses.

This segment of the judgment of the trial Court is followed by another,

in which it considered the details of the tower records that were elicited

through different service providers along with their relationship to each of the

important factual events, as spoken to by the witnesses. The Court thereupon

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

16

found the evidence of Fausedeen, Krishantha and Anuradha are truthful and

reliable accounts of the series of events that led to the death of the deceased.

The Court was of the view that the conformation of some of the important

items of evidence referred by the witnesses in their respective narratives,

could be assessed through independent sources for its veracity, and therefore

it is safe to rely on that evidence.

Interestingly, the High Court at Bar had not arrived at a specific finding

that the prosecution witnesses Fausedeen and Krishantha are not accomplices,

as already noted above. Instead, the Court merely concluded that neither of

the two knew that the deceased would be put to death and only the 1st to 6th

Appellants participated in the conspiracy to commit the murder of Shiyam and

abducted him in order to commit his murder.

Fausedeen and Krishantha were under a conditional pardon given by the

Attorney General, granted in terms of Section 256(1) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 as amended. Their names were included as co-

conspirators to the offences of conspiracy to commit murder of Shiyam in the

body of the 1st count contained in the information, along with the 1st to 6th

Appellants as other conspirators. The 2nd count too contained the names of the

two witnesses in its body accusing them of having abducted the deceased in

order that he may be murdered or may be so disposed of as to be put in

danger of being murdered.

However, only the 1st to 6th Appellants were named in the information

as accused, while names of Fausedeen and Krishantha were included in the list

of prosecution witnesses Nos. 3 and 2, respectively. They were called by the

prosecution in support of its case and in terms of Section 256(2) of that Code.

Thus, throughout the trial as well as in the body of the impugned judgment,

Fausedeen and Krishantha were referred to by the High Court at Bar as

“accomplices”. It must also be noted that the said references to Fausedeen and

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

17

Krishantha were correctly made by the trial Court at that stage, as the fact they

were accused along with the 1st to 6th Appellants in two of the counts, in itself

satisfied the attributes of an accomplice, per Peiris et al v Dole (supra). The

specific finding of the High Court at Bar about Fausedeen and Krishantha that

neither of them had any intention to cause death of the deceased was made at

the concluding stage of the trial. It is a finding which had the effect of

removing tags that were attached to them initially by the prosecution as

“accomplices”. The Court also found witness Anuradha too is not an

accomplice.

The High Court at Bar, in its presentation of the factual analysis, had

highlighted the several items of evidence that are indicative of the fact that

either Fausedeen or Krishantha did not intend the death of the deceased,

whenever it came across them. Given the extra-large volume of relevant facts

that were placed before it, this manner of dealing with an important element

of the prosecution case could be understood, although a dedicated section

dealing solely with this aspect would have been more helpful to the appellate

Court.

These multiple references, during which the Court considered the

intention and knowledge of Fausedeen and Krishantha as regard to the death of

the deceased, are found at different parts of the impugned judgment, and,

therefore, shall be referred to individually while dealing with the contentions

that were advanced by the Appellants.

Learned President’s Counsel for the 1st to 6th Appellants urged

following factors before this Court for its consideration which, according to

him, the trial Court had failed to consider, in coming to the conclusion that

Fausedeen and Krishantha are not accomplices.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

18

(i) During his cross examination, Fausedeen admitted having

told the investigators that Krishantha had threatened him

“If you don’t bring Siyam to me today you will not be able to live

in this country”, “ If Siyam is not handed over to me today I will

kill you also” and these words are clearly illustrative of

Krishantha’s complicity in the murder of the deceased,

(ii) Krishantha owed over Rs. 20 Million to one Lee, a Chinese

national. The deceased alerted Lee of Krishantha’s presence

in China. This led to Krishantha being kept in ‘house arrest’

in China by Lee, until the former pays his dues. Krishantha

admitted he was angry over the act of the deceased and

vouched he would take revenge for his act of treachery,

(iii) Similarly, Fausedeen too had admitted to Shaheen (PW No.

10) that the Deceased torments him (“jo fokjd”),

(iv) Certified copy of the 3rd further report filed before the

Magistrate’s Court (4V1), reveals that the investigators

have reported to Court that Fausedeen and Krishantha, who

were already named therein as suspects, have abducted six

businessmen, killed three of them, and extorted money

from them in order to resurrect the LTTE, which tends to

support their propensity to commit the murder of Shiyam,

(v) ASP Abeysekara admitted that Anuradha, too is an

accomplice.

Before proceeding to consider the 1st, 2nd and 6th Appellants’ complaint

on the failure of the High Court at Bar to consider the factors that were

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

19

brought to the notice of this Court in this regard, it is helpful if a brief

reference is made at this stage to the factors that were in fact considered by

the Court, in arriving at this particular finding. As already noted, these factors

were referred to by the Court at different points of its judgment as and when

it considered each aspect separately and thus, are found scattered throughout

its 802-page judgment.

The High Court at Bar was of the view that:

a. Krishantha had no idea of the plan of action that had been

developed by the 1st Appellant in relation to the abduction of

the deceased and the manner of dealing with him thereafter

(pgs. 69, 95 and 96 of the judgment). Court also found that

none of the others, who are involved with the abduction and

murder, expected Fausedeen’s participation in their plan to

abduct the deceased near his factory at Saranakara Road,

which was aborted subsequently (p.91 of the Judgment),

b. the evidence does not indicate that neither of the two had

entertained any intention to murder the deceased (pgs. 100

109 and 115 of the judgment). Court further observed that

Fausedeen consented to handover the deceased to Krishantha,

only when it was assured by the 1st Appellant that he would

see to it that the deceased would not make a complaint to any

authority. Court considered this as a factor that negates any

intention on the witness’s part to commit murder (pgs. 109

and 115 of the Judgment). Court also noted that when the

Appellants suggested to the two witnesses during cross

examination that it was they who wanted to murder the

deceased, both had denied and reiterated their intention was

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

20

to get their monies back (p. 155) and that there would not be

any benefit accrued to Krishantha by the death of the deceased

(p.220 of the judgment),

c. the conduct of the two, particularly after Biyagama incident,

and the manner Krishantha had disclosed, “jdia, IShdïj

urkakhs hkafk” to Fausedeen. Krishantha also warned his

business partner that “if we are to disclose that, we too would

suffer same fate” (p.126 of the Judgment). Court also noted that

Fausedeen confided to his driver Shaheen (PW 10) regretting

for getting involved with this affair at all. Court found his

claim on this point is probable, when considered in the light

of him issuing instructions to destroy deceased’s phone, only

after realising that the deceased would be killed ( pgs. 291

and 295 of the judgment),

d. Krishantha, although he knew that the deceased was in

danger, failed to inform any law enforcement agency about it

due to fear of his own life (p. 219 of the judgment). The Court

was of the view that Krishantha’s act of borrowing a van from

his brother’s residence at Baddegana, on the direction of the 1st

Appellant, is corroborated by the phone records (pgs. 276

and 577of the judgment), along with the act of the 1st

Appellant of verifying with Krishantha whether the deceased

was taken in (p. 561 of the judgment), after abduction of the

deceased, Fausedeen and Krishantha travelled in opposite

directions (p. 563, of the judgment), while 5th and 6th

Appellants travelled in same direction (p.581 of the

judgment), Krishantha initiating a conference call (p. 582 of

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

21

the judgment), calling his wife after arriving at his home

(p.583 of the judgment) and getting the gate to the 1st

Appellant’s house open in order to get the van back by taking

a call from his nephew, Shenal’s phone in the following

morning (p.588 of the judgment),

e. two accomplice’s evidence were corroborated by phone

details along with that of Anuradha’s (p. 617 of the judgment).

Returning to the several factors highlighted by the learned President’s

Counsel which said to have escaped consideration of the High Court at Bar, it

is appropriate to consider the highlighted portion of Fausedeen’s ‘evidence’ “If

you don’t bring Siyam to me today you will not be able to live in this country” and

“If Siyam is not handed over to me today I will kill you also” as these words, as

submitted by Counsel, are clearly illustrative of at least Krishantha’s complicity

in the murder of the deceased. In view of the said finding of fact made by the

High Court at Bar that neither Fausedeen nor Krishantha intended the death of

the deceased, despite their complicity in his ‘abduction’, this particular

submission assumes a greater significance, since if accepted, its benefit should

accrue in favour not only to the 1st, 2nd and 6th Appellants but to the other

Appellants as well.

This submission essentially presupposes the fact that the evidence

relating to the statements that were attributed by Fausedeen to Krishantha “If

you don’t bring Siyam to me today you will not be able to live in this country” and

“If Siyam is not handed over to me today, I will kill you also” were presented to the

High Court at Bar by them during the trial as portions of legally admissible

evidence in relation to the facts that it speaks of. If the Court had failed to

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

22

consider such “evidence” in the correct perspective, would certainly have the

effect of causing grave prejudice to the Appellants.

The particular segment of the evidence of Fausedeen that was referred to

by the learned President’s Counsel is as follows:

m% ( Bg miafi wdmiq ;ud lg W;a;rhla ÿkakd 30’05’2013 oj,a 12’00g@

W ( Tõ’

m% ( ta lg W;a;rfha wdmiq ;ud lsõjo ls%Idka; ug ;¾ckh lrkjd

WUf.a hdÆjd ksid ug mdvqjqkd WUg i,a,s ´fka kï Ishdïj

ndrfokak lsh,@

W ( uu tfyu lsh,d we;s uu nhg lsh,d we;s uu we;a; lsõfj keye

lsh,;a uu lsõjd’

m% ( fofjks wjia:dfõos Th lg W;a;rh fok fldg;a th lsõfj

keye@

W ( keye’

m% ( oeka ;udg ;¾ckh lsrSfula l,do wdmiq ierhla WUj;a urkjd’

biaird,du ;udg lsõfj i,a,s ´k kï Ishdïj ug oSmka’ tjeks

l;djla lsõjd’ oeka ta l;dj ;j;a bosrshg .syska ;ud

lsõjdo WUj;a urkjd lsh,d’ Ishdïj ÿkafk ke;akï WUj;a urkjd

lsh,d@

W ( uu mji,d we;s’

m% ( ta lshkafk ;ud lshkafka tfyu;a Wfka keye@

W ( keye iajdóks’

Careful consideration of this segment of cross examination by the 1st

and 6th Appellants reveal that it is relation to an attempt to bring in material

from a statement made by Fausedeen in order to highlight a contradictory

position taken up by him before the High Court at Bar to the one he had taken

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

23

up in that statement. In his evidence before the High Court at Bar, Fausedeen

had consistently denied of having entertained any intention to take the life of

the deceased. He was emphatic that he was only interested to get his Rs, 50

Million back from the deceased. It was also his evidence that he got to know

through Krishantha of the arrangement made by the 1st Appellant to recover

his investment. The 1st Appellant was to ‘arrest’ Shiyam and to keep him in

detention for a period of about three hours to induce him to part with his

assets. The moment Shiyam agreed, he was to be returned back to Fausedeen.

The utterances attributed to Krishantha are indicative that he knew

beforehand that the deceased would be put to death, when he said “Ishdïj

oSmka" ke;akï WUj;a urkjd” and thereby threatening Fausedeen also with death

along with Shiyam. These two sentences were readout by the learned Counsel

from the statement made by Fausedeen to the officers of the CCD, whilst in

their custody. When he was confronted with these two statements, Fausedeen

candidly admitted that he did make such statements. However, in replying to

the last question put to him by the 1st and 6th Appellants (as reproduced

above), Fausedeen clarified that such a conversation did not take place, he had

lied to the CCD and thereby denying any truth in these two statements that

were attributed to Krishantha. The matter was not pursued any further in the

cross examination by the learned President’s Counsel who defended the 1st

and 6th Appellants before the trial Court.

Clearly, the statement containing the said two sentences, was recorded

in terms of Sections 109 and 110 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.

Section 110(1) authorises any police officer to examine orally any person

supposed to be acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case, and

was duty bound to reduce any statement made by such a person in to writing

following the format prescribed by Section 109 of that Act. Thus, the use of

such a statement is qualified to the extent as set out in Section 110(3), which

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

24

states such a statement could be used “ … in accordance with the provisions of the

Evidence Ordinance, except for the purpose of corroborating the testimony of such a

person in Court … “. The resultant position is Fausedeen had made a statement

to CCD, in which he admittedly made false claims to the recording officer

indicating that Krishantha had told him “If you don’t bring Shiyam to me today

you will not be able to live in this country” and “If Shiyam is not handed over to me

today I will kill you also”.

It appears from the submission of the learned President’s Counsel that

he expected the High Court at Bar to have considered the contents of these

two sentences as items of substantive evidence, which indicative of the

position that Krishantha in fact had threatened Fausedeen that “If you don’t bring

Siyam to me today you will not be able to live in this country” and “If Siyam is not

handed over to me I will kill you also” (“ Ishdïj ÿkafk ke;akï WUj;a urkjd”)

compelling him to hand over the deceased and therefore had knowledge that

the decease would be put to death. In my view this contention is not in

inconformity with the jurisprudence built over the years as to the proper use

of the contents of statements that were recorded during investigations. The

words of Section 110(3) which states “ [A] statement made by any person to a

police officer in the course of any investigation may be used in accordance with the

provisions of the Evidence Ordinance except for the purpose of corroborating the

testimony of such person in Court …” does not envisage a situation where the

contents of such a statement could be used in a criminal proceedings as

substantive evidence. The legitimate use of such statements is limited to

highlighting that the position taken by a witness in his evidence is different to

the one taken in the statement. Of course, such a statement could also be used

to refresh the memory of the person who recorded it.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

25

Would the situation be any different, if Fausedeen had accepted the

highlighted parts of contents of his statement made to CCD, as a truthful

description of the event it speaks of ?

In my view, the answer would still be in the negative. A clear

pronouncement on this issue was made by Court in Binduwa v Siriya (1926)

28 NLR 126, where Jayawardene J, following the reasoning adopted in Rex v

Charles Perera 3 S.C.D. 57. In this instance, the Court considered whether a

previous statement made by a witness, which he admits being true, but which

is contradicted by his evidence in Court, could be used as substantive

evidence. It was held (at p. 128) that “ … the statement of the complainant to the

Korala has been used, not to contradict or corroborate evidence given in Court, but as

substantive evidence against the accused, because the witness who made the statement

says it is true. I do not think that such a use of a former statement is authorized by

law. The question whether a former statement is true or false does not arise in a case

like this, and it seems to me doubtful whether a Court can ascertain from a witness

whether such a statement is true or not for the purpose of utilising it as evidence in

the case. It would, of course, be different if the witness repeats on oath what he had

said in his former statement. Further, the Korala appears to have been acting in this

matter as an Inquirer under Chapter XII of the Criminal Procedure Code, as he says

he held the preliminary inquiry into the case. If so, then section 122 (3) prohibits the

use of a statement made to an Inquirer in the course of an investigation otherwise

than to prove that a witness made a different statement at a different time or to refresh

the memory of the person recording it.” It must be clarified here that when

Jayawardene J said “It would, of course, be different if the witness repeats on oath

what he had said in his former statement” it was said in relation to the evidence of

that witness which is consistent with his pervious statement and in such a

situation the eliciting of the contents of his statement to show that he made a

similar claim on his previous statement does not arise. If that was elicited, it

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

26

would be to show his consistency, and such a purpose is not permitted by the

statute.

In this context, it is also relevant to note the view expressed by

Basnayaka CJ, in The Queen v Mapitigma Buddharakkita and Others (1962) 63

NLR 433, (at p 482) “ … the use of the oral statement made to a police officer in the

course of an investigation under Chapter XII is as obnoxious to it as the use of the

same statement reduced into writing”. However, in the judgment of Wanasinghe

v Attorney General and Others (2011) 1 Sri L.R. 1, Amaratunge J, considered

the question whether the admission of the evidence relating to the act of

pointing out the accused by the complainant during investigations as the

person who solicited a bribe as evidence is prohibited under Section 110(3) of

the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.

His Lordship stated (at p. 7) such evidence is admissible, since the

“[Section 110(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act prohibits the use of the

written record of a statement recorded under and in terms of Section 110(1) in the

course of an investigation. In this case there was no such statement in

existence. Section 110(3) does not shut out direct evidence of a police officer of

anything done or said by a witness or an accused (except a confession of an accused)

in his presence and seen or heard by such police officer.”

In view of the reasoning adopted in these judicial precedents, it must be

noted here that Fausedeen, during his examination in chief as well as in cross

examination by all the Appellants, had consistently maintained the position

that he did not disclose the whole truth to the officers of the CCD. He was

particularly determined not to make any reference to the 1st Appellant or to

any of other officers who were with him, namely the 2nd to 5th Appellants, to

the officers of the CCD. He had no knowledge that the 6th Appellant had

joined the deceased at a later point of time. Fausedeen clearly admitted

deliberately lying on this issue in his statement to CCD, in addition to lying to

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

27

the deceased’s wife, who called him to find out the whereabouts of her

husband, after Shiyam was handed over to Krishantha by the witness. This

aspect of Fausedeen’s evidence would be dealt with in another context further

down in this judgment. In relation to the complaint of the Appellants that the

trial Court failed to consider the contents of the statement as substantive

evidence in the case, should therefore necessarily fail.

The second factor relied upon by the 1st, 2nd and 3rd Appellants, that

Krishantha had entertained a strong motive to eliminate the deceased, should

be considered next. Learned President’s Counsel invited attention of this

Court to the evidence where Krishantha had vouched that he would take

revenge from the deceased, along with Fausedeen’s brother, for their action

resulted in his ‘house arrest’ in China by one Lee, which made him to suffer a

substantial financial loss, and gross humiliation.

The evidence relating to this incident is as follows. Krishantha is a

businessman who regularly imported textiles from China, through a Chines

national called Lee. In order to coincide with the festive season sale in the

month of April, Krishantha arranged with Lee for a consignment of garments.

Unfortunately, the said consignment could not be cleared from Customs in

time and there was a delay on the part of Krishantha in the repayment of dues

to Lee which was said to be in a sum of Rs. 20 Million. During a subsequent

business visit to China, Krishantha was prevented returning to Sri Lanka by Lee,

who kept him in house arrest, until the monies for the delayed consignment

are fully settled. Krishantha had eventually paid all of his dues in full to Lee by

raising funds, after adopting several desperate means, and managed to return

to Sri Lanka.

In order to raise funds for his ‘ release’, Krishantha had to borrow Rs. 6

Million from Fausedeen, mortgage his own house and was forced to pull out

capital from his businesses. Owing to this factor, Krishantha suffered severe

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

28

financial difficulties. The 1st Appellant, in his statement from the dock too had

referred to this fact and said that he offered his vehicle, which was imported

under the duty concession permit, to be mortgaged to raise funds to secure

the release of his friend. Krishantha had later learnt that it was the deceased

and Fausedeen’s brother who had passed information of his presence in China

to Lee. Krishantha admitted he was angry over the said act of the deceased,

which he thought as an act of jealousy, motivated by business rivalry.

Krishantha had vouched that he would take revenge from the deceased for all

the trouble he had to endure.

It is on this admission made by Krishantha, the Appellants have

contended that it was he who had a real motive to kill the deceased and not

the 1st and 6th Appellants, who only said to have a grudge against Shiyam over

a trivial incident, which the prosecution relied on as the motive for the

abduction and murder of the deceased. Learned Counsel submitted that the

High Court at Bar rightly rejected the said motive attributed to the 1st and 6th

Appellants, thus making Krishantha the only party who admittedly had a real

motive against the deceased. According to the Appellants, the High Court at

Bar failed to take note of this important factor.

The High Court at Bar, in dealing with the said issue of motive of the 1st

and 6th Appellants, had the evidence before it which revealed of a reference

made by the 1st Appellant in respect of the deceased as “wr hld”. The nature of

the relationship between the deceased and the 1st Appellant could be seen

from the evidence that surfaced from a statement made by the deceased to

Fausedeen referring to an incident with 6th Appellant, over several pairs of

shoes. The apprehensions entertained by the deceased to personally meet up

with the 1st Appellant at Kandewatta Road, is indicative from the very term he

used to address the 1st Appellant. When the deceased was taken to the vehicle

under the pretext that the 1st Appellant wants to speak to him, the deceased

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

29

addressed him in total submission as “ nqÿ i¾”, thinking the 1st Appellant was

in fact inside of the vehicle. The Court also considered the proposition posed

by the 6th Appellant in his dock statement whether it is believable that a father

and son would be plotting together to kill a man over an incident involving

shoes worth of only Rs 3,500.00. Similarly, the 1st and 6th Appellants contend

that Fausedeen too had admitted to Shaheen (PW No.10), a relative who served

him as his driver, that Shiyam had regularly harassed or mentally tormented

him (“jo fokjd”) and the High Court at Bar had taken note of that evidence (at

p.290 of the judgment).

The Court apparently did not specifically act on the evidence of motive

presented by the prosecution but, in the course of its judgment, noted that

sometimes murders are committed over trivial reasons (referring to the

motive attributed to the 1st and 6th Appellants), and cited the incidents of the

murder of “Judge Ambepitiya” and “Angulana double murders”, as a

justification for its observation. It must be noted that this had been the view

taken by Courts since 1856, when Lord Campbell stated in R v Palmer that

“the adequacy of motive is of little importance. We know from the experience of

criminal Courts that the most atrocious crimes of this sort have been committed from

very slight motives …”, as seen from the judgment of The Attorney General v

Potta Naufer and Others (2007) 2 Sri L.R. 144.

Another factor relied on by the learned President’s Counsel for the 1st to

6th Appellants in this regard was ASP Abeysekera, conceded that Anuradha is

an accomplice. It is a suggestion Anuradha himself had admitted. Although

this factor was highlighted by the Appellants in relation to their contention on

motive entertained by the two ‘accomplices’, vis a vis the strength of the

motive attributed to the 1st and 6th Appellants, the admission of a police officer

or even a witness himself that he is ‘an accomplice’ to the abduction and

murder of Shiyam, has no impact on the duty of the trial Court in determining

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

30

whether the person concerned is an accomplice, in view of the attributes of an

accomplice identified by Courts, for it is for the trier of fact to determine that

question of fact. The fact of granting a conditional pardon by the Attorney

General to a person in itself does not necessarily make such a person an

accomplice in the eyes of law, as Section 256 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act provides the consideration that are applicable in exercising that

discretion only if the person is “ directly or indirectly concerned in or privy to any

such offence”. It is relevant to point out in this context that this Court, in Ajit

Fernando and Others v The Attorney General (2004) 1 Sri L.R. 288, considered

the propriety of granting a conditional pardon on a person under Section 256.

After consideration of several factors, the Court was of the view (at p.303) that

“ [A] close scrutiny of his statement clearly reveals that he cannot be regarded as a

person who could have been directly or indirectly concerned in or privy to the offence

under inquiry.”

After undertaking a careful evaluation of the complex body of evidence

that had been placed before the High Court at Bar, I am inclined to agree with

the conclusions reached by that Court (as reproduced in the preceding

paragraphs of this judgment) in determining the question whether Fausedeen

and or Krishantha knew that the deceased would be put to death when they

handed him over to the 2nd and 5th Appellants at Kandewatta Road in the

negative. In addition to agreeing with the reasoning adopted by the High

Court at Bar, I wish to fortify my said conclusion with following reasons.

Clearly the case presented by the prosecution against the 1st to 6th

Appellants is essentially a one based on circumstantial evidence. Of course,

both Fausedeen and Krishantha have had the opportunity to specifically deny

in their evidence under oath that they did not individually or collectively

entertain any intention to terminate life of their business acquaintance Shiyam,

upon being suggested so by the 1st to 6th Appellants. Despite the said specific

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

31

denials made by Fausedeen and Krishantha in responding to those suggestion

for obvious reasons, it is important for this Court to consider, in addition to

the several factors that contributed to the conclusion reached by the High

Court at Bar to arrive at a finding in the negative, whether there are other

circumstances that tend to point towards the contrary, in addition to the

factors that were pointed out by the Appellants. This could be determined

after consideration of the conduct of each of the two witnesses prior to, during

and immediately after Kandewatta episode, coupled with their conduct when

they first got to know that Shiyam would be put to death.

The starting point of the series of events that ended with the death of

the deceased was the obvious reluctance on the part of the deceased to return

the capital invested in his business by Fausedeen, despite the latter’s repeated

requests. These business transactions were made on mere verbal undertakings

and not on formally signed legally enforceable contracts. When Fausedeen

realised that his investment did not yield profits to satisfy his expectations, he

decided to divert that investment to another project, and also to part ways

with Shiyam. This he intended to do only after getting his capital back.

With regular checking of accounts of their partnership business and in

view of its actual financial status, Fausedeen had realised that it is not possible

to get his total investment of Rs. 50 Million back. Instead, he opted to be

content with only Rs. 30 Million, in view of a pragmatic assessment of the

circumstances and decided to forego Rs. 20 Million. Given the fact that Shiyam

was in the habit of making veiled threats to divulge the relationship Fausedeen

had with another woman, whenever the topic of recovering of his investment

was brought up for discussion, even this goal seemed an unattainable one.

Naturally, Fausedeen was frustrated and dejected, particularly over the

conduct of his business partner.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

32

Similarly, Krishantha too was indebted to Fausedeen in a sum of Rs. 18.5

Million. In view of the financial difficulties faced by Krishantha over the

incident with Lee, Fausedeen was aware that his friend was unable to pay back

the full amount owed to him in one payment. He had unsuccessfully tried that

option for last two years. In these circumstances, all he could do was to

entertain an expectation to collect his dues in small instalments and, that too,

spread over for a long period of time. But Fausedeen needed some capital

urgently. It was in this mindset that the teary eyed Fausedeen had laid bare his

predicament in the presence of Krishantha and complained of the cold

response received from Shiyam. Krishantha had already helped Fausedeen many

a time to recover monies from his defaulters, through the intervention of his

family friend, the 1st Appellant. Krishantha apparently seized the opportunity

to propose Fausedeen that if he could secure Rs. 50 Million from the deceased,

instead of Fausedeen’s expectation of Rs. 30 Million, whether the amount he

owed to Fausedeen could be set off against that. Fausedeen agreed with this

proposition.

When Krishantha arranged a meeting with the 1st Appellant at his

residence, Fausedeen requested whether the 1st Appellant could help him to

recover his dues legally from Shiyam if he makes a formal complaint to Fraud

Bureau. The 1st Appellant was its director at some point of time. The 1st

Appellant rebuked Fausedeen not to talk rubbish in his presence and indicated

his plan to recover the dues.

The declared plan of action by the 1st Appellant was to compel the

deceased to transfer the ownership of his factory and premises along with the

stock of footwear to Fausedeen. The deceased was to be held in for period of

few hours and, once the transfer of assets is made, he was to be released. But

Fausedeen was worried about what the deceased would do after his release,

even though he might agree to transfer property under compulsion. The

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

33

response of the 1st Appellant was that he is in charge of the ‘ white van squad’

and the people who come to them only return “blind, mute and deaf” ( “wms .djg

tk ñksiaiq w|" f.d¿" ìysrs fj,d hkafk” ). After this meeting there were requests

from the 1st Appellant to facilitate the 6th Appellant’s trip to Thailand and also

made a demand of Rs. 500,000.00 for incidental expenses.

Despite the said plan of action in place, there was no positive action on

the part of the 1st Appellant to arrange a meeting with the deceased to compel

repayment, even though Fausedeen responded positively to all of his requests

for financial support. Naturally Fausedeen was frustrated and regularly

pestered Krishantha for some positive action. An attempt was made to take the

deceased in near his factory. That did not succeed. With that failed attempt,

Krishantha told Fausedeen (on instructions of the 1st Appellant) that it was for

him to bring Shiyam to a point and hand him over to the officers who work

with the 1st Appellant.

Fausedeen lured the deceased to drive to a point with Krishantha where

Anuradha would wait for them in his cab with the 2nd and 5th Appellants. After

taking the deceased into the cab they left for an unknown destination, leaving

Fausedeen stranded there without any means of transport, as the car keys

were with the deceased. He picked up the deceased’s phone from that car,

before leaving Kandewatta in a taxi.

After Kandewatta incident, Fausedeen was constantly in touch with

Krishantha over the phone, checking out their movements and progress made

of their plan of action. Krishantha promised to get back him once the

transaction was over. When Shiyam’s wife called Fausedeen to find out

whereabouts of her husband, he lied to her knowing fully well that once the

deceased returns, she will get to know the truth. When he contacted

Krishantha around midnight, he was told that they are at Biyagama. Krishantha

said he would call back again. After some time, seeing several missed calls

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

34

from Krishantha, Fausedeen returned the call only to be told that the deceased

would be murdered, and he would lose all his investment.

Strangely, the prosecution did not elicit any evidence as to the

immediate reaction of Fausedeen when the news Shiyam would be put to death

conveyed to him by Krishantha. The 3rd Appellant, during his cross

examination, clarified this aspect. Fausedeen said in his evidence that he was

frightened to hear that the deceased would be killed. Krishantha also conveyed

the threat issued by the 1st Appellant, if Fausedeen were to reveal what

happened, not only him but his family too would be eliminated.

After hearing the death of the deceased, Fausedeen asked his driver to

destroy the phone through which Krishantha communicated with him, along

with the phone used by the deceased. Fausedeen had re-traced his route in

Kandewatta in order to verify for himself whether there were any CCTV

cameras that may have recorded his movements. In an attempt to double

check on that aspect, he asked his driver to drive along Kandewatta Road once

more, making sure that there were no CCTV cameras in the vicinity of the

place of ‘abduction’. The evidence of Fausedeen that he told his driver Shaheen

after meeting him that he now regretted for getting involved with this

transaction remains unchallenged.

It must be noted in this regard, that even after an intense session of

continued cross examination on behalf of all the Appellants by different

Counsel representing them, Fausedeen was able to maintain his consistency on

his motive and the reasons for his decision to handover the deceased to the 2nd

and 5th Appellants through Krishantha. When suggested that Fausedeen was

aware that Shiyam would be murdered, he posed a question back to the cross

examiner, if that is the case, how he was to recover his investment. Fausedeen

added that, as a result of Shiyam’s murder, he did in fact lost his entire

investment.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

35

In view of these considerations, it is reasonable to conclude that

Fausedeen had no intention to cause the death of the deceased. His primary

concern was to get his substantial investment recovered from Shiyam. When

he failed in his repeated attempts to recover his dues from the deceased on his

own, Fausedeen looked for other options and when Krishantha made the

proposal which benefited both of them, he decided to proceed with the same,

having had previous incidents of successfully recovering monies from other

defaulters with the help of the 1st Appellant. The threats of ‘blackmailing’ by

Shiyam may have certainly dented his relationship. But to murder Shiyam

solely for that reason alone, while losing all of his investment of Rs. 50

Million, seemed a mere possibility, rather than being a realistic probability. It

is evident that Fausedeen had faith in the assurance of the 1st Appellant that the

deceased could be persuaded to part with the ownership to the factory

premises and its stock after a period of confinement, with no legal

consequences to follow.

The degree of Krishantha’s interest in the death of the deceased,

particularly in view of his declared intentions to take revenge from the

deceased over the incident with Lee, must be considered carefully. It is with

Krishantha’s intervention only the 1st Appellant agreed to help out Fausedeen to

get his investment back. In the process Krishantha brokered a deal by which a

sum of Rs. 18.5 Million he owed to Fausedeen is deemed settled. Krishantha

maintained that the 1st Appellant wanted Rs. 10 Million for him to secure

what Fausedeen wanted, and it was confirmed by the 1st Appellant at a

subsequent meeting. The arrangement was for Krishantha to pay the 1st

Appellant a sum of Rs. 10 Million after the completion of the operation and

Fausedeen would not press for the balance Rs. 8.5 Million from Krishantha.

Despite the demand of Rs. 10 Million, the 1st Appellant did not insist

that it be paid before he intervenes. He said Rs. 10 Million could be settled

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

36

after Shiyam transferred his assets. There is no evidence that he strongly

reminded any of the two witnesses about of what they owe him at any point

of time thereafter or the consequences that would follow, should they breach

the said undertaking. Whether this demand of Rs. 10 Million for the 1st

Appellant is only a sham to deceive Fausedeen, following an understanding

between Krishantha and the 1st Appellant owing to their close friendship,

could not be determined either way in the absence of any evidence. Whatever

the circumstances, the successful completion of the project would accrue a

benefit to Krishantha of at least Rs. 8.5 Million, if not Rs. 18.5 Million.

It is through Krishantha only Fausedeen got to know of the plan of action,

and to facilitate an effective persuasion, the deceased would be kept in for few

hours in the ‘custody’ of the 1st Appellant and his team after his “arrest”. This

being the general agreement, the specific modalities of the manner of taking

the deceased in, and where he would be kept until he agrees to transfer

ownership were not known either to Krishantha or to Fausedeen. It was

Krishantha’s evidence that the 1st Appellant issued instructions from time to

time, which he merely carried out or conveyed. It was also his evidence that

the 1st Appellant would privately speak to one of the officers in his team to

give instructions (the 2nd to 5th Appellants) and directing Krishantha to

facilitate their task by coordinating with Fausedeen.

This pattern could be seen from the two scouting visits that were made

to the deceased’s factory as well as to his residence and the failed attempt to

take him in near that factory. When the attempt to “take in” the deceased at

Saranakara Road failed, it was the 1st Appellant who instructed Krishantha to

inform Fausedeen to hand the deceased over to his men. This task was

accomplished at Kandewatta. The evidence also disclosed the 1st Appellant

instructed his officers from time to time, who also claimed they act only on

the instructions of their DIG.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

37

The degree of control the 1st Appellant had over the actions of

Krishantha throughout the whole sequence of relevant events could be

assessed in its correct perspective by consideration of evidence in relation to

two prominent incidents that had taken place on the day of the Kandewatta

incident. In this regard a more descriptive reference to the evidence of

Krishantha is required.

When the attempt to take the deceased in near his factory had failed,

Krishantha met the 1st Appellant along with the 5th Appellant and described

what happened. Krishantha also conveyed to 1st Appellant that Fausedeen had

lost confidence in them over their failure to make any progress in the matter.

The 1st Appellant’s response was to ask Fausedeen to bring in Shiyam to some

point and thereby facilitate his men to ‘arrest’ him. He further directed

Krishantha to come to his office on the flowing day to discuss the matter

further.

Krishantha thereafter met Fausedeen on his way home and after quoting

the 1st Appellant, requested him to bring along Shiyam to a halfway point.

Fausedeen agreed with that plan when Krishantha assured him that the 1st

Appellant will solve his problem with no consequences to follow and with the

deceased being returned to him. When Krishantha met the 1st Appellant at his

office, he was instructed by the DIG to go along with the two men he would

assign for the operation and to ‘bring’ Shiyam. This was conveyed to Fausedeen

by Krishantha.

That evening the 1st Appellant returned to his Nedimala residence with

Krishantha. He instructed Krishantha to go with the 2nd and 5th Appellants to

‘bring in’ the deceased. Just before leaving the 1st Appellant’s residence at

about 8.15 p.m., the 5th Appellant had a private discussion with the 1st

Appellant. Krishantha was told by the 1st Appellant that he had already given

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

38

instructions to the 5th Appellant and directed for him to go with them to ‘bring

in’ the deceased.

It is important to note that the repetitive use of the words ‘bring in’ (“

wrka jfrka”) used by the 1st Appellant, whenever Krishantha referred to the

instructions of the 1st Appellant. It had obviously created an impression in the

mind of Krishantha what the Senior DIG expected of him was to ‘bring in’

Shiyam to his Nedimala residence, after his “arrest” made by the two police

officers, who are assigned to go with him.

Fausedeen called Krishantha to find out where they were. Krishantha and

his party met Fausedeen who came with Shiyam in a white Honda Fit car at

some point along Balapokuna Road. Fausedeen had told a lie to Shiyam, that

Krishantha knew a place where a Rolex watch is available for sale for a low

price, and he would take them there, in order to convince the deceased to

come with him. Krishantha then joined Fausedeen. Shiyam drove his vehicle

following Krishantha’s instruction to a point in Kandewatta Road. Anuradha,

having already arrived at that point, as instructed by Krishantha, was waiting

with his two passengers, the 2nd the 5th Appellants, in his double cab expecting

the arrival of Krishantha and others. Upon seeing the double cab, Krishantha

told Shiyam to stop his car and lied that he stopped the car in order to speak to

the 1st Appellant, who was said to be in that double cab. Shiyam was initially

reluctant to meet the 1st Appellant as he knew the Senior DIG was angry with

him. Upon being informed that the 1st Appellant wants to talk to him, Shiyam

walked up to the cab, taking along with him the car keys but leaving his

phone behind.

After coming up to the double cab, the deceased bended down and put

his head into the vehicle, in order to speak to the passenger seated on the rear

seat. He did so very submissively while addressing the 1st Appellant as “ nqÿq

i¾”. As he peeped into the vehicle, Shiyam was pushed into the double cab by

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

39

the 5th Appellant, who too got into the vehicle after the deceased. Krishantha

also got into the double cab and while driving on, contacted the 1st Appellant

to inform him that they got Shiyam. When Krishantha checked up with the 5th

Appellant, in order to verify what he understood from the instructions given

by the 1st Appellant that after the abduction, the deceased was to be taken to

Nedimala residence was correct, he was told that they should head to Biyagama

instead and the 5th Appellant would follow the 1st Appellant’s instructions.

Along Pagoda Road, the 1st Appellant contacted Krishantha, where the latter

complained that, instead of coming to his residence, the 5th Appellant wants to

take the deceased to Biyagama. The 1st Appellant confirmed it was his

instructions to do so and directed Krishantha also to accompany them by

adding that he had already given instructions to the 5th Appellant as to what

should be done.

On their way to Biyagama, the deceased after realising the motive

behind his ‘abduction’ pleaded with Krishantha to take him to a lawyer, before

whom he would transfer all his machinery along with the entire stock of

footwear in lieu of his dues to Fausedeen. With this development, Krishantha

stopped the double cab and called the 1st Appellant and conveyed what the

deceased indicated. The 1st Appellant wanted to speak to the 5th Appellant

and gave some instructions, which Krishantha realised through the 2nd

Appellant, as they were instructed to return to Nedimala.

They reached Nedimala at about 10.00 p.m. and as the double cab

approached the gate, the 3rd, 4th and 6th Appellants came up to the vehicle

with a T 56 weapon and tried to get in. When Krishantha asked 5th Appellant

for the reason for them to join, he received a veiled threat indicating for him to

do what they say. Krishantha then got off from the cab and walked up to the 1st

Appellant and told him that the issue of recovery of money is now sorted out

and questioned what this set up was all about. The 1st Appellant directed

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

40

Krishantha to go with his team and when he refused, demanded to provide a

van. Krishantha, having realised from the way the 1st Appellant and others

behaved towards him, that the situation is well beyond his control, agreed to

provide a van, but wanted to keep away from the happenings.

Krishantha travelled with the others in two vehicles, and after switching

vehicles they stopped after passing Kaduwala bridge on Biyagama Road. When

Krishantha came up to the double cab, the 5th Appellant got down with the T56

weapon. He instructed Krishantha and Anuradha to go back but not to talk

about this incident (“ls%Idka; uy;a;h oeka Thf.d,a, hkak" yenehs fï .ek lgla

fyd,a,kak tmd”). Krishantha realised that the 2nd to 6th Appellants were about to

do some cruel act to Shiyam and was told that they were to follow the 1st

Appellant’s “orders”.

The van proceeded on with the deceased. Krishantha and Anuradha

returned to Colombo in the double cab. On their way to Colombo and were

nearing Kotte, the 5th Appellant called Krishantha to convey a message “ls%Idka;

uy;a;h wms uQj bjrhla lrkj" jEka tl fyg Wfoag weú,a, wrka hkak” . The 5th

Appellant then informed Krishantha that the 6th Appellant wants to speak to

him. The 6th Appellant requested Krishantha to initiate a conference call to his

father, the 1st Appellant. Once the call was initiated, the 6th Appellant wanted

to know from the 1st Appellant how to deal with the deceased. The reply of

the 1st Appellant was that he had already given necessary instructions to the

5th Appellant, who would do the “job” once they reach “his area”. Krishantha

once more asked the 1st Appellant for a reason why things happened in this

manner and was threatened to keep quiet. The 1st Appellant threateningly

reminded Krishantha of who he is.

During the journey towards Biyagama, Fausedeen called Krishantha to

find out the progress made on their plan to recover money from the deceased.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

41

Krishantha said he would call him later in the night and did call him only after

reaching home. It is important to reproduce the exact evidence of Krishantha,

that was presented to the trial Court regarding their conversation, which

appears in the transcript as follows.

m%(- fudkjo Tn iy *jqiaãka l;d lf,a tA weu;+fuka@

W(- *jqiaãkag uu lsõjd *jqiaãka wms ys;+fõ ke;s fohla fu;k

isoaO fjkak hkjd uu okafk keye uu fudllao lrkak ´fka lsh,d

uf.a TÆj msiaiq jf.a *jqiaãka lsh,d lsõjd’

m%(- *jqiaãka talg m%;spdrhla oelajQjdo@

W(- Tõ’

m%(- fudllao lsõfj@

W(- uf.ka weyqjd wehs ls%Idka; whshd Thd fudkjo lshkafka lsh,d uu lsõjd

*jqiaãkag *jqiaãka jdia,d Ishdïj urkak hkafka wmsg lg fyd,a,kak tmd

lsõjd fy,a¨fjd;a wmsg;a ta foau isoaO fjhs lsh,d lsõjd’

m%(- *jqiaãka thg hï m%;spdrhla oelajQjdo@

W(- Tõ’

m%(- fudllao Tyq olajmq m%;spdrh@

W(- *jqiaãka uf.ka weyeõjd fudllao ls%Idka; whshd fï fjkak

hkafka wms fokaku wkjYH foalg fkao megÆfka lsh,’

m%(- Tn thg ms<s;=rla ÿkako@

W(- uu ms<s;=rla ÿkakd’

m%(- fudllao Tn lsõfj@

W(- uu *jqiaãkag lsõjd tal ;uhs *jqiaãka fïl wkjYH fohla

wmsg oeka fïflka wms kslï m%YaK j,g kslï megf,kak ;uhs

hkafka’

m%(- fldÉpr ú;r fj,djla Tn;a *jqiaãkq;a Th wdldrhg l;d

l,do@

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

42

W(- ug ta .ek lshkak wudrehs’ fï úiai;r ál ;uhs wms l;d

lf,a’

It is natural to expect from a person, who gives evidence under a

conditional pardon, to make an attempt to distance himself as much as

possible from the perpetrators of the crime along with whom, he too could

have been charged. This being the natural tendency of a person, the Courts, in

assessing such evidence were mindful of this aspect as reflected in many a

judicial pronouncement. In this instance too, both Fausedeen and Krishantha

were introduced by the prosecution as ‘accomplices’ to the 1st to 6th

Appellants and their names were included in the body of the 1st and 2nd

counts to reflect that position. This decision was arrived at by the Attorney

General, upon consideration of the material presented before him at the time

of exhibiting information in the High Court of the Republic. Thus, it is

prudent that their evidence be assessed with extra caution.

However, in the appeal before us, the High Court at Bar concluded that

both Fausedeen and Krishantha had no intention or knowledge that the

deceased would be put to death, which the 1st ,2nd and 6th Appellants

collectively challenge as an erroneous finding. The legal effect of the said

finding is both Fausedeen and Krishantha could not have been included in the

charges as co-accused along with the 1st to 6th Appellants and, more

importantly, due to this very reason the rules of evidence that are applicable

to accomplices are no longer applicable to them. As such, they ought to have

been treated as any other ordinary lay witness.

Perusal of the impugned judgment indicates that the High Court at Bar

not only assessed the testimonial trustworthiness of the evidence of Fausedeen

and Krishantha with a fine-tooth comb, but, in addition, it also looked for

corroboration of their evidence by independent sources. In a similar situation,

it was held in Anderson v Mutukaruppen Kangani (1899) 3 NLR 353 by

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

43

Withers J (at p. 355) that “ … an accomplice’s evidence was always open to the

gravest suspicion, not because he had participated in a crime, but because his

expectation of pardon depended on the accused's conviction. But it is not every

participation in a crime which stamps a man as an accomplice, so that his testimony

has to be confirmed.”

Since the Appellants, in respect of their individual grounds of appeal,

sought to challenge the assessment of the High Court at Bar on its assessment

of credibility of the two witnesses as well, this Court must examine the

reasons on which the lower Court had decided to accept their evidence as

credible for its validity, even though credibility of a witness, being a question

of fact, is best left to the original Court, which has a distinct advantage to

observe the demeanour and deportment of each witness, to decide. I intend to

undertake this task after this segment of the judgment that deal with the issue

of whether the two witnesses are accomplices is completed and, for now,

continue to deal with the question whether Krishantha had any intention or

knowledge that Siyam would be murdered.

The two prominent incidents, which I have referred to in the previous

section of this judgment are, in my view effectively negates any intention or

knowledge on the part of Krishantha to the murder of Shiyam, and therefore

should now be specified at this juncture and reasoned out. The first of the two

is Krishantha’s conduct immediately after Shiyam indicated his willingness to

pay up what he owed to Fausedeen. The second incident is Krishantha’s

conduct over the response of the 1st Appellant, after he returned to Nedimala

with the deceased after he agreed to pay up.

After the failed attempt at Sarankara Road to take in the deceased, the

1st Appellant directed Fausedeen and Krishantha that they need to handover

the deceased to his team. Krishantha passed that task on to Fausedeen. Up until

the deceased was taken into the double cab at Kandewatta, neither of them

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

44

knew exactly where they should head therefrom. Krishantha was under the

impression that after taking the deceased into their charge, they were to take

him before the 1st Appellant for his intervention to secure the recovery of

monies. This belief entertained by Krishantha is evident from the fact that he

invited Fausedeen to come with him in the double cab to see the 1st Appellant.

When the 5th Appellant, after taking in the deceased, said that his

instructions were to take the deceased to Biyagama instead of Nedimala, that

had surprised Krishantha. He immediately contacted the 1st Appellant for his

confirmation of that strange course of action. Then only Krishantha realised

that the Senior DIG had planned the operation differently to the way he

indicated it to him initially. It is relevant to note that when the 2nd and 5th

Appellants got into the double cab to take the deceased in, they did not carry

any firearms or, even if they had them concealed, did not use them at any

point of time to force the deceased to get into the vehicle or to subdue him

when he struggled with them. It is also relevant to note that neither of the 2nd

and 5th Appellants ever mentioned anything, giving an indication to

Krishantha as to what they had in their minds, involves the death of the

deceased, except to claim that they only act on their DIG’s instructions. Both

these Appellants were serving as police officers at that time. Krishantha knew

that the recovery process they were engaged in is without a formal complaint

being made to any law enforcement agency. However, it is highly probable

that he may have been under the impression that the actions of the two

Appellants were within their powers as police officers, as he had no indication

that the ‘abduction’ of the deceased would lead to his death.

The other significant incident that I wish to highlight is the conduct of

Krishantha after the deceased had agreed to transfer some of properties in

favour of Fausedeen in settlement of the monies he owed. The deceased

indicated his willingness to a compromise only after reaching Biyagama

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

45

junction. This was the end result both Krishantha and Fausedeen expected to

achieve through the persuasive power of the 1st Appellant. When the deceased

indicated his willingness to settle his dues, all Krishantha wanted from the 1st

Appellant was to cement that undertaking into a reality, as he would then be

released from his debt to Fausedeen. What is important to note from the

conduct of Krishantha is that, while being excited with the success of obtaining

deceased’s agreement on his own, he failed to realise that the deceased only

consented to transfer ownership of his machinery and stocks and not the most

valuable part of his assets, the factory and its premises at Saranakara Road. In

Fausedeen’s assessment it is the total of all these assets, including the factory

and its premises, machinery and stock, taken together would satisfy his

expectation of Rs. 50 Million. Krishantha lost sight of that important fact and

decided to return to the 1st Appellant’s residence after securing only a part of

the total dues.

This is a factor that undoubtedly supports the conclusion reached by

the High Court at Bar that Krishantha had no intention to kill the deceased, as

it shows that if he really entertained an intention to put the deceased to his

death, there was no reason at all for him to turn back after reaching Biyagama

junction and that too by first convincing the 1st Appellant. The only reason

that compelled Krishantha to turn back was the unexpected willingness of the

deceased to transfer some of his property. If not for that indication of

willingness, they could have simply proceeded on. If Krishantha intended the

death of the deceased with or without such an agreement on the part of the

deceased, all he had to do was to proceed as instructed, regardless of the

compromise offered by the latter.

After turning back from Biyagama junction and just before they almost

reached the 1st Appellant’s residence, there was a call from the 1st Appellant to

Krishantha verifying where they were. Krishantha replied that they will be

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

46

there in a two-or three-minutes time. When the double cab arrived at the gate

of the Nedimala residence, the 3rd, 4th and 6th Appellants were already waiting

there to get into the vehicle. The 3rd Appellant carried a T56 with him. When

the 5th Appellant directed Krishantha to do what he says hereafter in a stern

voice, the latter got alarmed and suspected that something sinister is about to

happen. With that thought he got down from the vehicle and walked into the

premises and met the 1st Appellant to clarify what was happening. Krishantha

questioned the 1st Appellant stating Shiyam was brought there to settle the

monies but what happens before him is not what he expected. The 1st

Appellant’s only response was directing Krishantha to accompany the team

which he refused. The 1st Appellant then ordered, “if you can’t go, give your

van”. Krishantha, being disturbed and worried with the manner in which the

1st Appellant and others had behaved towards him, replied that he would give

the van but would not participate in this affair any further.

Krishantha provided a van, after borrowing one from his brother, as

demanded by the 1st Appellant and travelled with the others up to Malabe

junction, where the team switched vehicles by bringing the deceased to the

van, being held from either side by 2nd and 3rd Appellants. The 5th Appellant

went somewhere in the double cab, now driven by Anuradha and directed the

van to come towards Kaduwela and from there to Biyagama. The purpose of

the 5th Appellant’s travel was to buy a coil of rope and some cigarettes as

Anuradha stated in his evidence. At some point they stopped and the 5th

Appellant, after alighting from the cab with the T56 weapon, instructed

Krishantha to return home with Anuradha and to keep silent. Krishantha

meekly complied.

On their way back and nearing Kotte, Krishantha received a call from the

5th Appellant, to inform the former to collect the van on the following morning

and for the first time indicated their intentions. The 5th Appellant said “wms uQj

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

47

bjrhla lrkj"”. What the 5th Appellant said was once more confirmed by the

1st Appellant, who conversed with the 6th Appellant, through a conference call

initiated by Krishantha by using his smart phone, which enabled him to hear

their conversation.

In view of this evidence, it is clear that when they reached Nedimala for

the second time with the deceased, Krishantha realised for near certainty that

the 1st Appellant had not attached any significance to the recovery of the

monies due to Fausedeen from the deceased but was determined to achieve

something else. This is clear from the consideration of the fact that the 1st

Appellant knew Krishantha was coming to meet him with the deceased at his

residence shortly, but instead of personally intervening in the matter, had

prepared a party of the 3rd, 4th and 5th Appellants with a T56 rifle, ready to

receive them and thereafter to take the control over the deceased, and to

transport him once more to Biyagama.

Krishantha decidedly indicated his protest by informing the 1st

Appellant that he cannot participate any longer in this transaction and in

order to mitigate for his personal participation agreed to provide a van, as

demanded. However, he did follow the double cab carrying the deceased,

until he was told to return home, empty handed and without any solution to

the problem of recovering Fausedeen’s dues.

Why the High Court at Bar approached the question of accomplices, by

considering the different roles played by Fausedeen and Krishantha in this

whole transaction, could be understood by examining the reasoning it had

adopted. The Court concluded that (at p. 798 of the judgment) even though

both ‘accomplices’ (Fausedeen and Krishantha) had a hand in the conspiracy to

the ‘abduction’ of the deceased, they clearly had no intention to cause the

death of the deceased. The Court further concluded that it was the 1st to 6th

Appellants who conspired to commit murder of the deceased. This specific

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

48

finding of fact by the trial Court in respect of these two witnesses was

necessitated due to the reason that in the information as well as in the charge,

Fausedeen and Krishantha were included in the 1st and 2nd counts with the

accusation of conspiring with 1st to 6th Appellants to commit murder of the

deceased and abducting the deceased in order that he may be murdered or be

so disposed of as to be put in danger of being murdered. Since Fausedeen and

Krishantha were charged along with the Appellants in the same charge sheet,

the prosecution proceeded on the footing that both of them had the attributes

of an accomplice, in view of the pronouncement in Chetumal Rekumal v

Emperor (supra) that “[A]n accomplice is one who is a guilty associate in crime or

who sustains such a relation to the criminal act that he could be charged jointly with

the accused.”

Learned Addl. Solicitor General, defended the said finding of fact by

the High Court at Bar during her submissions in reply before us, despite the

fact that Fausedeen and Krishantha have given evidence as ‘accomplices’.

Learned President’s Counsel submitted that the de-classification of the two

witnesses at the appeal stage from their original status of accomplices to be

mere lay witnesses, would be “ pulling the rug, from under the Accused’s feet and

change the entire set of evidentiary rules ex ipso facto”. This complaint, according

to the learned Counsel, arises on the premise that the Appellants are “ entitled

to the rules of evidence and safeguards and exceptions which come with the State’s

position before the Judgment, they will be judged in appeal under a different set of

rules.” In further elaborating the prejudice caused by adopting such a change

in its approach by the State, learned President’s Counsel submitted that

throughout the course of the trial, the Appellants were led into the belief by

the State that they are entitled to rely on the law relating to the evidence of

accomplices, which justifying them in insisting on the need for corroboration

in regard to the evidence led at the trial.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

49

With due respect to the learned President’s Counsel, I am unable agree

with his submissions on this aspect. He himself conceded that it was for the

trial Court to determine whether a particular witness is an accomplice or not

upon the material presented before that Court. That being the case, the said

question of fact would be decided by a trial Court only after all the evidence

for the prosecution and defence were led before it and also after the closing

addresses by the respective Counsel. The prejudice complained of, being

different application of evidentiary rules at trial and appeal stages, does not

arise as, by then, the defence had already concluded its case on the basis that

the two witnesses are accomplices, with the full knowledge that it is a fact that

the Court would be considered and decided only at the concluding stages of

the trial.

If the accused failed to utilise his right to cross examine the witnesses

for the prosecution on the inference that the initial tag attached to a witness as

an accomplice would remain with him permanently, and if the trial Court

concluded otherwise, the responsibility for his failure to present his case

effectively before the trial Court would naturally be attributable to that

accused, as he had obviously taken a serious risk, rather recklessly.

The reliance placed on the admitted animosity between the deceased

and the two witnesses in varying degrees should also take note in the present

context. Clearly the relationship between Fausedeen and the deceased had

suffered a blow when the latter had issued veiled threats, whenever the

former brought up the topic of returning his share of investment from their

partnership. The threat of disclosing Fausedeen’s relationship with another

woman to his wife does not itself create a strong motive to eliminate the

deceased. In fact, Fausedeen had considered the options that are available to

him if such an eventuality presented itself.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

50

During cross examination, he said that he could marry that woman to

be his second wife, as the personal law applicable to him did permit such a

course of action. With this option available, it is almost an improbability that

Fausedeen would opt to lose all hope of getting his substantial investment

back, should he decide to take the life of the deceased. The situation is

somewhat different with Krishantha’s involvement as he had to undergo a

financial crisis and an embarrassment over the incident happened in China, to

which the deceased is directly responsible. In addition, Krishantha had

vouched to take revenge for what happened. It could well be, as the

Appellants contend, that Krishantha was waiting for an opportunity to strike

back at the deceased and when Fausedeen presented his tale of woe, it is

highly probable that Krishantha would have considered that as an

opportunity that had presented itself to even out the humiliation.

But did he intend to take the life of Shiyam over the incident in China ?

The preceding section of this judgment has dealt with this aspect and

having viewed the evidence, I have reached a conclusion on this question in

the negative. In this part of the judgment, I intend to consider that evidence in

yet another angle to find an answer to the said question.

Krishantha admittedly had a serious grievance with the deceased. At

the same time, Krishantha found himself in another predicament, namely, to

find sufficient funds to return Rs. 18.5 Million back to Fausedeen, who

indicated that he needed that money as a part of his capital to another

business venture he wishes to pursue. When Fausedeen’s request for his

intervention to get at least Rs. 30 Million from the deceased, Krishantha

readily agreed to speak to this friend, the 1st Appellant. What motivated

Krishantha to spring into action immediately was Fausedeen’s willingness to

write off his debt of Rs. 18.5 Million, only if he could secure the repayment of

his entire investment of Rs. 50 Million from the deceased. Even if Krishantha

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

51

entertained an intention to ‘punish’ the deceased with death, instead of

plotting for his murder, he is now presented with an opportunity to make the

deceased lose his main business in its entirety and at the same time to write

off his debt of Rs. 18.5 Million with Fausedeen.

This is because, as the evidence indicates, after the Tsunami, the

deceased was financially down to the extent that he could not even afford to

buy milk powder for his child. Being sympathetic to his plight, Fausedeen

agreed to provide capital for a shoe manufacturing business on profit sharing

basis with the deceased. Thus, it is clear that the only substantial asset the

deceased had, apart from his apartment and vehicles, was the factory and its

stock in trade. If that asset is taken away from the deceased, whilst erasing a

substantial debt owed to Fausedeen in the same process and at the same time,

Krishantha could achieve a significant victory at the expense of the deceased.

The recovery of money through the intervention of the 1st Appellant

guaranteed that there would be no legal consequences. Thus, it is highly

probable Krishantha would opt for this option, rather than trying the other

option, which would undoubtedly entail very serious consequences.

Thus far in this segment, I have dealt only with the factual aspect of the

impugned finding of the trial Court on the status of accomplices. It is

important to test such factual findings against the applicable legal principles

that had already been laid down and applied by this Court.

The judgment of The King v Loku Nona and Others (1907) 11 NLR 4, is

in relation to an appeal by which the appellants challenged their conviction

for murder of one Carlina. The evidence was Carlina, Jane and Kaitan were

employed by Loku Nona as domestic servants, and after Carlina made a

derogatory remark to Punchi Nona, a sister of Loku Nona, over the paternity of

a child, Loku Nona was naturally enraged. Carlina was killed by cutting her

throat and her body was dumped in the sea. Jane, who saw the killing was the

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

52

witness for the prosecution. During the incident, Loku Nona ordered Jane to

bring a knife, and when she did and handed it over to Loku Nona, who then

passed it on to Punchi Nona, who slit Carlina’s throat with it.

In the course of the trial for committing the murder of Carlina, which

was held before a jury, it became necessary to determine the question

whether Jane is an accomplice to the said murder. In determining the appeal,

Hutchinson CJ held thus (at p. 11),

“[I]t was for the jury to decide whether or not Jane was an accomplice. If

they believed the whole of her story, they must of necessity find that she

was not an accomplice; for the case says that Jane stated that she was so

afraid and confused that she did not think of the use to which the knife

was to be put, and that, if she had known that it was to be applied to

Carlina, she would not have brought it. If, however, they disbelieve that

part of her evidence, and believe the rest of it, they might find that she

was an accomplice.”

The principle on which the said pronouncement was made by

Hutchinson CJ, is applicable to the instant appeal in relation to Fausedeen and

Krishantha in full force. The distinguishing feature that made Jane, an

accomplice to the murder or not, was dependent on her intention she said to

have entertained in her mind when she brought in the knife, following an

order of her mistress Loku Nona. Jane said, she did not think of the use to

which the knife was to be put, and that, if she had known that it was to be

applied to Carlina, she would not have brought it. If the jury accepted her

evidence as credible, which they did, Jane could not be treated as “ an

accomplice” because she had neither an intention nor any knowledge that the

knife, she had brought into the crime scene, would be put to commit murder.

The reasoning I have adopted is also consistent with the determination

of the question of fact presented before Court in The King v Piyasena (1948)

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

53

49 NLR 389. The issue was whether witness Ranbanda is an accomplice to the

accused who shot the deceased. The evidence revealed Ranbanda came twice

over to the deceased’s house on the previous day to convey a message that

someone wants to see the deceased, and for him to come to the bund.

Podiappuhamy, who lives close to the deceased's house, said in evidence

that he saw the deceased with gunshot injuries on his abdomen. The deceased

told him that he went to the bund of the tank with Ran Banda, because he was

told that he was wanted by someone. The deceased also said when he was

returning, he was shot by the accused, and when he fell down, Ran Banda ran

away.

Ran Banda had offered a slightly different narrative and said that the

deceased came to his house at about midnight and called him to go and bring

something. Both of them went into the jungle, and the deceased was looking

for someone whom he expected to meet there. That person was not to be

found and they proceeded along the bund of the tank. He then noticed the

figure of a man about 100 feet in front of him. It was the accused. The

deceased went towards him followed by Ran Banda. When they got close to

the accused, he fired a shot, which struck Dingiri Banda. Dingiri Banda fell

down saying that he was shot by the accused.

In appeal, delivering the judgment of the Court of Criminal Appeal,

Jayetileke J was of the view that (at p. 393) “ If they believed the whole of Ran

Banda's evidence, they must necessarily have found that he was not an accomplice. If,

on the other hand, they believed that he knew that the accused intended to shoot the

deceased, and that he took the deceased out that night, at the request of the accused, on

a false pretence, they might have found that he was an accomplice.” What must be

emphasised here is the knowledge, on the part of Ran Banda, that the accused

intended to shoot the deceased, was the determinant factor in the

determination of the factual issue of whether he is an accomplice or not.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

54

Similarly, when Fausedeen agreed to bring in Shiyam to be handed over

to Krishantha, who would then take him to the 1st Appellant to compel to pay

up his dues to Fausedeen, had no intention or knowledge that the deceased

would be put to death. Krishantha, who acted as the middleman to the whole

transaction ending with the ‘abduction’, was only interested to get him

released from his Rs. 18.5 Million obligations to Fausedeen, while enjoying the

sweet taste of revenge for what the deceased did to him by betraying his

presence in China to Lee. These factors would undoubtedly negate any

probability of entertaining an intention or knowledge of taking the deceased’s

life on the part of Krishantha. It thereby reduces the Appellant’s contention

that both witnesses intended the death of the deceased to a mere proposition.

The 1st count, as well as the 2nd count alleged that the accused

were engaged in conspiracy to commit murder and abducting the deceased in

order that he may be murdered or be so disposed of as to be put in danger of

being murdered respectively. It is incumbent on the prosecution to prove to

the required degree of proof that Fausedeen and Krishantha acted with the

requisite mental element in committing these two offences for them to be

accomplices. This is because the accomplice had to be “ … a person who could

have been directly or indirectly concerned in or privy to the offence under inquiry” as

stated in Ajit Fernando and Others v The Attorney General (supra)) 1 Sri L.R.

288 (at p.303). The requirement that an accomplice should be “privy to the

offence under inquiry” must be emphasised in this regard. In relation to the 1st

count the prosecution was to establish that the actions of Fausedeen and

Krishantha indicate that they shared an intention to conspire to commit

murder. The prosecution was also under a duty to place evidence to establish

that the two witnesses had an agreement with others to commit the death of

the deceased.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

55

The offence of abduction, as described in count 2, is an offence coupled

with aggravation of liability on account of a specific intent, i.e. death of the

deceased. Accordingly, it was for the prosecution to establish that the two

witnesses had the intention or knowledge that the abduction of the deceased

was for the purpose of murder or to put him in danger of being murdered and

therefore are accomplices to the Appellants. Hence, in order to convict

Fausedeen and Krishantha on these two charges, the prosecution must prove

beyond reasonable doubt that either of them had participated in the

conspiracy and the abduction with the requisite intention to commit those two

specific offences, and not any other offence.

It is clear from the evidence that the manner in which Fausedeen and

Krishantha acted, in order to achieve their own objectives, is most

reprehensible and should be condemned as they violate basic social norms of

a civilised society. Their actions do not conform to the actions of a reasonable

human being who is conscious of his civic duties. Learned President’s

Counsel, in order to impress upon us of the culpability of the two

‘accomplices’ strongly commented on their repeated acts which he termed as

“acts of treachery”. Fausedeen, after having prayed with the deceased in the

mosque, lured the latter to visit Kandewatta Road with him on the pretext of

availability of a Rolex watch for low price. This he did with the concealed

intention of handing the deceased over to the 1st Appellant’s men, who would

“arrest” him (“w;a wvx.=jg .kak”). When the deceased’s wife became worried

about her husband, who failed to return home for the evening, Fausedeen lied

to her as to whereabouts of her husband, joined the search party that night

pretending to be innocent of what had taken place. In the following morning,

with the full knowledge that the deceased had already been killed in the same

night, he made a false complaint to Bambalapitiya police that the deceased

went missing after meeting him in the previous evening.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

56

On the part of Krishantha, when Fausedeen sought his help to recover his

investment from the deceased, he used that opportunity to entice Fausedeen to

agree to erase his debts, by passing that burden on to the deceased by

ensuring that the deceased to pay the entire capital of Rs. 50 Million. Whilst

achieving his objective of taking revenge from the deceased for the role he

played in relation to the incident in China, Krishantha cunningly utilised the

opportunity to settle what he owed to Fausedeen from the deceased’s assets.

All these actions certainly deserve unreserved condemnation. But a Court of

law cannot make its judgment by applying a set of moral or ethical standards

to assess the actions of the two witnesses. In this context, I wish to insert a

quotation from the text of Principles of Criminal Liability in Ceylon by Prof

Peiris (at p.70);

“[W]hile the link between mens rea and morality is clear, in that moral

blame is treated as an element of criminality, mens rea is not

synonymous with morality. The postulates of criminal law, expressed in

relation to the mental element of an offence, do not give effect to

ordinary moral conceptions in any degree of detail. Indeed, it is

manifestly unsatisfactory that legal guilt should depend exclusively on

moral ideas because of the wide range of attitudes which are prevalent in

regard to moral issues. It is important that the criminal law should be

clear and certain in content.”

The 1st and 2nd charges are for conspiracy to commit murder and

abduction with a view to commit murder. Thus, in the absence of evidence to

establish that Fausedeen and Krishantha are accomplices, they could not be

considered as such on an application of moral standards. Even if Krishantha,

having agreed to commit murder with his co-conspirators, at a later point

withdrawn from participating any further in that conspiracy at Nedimala

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

57

(after the 3rd, 4th and 6th Appellants joined him and others), his initial

agreement to ‘abduct’ alone would not make him an accomplice.

In the case of Gunawardene v The King (1950) 52 NLR 142, it was held

that (at p.144) a guilty associate in a conspiracy to cause the death of someone

cannot divest himself of the character of an accomplice merely because he

refrained thereafter from participating in the murder which had already been

planned. In this instance of course, there is no evidence to prove that

Krishantha did agree with others in conspiracy to murder the deceased in the

first place and therefore, his act of protest by asserting that he no longer

wishes to participate in this affair, should accrue to his advantage when the

question, whether he is an accomplice or not, is to be decided.

However, it must not be overlooked that a person, who could not be

considered as a co- accused to the offence with which the perpetrator of the

crime is charged, could still be considered as an accomplice if the offence he is

involved in could be accepted as a lessor of kindred offence to the offence,

with which the main perpetrator is charged. Soza J, in Attorney General v

Seneviratne (1982) 1 Sri L.R. 302, stated that (at p.329), “[T]here may be occasions

when an accomplice though a particeps criminis cannot be charged with the same

offence. His guilty participation may not go far enough for this. Further it does often

occur that an accused person though charged with a particular offence is found guilty

only of a lesser or kindred offence. More properly therefore an accomplice is a guilty

associate whether as perpetrator or inciter or helper in the commission of the criminal

acts constituting the offence charged or a lesser or kindred offence of which the accused

could be found guilty on the same indictment.”

Learned Addl. SG rightly contended, that the evidence presented before

the High Court at Bar only indicated that Fausedeen and Krishantha were only

involved in the ‘abduction’ simpliciter of the deceased and therefore their acts

do not constitute a kindred offence, with which both of them could have been

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

58

charged in the same indictment. This is due to the reason that there is no

offence of ‘abduction’ simpliciter defined in the Penal Code as a punishable

offence.

In the absence of any evidence to indicate that Fausedeen and Krishantha

had any intention to commit murder, the allegations contained in the 1st and

2nd counts could not be maintained against Fausedeen and Krishantha. I

therefore concur with the said finding of fact made by the High Court at Bar

in relation to the ‘accomplices’ Fausedeen and Krishantha, upon the reasons

that were adverted to in the preceding paragraphs of this judgment.

It was also urged before this Court that not only Fausedeen and

Krishantha, but Anuradha too should have been considered as an accomplice

by the High Court at Bar, particularly in view of his own admission. Anuradha

admitted that he realised that the deceased was taken in and being

transported against his will. The Court found, in relation to Anuradha’s

complicity in the ‘abduction’, that he had no knowledge of what would

happen to the deceased after taking him in at Kandewatta or as to the fate of

the deceased, after the 2nd to 6th Appellants took him under their control.

Court specifically found that in all the important discussions Krishantha had

with the 1st Appellant about the deceased, Anuradha had not participated.

Having noted that his evidence at certain point contradictory with Fausedeen

and Krishantha, the Court was of the view that there is no reason to reject the

same merely on that account.

It is also important to note that Anuradha was not even arrested by any

of the three different police units that successively investigated into this

incident, in spite of the fact that he was taken to obtain legal advice by the 1st

Appellant before the latter’s arrest. Anuradha did not give evidence under a

conditional pardon, nor a reference was made in any of the charges in the

information or charge sheet to him. The admission he made was that he

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

59

realised that Shiyam was forcefully ‘abducted’ without his consent and that he

drove the vehicle on, in which the deceased was taken to Biyagama, regardless

of that realisation.

I am in agreement with what the High Court at Bar eventually found,

namely, that the evidence presented before it clearly revealed that Anuradha

was not involved with any of the discussions during which the ‘abduction’ of

the deceased was taken up and the fact that he drove on with the ‘abducted’

deceased, itself would not make him having attributes of as an accomplice

either to the conspiracy to murder or to the abduction to commit murder.

My reasoning derives support from a pronouncement made by a

divisional Bench of this Court in Kumarasiri and Others v Kumarihami, Chief

Registrar, Colombo, and another ( SC TAB Appeal No. 2/2012 - decided on

02.04.2014). In that judgment, having inserted a quotation from the judgment

of Emperor v Burns (11 BLR 1153), which stated “ [N]o man ought to be treated

as an accomplice on mere suspicion unless he confesses that he had a conscious mind

in the crime, or he makes an admission of facts showing that he had such hand. If the

evidence of a witness falls short of these tests, he is not an accomplice and his

testimony must be judged on principles applicable to an ordinary witness”, and this

Court was of the view that therefore the “ … definition of an accomplice in Sri

Lankan law, as accepted by Courts clearly indicates that an accomplice must

demonstrate common intent and knowingly unite with the principal offender to

commit the crime but excludes the mere presence of a witness in the vicinity of the

scene from coming within this definition.”

Before I part with this section of the judgment, it its necessary to refer to

another contention advanced on behalf of the 1st and 6th Appellants. The said

contention was to the effect that, since the 1st and 2nd counts read that the 1st to

6th Appellants have conspired to murder and to abduct in order to murder

“with” Fausedeen and Krishantha and in view of the finding made by the High

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

60

Court at Bar that they are not accomplices, those two charges must fail as they

remained without being amended.

Learned Addl. SG’s submission on this point was the prosecution had

no opportunity to make any amendments to the charges after the Court

delivered its verdict and when it decided that Fausedeen and Krishantha are

not accomplices, there was no provision to make amendments to reflect that

finding.

The contention advanced by the 1st and 6th Appellants in this regard

cannot succeed for the reason that if it reflects the correct position, then in a

charge of a conspiracy, if the Court found that the evidence against one of the

co-conspirators is insufficient to enter a conviction against him for that charge

or it entertains a reasonable doubt as to his participation in the conspiracy,

then all the accused who are charged along with him to the said conspiracy

must necessarily be acquitted. I am afraid this is not the law. As long as there

is evidence of conspiracy between two of the many accused, still the Court

could proceed to convict those two for conspiracy, even though it had

acquitted others. Similarly, if the accused are charged for an offence on the

basis of common intention, in conjunction with Section 32 of the Penal Code,

and if one or more of the accused are acquitted for want of common intention

shared with others for that offence, even one of the accused could be

convicted. Hence, I find no merit in that contention and proceed to reject the

same.

After stressing the point that the High Court at Bar erred in its failure to

consider Fausedeen and Krishantha as accomplices, learned President’s

Counsel further contended that the Court also failed to evaluate the

testimonial trustworthiness of these two witnesses, in view of judicial

pronouncements, which laid down following principles in relation to

evaluation of the evidence of accomplices.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

61

(a) an accomplice’s evidence must be reliable,

(b) it must adequately be corroborated,

(c) the corroboration must come from an independent source

and not from another accomplice,

(d) the corroborative evidence must link the accused to the

crime.

The reason for making reference of these principles in relation to

accomplice’s evidence by the learned Counsel was to invite attention of this

Court to a quotation from Sarkar, Law of Evidence, 19th Ed., p.2830, where the

rationale behind those principles were explained.

“[A]n approver is most unworthy friend, if at all, and he, having

bargained for his immunity, must prove his worthiness for credibility.

The testimony of a man of the very lowest character who has thrown to

the wolves his erstwhile associates and friends in order to save his own

skin and who is a criminal and has purchased his liberty by betrayal,

must be received with great caution … the principal reasons for holding

accomplice’s evidence untrustworthy are:

(1) because an accomplice is likely to swear falsely in order to

shift the guilt from himself,

(2) because an accomplice being a participator in crime, and

consequently an immoral person, is likely to disregard the

sanction of an oath,

(3) because an accomplice gives his evidence under the promise of

a pardon, or in the expectation of an implied pardon; if he

discloses all he knows against those with whom he acted

criminally, and this hope would lead him to favour the

Prosecution.”

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

62

Learned Counsel placed heavy reliance on a passage, reproduced below

from A Commentary on the Ceylon Criminal Procedure Code by Reginald F.

Dias, Vol II, at p. 723, in order to impress upon this Court that the evidence of

accomplices should not be relied or acted upon for the reason such evidence is

essentially tainted with an obvious act of treachery and therefore lacks any

credibility.

“[O]ne class of accomplice evidence is that given by ‘approvers’ or

persons who have turned ‘King’s evidence’ i.e. accomplices who have

received a conditional pardon from the Crown on the understanding

that they are to tell all they know about the crime in question … Such

an accomplice, when called, does not cease to be an accomplice; in fact,

he is one of the worst types of accomplices that can be imagined, for he

gives his evidence in the hope of saving himself at the expense of the

lives or liberty of his companions in crime. The fact that he gives his

evidence under the shadow of a pardon counts for nothing for no pardon

can restore his respectability or his credit.

He cited the judgment of The Queen v. Liyanage and Others (1965) 67

NLR 193, where it was held “ in the case of fellow conspirators or accomplices the

established practice, virtually equivalent to a rule of law, requires independent

corroboration of their evidence, in material particulars. What is required is some

additional evidence, direct or circumstantial, rendering it probable that the

accomplice’s story is true and reasonable safe to act upon, and connecting or tending

to connect the particular defendant with the offence. The degree of suspicion attaching

to an accomplice’s evidence varies according to the extent and nature of his

complicity.” It was particularly urged before us by the learned Counsel that the

corroboration of such evidence is now “virtually equivalent to a rule of law”.

Learned Counsel thereupon contended that the entire body of evidence

that had been presented by the prosecution before the High Court at Bar,

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

63

particularly against the 1st Appellant, consists only of several incriminating

and prejudicial statements that are attributed to him by Fausedeen and

Krishantha, totalling to 54 of such statements. In view of the requirement of

corroboration of their evidence, it was contended that none of these

statements could be relied upon for the reason that the two accomplices

cannot corroborate each other’s evidence, an important factor the High Court

at Bar had failed to take into account in coming to a conclusion against the 1st

Appellant. Similarly, that Court had fallen into serious error once more when

it considered phone records as items of corroborative material which adds to

the credibility of the already tainted evidence of Fausedeen and Krishantha.

In relation to the assessment of credibility of the evidence given by

Fausedeen, Krishantha and Anuradha, learned President’s Counsel submitted

that the manner in which their evidence ought to have been assessed was

considered in the judgment of The Queen v Liyanage and Others (supra). He

invited attention of Court that the said approach is a deviation from the

English practice of looking for corroboration of accomplice’s evidence, if only

it is accepted as truthful and reliable account in the first place, and thereby in

effect adopting a two-tier approach per Director of Public Prosecutions v

Hestor (1972) 3 WLR 910. In The Queen v Liyanage and Others (supra), the

Court stated (at p.214) “… it is wrong … to treat the evidence of an accomplice and

the corroborating pieces of evidence in two different compartments. In other words,

the reliability of the accomplice's evidence should not be judged apart from the

evidence led to corroborate him.”

In order to arrive at a finding that neither Fausedeen nor Krishantha had

any knowledge or intention to kill the deceased, the High Court at Bar had

assessed their testimonial trustworthiness on certain considerations which it

found to have enhanced their credibility while certain other considerations

provided independent corroboration, thereby following the said approach. In

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

64

the end of its assessment, the Court found that their evidence is credible and

reliable to act upon.

In view of the strong reliance placed by the learned President’s Counsel

on the above quoted sections from the texts of Sarkar, Law of Evidence and A

Commentary on the Ceylon Criminal Procedure Code by Reginald F. Dias,

where the authors have stressed the point that the credibility of the evidence

of an accomplice should be placed its lowest in strong language. Sarkar states

an accomplice “ … must prove his worthiness for credibility”, whereas Dias too

states “[T]he fact that he gives his evidence under the shadow of a pardon counts for

nothing for no pardon can restore his respectability or his credit.” In addition to the

said statement, learned author once more emphasised the requirement of

corroboration of such an accomplice (at p. 728) as he states that “ … He is as a

rule most untrustworthy witness unless his evidence is corroborated by independent

testimony on some material particulars.” It seems that the underlying rationale

for these statements was the act of giving evidence on behalf of the

prosecution by an accomplice is an act of betrayal in the highest order. Sarkar

equated such an act to a situation akin to throwing his erstwhile associates

and friends to the wolves, in order to save his own skin.

Clearly the tendency to shift one’s criminality on to the others, in order

to save himself from punishment, could be taken as a natural tendency of a

person, when faced with the prospect of criminal prosecution. When it

concerns a capital offence, this aspect assumes a greater significance. Apart

from the assessment of evidence of such an individual by employing the

traditional tests of credibility for its trustworthiness and reliability, using

ethical considerations or moral values in order to condemn his act of giving

evidence seemed such statements were “ … incorporated in the English criminal

law in medieval times by schoolmen who were influenced not only by general moral

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

65

ideas but their familiarity with the ethical refinements of the Roman Law” (vide

Principles of Criminal Liability in Ceylon, Prof. G.L. Peiris, p.70).

When learned President’s Counsel for the 1st and 6th Appellants,

submitted that the High Court at Bar should have rejected and discarded the

evidence of Fausedeen and Krishantha, by placing heavy emphasis on Sarkar’s

statement “ “[A]n approver is most unworthy friend, if at all, and he, having

bargained for his immunity, must prove his worthiness for credibility. The testimony

of a man of the very lowest character who has thrown to the wolves his erstwhile

associates and friends in order to save his own skin and who is a criminal and has

purchased his liberty by betrayal, must be received with great caution”, his

submission seems to be moulded more on principles of morality rather than

on principles of law.

In criminal prosecutions, the Courts are bound to admit legally

admissible evidence, as sanctioned by the provisions of Evidence Ordinance,

in discharging its responsibility to determine the guilt or innocence of an

accused. Section 133 of the Evidence Ordinance states that an accomplice shall

be a competent witness against an accused person, and thereby legally

approved admissibility of his evidence, subject to other provisions of the said

Ordinance. Corresponding to the provisions of Section 133 of the Evidence

Ordinance, Section 256 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act permits the

Attorney General to grant conditional pardon to any person supposed to have

been directly or indirectly concerned in or privy to the offence under inquiry

for the purpose of obtaining his evidence.

When an accomplice gives evidence in a criminal proceeding as a

witness for the prosecution, especially under a conditional pardon, there

would be an attempt by the accused to discredit such a witness by trying to

exaggerate his involvement in the offending transaction. On the other hand,

the prosecution may, on behalf of its witness, attempt to portray him as a

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

66

victim of circumstances and thereby limiting his role in the commission of the

offence to a bare minimum, in order to justify its decision to offer conditional

pardon. Whilst being conscious of the competing interests of the prosecution

as well as of the accused, the Courts must also be cautious enough not to lose

sight of why such evidence is made admissible in the first place by enactment

of specific provisions of law, as a part of public policy. However, in the

assessment of that evidence, the safeguards that were developed over the

years by the Courts should be applied to mitigate the adverse impact on the

accused person.

In this regard, I intend to digress from the current considerations to

make a quick foray into the past practices of English Courts to trace the

origins of presenting evidence of accomplices in criminal trials against a co-

accused.

The policy considerations that were enacted into statutory provisions

and thereby legalising the admissibility of accomplice’s evidence was not a

result of an overnight decision but had evolved over past three centuries in

European societies. The State policy in offering a pardon to an accomplice was

founded upon the recognition of the more pressing need to punish offenders

who otherwise would be left unpunished for their crimes and continue to be

in the society posing a threat to its members. Interestingly, historical aspect of

these policy changes was considered in detail by Leon Radzinowicz, in his

work “A History of English Criminal Law and its Administration from 1750”

in Vol. 2, Chapter 2, under the title “Impunity for Accomplices” (at p. 33). It was

noted by the learned author, similar to the accepted practice that prevailed in

early 18th Century in France that thieves were needed to catch other thieves,

England too had adopted the same policy, and the Government, local

authorities, private companies, and even private individuals all offered

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

67

inducement to robbers, thieves, embezzlers, and murderers to betray their

accomplices.

Referring to the judgment of R v Rudd (1775) 1 Leach, 119, where

Mansfield CJ, following the prevalent common law practices, admitted an

accomplice as a witness for the Crown and made use of his evidence to

convict the others for a capital offence, learned author states (at p. 43), “… the

hope of receiving a free pardon or at least a more lenient punishment was held out to

any accomplice, who having made a full and fair confession …” was recognised by

English Courts. He further states (ibid) “ [T]his was based on the practice of the

Courts and amounted to the promise of a recommendation to mercy, not pardon by

right, and it was known as equitable title to the mercy of the Crown.”

Justification for the adoption of such a State policy was explained in R v

Turner and Others (1975) 61 Cr. App. R. 67, by stating “ If the inducement [ to

offer evidence] is very powerful, the judge may decide to exercise his discretion; but

doing so he must take into consideration all factors, including those affecting public. It

is in the interests of the public that criminals should be brought to justice; and the

more serious the crime the greater is the need for justice to be done.”

Indeed, the morality of the State in offering a pardon to an accomplice

and, not the morality of the accomplice in accepting such a pardon, was

considered by scholars as far back as early 18th Century. Referring to Samuel

March Phillips and to his “Treatise on the Law of Evidence”, Radzinowicz (supra)

states (at p. 54); “[P]hillips probably knew better than anyone else in England the

grave dangers inherent in this method of bringing offenders to justice …”. But “ …

their evidence must be used … in order to prevent [the] entire failure of justice in

those cases where without the aid of an accomplice’s testimony, offenders remain

undetected.” Thus, the public policy justification of this approach was

convincingly established. In view of Lord Ellenborough’s statement, which was

made during the trial of E.M. Despard for high treason in 1803, to the effect

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

68

that an accomplice’s evidence is to be received and acted upon with “an

attentive and scrupulous consideration of its merit and value”, Radzinowicz, noted

that (at p. 55) “[T]he practice of convicting an offender on the unsupported evidence

of an accomplice had been somewhat modified, and it was generally accepted that

confirmation of such testimony was necessary and that, unless it were corroborated in

a material part, the judge should advice the jury to acquit the prisoner.”

Accordingly, a pragmatic approach was adopted by Courts by insisting on

corroboration of an accomplice’s evidence in order to negate the inherent

dangers of placing total reliance on such a testimony to convict another co-

accomplice.

Since the introduction of statutory recognition of a formal offering a

pardon to an accomplice by Ordinance No. 15 of 1898 into the criminal justice

system of this country, it had since retained the said discretion, in spite of

many subsequent changes made to the law on criminal procedure.

Interestingly, the power to offer conditional pardon to an accomplice is also

included in the Constitution since 1972. Article 22(1) of 1972 Republican

Constitution and Article 34(3) of the 1978 Constitution contain such

provisions. The ordinary enactments such as the Administration of Justice

Law No. 44 of 1973 contained provisions governing conditional pardons in

Section 118(1) while Sections 256(1) and 257 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979, contained similar provisions to that of Section

283 the Ordinance No. 15 of 1898, which conferred power on the Attorney

General to tender a pardon, either directly by himself or through a

Magistrate.

Thus, irrespective of the moral propriety of offering a pardon to an

accomplice and him accepting such a pardon with the undertaking of making

a full and fair confession, the Courts, nonetheless should give effect to

intention of the Legislature in the enactment of these statutory provisions,

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

69

which lays down the applicable law. Dias, under the heading “Considerations

which should guide the Attorney General in the granting or withholding the pardon”

(supra – at p. 727) recommends that the Attorney General “ should consider the

degree of complicity of the accomplice” as there are “involuntary accomplices” who

acts as servants of the principal offender or under his coercion, along with

“accomplices by implication” i.e., a person who pays a bribe under pressure.

Importantly, the learned author stresses the point “ [W]here possible the pardon

should be tendered to the least guilty of the accomplices, with the object of securing the

conviction of the most guilty amongst their number.” This has been the case in

almost all such instances where the evidence of an accomplice is obtained

under a conditional pardon, as indicative from judicial precedents.

In fact, the scheme presented by Sections 256(1) and 257, in selecting the

person who would be offered a conditional pardon does reflect the said

considerations expressed by Dias, as these two Sections permit the Attorney

General to grant conditional pardon only to “ … any person supposed to have

been directly or indirectly concerned in” or importantly “privy to any such

offence…”.

In these circumstances, the contention of the 1st and 6th Appellants, that

the High Court at Bar should have refused to act upon the testimony of

Fausedeen and Krishantha by totally rejecting the same, could not be accepted

as a valid contention for two reasons.

First, having already granted a conditional pardon, the accomplice, who

turned himself to be a prosecution witness, is not prosecuted for the offence in

view of his pardon and, if the Courts were to reject his testimony simply on

the footing of him being an accomplice, it would result in the acquittal of the

main perpetrator of the crime as well, which would obviously be against the

public policy consideration which identified by Dias as “… the object of securing

the conviction of the most guilty amongst their number”.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

70

Secondly, over the past three centuries, the Courts have consciously and

effectively mitigated for most of the ill effects of an accomplice in testifying

against his partners in crime “… in the hope of saving himself at the expense of the

lives or liberty of his companions in crime”. Courts achieved this mitigation by

insisting on independent corroboration of his testimony. Statutory

recognition for necessity of corroboration of such evidence could be found

with the discretion conferred on Courts by Section 114(f) of the Evidence

Ordinance by which a Court may presume that an accomplice is unworthy of

credit unless he is corroborated in material particulars. Dias recommends that

(at p.723) “ … the necessity for corroboration, which is insisted upon in the case of

generally, applies with even greater force to the case of approver witness.”

Therefore, rejecting a testimony of an accomplice, who gave evidence

under a conditional pardon, solely on that basis, would undoubtedly make

the relevant statutory provisions contained in Sections 256(1) and 257 of the

Criminal Procedure Code Act and the jurisprudence that had built over a long

period of time obsolete and redundant. Adopting such an approach would

undoubtedly defeat the very purpose of enacting those statutory provisions,

which were retained in the Code of Criminal Procedure Act despite the

changes it had acquired over the years, for the reason that it was regarded as

an effective tool for the prosecution in the administration of criminal justice.

Returning to the point at which I have digressed from, the emphasis

laid on the need to corroboration of the evidence of an accomplice was

necessitated due to the presumed intention of such an accomplice ( as

observed by Dias) in offering himself as a witness for the prosecution i.e. to

accept the benefit of impunity from punishment offered along with it, the

level of corroboration needed is not a rigid and inflexible standard that could

universally be applicable to all situations.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

71

Coomaraswamy identified three categories of witnesses (at Vol. II, Book

2, p.625), i.e., those who are wholly reliable, those who are wholly unreliable

and those who are neither wholly reliable nor wholly unreliable.

Corroboration is required in relation to the evidence of those witnesses who

fall under the third category and is used as a cautionary rule, with statutory

recognition of that requirement.

In this perspective, the term corroboration is understood as facts, “ …

which tends to render more probable the truth of the testimony of a witness on any

material point” (vide Coomaraswamy, at Vol. II, Book 2, p.627). These facts

should come from someone other than the witness to be corroborated and

must arise out from an independent source and support direct testimony of

the accomplice, in material particulars to connect the accused to the crime.

R.F. Dias, under the heading “Considerations which should guide the

Attorney General in the granting or withholding the pardon” (supra – at p. 727)

recommends that the Attorney General “ should consider the degree of complicity

of the accomplice”. With the recognition of accomplices with multiple degrees

of complicity with the crime with which the main perpetrator is accused of, it

is reasonable to apply varying degrees of corroboration, in assessing their

testimonies for credibility and reliability. A similar observation was made by

Coomaraswamy ( Vol.2, Book I, p.365), “[T]he degree and gravity of the complicity

of the accomplice may vary. The degree of suspicion attaching to the evidence of an

accomplice varies according to the nature and the extent of accomplice’s complicity”

in view of a pronouncement to that effect made by the Privy Council in

Queen-Empress v Bastin (1897) AIR PC 135.

In The Queen v Liyanage and Others (supra), it was stated (at pgs. 212-

213) that the “ … nature and extent of corroboration required by the rule of prudence

must, from the very nature of things, vary with the circumstances of each case. What

is required is some additional evidence, direct or circumstantial, rendering it probable

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

72

that the accomplice’s evidence is true and reasonably safe to act upon, and connecting

or tending to connect the particular defendant with the offence.”

Thus, even if a witness is proved to be an accomplice, there is no static

or universal standard, that is applicable to the assessment of his evidence,

which sets out the degree to which such evidence should be corroborated. But

that standard, which commensurate with the degree of complicity of that

accomplice, is a factor, which in turn should depend on the facts and

circumstances of each case.

Learned President’s Counsel for the 1st and 6th Appellants,

despite presenting the contention that the evidence of Fausedeen and

Krishantha should have been totally rejected by the High Court at Bar, as it

failed the multiple tests in the assessment of credible evidence, also

contended that even if their evidence is accepted for some reason, the trial

Court should have insisted for independent corroboration of that evidence , as

it is a mandatory requirement in relation to assessment of an accomplice’s

evidence. Therefore, he complains that the trial Court had ignored that vital

aspect in arriving at the said erroneous determination to the detriment of the

two Appellants.

Learned President’s Counsel for the 1st and 6th Appellants, in extending

his contention further, submitted that the trial Court was wrong in accepting

phone records, as items of evidence that provide independent corroboration

of their evidence, particularly what they claimed to have spoken during those

calls. It was further contended by the Counsel that the evidence of Fausedeen

and Krishantha consists of 54 instances where they made gravely prejudicial

statements that are falsely attributed to the 1st and 6th Appellants, in relation to

one-to-one telephone conversations they had with the 1st Appellant. These 54

instances were highlighted by the 1st and 6th Appellants in Annexture I to their

written submissions. The complaint of the Appellants is that the Court had

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

73

simply narrated each and every one of such statements in its judgment on the

assumption that those statements were in fact made by the 1st and 6th

Appellants. Learned Counsel complained that these assumptions were made

by the trial Court without undertaking any analysis and without any

consideration whether the contents of such were corroborated individually.

In this regard, the 1st and 6th Appellant’s contention is whenever a tower

record shows that there has been contact between two phones, that factor

alone cannot be taken as corroboration of the content attributed to that call, as

the tower records do not contain details of call content.

The graph annexed to the written submissions (WS2) of the learned

President’s Counsel in order to impress upon this Court that the evidence

regarding the “conference call” during which the 1st, 5th and 6th Appellants

have conversed with Krishantha, is neither supported by the witness who gave

evidence on behalf of the service provider nor by the details retrieved from

tower records.

However, in assessing the credibility and reliability of the testimony of

these two witnesses, whom the Appellants contend as “accomplices”, the

necessity for the trial Court to have looked for corroboration of such

testimony as a rule, arises only if they were “accomplices” in the eyes of law.

Despite the finding made that the two witnesses had no intention or

knowledge that the deceased was to be murdered in that evening, the High

Court at Bar nonetheless was of the view that owing to the very nature of their

evidence, it is prudent to look for corroboration. In dealing with the issue of

assessing credibility of the lay witnesses who spoke of the circumstances

relating to the abduction and murder of the deceased, the trial Court had, in

its process of reasoning, considered some of these items of evidence as

evidence that enhances credibility of the witnesses while certain other

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

74

evidence was considered as items of evidence that tends to corroborate their

evidence in material particular.

Since this is the manner in which the Sri Lankan Courts consider the

evidence of an accomplice for its credibility, it is of importance to clarify a

particular submission made by learned President’s Counsel regarding

corroboration. It was submitted that none of those prejudicial statements that

were attributed to the 1st Appellant had been corroborated by independent

evidence, but the High Court at Bar was of the erroneous view that the call

records relating to each of these telephone conversations had corroborated the

contents of the two-way conversation that had taken place between the caller

and receiver during its duration.

It appears that the said contention carries two components within it.

While stressing for independent corroboration of call content, it also

emphasised that contents of each telephone conversation must have been

corroborated individually. This contention is obviously not a convincing one.

If this submission is accepted as a one that reflects the nature of corroboration

that is needed to assess credibility of a witness, the resultant position would

be that the prosecution is required to present independent evidence in respect

of each and every item of evidence its witnesses speak of in Court and thus

negates the necessity to lead evidence of that accomplice.

Coomaraswamy (Vol. II, Book 1, p.373) states in relation to the

requirement that it should connect the accused to the crime, that “ [T]he

corroboration need not be direct evidence that he committed the crime. It is sufficient

if it is merely circumstantial evidence of his connection with it. Nor it is necessary

that the accomplice should be confirmed in every detail of his evidence, if it were, the

evidence would be merely confirmatory of the independent testimony and would not

be essential to the case.” This statement echoes what has already been quoted

above in relation to the nature of corroboration from Coomaraswamy (supra)

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

75

that it means facts “ … which tends to tender more probable the truth of the

testimony of a witness on any material particular.” Thus, manner of application of

relevant principles by the High Court at Bar in the assessment of credibility of

Fausedeen and Krishantha could not be faulted.

Moving to consider the remaining part of the submissions, it is

important to note that, the several instances referred to by learned President’s

Counsel with the term ‘54 highly prejudicial statements attributed to the 1st

Appellant’, are in fact limited only to 5 such instances of conversations carried

out through phones. Remaining 49 instances are in relation to conversations

the 1st Appellant had with Krishantha and Fausedeen, which are person to

person conversations. After considering the five telephone conversations first,

these instances too will be dealt with.

It is relevant to note in this context that several admissions were

recorded under Section 420 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, including

the telephone numbers of the witnesses as well as the 1st to 6th Appellants.

Importantly, the details of calls initiated from these phones, the ones received

by them, duration of the conversation and location of the phone were also

tendered by the prosecution.

The first of the telephone conversations was in relation to a one

Krishantha had with the 1st Appellant. During this conversation, that had taken

place in the first week of April, the 1st Appellant had brushed aside the

suggestion to present Fausedeen’s problem to CID and instructed Krishantha to

come to his office to discuss over this matter. The complaint of the 1st

Appellant is that there was no corroboration of this item of evidence and the

High Court at Bar had merely made a repetition of the evidence without a

proper analysis. A perusal of the section in which this reference is made in the

judgment reveals that the High Court at Bar was merely making a reference to

the evidence of Krishantha, and thereby taking note of this item of evidence.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

76

The second instance refers to the demand made by the 1st Appellant

that he should be given Rs. 10 Million after he secures repayment of Rs. 50

Million. Complaint against this item of evidence of the Counsel is that, in spite

of the Admission No.123, where it was admitted Krishantha made no such

reference in his statement to CID, in the absence of any corroboration of that

evidence, the High Court at Bar simply accepted and repeated that evidence

without undertaking any analysis.

Contrary to the claim of the 1st Appellant, the High Court at Bar

considered Krishantha’s evidence on this point and, after having ascertained

the nature of the omission, it was of the considered view that the said

omission be attributed to the threats the witness had received compelling him

to supress the involvement of the 1st Appellant, while making statements.

Court found that his evidence over this meeting with the 1st Appellant was

confirmed by P7,P7A and P8.

Third telephone conversation is related to a call received by Krishantha

from the 1st Appellant. After the Kandewatta Road ‘abduction’, the 1st

Appellant, after verifying with Krishantha that they had taken the deceased in,

instructed him to proceed to Biyagama, as he had already given instructions to

the 5th Appellant regarding what is to be done with him. The Court was of the

view that the tower records confirmed the call between the two and accepted

the same as an independent corroboration of Krishantha’s evidence. The

complaint of the 1st Appellant against that finding is that there was no

independent corroboration of the contents of the call as the tower records

would only confirm the call and its duration. Despite Krishantha’s failure to

mention this fact to the Magistrate, the trial Court erroneously accepted that

evidence as a corroborated item of evidence.

The fourth conversation referred to a conference call involving

Krishantha the 1st,5th and 6th Appellants. The evidence as to the contents of this

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

77

call, if accepted as credible, indicate the complicity of the 1st , 5th and 6th

Appellants to the abduction and murder of the deceased. Since this call also

featured in the statements made from the dock by the 5th and 6th Appellants,

who offered an alternative content to the conversation attributed by the

prosecution to that call, in order to impugn their respective convictions, it is

intended to undertake a detailed consideration of this contention at the stage

where the grounds of appeal of the 5th and 6th Appellants are examined for its

merits.

Lastly, the contents of the call referred to as the 52nd item of Annexure

01 to the written submissions of the 1st and 6th Appellants indicate that the 1st

Appellant, using the 3rd Appellant’s phone, had checked up with Fausedeen,

whether he was able to arrange some cash for the 6th Appellant, for his tour in

Thailand. The Appellants contend that there was no corroboration to the

evidence regarding that it was the 1st Appellant, who spoke to Fausedeen, and

also to the claim that Fausedeen remitted cash in favour of the 6th Appellant,

consequent to that call.

Learned Addl. SG, submitted that the call contents could only be

obtained through a specific software, after recording such conversations by

one party or through the engagement of the practice known as

‘eavesdropping’, which is an act prohibited by law. It is her contention that a

total number of 19 telephone connections were used during the entire period

of conspiracy until its common purpose was achieved, and in view of the

totality of the evidence that had been presented before the High Court at Bar,

it had correctly held that the tower details generally corroborate the oral

testimony of the two witnesses as to the contents of the specific conversations.

The question whether the tower details of a telephone conversation

could corroborate the contents of a conversation attributed to that call arose

for consideration of this Court, in slightly a different perspective, in the High

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

78

Court at Bar appeal of The Attorney General v Potta Naufer and Others (2007)

2 Sri L.R. 144. In that appeal, this Court considered the evidence of a

prosecution witness, who was contacted by the 1st Appellant Potta Naufer,

through a number not registered under his name. The question of fact that

arose for determination by Court was whether it was the 1st Appellant, who in

fact initiated that call.

Having regard to the totality of the evidence presented before the High

Court at Bar, this Court held (at p. 176):

“[A]ccording to his evidence this witness had travelled to Hambantota

passing Suriyawewa and Ambalantota with one Sunil Gamage who had

arrived from Japan with his traditional dancing troupe. For this

purpose, the witness had borrowed a vehicle belonging to the 1st accused.

The witness stated that he was on his way back to Colombo when he

received a call from the 1st accused on 19.11.2004, at around 2.40 p.m.

while he was in Hanwella. The records produced by Mobitel Lanka Pvt.,

Ltd., and Celltel Lanka Pvt., Ltd. corroborates this statement of the

witness. The witness observed that the number 418 from which the call

was made was not the usual number used by the 1st accused, but states

that he could easily identify the voice of the 1st accused as they have been

in regular phone contact, and by virtue of their long-standing

friendship.”

In reaching that conclusion, this Court utilised evidence presented

before the trial Court through expert witnesses, who are academically and

professionally qualified in the fields of electronics and telecommunications

and therefore are capable of describing the manner of collection and

preservation of data regarding their customer communications and the

technology that facilitates identification of their respective locations of both

the caller and the receiver, based on technology. There was also evidence led

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

79

through these experts to the effect that every call made and received by a

mobile phone, passes through a mobile switching centre where its details are

recorded, which then analyses the number and determines whether the call is

meant for a particular subscriber within that network or any other network.

Information recorded in this mechanical process includes the calling

number, receiving number, duration of the call, identity of the tower or base

station, and the time and date of the call. It is this bundle of technical evidence

that had cumulative effect in the finding that the tower records corroborate

the oral evidence of that witness.

Similarly, in the appeal before us, the prosecution presented evidence

through the several expert witnesses on those aspects as referred to in the

preceding paragraph. In addition, the prosecution also led evidence of an

expert in network planning and mapping, Dhananjaya Ponnamperuma, through

whom it was elicited that even during the time LTTE terrorist movement was

active, they co-operated with the security establishment by making available

the maps indicating the geographical locations of a particular subscriber, who

used his mobile phone to initiate and receive calls.

Those technical evidence would undoubtedly indicate all the details of

the calls that were initiated and received, but as learned President’s Counsel

contended can that be extended to corroborate the contents of the

conversation?

Contents of a conversation that had taken place during a call is

obviously known only to the person who initiated the call and to the person

who received that call, excluding the instances where a conference call was

initiated between multiples subscribers or if the phone was put on speaker

mode, enabling others to hear a conversation. When a witness, having

described the relevant background, makes a disclosure of the content of what

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

80

he had conversed with a particular accused during that call, the acceptance of

that evidence as to the content, would depend on the testimonial

trustworthiness of that witness. When such a disclosure is made, the accused

person could either simply deny the content that had been attributed to him

or, in addition to the denial, could offer an alternative content, which the

Court would consider along with the evidence of that witness.

This is because, in a criminal trial the accused has the opportunity to

hear the exact words of the conversation that are attributed to him by a

prosecution witness, which tends to connect him to the counts contained in

the indictment. In the absence of an alternative content, a Court would only

have one version of the call content to deal with and, if that witness is found

to be credible and reliable, it could rely on that evidence in its reasoning to

determine guilt or innocence of the accused. Of course, it must be emphasised

here that there is no burden on an accused at all to offer an alternative content.

Similarly, it cannot be said that what the prosecution witness said is simply

accepted because there was no alternative content provided by an accused.

If the content of a telephone conversation, as spoken to by a witness, is

thereafter transformed into an action or inaction, consequent to that call or

traceable to that conversation, that fact would tend to corroborate the content

attributed to conversation with the accused. Thus, if the totality of the

surrounding circumstances tends to support the witness’s version of the

conversation, a Court could accept that particular content as an instance of

truthful disclosure.

If the act that A and B were engaged in a conversation was seen by C,

and if A denies the fact that he spoke to B on that occasion and thus becomes

a disputed fact, in order to establish that A and B were in a conversation, the

evidence of C could be relied upon by B to corroborate the fact that he

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

81

conversed with A. However, the complaint of the Appellant is that the tower

records alone cannot corroborate the disputed contents of a conversation.

In this context, it must be stated that the purpose of the call details

obtained from tower records are to substantiate the fact that a particular

subscriber is electronically connected to another subscriber in order to

facilitate communication between the two, over a particular duration of time

and, to that extent, the tower records can be accepted as corroborating that

fact. In the strictest sense, the question whether the technical evidence could

be extended to corroborate the contents of the conversation should be

answered in the negative. However, it must also be emphasised that in an

appropriate situation, surrounding circumstances that are indicative as to the

contents of a call, as referred to above, could well be taken along with

technical evidence as items of corroboration of call content.

In the five instances highlighted by the 1st and 6th Appellants, as

referred to in the preceding section, except for the conference and the calls

made by the 6th Appellant, there was no alternative content suggested by

them. In respect of the 1st and 2nd instances, during cross examination by the

1st Appellant, it was highlighted that Krishantha failed to mention to the

Magistrate that these demands were made. No alternative content was

suggested, although a suggestion of total denial was made. However, no cross

examination of the witness on the 3rd incident was made by the 1st Appellant.

Challenging the evidence of Krishantha on the fifth incident, the 1st Appellant

suggested that he never demanded any money for the 6th Appellant’s trip to

Thailand.

In view of the material elicited during examination in chief and cross

examination of Fausedeen and Krishantha by the 1st Appellant and others, the

High Court at Bar was inclined to accept their evidence as credible and

reliable. The 1st and 6th Appellants invited the attention of this Court that in

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

82

most of the remaining 49 out of the total of 54 instances, the witnesses failed to

state what they said in evidence either to the investigators or to the

Magistrate.

High Court at Bar was mindful of the several omissions that were

highlighted by the Appellants off the narrative of Fausedeen and Krishantha,

when it had undertaken the task of evaluating same for credibility. The Court

did consider these omissions, in the light of the answers given by the

witnesses, when these omissions were brought to their notice during cross

examination. Krishantha, upon being challenged with an omission from what

he stated before the Magistrate, replied that after having determined to tell the

truth, he had divulged what he thought was relevant to the Magistrate. He

further added that, unlike in the High Court, during his statement, there was

no questioning of the incident in detail. The Court considered the admitted

fact of the witnesses that they have either deliberately supressed material or

simply lied to the investigators, when they were being interrogated by the

CCD or CID, as they made these statements under threats.

In relation to the circumstances that were presented before the High

Court at Bar, there appears to be a reasonable assessment of credibility on the

specific omissions that were highlighted. Generally, the lay witnesses on

whose evidence the prosecution would rely on to prove the charges against

the accused are mainly the relatives, friends, or acquaintances of the victim of

crime. They would truthfully describe the incident and what they know of the

incident to the investigators on the first available opportunity when their

memories are fresh. They would then repeat that narrative during the non-

summary proceedings or in the High Court, to the best of their ability to

recollect the incident. They would vouch for the accuracy and truthfulness in

what they stated to police and to Court.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

83

The considerations that are generally applied for evaluation of evidence

of a witness in such a situation, might be proved ineffective especially when

the witnesses clearly admit that they supressed details and deliberately lied to

the investigators under compulsion. In the instant appeals, the admitted acts

of suppression of material are also attributed to the actions of the 1st

Appellant, who had issued death threats to dissuade them from disclosing the

truth. In such a situation, trier of facts will have to be alive to the ground

realities, whilst being extra cautious in the assessment of such evidence on his

quest to discover truth. Perusal of the impugned judgment did not reveal any

reason for that Court to look for corroboration, nonetheless, it had looked for

same. The approach adopted by the High Court is indicative that it was alive

to the fact that the witnesses have admittedly lied to investigators, and they

omitted to mention certain items of evidence in their statements to the

Magistrate, and therefore the Court ought to be cautious over those

considerations.

In fact, the High Court at Bar noted and considered certain inter se

inconsistence between Fausedeen and Krishantha as well as these two and

Anuradha (pgs. 70 and 244 of the judgment) and attributed the inconsistencies

to faulty memory of the witnesses. The Court, in evaluating Krishantha’s

evidence on each of the incidents he spoke of during his narrative, considered

same along with the other evidence and found them either to have been

corroborated or as instances that enhances his credibility.

These large number of individual incidents, referred to in the

judgement of the High Court in this regard could be identified as follows;

calling Anuradha on his mobile in order to pump diesel to the van (p.276),

Shenal’s act of joining them in the van near Naga Vihara Temple (p.278),

Anuradha going to the 1st Appellants residence on his invitation (p.281),

borrowing a van used to take the deceased before he was murdered (p.282),

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

84

Fausedeen, Krishantha and Anuradha were at the 1st Appellant’s residence

(p.523),during that time 2nd Appellant too had been there (p.525), calling

Krishantha due to his delay to turn up at Polhengoda junction (p.526), 6th

Appellant visiting Sheshadri’s residence (p.227), Fausedeen did not continue to

travel along with the rest after reaching Mayura Kovil (p.531), Krishantha

dropped off 1st Appellant at his residence along with the 3rd Appellant (p.533),

Fausedeen and Krishantha started using two phone connections on the

directions of the 1st Appellant (p.533), Krishantha leaving for Thailand (p.533),

Krishantha sending a text message to Fausedeen to contact 1st and 3rd

Appellants(p.534), Krishantha meeting the 1st Appellant in his office at

Peliyagoda (p.539), Krishantha was near Shiyam’s factory at Saranankara Road

(p.541), Kirhantha and Anuradha were at Peliyagoda office (p.548), Krishantha

visiting the 1st Appellant’s relative at Barnes Place (p.550), Krishantha came to

Balapokuna Road with Anuradha (p.556), Krishantha using Shenal’s phone to get

the gate of the 1st Appellant’s residence open (p.588), Anuradha travelling

along with Krishantha to Polgahawela Courts (p.590) and Krishantha and

Anuradha were at Peliyagoda office (p.594 of the judgment).

The High Court at Bar also considered Fausedeen’s evidence in a similar

manner and found it to have been also corroborated by other evidence. These

incidents are related to Fausedeen instructing Shafeen to travel along

Kandewatta Road after the deceased was killed (p.291), destroying Fausedeen’s

phone along with the deceased by Shafeen on instructions of Fausedeen (p.295),

obtaining Rs. 500,000.00 from Nazeer to be given to the 1st Appellant (p.302),

Fausedeen calling Krishantha to enquire about the delay in coming to

Polhengoda junction (p.526), Fausedeen had got off near Mayura Kovil after

showing the deceased’s factory (p.531), Fausedeen was near Shiyam’s factory

when the 5th Appellant came to see that (p.542), after the failed attempt to

‘arrest’ the deceased, Fausedeen came to 1st Appellant’s residence to plan out

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

85

the next step (p.544), when Krishantha left Kandewatta Road with the deceased,

Fausedeen called Shafeen to bring his vehicle (p.586) and before the ‘abduction’

of the deceased Fausedeen and Krishantha were together (p.556 of the

judgment).

These incidents that are far too numerous to be referred descriptively

and individually in this judgment, along with the reasoning of the High Court

at Bar. However, the most significant incidents that were referred to by the

trial Court regarding the charges levelled against the 1st to 6th Appellants, will

be included in this section, as we progress along the issue of evaluation. Of

these, the most important incidents are the ‘abduction’ of the deceased from a

point at Kandewatta Road, and the departure of the 2nd to 6th Appellants in two

vehicles from the 1st Appellant’s residence at Nedimala, with Krishantha,

Anuradha and the deceased. These incidents are needed to be considered as

they are directly linked to the conviction of the Appellants. These individual

incidents had taken place on the evening of 22.05.2013, and the tower records

indicate the different geographical locations they were served with during the

period commencing from early evening to the late evening of that day.

Krishantha, in his evidence described the sequence of events that led to

the act of failed ‘abduction’ of the deceased in the following sequence.

Krishantha, Anuradha and the 5th Appellant were waiting in their parked

vehicle along Saranankara Road, in anticipation of the deceased to leave his

factory at any moment. Fausedeen was the first to arrive at that place in his

vehicle. Tower Records indicate that Fausedeen’s mobile phone was served by

Saranankara Road North – C tower from 5.46 p.m. to 7.12 p.m. Krishantha’s

mobile phone was served by the same tower 6.47 p.m. for the first time in that

evening along with Anuradha’s mobile phone at 6.52 p.m. The 5th Appellant’s

mobile phone was served by Pamankada DCS-1 tower at 6.34 p.m. and by

Saranankara Road DCS-2, at 7.28 and 7.29 p.m.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

86

After their attempt to take the deceased in was called off by the 5th

Appellant, Krishantha returned to the 1st Appellant’s residence with him in

Anuradha’s double cab. Fausedeen went away on his own. After listening to 5th

Appellant, the 1st Appellant asked Krishantha to inform Fausedeen to bring the

deceased to a halfway point from which his men could take him. Krishantha

then responded to the 1st Appellant with a long story, stating Fausedeen is fast

losing confidence in them and suspects all their actions as mere pretence. He

insisted that they take the deceased in without further delay. It is at that point

the 1st Appellant decided that they should “arrest” the deceased tomorrow

and directed Krishantha to ask Fausedeen to bring him along. The 1st Appellant

instructed Krishantha to go in the double cab with others to bring in the

deceased.

At 7.20 p.m. Fausedeen’s mobile phone was served by Iswari Road

DCS-3 tower, whereas Krishantha’s mobile phone was served by Nedimala

tower at 7.55 p.m., with that of Anuradha’s at 8.04 p.m. The 5th Appellant’s

mobile phone was served by Nedimala Reloc DCS tower at 8.23 and the 1st

Appellant was served by Nedimala- A tower at 6.11 p.m., Nedimala-U tower at

7.04 p.m., Anderson Road-B at 8.33 p.m., and Kalubo-V tower at 8.35 p.m.

On instructions of the 1st Appellant, Krishantha and Anuradha met

him on the following day at his Peliyagoda office some-time after 1.30 p.m., the

day on which the deceased was expected to be ‘abducted’. When they met,

Kirishantha conveyed that Fasedeen agreed to bring the deceased along with

him up to some point. 1st Appellant’s response was that he would give two of

his men and to bring in the deceased. Krishantha and Anuradha was asked by

the 1st Appellant to stay back as he intended to go home with them. Krishantha

contacted Fausedeen to confirm that he needed to bring the deceased with him

that very evening.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

87

On their way to Nedimala, the 1st Appellant visited one of his relatives

who resides along Barnes Place and then arrived at his residence with

Krishantha, Anuradha and the 3rd Appellant. The 1st Appellant assigned 2nd

and 5th Appellant to accompany Krishantha to bring the deceased. The 5th

Appellant had not returned from Kurunegala by then, and Krishantha had to

wait until he arrived at Nedimala.

The tower records indicate that the 1st Appellant’s mobile phone was

served by Peliyagoda New Bridge DCS-2 at 12.32 p.m. and continued to be

served by the Peliyagoda New Bridge DCS-2, Peliyagoda and Peliyagoda New

Bridge A towers until 5.06 p.m. and was thereafter served by Barnes Place

tower at 5.52 p.m. Krishantha’s mobile phone was served by Peliyagoda New

Bridge A tower at 1.13 p.m. while Anuradha’s was served by the same tower at

1.11 p.m. These two witnesses either received or initiated calls through

Peliyagoda tower until 5.11 and 5.16 p.m. respectively. At 7.49 p.m.

Krishantha’s mobile phone was served by Nedimala tower and Anuradha too

was served by the same tower at 7.35 p.m.

The 5th Appellant who was assigned to accompany Krishantha that

evening, was served by the tower at Peliyagoda New Bridge DCS-2 at 12.32

p.m., Kurunegala Town Hall tower at 3.27 p.m., Kurunegala Bus Stand- 1 tower

at 3.48, Kadurugas Jun tower at 4.30 p.m., Polgahawela-1 tower at 5.25 p.m.,

Warakapola tower at 5.50 p.m., Ambepussa tower at 5.52 p.m., Imbulgoda tower

at 6.54 p.m. Peliyagoda tower at 7.18 p.m., and Nugegoda tower at 7.56 p.m. The

other person who was assigned to bring in the deceased, the 2nd Appellant,

too was served by Nedimala tower at 8.04 p.m.

After the 5th Appellant returned, Krishantha set off to meet up with

Fausedeen, who agreed to bring the deceased. Fausedeen, having verified with

Krishantha of his whereabouts, met them at a point along Balapokuna Road.

Krishantha joined Fausedeen in the car driven by the deceased and proceeded

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

88

to Kandewatta Road. Then the ‘abduction’ had taken place and Krishantha left

taking the deceased with him, leaving Fausedeen stranded. Krishantha clarified

in his evidence as to why he chose Kandewatta Road for this operation. There

is a ‘garage’ near the place where the ‘abduction’ had taken. Krishantha gets all

mechanical repairs to his vehicles, attended to in that establishment and, for

that reason, was quite familiar with the area.

Fausedeen, who was served by Saranakara Road – 2 tower form 6.07 p.m.

to 7.02 p.m., served by Havelock tower at 8.09 p.m., Col 5 – Dickman’s Road

GGI3 tower at 8.39 p.m., Col 5 Maya Ave – GSI at 8.43 p.m. and Kohuwala DDI -

4 tower at 8.4 p.m. while Anuradha and Krishantha too were served by

Balapokuna B, Balapokuna East C towers between 8.35 p.m. to 8.51 p.m. and

8.51 to 8.57 p.m. Fausedeen was thereafter served by Polhengoda Junc – GS

tower at 9.04 p.m., Narahenpita Lanka Hosp tower at 9.10p.m., Col 5 Maya Ave

tower at 9.12 p.m., Col 5 Skelton Rd DDI 6 at 9.18 p.m., Col 5 Maya Ave tower at

9.21 p.m., followed by Col 6 Peterson Ln DSI tower at 9.28 p.m.

Contrary to the belief of Krishantha that after taking the deceased in,

they were to proceed to Nedimala, the 5th Appellant directed Anuradha to

proceed to Biyagama, instead. Only after the deceased agreed to transfer

property, nearing Biyagama, they were instructed to return to Nedimala.

The 5th Appellant was served by Nedimala-1 tower at 9.10 p.m.

Tower records also indicate that Krishantha and Anuradha were served by

Biyagama tower between 9.32 to 9.46 p.m. and then once more served by

Nedimala tower at 10.22 p.m.

At Nedimala the 3rd , 4th and 6th Appellants also joined Krishantha, who

arranged a van from his brother’s residence at Baddegana and travelled along

with the deceased. After turning towards Malabe from Koswatta junction, they

switched vehicles, after passing Kaduwela bridge they turned towards

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

89

Biyagama, travelled up to a point. On instructions of the 5th Appellant,

Krishantha returned home with Anuradha in his double cab. The 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th,

and 6th Appellants proceeded on in the van with the deceased.

Krishantha’s as well as Anuradha’s call details obtained from tower

records indicate that they were served by Duwa Road tower at 9.41 p.m.,

Baddegana tower at 10.42 p.m., Battaramulla tower at 10.46 p.m., Talahena tower

at 10.54 p.m., Malabe tower at 11.05 and 11.07 p.m., Kaduwela -A tower at 11.14

and 11.16 p.m., and then Etulkotte tower at 11.39 p.m., for a ‘conference call’

and finally for the day, Kotte tower at 11.41 and 11.42 p.m.

The 2nd Appellant was served by Nedimala tower at 10.54 p.m., along

with the 3rd Appellant at 8.18 p.m. and 4th Appellant at 8.15 p.m. The mobile

phone of the 6th Appellant too was served by that tower at 10.48 p.m. After

being served by Nedimala tower at 9.10 p.m., the 5th Appellant was served by

Kaduwela-2 tower at 10.28 p.m., Anula Vidlaya-2 tower at 10.32 p.m., Pagoda

Road tower at 10.32 and 10.33 p.m., Delgoda tower for a ‘conference call’ at

11.39 p.m., Dompe town tower at 11.56 p.m. and finally by Kanduboda tower at

12.58 a.m.

When tower records are aligned with the narrative of Fausedeen,

Krishantha and Anuradha, it is apparent that their movements within the day of

22.05.2013 do perfectly tally with them. The two parties were in the service

area of Balapokuna tower during the same time period, is a factor at least

supports all three witnesses for consistency. This is because all three witnesses

claim they had their mobile phone with them and thus provide a tool to verify

their claims against a contemporaneously made digital record, which could

not be tampered with. The High Court at Bar, however, did not solely rely on

tower records when it looked for corroboration of the evidence of the three

witnesses.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

90

There are no tower records supporting the presence of three witnesses

for the ‘abduction’ which had taken place at Kandewatta Road. But the

recovery of the deceased’s vehicle from Kandewatta Road by the CCD, along

with the contents of CCTV footage from the deceased’s factory premises as

well as Dr. Ratnayake’s residence at Kandewatta Road supported Fausedeen’s

claim that he had accompanied the deceased immediately after their evening

prayers to Kandewatta Road. In both these locations, Fausdeen appeared in

CCTV footage with his shirt sleeves and trousers rolled up, ready to enter

Mosque for prayers. The fact that Fausedeen was picked up from a point along

Kandewatta Road too is supported by Shafeen, who was called by the

prosecution as a witness.

The prosecution presented evidence regarding the recovery of a

damaged mobile phone recovered by the CID during its investigations, after

being thrown into a canal by Shafeen. This was the phone that was used by

Fausedeen to communicate with Krishantha. After learning from Krishantha

that the deceased may have been murdered in the early hours of 23.05.2013,

he instructed Shafeen to destroy that phone. Shafeen gave evidence confirming

the instructions he received and what he did pursuant to those instructions.

The decision to provide a van to be used by the 2nd to 6th Appellants to

take the deceased was a spontaneous one. When Krishantha refused to take

part in the activities any further, the 1st Appellant demanded that he provide a

van for the 2nd to 6th Appellants to travel in. Krishantha borrowed one from his

brother’s residence at Beddagana. He had travelled in the van following the

cab, in the direction of Kaduwela. Then the switching of vehicles occurred on

the instructions of the 5th Appellant. The deceased was brought into the van,

and the 2nd to 6th Appellants proceeded along with him. On his way,

Krishantha was contacted by the 5th Appellant by phone in order to inform

him that the van could be picked up from the 1st Appellant’s residence in the

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

91

following morning. When Krishantha took the van parked in the garden in the

morning, there was a T56 weapon inside the van. After Krishantha spoke to the

1st Appellant, before leaving to Polgahawela, he was instructed to thoroughly

clean both vehicles. The prosecution presented evidence of the employees of

the two vehicle service centres, where the two vehicles were cleaned.

There is no doubt that the deceased had travelled in that van at some

point between 10.00 p.m. on 22.05.2013 to 6.15 a.m. on 23.05.2013. This fact

was confirmed after DNA profiling by Prof Illangasinghe on a sample obtained

from a faded patch of body fluids, found on surface of the upholstery of the

middle seat of that van, located close to the sliding door. This patch was first

identified by the Government Analyst, only after it tested positive for human

blood.

Anuradha said in his evidence that after switching of vehicles, the 5th

Appellant who travelled with him in the cab, after passing Pittugala bridge,

bought a coil of rope and some cigarettes. At some point, the 5th Appellant

had picked up the T56 weapon from the double cab and joined the others in

the van, and Krishantha was instructed to return home with Anuradha. During

cross examination by the 4th Appellant, Anuradha admitted that he threw away

pieces of rope found inside the van, after collecting it from Nedimala, in the

following morning. Dias speaks of an incident where he was instructed by the

3rd Appellant to throw away a nylon cord, a few days before the arrest of the

1st Appellant. The postmortem examination confirmed a ligature mark around

the neck of the deceased, which, in the opinion of the medical witness, may

have caused by ligature, when it was tightened around the neck of the

deceased, probably in order to subdue any resistance offered by the deceased,

as his death was due to firearm injuries to the head.

The High Court at Bar also considered the suggestion put to these

witnesses that they connived with the investigators to fabricate a case against

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

92

the 1st Appellant by weaving a narrative based on the tower records of calls

received and initiated by him. Almost all the Appellants, levelled the same

allegation against the investigators, particularly against ASP Abeysekera, in

their respective dock statements. The Court considered these complaints

extensively and concluded that the sheer complexity of the factual narrative as

spoken to by the witnesses supported by similarly complex technical evidence

made it simply impossible for one to remember all these individual incidents

in such a detailed manner and to describe them in Court purely from memory

and therefore the allegation of a fabricated narrative at the instance of CID has

no validity.

In my view, the act of weaving facts to fit into tower records could be

accepted as a reasonable proposition but only in a very limited sense. The

factual basis on which the said complaints are founded is that the

‘accomplices’ did not implicate any of the Appellants during their initial

statements and did so only after making several statements after taking

contradictory positions. Admittedly, Fausedeen and Krishantha did not

volunteer information to assist investigations at the initial stages and they did

so only when they were confronted with the details of their phone records.

Fausedeen was also shown the CCTV footage obtained from Kandewatta Road,

to persuade him to volunteer information. Both of them had reluctantly

divulged the details of what had taken place between them but did not

implicate the 1st and 6th Appellants or any of the officers involved with the

incident. Fausedeen and Krishantha did implicate them only after their family

members obtained legal advice on their behalf and conveyed that advice to

them, when they were kept under detention orders.

It is the evidence of the investigators that they persisted on with

interviewing Fausedeen and Krishantha until they disclosed all their actions.

The investigators were aided in their investigations with the details of tower

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

93

records. In that sense, the contention of the 1st to 6th Appellants that the case

against them was built upon phone records is partially a correct proposition,

although it is only valid to a very limited sense, as noted above.

On behalf of the 1st to 6th Appellants, the three prosecution witnesses,

Fausedeen, Krishantha and Anuradha were cross examined extensively by a

team of Attorneys at Law, including several President’s Counsel. All three

witnesses have survived this most effective, time tested and universally

accepted method of verifying truthfulness of their evidence. The High Court

at Bar, having had the benefit of observing the demeanour and deportment of

these witnesses during their examination in chief as well as during their cross

examination, which continued for several consecutive days, eventually

decided to accept their evidence, by making references as to their demeanour.

It is these factors that were considered by the High Court at Bar in

determining to accept the evidence of the three principal witnesses, as credible

and reliable evidence, supported and corroborated by independent sources.

Indeed, these factors clearly satisfy the requirements of corroboration that is

needed, in view of what Coomaraswamy states (supra) regarding items of

corroboration, which he describes as the facts “ … which tends to render more

probable the truth of the testimony of a witness on any material point.”

Having carefully perused the entire body of evidence presented before

the Court below, I am unable to find any fault in the finding made by the

High Court at Bar, on the credibility of these witnesses, or on the process of

reasoning it had adopted in arriving at that finding.

The remaining ground of appeal relied on by the 1st and 6th Appellants

was the alleged deprivation of a fair trial due to the prosecution’s failure to

disclose all matters that the CID had gathered during its investigations. They

strongly relied on the dicta of Fernando J in Wijepala v The Attorney General

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

94

(2001) 1 Sri L.R. 46, which brought in the principle of “equality of arms” in

criminal prosecutions. Learned President’s Counsel’s complain in this regard

was that the prosecution, by its failure to provide those important material,

had “starved” them of vital information.

It was contended by Counsel that the disclosure of those information

became vital as there are no eyewitnesses or any CCTV footage to place 1st

and 6th at the scene or in the journey to the place of murder, no murder

weapon recovered and there was no DNA evidence to indicate any

involvement of 1st and 6th Appellants. Learned President’s Counsel

particularly referred to the failure of the prosecution to produce phone

records of the deceased and accused the prosecution of withholding certain

CCTV footage which had the tendency to indicate that several others were

involved in the abduction.

Since the complaint by the 1st and 6th Appellants relates to the alleged

failure to disclose certain items of information that may have come to light

during investigations were not provided to them, it is relevant to consider the

applicable statutory provisions which govern the issue. These statutory

provisions describe what should be provided to an accused with the service of

an indictment.

Section 5 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act states that all offences

under the Penal Code, under any other law, unless otherwise specially

provided for in that law or any other law, shall be investigated, inquired into,

tried and otherwise dealt with in according to the provisions of that Code.

Despite the fact that the trial against the Appellants proceeded on a charge

sheet upon exhibition of information by the Attorney General under Section

450(3), these provisions are applicable to determine the entitlement of an

accused, in view of Section 5 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act .

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

95

Section 450(5)(a) states “ [A] trial before the High Court at Bar under this

Section shall be held as speedily as possible and shall proceed nearly as possible in the

manner provided for trials before the High Court without a jury, subject to such

modifications as may be ordered by the Court or as may be prescribed by rules made

under this Code.”

The contents of an indictment are statutorily governed by the

provisions contained in Section 162(1), which imposes a mandatory duty on

the prosecution to make a list of witnesses whom the prosecution intends to

call, and another list of documents and things intended to be produced at the

trial, termed as “productions”. The explicit provision contained in Section

162(2) similarly imposes a mandatory obligation to attach those documents it

had identified and listed out in sub sections 162(2)(a) to (f) to an indictment,

so that those documents could be served on an accused along with an

indictment at the time of his arraignment.

Since this is a situation where there was no preliminary inquiry which

preceded the institution of proceedings before the High Court at Bar, the

provisions of Section 162(2)(b) become most applicable to the complaint of the

Appellants. Section 162(2)(b) states that “ where there was no preliminary inquiry

under this Chapter, copies of statements to the police, if any, of the accused and the

witnesses listed in the indictment” should have been provided.

The phrases that appear in Section 162(1) that “ a list of witnesses whom

the prosecuting intends to call” along with “documents or things intended to be

produced at the trial” are applicable to Section 162(2)(B) which make it

mandatory to the prosecution to make available copies of statements made to

police by “the witnesses listed in the indictment”. Thus, the mandatory duty to

make available the statements of the witnesses and documents or things, are

in relation to such statements of the “witnesses whom the prosecuting intends to

call”, and documents or things “intended to be produced at the trial” and not any

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

96

other. This being the scheme provided by the Legislature in affording an

accused an opportunity to effectively defend himself from a prosecution by

State, it might be of interest to consider whether Fernando J, in Wijepala v The

Attorney General (supra) did introduce any expansion to that scheme. That

was an instance where the prosecution failed to provide a copy of the 1st

information of the crime to the appellant before this Court but instead had

served another statement that was recorded during the course of the

investigations.

It is evident from the judgment itself that his Lordship identified the

question whether the witness Senaratne, actually saw the deceased being

stabbed. This question arose for consideration because Senaratne did not

disclose the identity of the assailant to the Gramasevaka of the area, who took

him and the deceased to hospital. It was Senaratne who provided the first

information to police. In determining whether he implicated the accused in

providing first information to police, the Court considered Senaratne’s claim

that he did provide first information at 9.30 p.m., to the hospital police post,

whereas the prosecution maintained it was provided only to Anguruwathota

police at 11.30 p.m., while maintaining throughout that there had been no 9.30

p.m. statement.

Upon consideration of this evidence, this Court observed (at p. 48) “ if

Senaratne was truthful in claiming that he had made a statement at 9.30 p.m., then

that statement would have been the first information. Whether in that statement

Senaratne had claimed that he had seen the stabbing, and had identified the Appellant

as the assailant, would have been of very great importance.” The Court further

observed that “If indeed the 11.30 p.m. statement was the first information, then

obviously Senaratne had not made an earlier statement at the police post, if so, his

evidence on that point was not credible; and the finding of the Court of Appeal that he

did make such a statement was erroneous. On the other hand, if Senaratne was

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

97

truthful in claiming that he had made a statement at 9.30 p.m., then that statement

would have been the first information. Whether in that statement Senaratne had

claimed that he had seen the stabbing, and had identified the Appellant as the

assailant, would have been of very great importance.”

The Court then considered the statutory provisions contained in

Sections 147 and 159 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act (at p.49) “[A]n

examination of the High Court record reveals, however, that such a statement was

neither among the documents listed in the indictment nor included in the statements

furnished in terms of sections 147 and 159 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, No.

15 of 1979. Section 147 provides that the officer in charge of the relevant police station

shall at the commencement of the non-summary inquiry furnish to the Magistrate two

certified copies of the notes of investigation and of all statements recorded in the

course of the investigation. When the Magistrate commits the accused for trial, section

159(2) requires him to send one of those copies to the High Court and the other to the

Attorney-General.”

It is in this backdrop of facts, Fernando J stated (at p.49):

“[E]ither Senaratne made a statement at the police post, or he did not. If

he did not, his credibility was seriously in question. If, on the other

hand, he had made that statement, then a very serious irregularity had

occurred at the trial: the first information had neither been disclosed nor

furnished to the accused and to the Court. Quite apart from that being a

failure to make such disclosure as the statutory provisions require, the

non-disclosure of that statement to the defence and to the Court resulted

- for the reasons I set out below - in the impairment of the right of the

Appellant to a fair trial which was his fundamental right under Article

13(3). That Article not only entitles an accused to a right to legal

representation at a trial before a competent Court, but also to a fair trial,

and that includes anything and everything necessary for a fair trial.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

98

That would include copies of statements made to the police by

material witnesses.” (emphasis added)

It is important to note that when his Lordship stated, “anything and

everything necessary for a fair trial” include copies of statements made to the

police, the said reference was made, laying emphasis on the statements made

“by material witnesses”, not by any other.

The complaint of the 1st and 6th Appellants that the prosecution did not

provide them with phone records of the deceased. They accused the

prosecution of withholding certain CCTV footage which would tend to

indicate that several others were involved in the abduction. This complaint is

therefore would more or less concerns with ‘documents’ that are to be made

available under Section 162(1) being qualified to be termed as “ documents or

things”.

In terms Section 162(1), the mandatory duty on the prosecution to

provide such “ documents or things” are in relation to what it “intended to be

produced at the trial”. It is important to consider whether this operative part of

the Section was modified by the judgment of Wijepala v The Attorney

General (supra). Section 6 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act states that

“[A]nything in this Code shall not be construed as derogating from or limiting the

powers or jurisdiction of the Supreme Court or of the Court of Appeal or of the Judges

thereof or of the Attorney General.”

His Lordship, in the said judgment, reproduced several principles from

a judgment from South Africa (State v. Botha (1994) 4 SA 799) of which the

one that applies to the Appellant’s complaint is “ there is a general duty on the

state to disclose to the defence all information which it intends adducing and also all

information which it does not intend to use, and which could assist the accused in his

defence.”

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

99

Article 6(3)(b) of the European Charter of Human Rights states

everyone charged with a criminal offence has the minimum right “ to have

adequate time and facilities for the preparation of his defence” and in Rowe and

Davis v the United Kingdom [2000] ECHR, stated (at paragraph 60), “ [I]t is a

fundamental aspect of the right to a fair trial that criminal proceedings, including the

elements of such proceedings which relate to procedure, should be adversarial and that

there should be equality of arms between the prosecution and defence. The right to an

adversarial trial means, in a criminal case, that both prosecution and defence must be

given the opportunity to have knowledge of and comment on the observations filed

and the evidence adduced by the other party”. The Court further stated, “In

addition, Article 6 requires, … that the prosecution authorities disclose to the defence

all material evidence in their possession for or against the accused.”

In this regard, it is pertinent to note that the UN Human Rights

Committee, in Van Marcke v Belgium (U.N. Doc. CCPR/C/81/D/904/2000)

stated (at paragraph 8.3), “[T]he Committee observes that the right to a fair hearing

contained in article 14, paragraph 1 [ of ICCPR], does not in itself require that the

prosecution bring before the Court all information it reviewed in preparation of a

criminal case, unless the failure to make the information available to the Courts and

the accused would amount to a denial of justice, such as by withholding exonerating

evidence.”

It is my considered opinion that the proceedings before the High Courts

or the High Courts at Bar are governed by explicit statutory provisions that

contained in Section 162, which laid down as to what the prosecution must

make available to the accused in preparation of his defence, under its

mandatory duty to do so. In terms of Section 444(1), an accused is conferred

with a right to obtain certified copies of the first information and of any

statement made by the person against whom or in respect of whom he is

alleged to have committed an offence. In terms of Section 162(2)(a) to (f), not

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

100

only the first information and the victim’s statement, but an accused is also

entitled to have copies of all statement of witnesses the prosecution intends to

call and copies of documents, including reports and sketches or scene

observations, it intends to produce against him, be served along with the

indictment.

In addition, Section 450(7) enables a person indicted or charged before

the High Court at Bar to make a written request during a specified time

period before the commencement of trial, that he be furnished with copies of

statements made by the witnesses whom the prosecution intends to produce,

and the Court could, in its discretion, direct that copies of all such statements

or documents, or of only such statement and documents it thinks fit, be made

available.

Thus, the provisions of Sections 162 and 450(7) are in line with the

Articles 14(1) and Article 14(3)(b) of ICCPR, where it is recognised that all

persons are entitled to a fair public hearing, along with the entitlement to have

adequate time and facilities for the preparation of his defence, as stated by the

Committee. The European Court of Human Rights defined the principle of

‘equality of arms’ in Rowe and Davis v the United Kingdom (supra) as “ … in

a criminal case, that both prosecution and defence must be given the opportunity to

have knowledge of and comment on the observations filed and the evidence adduced by

the other party.” This pronouncement also indicates that ‘equality of arms’ is

not a one-way street where only the prosecution is bound to disclose what

they intend to produce, but also the accused too must make a disclosure on

his part.

The entitlement of an accused to a fair trial conducted before a

competent Court as a fundamental right was recognised by Article 13(3) of the

1978 Constitution. The Code of Criminal Procedure Act was enacted in 1979,

after that right was recognised by the Constitution. Section 162 was

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

101

formulated to be in line with that right. The material that should be provided

along with an indictment as per Section 162 was therefore moulded in the fair

trial principle. This is clearly evident if one were to make a comparison

between the relevant Sections in the Administration of Justice Law No. 44 of

1973 and Code of Criminal Procedure Act.

Section 190(2) of the Administration of Justice Law made it mandatory

that every indictment shall be annexed a copy of statements, made by the

accused and by the person against whom or in respect of whom the offence is

alleged to have been committed, and of each statement recorded in the

information book and made by a person who is intended to be called as a

witness by the prosecution. The rationale of recognising this entitlement in the

Administration of Justice Law is founded on the observation made by the

Supreme Court in The Queen v Liyanage and Others (1963) 65 NLR 337, (at

p.340) where it was stated that :

“… on a trial upon Indictment, by the very essence of the pre-trial

procedure, an accused person becomes aware of all the evidence relied

upon by the Crown in support of the Indictment and which the Crown

intends to place against him at the trial. He is entitled in law to know

such evidence before he is called upon to plead to the Indictment. It is a

right of his, inherent in that procedure.

Acting in accord with the broad principles of Justice, if this trial by

information is to proceed as nearly as possible, in the manner provided

for trials on indictment, the defendants should not be deprived of so

important a right necessary to fully formulate their defence, when their

very lives are at stake.

On grounds of practical exigency, a summary trial may be justified for

offences which are not of a very serious nature and where the facts and

issues are not complicated. The present case is for capital offences and

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

102

the evidence to establish the charges of Conspiracy will undoubtedly be

of a complicated nature. It will be very difficult for Counsel to do justice

by their clients in a case of this nature if they do not have a full picture

of the evidence in the possession of the Crown.”

With the conferment of the entitlement to a fair trial as a fundamental

right, the Legislature, in enacting Section 162 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act, ensured that an accused who is tried upon an indictment is

entitled to not only to the statements made by himself along with that of the

witnesses who are listed in the indictment but also to copies of preliminary

inquiry proceedings, inquest proceedings, reports, sketches, notes of

identification parade, statements made under Section 127 by the accused and

any witness listed in the indictment along with copies of such portions the

notes, scene observations made during investigations by a police officer. In

relation to trial before a High Court at Bar, Section 450(7), reaffirms the duty

on the prosecution to provide such material and ensures that the accused

person could also make a request to Court and thereby ensuring the

fundamental right conferred by Article 13(4).

In Wijepala v The Attorney General (supra), this Court had thought it

fit to re-emphasise that entitlement of the appellant to the 1st information but

was denied of. The 1st information, being a document caught up in the list of

contents of an indictment in terms of Section 162 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act, the prosecution was under a mandatory statutory duty to have

made it available to the appellant.

Thus, the answer to the question whether Fernando J, in Wijepala v The

Attorney General (supra) did introduce any expansion to the scheme set out

in Section 162, clearly is in the negative. His Lordship did not observe any

inadequacy of the provisions contained in the Code in this regard as it was

stated (at p.51) “ … the Code of Criminal Procedure Act contains no inconsistent

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

103

provision” to the principles that were recognised in the judgment of State v.

Botha (supra).

The complaint of the learned President’s Counsel of the failure of the

prosecution to produce phone records of the deceased and the act of

withholding of certain CCTV footage, which, according to him, had the

tendency to indicate that several others were involved in the abduction

should be considered first in the light of the statutory provisions and secondly

along with the principle that “… unless the failure to make the information

available to the Courts and the accused would amount to a denial of justice, such as by

withholding exonerating evidence” (emphasis added).

It is clear that these two items of evidence, referred to by learned

President’s Counsel, were not listed as an item of production, which made it

obligatory for the prosecution to supply them to the Appellants, along with

the exhibition of information. None of the prosecution witnesses made any

such reference to them. If at all, these items could only be termed as

information that were reviewed by the prosecution in preparation of a

criminal charges against the Appellants. It was submitted on behalf of the 1st

Appellant that the section of CCTV footage, that had been withheld from him

by the prosecution, affects his defence for the reason it would have indicated

the falsity of the allegation of Fausedeen and Krishantha that he personally

visited the factory owned by the deceased before the latter’s abduction.

Indeed, if this was the case, then that item of evidence would become

qualified to be termed as an instance of “withholding exonerating evidence.” But

that is not the evidence before High Court at Bar. Fausedeen said in evidence

that he “showed” (fmkakqj) the factory to the 1st Appellant. He did not state

that they got off from the vehicle, entered the factory premises and the 1st

Appellant made an inspection tour of the factory. Similarly, Krishantha too

stated in evidence that Fausedeen had taken the 1st and 3rd Appellants in his

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

104

vehicle and went near the factory and “showed” it to him. This is the position

he maintained in his cross examination by the 1st Appellant as he reiterated

the fact that they only went near the factory. Thus, the evidence is clear as to

what was undertaken by the 1st Appellant was not an inspection tour of the

factory premises but rather of its location, as what was shown by Fausedeen

and Krishantha to the 1st and 3rd Appellants was confined only to its location .

The electronic record of the CCTV footage obtained by the CCD from

the storage device installed in the factory building only shows the area

covered by the camera and therefore is confined to an area within the front

yard of the factory premises. The CCTV footage that was presented before

Court shows that Fausedeen was leaving factory premises from its main gate

in the evening of 22.05.2013, along with the deceased. The camera does not

reach any area beyond the gate, which confirms the limited field of vision of

that camera. Related to the complaint of withholding of information, learned

President’s Counsel’s other contention that CCTV footage, retrieved at

Kandewatta Road, had the tendency to indicate that several others were

involved in the abduction of the deceased should be considered now. This is a

position suggested by the 5th Appellant to Krishantha during cross

examination and denied by the witness. The suggestion to the witness was

there was another vehicle in addition to the double cab of Anuradha and Honda

Fit car of the deceased. The High Court at Bar, in its impugned judgment

considered this evidence and was of the view that when the CCTV footage

was played before the Court, no such position was suggested by the 5th

Appellant nor was it brought to its notice.

If the CCTV footage that was withheld from the 1st Appellant is to be

capable of being termed as an item of “exonerating evidence”, it must record the

arrival of the 1st and 3rd Appellants into the factory premises and their

departure. In relation to Kandewatta incident it must show that there was

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

105

another vehicle parked along with the double cab and the car. That is not the

evidence presented before the High Court at Bar and therefore, CCTV footage

that was recorded on the evening of the 1st Appellant’s visit to Saranankara

Road would not have recorded any such movement, in relation to the first

complaint due to its limited field of vision. In relation to the second complaint,

it did not happen that way contended by learned Counsel. Hence, even if that

footage was withheld by the prosecution, it would not “amount to a denial of

justice, … by withholding exonerating evidence.”

The other factor, on which the 1st Appellant placed reliance to present

this contention, was that the prosecution had withheld phone records of the

deceased. The prosecution, presenting its case, did not rely on the tower

records in relation to the calls initiated and received by the deceased, before

he was ‘abducted’ at Kandewatta Road. The prosecution did not present any

evidence even to infer that there was any form of communication between any

of the Appellant with the deceased any time prior to his death. Neither did it

rely on details of calls between Fausedeen or anyone else had with the

deceased tending to connect the 1st Appellant with any of the circumstances

that were presented before the High Court at Bar.

It was the evidence of ASP Abeysekera that he recovered damaged parts

of the deceased’s phone from a canal in Maligawatta, upon information

received from Shafeen, who acted as a driver to Fausedeen, who threw it into

that canal. Even though the 1st Appellant made a very serious accusation of

fabricating a case against him, no suggestion was put to ASP Abeysekera

during his cross examination that he withheld call details of the deceased after

receiving them from the relevant service provider. In these circumstances, I

find it hard to accept that the phone details of the deceased too are capable of

being considered as an item of “exonerating evidence”.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

106

The resultant conclusion is that the ground of appeal that had been

presented on the basis of denial of a fair trial, is devoid of any merit and, on

that account, ought to be rejected.

With the issue of credibility of the witnesses Fausedeen, Krishantha and

Anuradha being considered in the preceding section of the judgment, I have

arrived at a finding on the validity of the conclusion reached by the High

Court at Bar on that issue. I now turn to the 1st Appellant’s contention that the

trial Court erred in relation to violation of principles governing cases

presented on circumstantial evidence in arriving at a finding prejudicial to the

1st Appellant.

In this regard the contention that had been advanced on behalf of the 1st

Appellant is that the prosecution failed to exclude the possibility of a 3rd party

committing the murder of the deceased at Fausedeen’s behest. This factor was

partly considered earlier on, along with the issue of whether Fausedeen or

Krishantha had the intention or knowledge of the fact that the deceased would

be put to death. In this instance, however, learned President’s Counsel

coupled this factor with the instruction allegedly issued by the 1st Appellant to

Krishantha to obtain two other SIMs and to use them to converse with him

regarding the deceased.

The High Court at Bar, in its judgment (at p. 58) concluded that the fact

that the 1st Appellant instructed Krishantha to buy and use two new SIMs, is

established by P7, P7A and P8A. Learned President’s Counsel challenges the

said finding by posing a question, how is that the act of Krishantha buying two

SIMs, would corroborate the fact that the 1st Appellant gave him such

instructions ?

The High Court at Bar was of the view that since this item of evidence

could not be manufactured artificially, and, as the evidence establish that he

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

107

secured a new connection for himself and provided another to his business

partner Fausedeen supports his claim that he did receive such instructions.

In order to appreciate the contention of the 1st Appellant in its proper

context, it is helpful if the evidence relating to the two SIMs are referred to at

least briefly. Krishantha in his evidence said he discussed with 1st Appellant

about the Fausedeen’s predicament in recovering his investment from the

deceased. The 1st Appellant after having agreed to intervene, instructed

Krishantha in the presence of Fausedeen to use new two SIMs and also to use

two new phones thereafter whenever they converse about the deceased. When

Krishantha questioned the 1st Appellant for a reason to use new SIMs, the 1st

Appellant curtly responded by stating not to talk rubbish. The 1st Appellant

also insisted that Krishantha to do things the way he instructs ( “ WU okak

flfy,au,la keye’ uu lshk úoshg jefâ lrmka”).

Krishantha already had a SIM issued by Etisalat network with him,

which he obtained from a wayside boutique after filling in an application

form (the application was produced marked P7, with Krishantha’s signature at

the end marked as P7A). Subsequent to the 1st Appellant’s instructions,

Krishantha applied for another SIM, this time from Airtel network (the

application was produced marked P8, with his signature at the end marked as

P8A). It is Krishantha’s position that he used Airtel SIM, while Fausedeen used

Etisalat SIM. Fausedeen in his evidence confirmed that he did receive a Etisalat

SIM from Krishantha, after about five days since they met the 1st Appellant at

his residence. Fausedeen also confirmed that he used this new connection to

contact Krishantha as well as the 1st Appellant. Fausedeen also recollects that he

had called the 5th Appellant from the said SIM once or twice on Krishantha’s

advice. The fact that the two witnesses used new connection after their

meeting with the 1st Appellant was established through the tower records.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

108

During cross examination by the 1st Appellant, this aspect was further

probed. Krishantha maintained that it was the 1st Appellant who instructed

him to do so and added that initially he had not acted on those instructions,

and when the 1st Appellant verified whether they use two new SIMs and

receiving an answer in the negative, had faulted Krishantha for his know-all

attitude (“WU mKaä;hfka" mKaä;h fkdù uu lshk foa lrmka” SIM folla wrka

mdúÉÑ lrmka”). Krishantha denied a suggestion put to him that the instruction

on SIMs, which he alluded to the 1st Appellant, is totally a false claim.

Thereafter the witness was questioned by the 1st Appellant whether he did

state to the Magistrate that if he had any intention to kill the deceased, he

would not have given a SIM to Fausedeen, which was under his own name.

The witness admitted and added that it is the complete truth. Krishantha did

admit that his to recollection the SIM was given to him after about two days

from receiving the said instructions, may not be correct as he could not

recollect the time duration accurately.

In addition to the evidence of two SIMs, Krishantha’s evidence also

reveal another instance where he was offered another SIM. This time, it was

the 6th Appellant, who offered him one. This incident occurred when

Krishantha came to visit the 1st Appellant after the deceased was killed. After

noticing Krishantha’s worried appearance, the 6th Appellant assured him that

his father would look after everything and handed him a SIM and asked him

to use it when calling his father from that point onwards.

Perusal of the reasoning of the High Court at Bar, adopted to reach the

impugned finding on the two SIMs, reveals that the Court was in the process

of evaluating credibility of Krishantha, when it arrived at the said finding with

a short sentence. Although, the Court did not reason out its finding on this

isolated item of evidence in great detail, the evidence referred to in the

preceding two paragraphs which were presented by the parties were available

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

109

before it for consideration. Said finding could not be termed as a perverse one,

in view of the fact that both Krishantha and Fausedeen used these new

connections to communicate with each other during the series of activities that

culminated with the ‘abduction’ of the deceased. Krishantha signing up for a

new connection with Airtel and activated another SIM, which he had not used

any time prior to the date of the 1st Appellant’s instructions, tends to make

Krishantha’s assertion in this regard a more probable one than not. The well

supported fact of Fausedeen taking steps to destroy the phone with Etisalat

connection along with the phone used by the deceased no sooner he realised

that the deceased would be put to death, not only is consistent, but well

supportive of the said assertion.

In view of this evidence, the conclusion reached by the High Court at

Bar that the phone records did corroborate the fact that Krishantha acted on the

1st Appellants’ instructions to secure two phone connections for himself as

well as for Fausedeen could not be faulted. It is also relevant to note that the

term used by the Court is “ikd: jkafkah” which means proved or established

and not “;yjqre jkafkah”, which is the generally used term to denote

corroboration, as it did on many other places.

The last set of complains made on behalf of the 1st Appellant is that the

High Court at Bar adopted a standard more favourable to the prosecution

than to the defence to its detriment in the assessment of evidence and, the

Court failed to follow the principles of law applicable to a case presented

essentially on items of circumstantial evidence, namely that the evidence must

point irresistibly to the guilt of the Appellant.

Prosecution presented following evidence against the 1st Appellant

during its case. The 1st Appellant agreed to help Krishantha and his business

partner Fausedeen to recover Rs. 50 Million from the deceased. When

Krishantha and Fausedeen wanted the 1st Appellant to help them to recover

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

110

monies through CID, the 1st Appellant took over the responsibility of

recovering monies on their behalf and demanded Rs. 10 Million. The 1st

Appellant asked Krishantha to accompany the 3rd Appellant and show him the

location of the decease’s factory and of his apartment. After seeing the

location of the factory and the apartment, the 3rd Appellant wanted a

photograph of the deceased and was given one by Fausedeen.

When Krishantha met the 1st Appellant afterwards, he asked for details

of the plan that latter had in his mind to recover monies. The 1st Appellant

replied he intends to take the deceased in near his factory at Sarankara Road.

When Krishantha suggested that the 1st Appellant could simply summon the

deceased to his office, the 1st Appellant scoffed at that idea and said “WU okafk

keye fïj lrk úosh’ WUg meyeos,s lr, lshkakï uu ma,Eka lrdg miqj”. During this

period there were requests to Fausedeen to provide financial support to the 6th

Appellant as well as to the 1st Appellant.

With pressure mounting from Fausedeen for some action, Krishantha too

insisted for some positive action on the part of the 1st Appellant, who then

assigned 5th Appellant to accompany Krishantha in order to “arrest” the

deceased near the factory and also indicated that he would send the 3rd

Appellant there as well in a ‘white van’, which undertaking he did not fulfil.

After that attempt failed, it was the 1st Appellant who instructed Krishantha to

ask Fausedeen to bring the deceased to a halfway point where he could be

taken. Fausedeen was reluctant to get personally involved fearing the deceased

would make a complaint against him. The 1st Appellant assured him that

people who come to them turn blind, mute, and deaf and he would ensure

there will be no consequences legal or otherwise. It was the 1st Appellant who

decided that the deceased could be taken on that day itself, only if Fausedeen

could bring the deceased along with him.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

111

When Krishantha left the 1st Appellant’s residence to meet up with

Fausedeen and the deceased, the latter had already assigned the 2nd and 5th

Appellants to accompany him. The 1st Appellant had a private conversation

with the 5th Appellant before leaving. After the deceased’s ‘abduction’ at

Kandewatta Road and when Krishantha verified with the 1st Appellant why the

deceased should be taken to Biyagama instead of Nedimala, he was told that the

5th Appellant had already been given instructions in that regard. This

happened after the 1st Appellant verified by calling Krishantha whether the

deceased was taken.

As the cab carrying them was nearing Biyagama, Shiyam, agreed to

transfer ownership of his machinery and stocks to Fausedeen. Krishantha

agreed and wanted to return to Nedimala to cement that proposal. They did so

only after the 5th Appellant confirmed with the 1st Appellant whether they

should return to Nedimala. Having verified that Krishantha and the group

almost reached his residence after turning back at Biyagama, the 1st Appellant

arranged the 3rd, 4th and 6th Appellants to board the double cab with a T56

rifle. Krishantha wanted to know the reason and was asked by the 1st

Appellant to do what the 5th Appellant says. When Krishantha refused to take

part any further, it was the 1st Appellant who demanded a van for his team to

take the deceased away. The 5th Appellant was in control and Krishantha and

Anuradha merely followed his instructions, who in turn said he follows 1st

Appellant’s ‘orders’. After switching vehicles and having asked Kishantha

and Anuradha to return home, the 5th Appellant called Krishantha once more

to instruct him to collect the van from the 1st Appellant’s residence in the

following morning. This is the call that had been transformed into a

conference call by Krishantha. The van was picked up by Krishantha from the

residence of the 1st Appellant and when asked why he did this, the response

was that it was due to the deceased’s arrogance. When Krishantha queried as

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

112

to why he was dragged into this, the 1st Appellant replied that he had no other

way to take hold of the deceased (“ug uQj .kak úoshla ke;sj ysáfh”).

On their return from Polgahawela Courts, Krishantha and Anuradha met

the 1st Appellant at his office and was asked by him to clean the cab and van

and to meet up with him in the evening. At his residence, the 1st Appellant

assured Krishantha if the police want to arrest him, he will personally

accompany him and settle the issue. The 1st Appellant also assured Krishantha

even if IG came, he would still look after him.

Krishantha regularly visited the 1st Appellant’s residence and office,

until his arrest. As promised, the 1st Appellant came to Krishantha’s residence

when CCD officers arrested him. The 1st Appellant spoke to the officers of the

CCD. The 1st Appellant also wanted to know the phone records of the 2nd

Appellant urgently and instructed an officer to insert those numbers into a

request for a Court order to release call details. The 1st Appellant, after having

assessed the situation, concluded that only the 5th Appellant needed to worry.

He instructed Krishantha what to state to investigators about the 5th

Appellant’s movements on that evening the deceased was murdered, on the

lines suggested by him. After the arrest of Krishantha, the 1st Appellant took

Anuradha to an Attorney and sought legal advice. He instructed Anuradha not

to divulge anything about the 6th Appellant.

The High Court at Bar, in its judgment considered the evidence

regarding the use of the two SIMs and stated its view. The Court held that the

evidence indicated that it was the 1st Appellant who devised a plan on Shiyam.

Court also considered the two meetings that had taken place at Peliyagoda

office and Nedimala residence with the 1st Appellant, during which he referred

to the deceased as that devil (“awr hld”). After making reference to the 1st

Appellant’s reaction when a photograph of the deceased was shown to him,

the Court referred to his instructions to the 2nd Appellant to have two

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

113

weapons cleaned, as they are needed to settle a transaction. A reference was

made by the Court to the demand of Rs. 500,000.00 made by the 1st Appellant

along with his act of seeing the location of the deceased’s factory with

Krishantha. Court further noted that the 1st Appellant said to Krishantha “WU

mKaä; fkdù ysgmka’ uu fïl yrshg bjrhla lrkj’ lr, uu uqo,a wrf.k fokj”

yenehs i,a,s wrka ÿkakg miafi uu b,aÆj .dk ug wjYHhs”. It also considered the

assurance made by the 1st Appellant that “fï .ek nh fjkak tmd” wfma ,Õg tk

tjqka w|” f.d¿” ìysrs fj,d hkafk’ ta ksid WU mdvqfj b|mka’ jefâ lr, ÿkafkd;a we;s

fka?”. The Court took note of the instructions issued by the 1st Appellant

regarding the ‘abduction’ and the place the deceased should be taken in the

consideration of his complicity to the abduction and murder.

The High Court at Bar had then turned to consider the long statement

made by the 1st Appellant from the dock. The Court, having considered its

content, noted that he had not taken any interest to investigate into the

discovery of an unidentified dead body found at Meepawita, which fact was

conveyed to him as the Senior DIG of that area. The admissions made by the

1st Appellant of his close relationship with Krishantha over a long period of

time and Fausedeen and Krishantha coming to see him at his office over Shyam’s

problem were noted by the Court along with an ‘admission’ erroneously

contained in his statement that he instructed 2nd Appellant to have two

weapons cleaned and ready, which the Court disregarded as a typographical

error not corrected. The Court, having considered the 1st Appellant’s denial of

requesting 500 Baht for 6th Appellant’s trip to Thailand, and that he went to

inspect the location of the decease’s factory or sending anyone on his behalf,

he directed Krishantha to use two SIMs, there was enmity between him or his

sons with the deceased, he ever received Rs. 500,000.00 from Krishantha and

thereafter proceeded to consider the admitted meeting of Krishantha at his

office with Anuradha on 22.05.2013 after noon, admitting his wife had to

attend a land transaction at Kurunegala, admitting he used to borrow vehicles

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

114

from Krishnatha due to security reasons and admitting that he returned home

with Krishantha that evening after visiting a relative en route, was of the view

that some of these factors failed make any adverse impact on the prosecution’s

case.

Regarding the deceased’s murder, the 1st Appellant denied any

complicity with that crime and maintained the position that he had no

knowledge of that incident nor had any motive against him at all.

The High Court at Bar, in its assessment of the dock statement of the 1st

Appellant, observed that the admitted meeting with Krishantha on 22.05.2013

was an attempt to offer an explanation to evidence presented by the

prosecution as to the movements of the three of them (the 1st Appellant,

Krishantha and Anuradha ) as shown by tower records. The Court noted that

the 1st Appellant’s position is that, after dropping him off at his residence,

Krishantha had thereupon proceeded to Kandy, following his advice, which he

offered, in order to settle a dispute Krishantha has had with his wife over an

extra marital affair. The admission of the 1st Appellant that he repeatedly

called Krishantha that night to remind of the case scheduled to be taken up in

Polgahawela Courts in the following morning too were taken note of.

The fact that the intervention of the 1st Appellant at the time of arrest of

Krishantha was admitted by him and the explanation offered by him to justify

his actions were also noted by Court and, in addition, it made references to

his conduct in obtaining call details using another pending case after the

arrest of Krishantha. After a lengthy analysis of the statement made by the 1st

Appellant from the dock, the Court rejected the same and concluded it made

no impact on the prosecution’s case.

In view of the oral evidence presented before Court and the supporting

evidence in the form of tower records and other forensic evidence, it had

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

115

arrived at the finding that a plan was developed by 1st Appellant, following a

conspiracy to commit the murder of the deceased, with which all the other

Appellants have agreed, and was put into execution by 2nd and 5th Appellants

as well as the 3rd, 4th and 6th Appellants.

The complaint presented by the 1st Appellant on this finding is a two

tiered one. While stating that the Court erred in its failure to hold that the

totality of the circumstantial evidence does not necessarily point irresistibly to

his guilt, the 1st Appellant also contended that the erroneous finding was

reached by the trial Court on his guilt was due to it applying varying

standards to evaluate evidence presented before Court.

It is trite law that in a prosecution based on items of circumstantial

evidence, the Court, in order to convict, must be satisfied that the evidence is

consistent with the guilt of the accused and inconsistent with any reasonable

hypothesis of his innocence. It must not arrive at a finding of guilt if the

evidence points only to a strong suspicion against the accused. The 1st

Appellant relies on this principle to impress upon us that the evidence

presented by the prosecution, placed at its best, only raises a mere suspicion

of his involvement with regard to the murder but is wholly insufficient to

establish that it is inconsistent with any reasonable hypothesis of his

innocence.

Before dealing with the complaint of applying varying standards, I

intend to deal with the part of the said complaint that the prosecution failed to

establish its case to show that it is inconsistent with any reasonable hypothesis

of his innocence.

Perusal of the 14-page statement from the dock, made by the 1st

Appellant, it is evident that he relies on two primary points for consideration

of Court in favour of his innocence. The 1st Appellant denied any knowledge

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

116

or complicity in the murder of the deceased and also denied having

entertained any motive attributed to him by the prosecution. The main thrust

of his statement was to impress upon the trial Court that he was a victim of

professional jealousies entertained by some of his colleagues, particularly

Senior DIG Anura Senanayake and, also became a victim of the animosity of the

officers of the Criminal Investigations Department, generated over a report he

submitted to the Inspector General of Police regarding certain lapses and

defects in the investigations conducted by that Department over a series of

murders committed in Kahawatta of Ratnapura division. An abridged version

of the said complaint is once again presented to the High Court at Bar by the

1st Appellant at the conclusion of his statement, which is reproduced below.

“ fï iïmQ¾K kvqju f.d;, ;sfhkafk iajdóks ud ls%Ydka; iu.

2013’05’22 osk l;d lr.;a“ ta l;d l, ÿrl:k ìf,ka ,nd.;a lreKq

u;’ ta;a ta iïnkaOj fjk;a u l=uka;%Kh l,d hehs hkako” fï

iïnkaOj ÿrl:k f,aLK ,nf.k thska ;uhs iajdóks fuu kvqj

iïmQ¾Kfhka f.d;, ;sfhkafk’”

The High Court at Bar, after considering this allegation on two different

angles, was of the view (at p. 755 of the judgment) that the totality of the

evidence presented by the prosecution does not enable the Court to arrive at a

conclusion that the prosecution either manufactured or fabricated evidence

against any of the Appellants.

The Court already considered the issue of fabrication when it

considered the challenge mounted by the Appellants that Fausedeen and

Krishantha, being accomplices, connived with the investigators and weaved a

fabricated story to fit into tower records, as they were being kept under

detention orders issued under Prevention of Terrorism Act. The Court once

more considered the same issue when the 1st Appellant’s presented claim of

mala fides on the part of the CID.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

117

In arriving at the said conclusion that there was no fabrication on the

part of the CID, the Court considered the fact that subsequent to Fausedeen’s

complaint of the disappearance of the deceased to Bambalapitiya police,

nothing substantial had been done by them to investigate that complaint. It

was the officers of the CCD that obtained CCTV footage from Kandewatta

Road and discovered the involvement of Fausedeen to the alleged

disappearance. It in fact commended the role played by IP Saman Prematillaka

of CCD, in identifying Fausedeen from CCTV footage. The Court also noted

that Fausedeen made only a partial disclosure of the facts and circumstances to

the CCD after his arrest, as he feared for his life and of his family, since a full

disclosure would involve complicity of a serving Senior DIG of the police

force.

The Court accepted Krishantha’s evidence, who was arrested by CCD,

that he was under threat not to disclose the complicity of the 1st Appellant and

6th Appellant to the investigators and noted that both these witnesses made a

full disclosure only when their relatives induced them to do so, and that too

on legal advice. In view of the sheer complexity of the factual narration of the

three witnesses that withstood a long session of piercing cross examination,

which corroborated by tower records and other forensic evidence in material

particulars, the Court concluded that there is no rational basis to accept the

proposition that the case against the Appellants is a fabricated one, either by

the witnesses or at the behest of the investigators.

The High Court at Bar, in its impugned judgment considered the

accusation of the 1st Appellant that he was framed into this crime being

motivated by professional jealously as well. The Court held that claim made

by the 1st Appellant that his rapid rise in rank after joining the police force in

1981 as a Sub Inspector of Police to the rank of Senior Deputy Inspector

General of Police and of his appointment to Colombo – West and North

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

118

ranges on 01.03.2013, in itself negates that the forces that worked against him

were successful in its efforts.

The decision to reject the dock statement of the 1st Appellant was made

by the trial Court after it had considered several factors that he stated in that

statement. The Court considered the fact that he did not clarify why he took

no action when the deceased’s body was found. Court also found that his

assertion of advising Krishantha to go to Kandy after he fought with his wife

was not tenable and rejected his explanation that he called Krishantha

repeatedly to remind of the case in Polgahawela Court, as it was not even

suggested to Krishantha. Court further noted that there was no denial of the

evidence that Krishantha arrived at his residence to collect the van in the

following morning or directing him to clean vehicles. Similarly, the Court

rejected the explanation offered to justify his involvement in the prevention of

the arrest of Krishantha since a wrong date mentioned by the 1st Appellant as

the day of the arrest, along with the explanation offered by the 1st Appellant

to justify urgency to obtain call records through a Court order. Court also

considered his conduct of taking Anuradha to a lawyer and advising him of

what to state, if questioned by police.

The premise on which the 1st Appellant founded his complaint that the

Court adopted varying standards to evaluate evidence and acted more

favourably to the prosecution is the decision to reject his dock statement. Why

the Court had rejected his evidence totally was partly due to its conclusion

that the case against him is a total fabrication and is not acceptable to it. The

rejection is also due to the view taken by Court, when he sought to justify

requesting phone details of 2nd Appellant by stating that he did so only after

becoming aware that an investigation was about to commence concerning the

2nd Appellant. The Court found that assertion by the 1st Appellant does not

reflect the correct factual position as the request for call details of his own

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

119

phone, his wife’s, 2nd Appellant’s, 6th Appellant’s and Sheshadri was made on

23.05.2013 and the IG had directed the CID to takeover investigations only on

01.06.2013.

The Court was of the view that there is a factor indicative of his

complicity to suppress evidence pertaining to the crime already under

investigation. In order to arrive at that finding, the Court considered the 1st

Appellant’s familiarity with the tower records that he gathered during an

investigation he conducted regarding abduction of a five-year-old girl, as the

Superintendent of Police for Trincomalee. The Court also noted that the 1st

Appellant made no reference to Anuradha’s assertion that he had taken steps

to consult a lawyer after getting down Anuradha to his residence and

instructing him to avoid making reference to the 6th Appellant.

The complaint of adopting varying standards by the High Court at Bar

in the evaluation of evidence and acting in a manner more favourably to the

prosecution, as made by the 1st Appellant, therefore has no validity at all for

the reason that the trial Court, even after its finding that Fausedeen and

Krishantha did not conspire to murder the deceased or participated in his

abduction to murder, which made both of them to be treated as any other

witness as the tag ‘accomplice’ is removed, nonetheless, decided to look for

corroboration of their evidence to substantiate their version of events. These

witnesses gave evidence under oath and were cross examined by Counsel,

giving an opportunity for the Court to effectively evaluate their evidence for

credibility. On the other hand, the trial Court noted that the 1st Appellant

presented evidence only through a dock statement, which he made without

any oath or being subjected to any cross examination by the prosecution. It

then found that his evidence on some important aspects did not reflect the

correct factual position and therefore his evidence should be rejected

altogether.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

120

In view of the foregoing, I endorse the conclusions reached by the High

Court at Bar that the rejection of the evidence presented by the 1st Appellant

as well as that the prosecution established the complicity of the 1st Appellant

to the offences specified in the 1st , 3rd, 4th, 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th and 10th counts in the

information and charge sheet is sufficient to establish that it is inconsistent

with any reasonable hypothesis of his innocence.

The ground of appeal, which is specific to the 2nd Appellant, that there

was no corroboration of the evidence of the accomplices who implicated him

to the charges should be considered now. Learned Counsel itemised these

multiple instances where the two ‘accomplices’ implicated the 2nd Appellant,

but not corroborated which are identified as follows:

1. the 1st Appellant asked the 2nd Appellant to clean two

weapons,

2. discussion between the 1st Appellant and the 5th Appellant at

Nedimala residence,

3. taking part in the transfer of the deceased from Anuradha’s

cab to the van,

4. evidence of Dias Samaratunga implicating the 2nd Appellant

5. 2nd Appellant’s phone thrown to Kimbula Ela by Krishantha,

6. throwing off the clothes worn by the deceased near a bridge,

7. obtaining his phone details by the 1st Appellant.

It is the submission of the learned Counsel for the 2nd Appellant that, in

the absence of any independent corroboration, all these items of evidence

against the 2nd Appellant remains mere statements of accomplices of the

crime, who sought to attribute these acts on him. Each of these items of

evidence shall be considered for its merits in the light of the complaint made

by the 2nd Appellant in relation to them as well as the submissions of the State

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

121

along with the manner in which they were considered by the High Court at

Bar.

The first complaint refers to a segment of the evidence where Fausedeen

had said he met the 1st Appellant at his residence either on 5th or 6th of May

2013. He was sure that the meeting that had taken place before 10.05.2013.

This visit was after Fausedeen and Krishantha accompanied the 3rd Appellant to

show the location of decease’s factory and of his apartment. As they sat down

to talk, the 1st Appellant instructed the 2nd Appellant, who happens to walk

past them, to have two weapons cleaned as there is a need to settle a

transaction on the following day. The 2nd Appellant responded he could do

that even after the job, as there was no urgency. Tower records indicated that

the 2nd Appellant was at Nedimala on 06th to 08th of May 2013. Krishantha who

was present along with Fausedeen for the said meeting with the 1st Appellant

but did not speak of this incident in his evidence.

In the dock statement the 2nd Appellant denied having received any

such instructions to clean any weapon. It is his position that it is a task

attended by officers of lower ranks.

Learned Counsel submitted that the evidence of Fausedeen on this point

should have been corroborated, on account of him being an accomplice and

that in the absence of any reference to the said incident by Krishantha it had

not even been supported for consistency. The mere presence of the 2nd

Appellant during the relevant time period at Nedimala in itself is not

corroborative of the fact that the 1st Appellant in fact gave those instructions

or that the 2nd Appellant responded in that manner.

In her submissions, learned ADDl SG refereed to the evidence of the

tower records Fausedeen’s and Krishantha’s phones and that is a factor that

independently corroborates that they too were present along with 1st and 2nd

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

122

Appellants and there was no contest to the fact that there was a meeting as

spoken to by the witnesses since the 1st Appellant admitted so in his dock

statement. Thus, it is a reasonable inference a Court could draw in the

circumstances.

High Court at Bar considered the evidence and was of the view that the

presence of 2nd Appellant at Nedimala during the same time with that of the

meeting, was established by the tower records. It also found that the evidence

of Fausedeen and Krishantha were corroborated with tower records that they

had handed over 500 Baht to 6th Appellant at a point near Appollo Hospital,

following the request of the 1st Appellant, which too was made during the

said meeting with the two witnesses.

Krishantha in his evidence said that the 1st Appellant wanted to meet

Fausedeen to discuss over the impending trip to Thailand by the 6th Appellant

and also about the recovery of money. Fausedeen, having vented his frustration

over the delay in action, wanted to know what the plan of action the 1st

Appellant had in mind. The 1st Appellant replied Fausedeen that “I have

already discussed with my men and once plans are finalised; would convey

its details through Krishantha”. The 1st Appellant also said that he too needed

to see the factory on the following day, as they got up to leave. This evidence

supports Fausedeen’s assertion that they discussed his problem in addition to

the discussion on the foreign currency for the foreign trip of the 6th Appellant,

thus making it more probable that the 1st Appellant, to impress upon

Fausedeen that he had already discussed the matter with his men, asked the 2nd

Appellant, who casually gone past the place where they were, to clean up two

weapons.

The confirmation of the presence of four persons involved with the

incident under discussion at Nedimala, Krishantha’s evidence on what they

discussed, the subsequent acts of Fausedeen and Krishantha of handing over

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

123

Baht to the 6th Appellant, as agreed during the discussion, all made the claim

that the 1st Appellant making a direction to the 2nd Appellant a more probable

event. It is already stated earlier on that the corroboration required need not

be on each individual event the witness speaks about.

Learned Counsel’s second submission was that the discussion between

the 1st Appellant and the 5th Appellant at Nedimala residence, which

Krishantha referred to in his evidence, was considered by the High Court at

Bar to arrive at the conclusion that Krishantha had no knowledge of what they

conversed on and therefore not privy to the intentions of the 1st Appellant had

over the deceased. In this backdrop, learned Counsel contend that the 2nd

Appellant, who too was there, but left out from the said dialog between the 1st

and 5th Appellants is indicative of the fact that the 1st Appellant had chosen to

have his discussion only with the 5th Appellant and thus, refrained himself

from giving any instructions to the 2nd Appellant. It was contended on behalf

of the 2nd Appellant that this fact should raise a reasonable doubt as to his

complicity to the conspiracy to commit murder.

Learned Counsel also invited attention of Court to the fact that the 2nd

Appellant is a Sub Inspector in rank while the 5th Appellant served as a police

constable. This comparison was highlighted in order to raise a point on

relative probabilities. Learned Counsel submitted that an officer of a higher

rank would not take orders from a junior officer, and it was the 5th Appellant,

who was chosen by the 1st Appellant to place at command. Therefore, Counsel

contended that the 2nd Appellant could not be considered as a co-conspirator

with the others as a reasonable doubt exists as to his agreement to the

conspiracy.

Prosecution’s case against the 2nd Appellant was that on or about

07.05.2013 the 1st Appellant instructed him to have two weapons cleaned to

settle a business, and that on the instructions of the 1st Appellant, the 2nd

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

124

Appellant joined Krishantha and 5th Appellant to ‘bring in’ the deceased from

Kandewatta Road, in a double cab driven by Anuradha. The 2nd Appellant

continued to be in the team of officers who proceeded from Nedimala with the

deceased. When the party switched their vehicles at Malabe, the 2nd Appellant

too got into the van along with the 3rd, 4th and 6th Appellants taking the

deceased along with them. On their way back to Pita Kotte, Krishantha found

the 2nd Appellant’s phone in the cab and threw it into Kimbula Ela. When

Krishantha met the 2nd Appellant after they took away the deceased, he found

fault with what they did (“nuqKqisxy fudllao fï Thf.d,af,d lf,a” wkjYH

jevlafka Thf.d,af,d lf,a”). The 2nd Appellant’s reply was “ fïl uy;a;h ÿkak

´v¾ia” tal wms l,d” bka tyd wms okafk keye.” The 2nd Appellant also revealed to

Krishantha that the clothing worn by the deceased was removed from his

body and threw them over a bridge. The 2nd Appellant had changed his IMEI

and IMSI numbers from 24.05.2013, indicating he had acquired another

mobile phone and a new connection.

During cross examination by the 2nd Appellant, Krishantha repeated the

statement attributed to the former and conceded when suggested that no

mention of that fact was made to the Magistrate. He offered an explanation for

that by stating that, in making the said statement, he merely narrated the

sequence of events that led to the death of the deceased in the way he recalled

from his memory and unlike in the High Court, there was no questioning

made clarifying the details. However, the witness assured the Court that what

he states before it is the absolute truth, and he had no reason at all to falsely

implicate the 2nd Appellant.

In dealing with the evidence presented against the 2nd Appellant by the

prosecution, the High Court at Bar also considered the contents of his dock

statement. The complaint that the Court had failed to grant the benefit of

doubt, arising out of the act of 1st Appellant in selecting only the 5th Appellant

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

125

to give his instructions and the exclusion of the 2nd Appellant from that

discussion involving conspiracy, is founded on the premise that the only item

of evidence against him is that particular part of Krishantha’s evidence. That is

not the position borne out by the evidence that had been elicited by the

prosecution before the High Court at Bar. I have referred to that evidence in

the preceding paragraphs and needs no repetition here.

The High Court at Bar considered the improbabilities of some of the

events as spoken to by the 2nd Appellant in his dock statement, and found that

in certain instances, he had uttered lies. It also found that the 2nd Appellant

lied in relation to his phone, as indictive from P43, which is a letter dated

05.06.2013 calling for call details of his lost phone, after obtaining a new

connection. The Court also made a very pertinent observation when the 2nd

Appellant said that he did not make official entries of the duties he had

performed under the supervision of the 1st Appellant due to the fear of

exposing his senior officer for a security breach. In explaining of the duties

which the 2nd Appellant said to have performed on the 22.05.2013, it was said

that he returned to Colombo that evening from Tanamalwila where he wanted

to check up with an information he received. Having considered this evidence

, the Court was of the view of that it is unable to accept this explanation as if

he did conduct a raid as he claim, it is imperative that he made relevant

entries in the official records. Any of his official activity, without any entries

to justify the manner in which they were conducted, could be liable to be

termed as illegal. At the conclusion of its reasoning, the Court decided to

reject his dock statement.

Turning to consider the complaint of the 2nd Appellant that the evidence

revealed only the 5th Appellant was given instructions by the 1st Appellant,

leaving him out from that conversation. It is correct that only the 5th Appellant

was given some last-minute instructions by the 1st Appellant, just before they

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

126

left Nedimala. But the evidence of Krishantha on this aspect is that the 1st

Appellant told him to go along with the 2nd and 5th Appellants to bring in the

deceased. When Krishantha queried the 1st Appellant that none of them were

there at that point of time to come along with him, the 1st Appellant replied

that they would arrive there shortly. A vehicle arrived at Nedimala and the 1st

Appellant took Krishantha to a room down stairs. Krishantha noted that the

2nd and 5th Appellants were already there. The 5th Appellant was singled out

by the 1st Appellant, who instructed him privately. The 1st Appellant then said

to Krishantha that he had instructed the 5th Appellant and directed him to go

with the 2nd and 5th Appellants, to bring in the deceased.

The evidence presented by the prosecution in this regard did not

indicate that the 2nd Appellant was clueless about what was about to take

place. At Kandewatta Road, Shyam walked up to the double cab in order to

speak with the passenger who was occupying the rear seat, and when he bent

his head down and peeped into vehicle to speak with him, he was pushed in

by the 5th Appellant, who too got into the vehicle along with him. It was the

2nd Appellant who was seated there on the other end of the rear seat of the

double cab. Shiyam was told that it was the 1st Appellant. The conduct of the

2nd Appellant indicated that he was not surprised by the way the deceased

was pushed into the double cab. He also had no qualms over the act of taking

an uncooperative passenger forcefully into the cabin and taking him along

despite of his struggles to resist his abduction. The evidence is that as the

deceased was pushed in, it was the 2nd Appellant who held him. Having

returned to Nedimala from Kaduwela, the 2nd Appellant voluntarily remained

with the ‘abducted’ deceased while the 3rd, 4th and 6th Appellants too had

joined with them to continue the journey. There is no evidence presented

before the High Court at Bar that the 2nd Appellant was surprised of the

subsequent events as they unfolded or made any queries from any of the

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

127

officers for the reason to bring in a T56 weapon or what they intend to do with

the deceased.

The subsequent conduct of the 2nd Appellant, as revealed from

Krishantha’s evidence, taken in conjunction with his previous conduct,

supports the inescapable inference reached by the High Court at Bar that he

was truly a part of the conspiracy to commit murder and abducted the

deceased to put him to his death. Therefore, the isolated fact that had been

relied upon by the 2nd Appellant, that the 1st Appellant gave private

instructions to only the 5th Appellant, does not suffice to raise a reasonable

doubt in the said inference of guilt.

The third factor on which learned Counsel for the 2nd Appellant relied

on was in relation to the evidence of Anuradha that he took part in the transfer

of the deceased from his cab to the van. Learned Counsel invited attention of

Court to the inconsistency between Krishantha and Anuradha on this point and

contended that that the said item of evidence could not have been relied upon

as Anuradha failed to state same to CCD, CID or the Magistrate and the High

Court at Bar erroneously held that Krishantha corroborated same when in fact

said nothing to that effect.

It was Krishantha’s evidence that after reaching Malabe junction, they

proceeded on about 800 meters or more and stopped. The double cab, which

followed them also stopped. The 2nd and 3rd Appellants have taken the

deceased to the van from the cab. They held him from either side. During

cross examination, the 2nd Appellant suggested to Krishantha that he failed to

mention that fact to the Magistrate. The witness replied that he would accept

that if it is not recorded, but insisted on his claim by stating that it is the truth.

However, Anuradha said in evidence that after passing Pittugala bridge, they

stopped, and the 3rd and 6th Appellant transferred the deceased to the van.

Thereafter, he drove behind the van with 5th Appellant. The 2nd Appellant, by

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

128

cross examining Anuradha, elicited that he had failed to mention that fact to

CCD, CID or to the Magistrate, as pointed out by learned Counsel.

It is clear that Anuradha’s evidence on the point was presented before

the High Court at Bar for the first time after a lapse of 19 months since the

death of the deceased. Krishantha failed to mention what he said in evidence

only to the Magistrate, leading to the inference that he did so to CCD and CID.

Of course, the weight that could be attached to Anuradha’s evidence on this

particular aspect is reduced due to his failure to mention this fact at the

earliest opportunity. Krishantha’s evidence, though contradictory to that of

Anuradha on this point is more credible than his relative.

The complaint of the 2nd Appellant is that the High Court at Bar failed

to take note of this ‘material inconsistency’ along with the fact that there was

no corroborative evidence that were placed before Court to substantiate that

claim. The reference made by the learned Counsel to page 250 of the

judgment, where the Court considered the evidence on the basis that it was

the 3rd and 6th Appellants who transferred the deceased to the van, without

referring to the inconsistency of that with Krishantha’s evidence. The way the

trial Court presented its process of reasoning on this aspect, indicates that it

had taken a bundle of facts into consideration and found some of them were

corroborated. As such, there is no finding of fact in relation to the persons

who transferred the deceased to the van and that is corroborated by other

evidence. Clearly the High Court at Bar overlooked the contradiction on this

point.

But the fact remains that the deceased was taken in the van, as proved

beyond any doubt by the DNA evidence, and therefore this particular

omission of the part of the High Court at Bar to consider the said

contradiction, in my opinion, did not result in causing any prejudice to the 2nd

Appellant, neither it adversely affected their credibility as witnesses, given the

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

129

multitude of other factors that supported the conclusion that had been

eventually reached by the trial Court. In converse, it could be said that said

failure had not resulted in an adverse finding made against the 2nd Appellant.

Connected to this submission, learned Counsel also referred to another

inconsistency between these two witnesses for the prosecution. The evidence

of Anuradha revealed that there was a scuffle when the deceased was pushed

into the cab whereas Krishantha, who also travelled in the same vehicle did

not make any such reference to offering resistance. Learned Counsel

submitted this too is a very material inconsistency between the two which the

High Court at Bar failed to consider. Apparently, this submission was made

by learned Counsel with the impression he had over Krishantha’s evidence

that the witness had nowhere in his long evidence ever mentioned the way

the deceased reacted to the act of aggression towards him. In fact, Krishantha

did mention in his evidence that the deceased resisted after he was pushed

into the vehicle. Naturally, the deceased was fearful as to what they would do

to him (at p. 743 of Vol. VIII). This is not the only instance where the resistance

offered by the deceased is referred to. It was the 6th Appellant, who wanted

Krishantha to come to the cab, because the deceased was making a ruckus and

demanding his presence.

In addition, another inconsistency between Krishantha and Anuradha

was pointed out by the 2nd Appellant. This time it was in reference to who

took away the T56 weapon from the van in the following morning when

Krishantha went to 1st Appellant’s residence to collect same, as instructed by

5th Appellant in the previous evening. Anuradha said it was the 3rd Appellant

who took away the firearm whereas Krishantha was not sure whether it was

the 2nd or the 3rd Appellant. Both the witnesses support each other to the fact

that there was a T56 weapon in the van. Krishantha, when asked who picked it

up, qualified his answer by adding that according to his recollection it was

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

130

either the 2nd Appellant or the 3rd Appellant. The point raised by the 2nd

Appellant in this instance is in relation to assessment of credibility of a

witness. These types of inconsistencies are quite natural in the testimonies

presented by lay witnesses for their powers of observation and recalling

memory or even their inability to express themselves may contribute to such

inconsistencies, in varying degrees. This is perhaps one of the reasons why the

High Court at Bar had looked for independent corroboration of their evidence

and being satisfied that there was, decided to accept as truthful and reliable

account of what had actually taken place.

The fourth point relied on by the 2nd Appellant was that the evidence of

Dias Samaratunga who he made references to him of participating in a

discussion with the 1st Appellant, his wife, 6th, 4th and 5th Appellant on

30.05.2013 and loaded a cache of weapons into a “Batta” car on 31.05.2013,

along with the witness. He also said that in the same evening the 2nd

Appellant went for a consultation with a lawyer. Learned Counsel pointed out

that the prosecution presented evidence through tower records that the 2nd

Appellant was present at Nedimala only in the evening at 7.31 p.m. on that

day whereas the witness states he was present there from the morning, a fact

not supported by an independent source. In relation to the evidence that he

loaded weapons, the witness, in his statement to the Magistrate, which the

witness said that contains the truthful account of the circumstances, failed to

mention that fact.

This point need not be considered in detail. These items of evidence are

related to certain activities of the 2nd Appellant, subsequent to the murder of

the deceased. The only item of evidence that tends to generate an inference of

his complicity to the murder is the consultation he had with a lawyer. The

High Court at Bar treated the evidence of Dias as a testimony offered by a lay

witness, rather than an experienced police officer, who is familiar with Court

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

131

proceedings and offering evidence after refreshing notes. The Court, after a

detailed consideration of his evidence elicited during cross examination,

noted his answer admitting the suggestion that he omitted to mention the 2nd

Appellant’s name to the Magistrate. These factors were taken into account by

the trial Court in assessing his evidence.

Learned Counsel’s next contention was based on the evidence that

revealed the 2nd Appellant’s phone being thrown into Kimbula Ela by

Krishantha on their way back after the 2nd to 6th Appellant proceeded on with

the deceased. It was submitted that Anuradha during his re-examination only

said about this act attributed to Krishantha. Learned Counsel submitted that

Krishantha in his evidence made no reference to the said act and therefore this

item of evidence, which the prosecution tried to utilise against the 2nd

Appellant is wholly inadequate to establish that he tried to dispose of his own

phone on 22.05.2013.

This contention was presented by the 2nd Appellant upon a clear

misappreciation of the evidence that were presented before the High Court at

Bar. In his examination in chief, Anuradha did not speak of this incident at all.

It was during cross examination of Anuradha by 4th Appellant (at p. 37 and 38

of Vol. X) this fact was elicited through the witness. Anuradha said he

discarded pieces of rope from the coil, which the 4th Appellant had purchased

the previous evening. It was also elicited from the witness that Krishantha

threw a mobile phone to Diyawanna Ela. In re-examination the State clarified

from the witness (at p.104 of Vol. X) that it was the 2nd Appellant’s phone

thrown into water at Kimbulawala, Madiwela. It is evident from the

proceedings that Krishantha gave evidence before Anuradha and accordingly

the prosecution had no opportunity to lead that evidence from Krishantha

himself, although the evidence on this point is an important item of evidence

for the prosecution. But the prosecution did present evidence that the SIM

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

132

through which the 2nd Appellant operated his mobile phone was changed

after 22.05.2013, along with the phone.

In his statement from the dock, the 2nd Appellant said that he had

misplaced his phone after as the last call, which was at 7.49 p.m., on

22.05.2013. According to the 2nd Appellant at 7.49 p.m. on 22.05.2013, he was

still at Kirulapona, whilst on his way to Nedimala. Since he misplaced his

phone, he applied for a new connection. In justifying his act of making a

request for call details in relation to the misplaced phone number, the 2nd

Appellant stated that he was apprehensive of the fact that his lost phone could

be used by someone to commit a crime, but opted not to make a complaint for

he thought it would be inappropriate for him to lodge a complaint that he lost

a phone at a Senior DIG’s residence.

The High Court at Bar considered the contents of his dock statement

and decided to totally reject the same, in view of the improbabilities and false

claims it contained.

The individual fact of his phone was found lying in the double cab

belonged to Anuradha by Krishantha is clearly indicative of the 2nd Appellant’s

act of travelling in that vehicle at some point of time on 22.05.2013, as claimed

by the witnesses. The opportunity for the 2nd Appellant to travel in that

vehicle arose only when Krishantha proceeded with him to “arrest” the

deceased at Kandewatta after meeting him at Balapokuna Road. Dias said the

2nd Appellant returned to Nedimala in a van with others at about 1.00. a.m. The

fact that the phone was not available with the 2nd Appellant either due to its

misplacement or the phone being thrown into water too is confirmed by his

prompt application to obtain a new SIM on 23.05.2013. Since the new SIM was

obtained immediately after 22.05.2013, that is a fact which coincide with what

Anuradha said regarding the fate of 2nd Appellant’s phone. This factor made

his evidence more probable on this point. Thus, the item of evidence that the

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

133

2nd Appellant applied for a new SIM on 23.05.2013, in effect corroborates the

evidence of witness on this particular aspect. In these circumstances, it is

highly unlikely that the 2nd Appellant’s act of obtaining call details of his lost

phone is for the purpose he claims. In view of the infirmities that were

highlighted by the trial Court on his dock statement, and, owing to the

reasons set out above, I am unable to take a different view to the one already

taken by that Court.

In view of these considerations, I find no merit in the submission made

on behalf of the 2nd Appellant, based on these multiple points referred to

above.

Learned President’s Counsel, in articulating grounds of appeal on

behalf of the 3rd Appellant, submitted to Court that the totality of the

circumstantial evidence presented by the prosecution do not justify drawing

an irresistible conclusion as to his guilt for the conspiracy to murder the

deceased or for the commission of his murder.

During his submissions, learned President’s Counsel identified

individual items of circumstantial evidence that were presented against the 3rd

Appellant and analysed them in order to support his contention. The several

items of circumstantial evidence that were identified by the 3rd Appellant are

as follows:

a. the 3rd Appellant was part of the security contingent assigned

to the 1st Appellant and stayed at Nedimala residence,

b. the 3rd Appellant was shown the location of the factory of the

deceased at Saranakara Road,

c. Krishantha gave the contact number of 3rd Appellant to

Fausedeen before his departure to China,

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

134

d. the 3rd Appellant was shown the location of the factory and

was given a photograph of the deceased as requested,

e. the 3rd Appellant assured Fausedeen that they would deliver to

his expectations acting on the instructions of the 1st Appellant,

f. when the 1st Appellant wanted to see the location of the

deceased’s factory, the 3rd Appellant accompanied him,

g. during the failed attempt to ‘abduct’ the deceased on

21.05.2013, the 1st Appellant said that he would send the 3rd

Appellant in a white van to Saranakara Road, but he never

came.

In his attempt to provide an innocent explanation to these

circumstances, learned President’s Counsel submitted that the 3rd Appellant,

being a resident of Kurunegala, staying behind with the 1st Appellant at

Nedimala as commuting from his place of residence on a daily basis was not

practical. Krishantha said in evidence that while waiting at the airport, the 1st

Appellant instructed him to give the 3rd Appellant’s number to Fausedeen for

him to speak, a fact confirmed by Fausedeen by admitting that he contacted

the 1st Appellant through that number. In an attempt to providing an

explanation to Krishantha’s claim, it was submitted that the 1st Appellant,

being a Senior DIG, might not be available on his personal numbers all the

time and as such the 3rd Appellant’s number too was given to others, as a

contact number.

Regarding the evidence of the 3rd Appellant’s first visit to the location of

the factory, it was submitted that the oral evidence of the two witnesses who

speak to this event are inconsistent as to who travelled with whom in whose

vehicle. Learned Counsel highlighted that Krishantha said that he travelled in

his vehicle, whereas Fausedeen said that he drove Krishantha’s vehicle with

both of them as his passengers. Similarly, there was another inconsistency

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

135

between these two witnesses as to what they did on their return trip.

Krishantha said in evidence that after seeing the factory, they arrived at the

residence of Fausedeen. The 3rd Appellant wanted to have a photograph of the

deceased. Fausedeen found a family photo of the deceased and made it

available him. Krishantha admitted that he failed to mention this incident to

the Magistrate.

Fausedeen in his evidence, though speaks about driving Krishantha’s

vehicle up to his residence, made no reference to an incident involving a

photograph of the deceased at all. Learned President’s Counsel submitted that

the High Court at Bar, in view of this “glaring contradiction”, had stated that

there is only an inconsistency. His compliant is that this item of circumstantial

evidence had not been proved by reliable and acceptable evidence and as such

it ought to have been disregarded.

Moving on to the next, it was brought to our attention that the

statement attributed to the 3rd Appellant by Krishantha after their factory visit,

“ jdia uy;a;h lshk úoshg ;uhs wms lrkafk" jdia uy;a;h jefâ lrhs" jdia uy;a;h

lshk úoshg jev ál lr, Thdg wjYH foa wrka fokakï’ ” was not found in the

witnesses’ statement to the Magistrate, on which he was granted a conditional

pardon.

The challenge mounted by the 3rd Appellant on his conviction to the 1st

count of conspiracy to commit murder was that although there was no

acceptable or credible evidence to establish that charge, the High Court at Bar

erroneously concluded that the evidence of Fausedeen, Krishantha and

Anuradha are corroborated by tower records notwithstanding the fact that

they contradicted each other at times. The Court also ignored that the

witnesses failed to mention the several items of circumstantial evidence that

were taken into consideration against the 3rd Appellant, thus failing the

requirement that the evidence must justify an irresistible inference of guilt.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

136

Learned President’s Counsel also contended that the High Court at Bar

erred when it found the 3rd Appellant guilty to the count of murder, which in

turn was founded on the evidence of the two accomplices Krishantha,

Anuradha and also on the evidence of witness Samarapala Dias, a fellow inmate

of the 1st Appellant’s residence. Learned President’s Counsel devoted

significant time in his submissions to convince this Court that the original

Court was in serious error when it failed to hold against Dias on truthfulness

and reliability of his evidence, in spite of the discrepancies.

It is correct that the prosecution presented a case based on

circumstantial evidence against the 3rd Appellant, as it did against all the other

Appellants. However, the prosecution version of the items of circumstantial

evidence differs with that of the 3rd Appellant as itemised above. According to

the prosecution the several items of evidence presented against the 3rd

Appellant are as follows:

a. the 3rd Appellant was shown the location of the factory, the route he

takes, location of his apartment and noted the car used by him. He

also collected a photograph of the deceased, assured Fausedeen of

what he wanted, showed the photo to the 1st Appellant after

returning to Nedimala, accompanied the 1st Appellant on his trip to

the location of the factory,

b. maintained contacts with Fausedeen during Krishantha’s absence,

c. after ‘abduction’ of the deceased, got into the double cab at Nedimala

with a T56 weapon, held the deceased when they switched vehicles

at Pittugala,

d. was not available at Nedimala at 11.00 p.m., and returned at 1.10 a.m.

on the 23.05.2013, with the 2nd , 4th and 6th Appellants, went upstairs

to speak to the 1st Appellant,

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

137

e. at 6.30 a.m. told Dias to open the gate for Krishantha and was there

when they took the van away,

f. picked up the T56 weapon and took it into his room,

g. on instructions of the 1st Appellant, 3rd Appellant came to Nedimala

on 31.05.2013 and suggested that the cache of weapons should be

moved out, loaded them to a Maruti Car on instructions of the 1st

Appellant, transferred them to the double cab once more when it

was brought into Nedimala premises by IP Willawarachchi,

h. did not report to CID when summoned, handed over a nylon string

to Dias to be thrown away,

i. reported to CID on 05.06.2013.

The High Court at Bar, in consideration of the evidence against the 3rd

Appellant considered the evidence of Fausedeen and Krishantha and found

that it could accept same as truthful and reliable account since the movements

of the three of them (two witnesses and the 3rd Appellant) are corroborated by

the details contained in the tower records during the time period they were

together. Krishantha said in his evidence the three of them left in Fausedeen’s

vehicle to show location of the factory to the 3rd Appellant at about 6.30 to 7.30

p.m. Fausedeen did not mention any time period in his evidence. After the 6th

Appellant left for Thailand, Krishantha accompanied the 3rd Appellant for

another visit to factory with Fausedeen. This time, the 1st Appellant himself

joined them. They reached near the factory at about 8.00 – 8.30 p.m. Since the

1st Appellant said he need not see the deceased’s apartment, Krishantha first

dropped Fausedeen off at the mosque near Mayura Kovil and thereafter the 1st

and 3rd Appellants at Nedimala.

The tower records indicate that Fausedeen and Krishantha were at

Nedimala as they were served by Nedimala Relocation – DCS 1 tower at 7.05

p.m. and Nedimala U tower at 7.07 to 7.20 p.m., respectively. During the same

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

138

time period, the 1st Appellant too was served by Nedimala U tower from 6.42

p.m. to 7.17 p.m. At 7.30 p.m. Fausedeen received an overseas call from India

and was served by Mangala Road tower.

During his visit to Saranankara Road, the 1st Appellant used his phone

four times, i.e. at 7.37 p.m., 7.43 p.m., 7.46 p.m. and 7.49 p.m. through the

towers of Saranankara Road – V, Edward Av and Pamankada- A while the 3rd

Appellant used his phone thrice, 7.46 p.m., 7.51 p.m. and 7.52 p.m. and was

served by Pamankada- 9D, Welwat-BEL-9D and Hampdon – 8D towers.

Krishantha was served by Havelock – W tower at 7.44 p.m., and at 7.45 p.m. by

Havelock – V tower. Fausedeen too was served by Havelock- DCS 2 tower at

7.44 p.m. This evidence coincides with Krishantha’s evidence that they

dropped Fausedeen off at the mosque for his evening prayers.

The High Court at Bar considered this body of evidence and concluded

that the evidence of Krishantha and Fausedeen were corroborated by the tower

records, which corresponds with their movements as spoken to by the two

witnesses during their oral testimonies. At the hearing, the 3rd Appellant took

up the position that the tower records show only that he was served by them

during the specified time slots, but this is because he regularly travels in the

bus that ply along Horana Road on his way to Nedimala and he may have been

served by these towers on such instances. This position was not put to any of

the prosecution witnesses, nor did he present it during his dock statement. It

is only in appeal that he presented this position to counter a determination of

fact made by the trial Court. Even if it was put to the witnesses, the said

explanation is clearly a false statement as the time duration of his call records

at Saranankara Road and surrounding areas is little over an hour. It is highly

unlikely that a passenger bus would take over an hour to pass about three

kilometres distance along the 120-bus route as the 3rd Appellant claims.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

139

The evidence regarding the 3rd Appellant was waiting with a T56

weapon, when Krishantha returned from Biyagama after Shiyam agreed to

transfer his assets, was considered by the High Court at Bar and concluded

that the tower records indicate that he was there at Nedimala during relevant

times. The last call for the day was either taken or answered by the 3rd

Appellant at 9.17 p.m. and was served by Dehiwala-Zoo -8DD tower. The fact

that Krishantha arriving at Beddegana to borrow his brothers van and leaving

there between 9.30 and 10.00 p.m. too was found to be corroborated by tower

records to the satisfaction of Court.

The remaining set of circumstances relates to the events that had taken

place subsequent to the murder of the deceased and would be relevant as

subsequent conduct of that particular Appellant. This evidence primarily led

through the witness Dias, and the complaint of the 3rd Appellant about the

Court acting on that evidence could be considered after dealing with the

evidence referred to in the preceding paragraphs.

It is seen from the complaints made by learned President’s Counsel on

this section of evidence primarily concerns with the assessment made by the

trial Court on its truthfulness and reliability. In this context, submissions were

made about the status of the witnesses as they are being accomplices in need

of corroboration, their admitted falsehoods, the several inconsistencies and

omissions. Credibility is essentially a question of fact. Since the trial Courts

are in the best position to observe witnesses, unlike the transcript of the

proceedings presented before the appellate Courts, the decision to accept or

reject evidence of witnesses is therefore a question of fact for those Courts to

decide and is best left to them, given the priceless advantage it has over an

appellate Court of observing the demeanour and deportment of witnesses.

The appellate Courts would be reluctant to interfere with the findings of the

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

140

trial Courts, unless such findings could be termed as totally inconsistent with

the evidence presented before that Court or as perverse findings.

The question of accomplice had already been dealt in detail earlier on in

this judgment. The remaining complaints were in relation to the assessment of

credibility in view of the admitted falsehoods of the witnesses, the several

inconsistencies that were apparent within their assertions and omissions that

were highlighted off their evidence. This aspect of the evidence of Fausedeen

and Krishantha too had already been dealt with and need to be revisited.

During his submissions, learned President’s Counsel referred to the

inconsistencies of whose vehicle Krishantha, Fausedeen and the 3rd Appellant

travelled to reach Saranankara Road factory, the handing over of a photograph

to the 3rd Appellant by Fausedeen, the way Fausedeen got to know when the 1st

Appellant said that he needs to know the location of the factory, who caried

the T56 weapon at Nedimala, who accompanied the deceased when he was

switched to the van and the failure to mention in the statement to the

Magistrate that the 3rd Appellant wanted a photograph of the deceased, that

he too joined them when the 1st Appellant’s visit to location and who

accompanied the deceased when he was taken to the van.

The issue of credibility of the principle witnesses for the prosecution,

Fausedeen, Krishantha, Anuradha and Dias, was relied upon by all the

Appellants at varying degrees, and already dealt with by this Court in

consideration of the basis of accomplices and the requirement of

corroboration. Although, the issue of credibility of Dias was highlighted by

the 1st and 6th Appellants, in relation to their application under Section 351 of

the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, it is the 3rd Appellant, who chose to

assail the decision of the High Court at Bar to accept his evidence as a truthful

and reliable account, particularly in relation to the counts with which he is

accused of and, on that basis, needs a detailed consideration at this point.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

141

The High Court at Bar considered these discrepancies among the

evidence of Krishantha and Fausedeen along with the omissions that were

highlighted off their statements to CCD, CID and the Magistrate and decided

to accept their evidence upon being corroborated in material particulars by

other independent sources, which made their respective narratives more

probable.

In coming to that conclusion, the High Court at Bar considered

Krishantha admitting his mistake in stating that Fausedeen invited him to get

into his vehicle ( at p. 225)and that he made an error regarding the day of

factory visit (at p.179). After evaluation of the evidence as a whole, the Court

was of the view that parts of his story were confirmed by other evidence while

some of his assertions were not even challenged, it is likely that the rest of his

narrative could be accepted (at p.282). In doing so, the Court considered the

inconsistencies and omissions that were highlighted by all Appellants, and

not only by the 3rd Appellant.

The High Court at Bar observed that it is highly unlikely that these

witnesses repeat a concocted story (at p.169) and also noted that the

omissions were explained by witness. Court accepted Krishantha’s explanation

for his omissions were due to the fact that he made a statement only from his

memory and there were no probing questions for details as in High Court at

Bar. He also stated that he was under immense mental pressure for his own

safety during the period of his detention. These factors were referred to by the

High Court at Bar in pages 165,175,207, 223 and 233.

Similarly, Fausedeen said in evidence that, while making the statement

before the Magistrate, he was told not to come out with irrelevancies and

confine himself to the basic narrative. Court also noted the threats that were

issued to Anuradha in the consideration of his evidence for credibility. Having

taken all these factors into consideration (at pages 119 to 125, 135,233,259

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

142

261,273 and 274) the High Court at Bar decided to disregard those

inconsistencies and omissions of the witnesses. The approach of the High

Court at Bar adopted in the evaluation of inconsistencies could not be faulted.

In Bandaranike v Jagathsena and Others (1984) 2 Sri L.R. 397, when a similar

situation arose for consideration, this Court said (at p.415);

“[W]hen versions of two witnesses do not agree the trial judge has to

consider whether the discrepancy is due to dishonesty or to defective

memory or whether the witness' powers of observation were limited. In

weighing the evidence, the trial judge must take into consideration the

demeanour of the witness in the witness box. Was she trying to the best

of her ability to speak the truth ? The learned Magistrate had to bear in

mind that Kamala was giving evidence eight and a half months after the

incident. Could she be expected to remember every detail of the incident

? She was unable to remember how many papers were taken from the

bag. She made these entries at night. Can she be expected to remember

precisely several months later what shade of blue ink she used ?

According to her recollection she used a black coloured (ink) ballpoint

pen which was clearly an error.”

A similar view was expressed by a divisional bench of this Court in

Attorney General v Potta Naufer (supra- at p. 185),

“[W]hen faced with contradictions in a witness testimonial the court

must bear in mind the nature and significance of the contradictions,

viewed in light of the whole of the evidence given by the witness. The

court must also come to a determination regarding whether this

contradiction was an honest mistake on the part of the witness or

whether it was a deliberate attempt to mislead court. Too great a

significance cannot be attached to minor discrepancies, or contradictions

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

143

as by and large a witness cannot be expected to possess a photographic

memory and to recall the exact details of an incident.”

Some of the more significant omissions that were marked off the

evidence of these witnesses came from their statements to CCD and CID. They

also made statements before the Magistrate, before the 1st Appellant was

arrested by the CID. All these witnesses feared for their lives and had

specifically been threatened not to mention the involvement of the 1st and 6th

Appellants or his team of officers to anyone in authority. It is natural for a

witness to avoid making references against a serving senior police officer,

when questioned by another police officer over a serious crime, without

having a very firm assurance for his safety. But the witnesses could not expect

that kind of an assurance either from the CCD or CID.

One of the main grounds that were presented before this Court for

determination in Dharmasiri v Republic of Sri Lanka (2012) 1 Sri L.R. 268,

was where the main witness for the prosecution failed to name the accused in

the first information to police due to fear of reprisals, even though she said to

have identified him accurately at the time of commission of the offence and, as

such her evidence should not have acted upon in view of such a serious and

material omission. This Court, in rejecting that contention stated that (at p.

272);

“[T]he Courts must look at the broader spectrum and must take into

account the holistic picture of the occurrences that the family had been

affected by, not forgetting the civil unrest and political tension in the

country during 1980's to early 1990's during which the JVP (Janatha

Vimukthi Peramuna, a Marxist Sinhalese Political Party) insurrection

took place accounting to a large number of killings [Gunaratna, R.

(1990), (Sri Lanka, a lost revolution?: The inside story of the JVP',

Institute of Fundamental Studies, Sri Lanka).The famous Embilipitiya

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

144

abduction and murder case, Dayananda Lokugalappaththi and

eight others v. The State (2003) 3 Sri L.R. 362, illustrates the dark

and bleak time period that brought consternation and struck an almost

unshakable fear into the hearts of the people of Sri Lanka.

It was in the backdrop of such times, that the husband of the deceased

was murdered in 1989 and four years later, in this particular incident,

the deceased was murdered at her residence, in front of her mother and

her 9-year-old son, who were the main eyewitnesses at the trial in the

High Court.”

Thus, the High Court at Bar, making a specific reference as to the

demeanour and deportment of the main witnesses for the prosecution,

especially during their probing cross examination by a team of defence

Counsel, decided to accept their evidence as truthful and reliable accounts of

the events they vouch to have been witnessed. The trial Court observed (at p.

169 of the judgment) that the witnesses had no difficulty in recalling any of

the events they spoke about in details during cross examination and were

natural and effortless in their demeanour in replying to the questions put

across by Counsel. The Court also noted that they described the multiple

incidents as it had happened, indicating there was no exaggeration or

embellishment.

Turning to the contention that witness Dias is a creation of the

investigators, who falsely pretended before the trial Court that he did not

volunteer information to investigators fearing the 1st Appellant (who by then

was in custody). I must now consider the basis on which the 3rd Appellant

sought to challenge the decision of the High Court at Bar to accept his

evidence as credible account of certain circumstances that had been relied

upon by the prosecution.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

145

Learned President’s Counsel submitted that witness Dias fails all the

tests that are applied on a testimony of a witness to ascertain its credibility. He

invited our attention to several observations made by the trial Court as to his

demeanour, in addition to citing questionable parts of his testimony in

support of his complaint, that the witness had presented an inconsistent

version of events coupled with many omissions regarding the several acts he

attributed to the Appellants.

Of the many observations made by the President of the High Court at

Bar during Dias’s evidence, the important observation was made in relation to

his tendency to evade questions put to him by the Appellants, without giving

a direct answer. Learned High Court Judge also observed his ability to recall

events from his memory without any note as an interesting feature and

strangely questioned the witness when he said that he knew what the 1st

Appellant and others read from the newspapers, by asking whether he had

nothing else to do other than spying on the activities of his senior officer.

However, the High Court at Bar, in its judgment had taken the view, in

spite of the observation on evasive manner, that factor alone would not justify

rejection of his evidence in total. Court noted that unlike other police officers,

Dias had no note to refresh his memory and had to totally rely on his ability to

recall events from his memory in order to testify before Court, and at times he

may have even exaggerated some of the details. It also noted that the witness

was under intense scrutiny by the Appellants as well as by the Court. The

High Court at Bar had taken into consideration of the fact that he had not

conducted any investigation during his entire career in the police force. The

Court also considered the comment made by the President of the High Court

at Bar that the witness had acted as a spy to observe activities of the 1st and 3rd

Appellants and concluded that it is not possible for it to infer from the

evidence that he acted as such. In assessing his evidence for credibility, the

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

146

Court took into consideration that he never had any investigative experience

or made entries denoting the duties he performed. In view of these factors, the

Court proceeded to accept certain sections of his evidence as truthful account

of the incident, following the dicta of Samaraweera v Attorney General (1990)

1 Sri L.R. 256.

Returning to consider the specific instances of his evidence found to be

inconsistent with his former statements and where he failed to mention a fact

in any one or more of his statements, learned President’s Counsel invited our

attention to his evidence regarding the return of the 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 6th

Appellants on the early hours of 23.05.2013, and highlighted that he did not

mention the 3rd Appellant opening the gate from outside. Another omission

was highlighted that he omitted to mention that the said Appellants, having

gone upstairs, have returned. The omission regarding that Dias failed to

mention that 6th Appellant came to the room in which he slept was also

highlighted by the Counsel.

The High Court at Bar considered the inconsistencies and omissions

that were brought to its notice before it proceeded to accept the section of his

evidence that can be accepted as truthful accounts of the events they speak of.

This approach was in line with the view taken by this Court on omissions in

the judgment of Rev. Matthew Peiris v The Attorney General (1992) 2 Sri L.R.

372, that (at p. 383), “[W]here the evidence was challenged on the ground of delay

or omissions or ill will the Court also scrutinise such evidence intrinsically, applying

the test of probability, to consider whether the facts spoken to are established beyond

reasonable doubt.”

Perusal of the evidence of Dias clearly indicative of his mental dilemma

when summoned by the CID and questioned him on the events that had taken

place in the night of 22.05.2013 at Nedimala residence of the 1st Appellant and

the conduct of the Appellants, up to the point of their arrests. The 1st

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

147

Appellant, after obtaining call details of his team of officers, said that only the

5th Appellant had a problem and he had seen to rectifying it. The 1st Appellant

similarly instructed Dias on what to say when CID questions him, which

made the witness to present a fabricated version by supressing what he saw

and heard. This was a difficult choice for the witness to make for he was

serving the 1st Appellant from his Kurunegala days up until his arrest. Not

only the 1st Appellant influenced him to lie to CID, but also an Attorney at

Law, who was known to the Senior DIG, also reminded that his master would

be released very soon .

When questioned by the 5th Appellant regarding the circumstances that

led him to make a second statement to CID to correct the first one he already

made, the witness laid bare his internal conflict in making a choice between

disclosing the truth or supressing the truth by making out a story on someone

else’s instructions for the sake of being loyal to his master. The decision to tell

the truth had been a very difficult choice for him.

Offering an explanation for the reason to deliberately make a false

narrative to CID, the witness said (at p. 251 of Vol. XI)

m%( wehs ;uqka Th jf.a wi;Hh lreKq iS’whs’ä’ tlg lsõfõ lsh,d”@

W( uy;a;hd iïnkaOj jdia uy;a;hd iïnkaOj ;=is; uy;a;hd

weú,a,d lsõjg miafia uu wú iïnkaOfhka lsõfõ keye" m%Yakh

;sfhkafka uf.ka weyqfõ iS’whs’ä’ tflka weyqfõ fjmka tlla

iïnkaOfhka muKhs’ kuq;a W;=udfKks ug fjmka tlla .ek

lshkak neye" uu oelald fjmka f.dvla ;sfhkjd talhs W;=udfKks

uu fjmka tlla .ek lsh,d bjrfj,d wr wks;A fjmka ál fidhd

.;af;d;a tfyu ug m%YAKhla fjkjd" fjmka f.dvla .ek

lsõfjd;a tfyu uy;a;hdf.ka m%YAKhla fjkjd ta m%YaKhg wdfh;a

uu wyqjqkd W;=udfKks’

The following sections of the proceedings amply illustrate his strong

loyalty towards the 1st Appellant.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

148

m%( ksjeros lrkak ;uqka iïmQ¾K wjYH;djh ;snqkd fkao@

W( ;snqkd’ 22 fjksod Wfoa ;=is; .=Kfialr uy;d ug weú,a,d lsõj

ksid ;uhs’ ;=is; .+Kfialr uy;d Wfoa weú,a,d ld¾ tlg ke.,d

uy;a;hdf.a Tmamq ;srmamq j, lghq;= lrkakfka tA uy;d’ uu;a

okakjd fyd|g’ jdia uy;a;hdg úreoaOj fudkj;a lshkak neye’

jdia uy;a;hd ;j ál ojilska t,shg tkjd lsh,d’ t;fldg lsisu

fohla wmsg m%ldY lrkak neye’ ys;d f.k bkak tajd lshkak

fjkafk keye’ hk fldg CID tlg nh fjkjd’ fï me;af;ka

uy;a;hd .ek ys;kjd’ t;fldg wms .sf¾g wiq fjÉp mqjla

f.ähla jf.a uu’”

The High Court at Bar nonetheless decided to accept his evidence by

applying the probability test, as Rev. Matthew Peiris v The Attorney General

(supra) recommended and found that most of his assertions were supported

by other credible evidence.

Prosecution relied on Dias’s evidence in order to highlight the conduct

of the Appellants during the time period commencing from the evening of

22.05.2013 and ending with the arrest of the 1st Appellant on 10.06.2013. The

fact that the 1st Appellant returned home that evening at about 7.30 p.m., with

Krishantha, Anuradha and 3rd Appellant, return of 2nd, 5th and 6th Appellants

from Kurunegala at about 8.10 p.m., arrival of two friends of the 6th Appellant

to install a projector about the same time, having dinner with Susantha, the

two policemen and the civilian at about 9.00 p.m., noting that 2nd and 5th

Appellant were not there along with Krishantha and Anuradha, served tea and

biscuits around 11.00 p.m., to all those who were up at that time, noting that

1st Appellant did not sleep until late into that night, did not see the 2nd, 3rd, 4th,

5th and 6th Appellant when serving tea, continued to help the three from

Mirigama with their task of decorating the lanterns which they concluded at

about 12.30 p.m., was preparing to sleep at about 1.00 a.m., saw the 2nd, 3rd, 4th

and 6th Appellant returning home in a van, did not pay much attention to

them as it is usual for them to arrive at late after attending parties, they all

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

149

went up-stairs and after few minutes returned and went to sleep, got up at

5.00 a.m., prepared tea for the 1st Appellant at 5.15 a.m., 1st Appellant asked

the witness to take a call to Krishantha, could not connect, swept the front

garden at 5.40 a.m., saw a dark coloured van parked similar to the one used

by Krishantha, 3rd Appellant said Krishantha had arrived, opened the gate and

saw Krishantha and Anuradha were waiting, Krishantha asked whether the 1st

Appellant was up, Krishantha spoke to the 1st Appellant for few minutes,

Krishantha invited the witness to come along as he is travelling to Polgahawela,

Krishantha left with Anuradha in that van, saw a T56 weapon lying on a

concrete slab in the garden, which was not there in the morning. He described

the weapons as a “lp,a ng T56”, which the 3rd Appellant picked and took it

into his room. The 1st Appellant left for office with the 3rd Appellant as usual.

The witness also stated that that he visited his hometown during Wesak

period and returned to Nedimala only on 29.05.2013, relieving the 3rd

Appellant from his duties. He learned on the evening of 30.05.2013 that

Krishantha was arrested and remembered that 1st Appellant left home that

morning at about 6.15 a.m., in a hurry and in casual clothing. He returned

home only after about 1 ½ hours.

After his return, the 1st Appellant had a discussion with his wife, along

with the 2nd, 4th and 6th Appellants. He instructed to send out messages to 2nd,

3rd , 4th and 5th Appellant to return to Nedimala after Krishantha’s arrest. They

arrived in the evening of 31.05.2013, and the 3rd Appellant suggested that the

stack of firearms should be dispatched to a safer location, witness joined the

others to load an assortment of arms to the boot of the Maruti car of the 6th

Appellant, the arms included T56 weapons of three models, including a “lp,a

ng ”, two mortar shells and a bundle of shot guns wrapped in a polysack bag.

IP Villavarachchi came to Nedimala either on the 2nd or 3rd June in a black

double cab, loaded those firearms into that vehicle and took them away. The

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

150

2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th Appellants were arrested by CID on 05.06.2013; when they

presented themselves, upon being notice to appear, and the 1st Appellant was

arrested by the CID on 10.06.2013. Witness made a statement to CID on the

lines he was instructed by the 1st Appellant that all of them were there on the

evening of 22.05.2013, helping him with Wesak decorations. He was directed

by the CID to appear once more on 21.06.2013 with the other officer, Susantha,

who also served at Nedimala with Dias.

The evidence thus presented indicate that the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th

Appellants were not seen at Nedimala residence when tea was served at about

11.00. p.m. It was also elicited that the 2nd ,3rd, 4th and 6th Appellants returned

to Nedimala residence in a van at about 1.00 a.m. The other significant item of

evidence was that a T56 weapon, which was lying on a concrete slab was

noticed by Dias only after Krishantha and Anuradha took away the van that

had been parked in the compound since early morning. The prosecution also

presented evidence that the said weapon was removed by the 3rd Appellant,

who took it to his room, after Dias alerted of its presence.

The reason for Dias to stay up late in that night was to help the two

police officers and another civilian, who arrived at Nedimala that evening in a

lorry with a number of Wesak lanterns from Meerigama, who were busy

pasting glass papers onto them. Dias provided them with dinner and

refreshments until their task was over. The three of them, after finishing their

work on Wesak lanterns, left Nedimala around 12.30 a.m. This was supported

by the witness who arrived with Wesak lanterns. It was also Dias’s evidence

that, as he prepared to lie down to sleep after Meerigama team left, he saw the

2nd, 3rd, 4th and 6th Appellants retuning home. Significantly, Dias did not say

5th Appellant too arrived there with the others. The 5th Appellant was there at

Nedimala after returning from Kurunegala. But, he was not seen when tea was

served at 11.00. p.m. It is an undisputed fact that the 5th Appellant was in

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

151

Dompe area between 12.00 midnight and 1.30 a.m. on 23.05.2013, and thus

Dias unwittingly provided credence to his own evidence, by being consistent

with already established facts.

During their submissions, learned President’s Counsel for the 1st and 6th

Appellants as well as learned President’s Counsel for the 3rd Appellant

strongly challenged the credibility of witness Dias, particularly with regard to

his evidence on the loading of a cache of weapons to the 6th Appellant’s car. It

was contended that it is a near impossibility that these number of weapons

with long barrels could be loaded into the relatively smaller boot of a Maruti

car and it was emphasised that T56 weapons could not be loaded to such a

limited space of its spare wheel bay. It was also suggested to the witnesses

that he makes this accusation against the 1st Appellant on the instructions of

the CID officers. This position was in fact suggested to the witness. Dias

offered clarification that a T56 weapon, when folded, would be of about two

feet in length and even challenged the cross examiners, that he could load

these weapons into a boot of a Maruti car once more in order to convince

them.

It is clear from his evidence that Dias did not disclose the incident of

transporting the cache of weapons voluntarily, when he was questioned by the

CID. The CID questioned him about a single T56 weapon during

investigations and the witness then decided to disclose this incident because

he feared that if the investigations revealed the fact that there was a cache of

weapons, he would be in trouble for misleading the investigators. The reasons

for his reluctance to volunteer this piece of information to CID is revealed

from his evidence, as he stated thus; “uf.ka weyqfõ iS’whs’ä’ tflka weyqfõ fjmka

tlla iïnkaOfhka muKhs’ kuq;a W;=udfKks ug fjmka tlla .ek lshkak neye" uu

oelald fjmka f.dvla ;sfhkjd talhs W;=udfKks uu fjmka tlla .ek lsh,d bjrfj,d

wr wks;A fjmka ál fidhd .;af;d;a tfyu ug m%YAKhla fjkjd" fjmka f.dvla .ek

lsõfjd;a tfyu uy;a;hdf.ka m%YAKhla fjkjd”.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

152

The evidence regarding a T56 weapon that was found in the van in the

morning was presented by Anuradha, who left it on a concrete slab, before

driving away with Krishantha, on the morning of 23.05.2013. Dias only states

that he saw a weapon lying on the concrete slab which he did not notice when

he swept the garden. This claim is confirmed by Anuradha’s evidence. If Dias

wants to implicate any of the Appellants, he could have added more details to

embellish his evidence and thereby making the T56 weapon as the probable

murder weapon, but he did not.

The investigators knew that the death of the deceased was due to a

rifled firearm injury to his head, as a penetrating core of a T56 ammunition

was recovered embedded into the soil, immediately below the exit wounds of

the deceased. It is natural in these circumstances for the investigators wanting

to recover weapon used to commit the murder, and therefore diverting their

efforts to obtain some information in that regard. The information regarding

the cache of arms, instead of the murder weapon, was thus an unexpected

result, but considered relevant to the investigation conducted by the CID.

His evidence on the point also indicate Dias did not implicate the 1st

Appellant as the person who initiated the move of the cache of weapons.

According to Dias, it was the 3rd Appellant who initially proposed the idea in

anticipation of a search, but it was implemented with the instructions of the 1st

Appellant.

It is proposed to deal with the impact of this evidence had over the

finding of guilt entered against the Appellants by the High Court at Bar, when

the application made by the 1st and 6th Appellant under Section 351 of the

Code of Criminal Procedure is considered for its merits. But for the purpose of

this part of the judgment, where the truthfulness and reliability of Dias’s

evidence is considered to test the decision of the trial Court to accept them, I

am of the view that it is a probable scenario.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

153

Dias’s evidence on subsequent conduct of the 1st Appellant, that he was

worried about the 5th Appellant’s phone records and assured that he had

already devised a solution to that issue was independently confirmed by

Anuradha in stating that the 1st Appellant instructed him what to state about

the 5th Appellant, if he was questioned by the CID. The narrative provided by

the witness Dias before the High Court at Bar is clearly a probable one. Being

one of the two lower rankers who were assigned to the 1st Appellant, who

personally requested Dias be released to him, could not be expected to reveal

the truth to CID acting on the dictates of his conscience, knowing very well

that if he did, his senior would be exposed to a criminal prosecution. He was

under immense pressure to provide a narrative that had already been scripted

out to suit those who are involved. A lawyer said that 1st Appellant would

return soon adding to his fears.

Dias complied with his instructions up to a point, and the moment he

realised that the investigators knew much more than him of the incident, he

reluctantly revealed what he saw and heard. Perusal of his narrative indicate

that he wanted to offer more details during his evidence, which was

interpreted by the trial Court as an attempt to exaggerate. However, the Court

decided to accept his evidence that are found to be supported by other

evidence. This was a prudent approach, given the fact that he, on his own

admission, lied in relation to 90% of the contents of his first statement to the

CID, of course faithfully following instructions to do so.

Thus, the decision of the High Court at Bar to accept Dias’s evidence by

applying the probability test, as Rev. Matthew Peiris v The Attorney General

(supra) recommended, is justified as his evidence was supported and

corroborated by other credible evidence. Having accepted his evidence as

credible, the High Court at Bar however did not rely on the evidence related

to the transporting of arms in the determination of the complicity of the

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

154

Appellants to the charges they were accused of. The evidence presented

before that Court was sufficient to drawn the irresistible inference of guilt of

the 3rd Appellant. Therefore, it is my considered view that the 3rd Appellant’s

contention regarding the failure of the prosecution to prove the charges

against him on credible and acceptable evidence is without any merit and

ought to be rejected on that account.

In addition to the ground of appeal that Krishantha and Anuradha should

have been treated as accomplices, the 4th Appellant also urged following

grounds of appeal before us, in support of his petition of appeal:

a. The High Court at Bar failed to hold that there was no direct

or circumstantial evidence against the 4th Appellant,

b. the High Court at Bar failed to consider the evidence relating

to the ‘confessional statement’ of the 4th Appellant,

c. the High Court at Bar erred when it expected the 4th Appellant

to offer an explanation,

d. the High Court at Bar reached several factually erroneous

conclusions,

e. conditional pardon offered by the Attorney General and the

journal entry.

Learned Counsel for the 4th Appellant submitted that none of the tower

records indicate that the 4th Appellant participated in the journey along with

the deceased in the late evening of 22.05.2013. In the absence of any electronic

evidence, Learned Counsel submitted that the prosecution case against the 4th

Appellant is essentially based on direct evidence, but the High Court at Bar,

in its analysis of evidence, had fallen into error in finding him guilty to

conspiracy to murder and committing murder, when there was no direct or

circumstantial evidence placed against him by the prosecution.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

155

It was submitted on behalf of the 4th Appellant that the only item of

evidence presented against him is that he joined the others, quite some time

after the abduction of the deceased had taken place at Kandewatta Road and

drove the double cab at one stage of the journey and a van at another stage. In

light of this evidence, learned Counsel contended that since the prosecution

has provided no material whatsoever that the 4th Appellant had any motive to

cause harm to the deceased or that he had any kind of murderous intention to

cause his death, the conviction entered by the High Court at Bar is clearly

erroneous. He further submitted that the prosecution also failed to adduce

any evidence that other than driving the two vehicles, the 4th Appellant was in

some way connected to the others, who may have abducted the victim or

those who were wielding dangerous weapons or those who planned out the

manoeuvres which culminated in the death of the victim.

Learned Counsel added that the 4th Appellant, being a serving

policeman, it is not unusual for him to act in this manner as it regularly

happens that a man being taken in a vehicle in relation to purposes connected

with various investigations in order to make discoveries in terms of Section 27

of the Evidence Ordinance. He stressed that, being a “ low-salt policeman”, it

is not for him to question his senior colleagues and that his duties did not

cover ascertaining from them about the rights and wrongs of this entire

undertaking. Learned Counsel also invited attention of Court that the

prosecution did not present any evidence of the role played by the 4th

Appellant beyond Bandarawatta junction and as such there was no material to

suggest even inferentially that he acted on “instructions” given to him by

others in the team.

Learned Addl. S.G. itemised the evidence that were presented against

the 4th Appellant before the High Court at Bar, which I shall refer to in detail

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

156

as we proceed further in this segment in relation to the other grounds of

appeal.

The first reference to the 4th Appellant in Krishantha’s evidence could be

found regarding the events that unfolded when the double cab carrying the

deceased arrived at Nedimala residence. The 4th Appellant, along with 3rd

Appellant, who carried a T56 weapon, and the 6th Appellant, emerged out

from the gate of the 1st Appellant’s residence. They came up to the vehicle to

join its passengers. Krishantha said he was frightened after seeing the way the

three had emerged out of the gate and coming up to the double cab.

Krishantha wanted to speak to the 1st Appellant and when he returned to the

vehicle, the 3rd Appellant had already occupied the front left seat while the 4th

Appellant had taken the driver’s seat, replacing Anuradha. Anuradha confirms

this incident in his evidence. It was the 4th Appellant who drove the double

cab carrying the deceased from Nedimala up to the point at which he stopped

the vehicle, after passing Pittugala bridge.

This is the point at which the deceased was transferred to the van and

so did the 4th Appellant, who thereafter got into the driver’s seat of that

vehicle, replacing Anuradha once more. After the 5th Appellant’s instructions

to Krishantha to return home in the double cab, in all probability, the 4th

Appellant would have continued with the journey by driving the van towards

Biyagama, in the absence of any evidence to show the driver was changed.

Dias is a witness who served as a member of the team of officers who

served the 1st Appellant and stayed in his Nedimala residence. It was Dias who

provided evidence of the return of the 4th Appellant, along with the 2nd, 3rd, 5th

and 6th Appellants, back to the 1st Appellant’s Nedimala residence in a van.

According to him, he went to sleep around 1.00 or 1.15 a.m. on 23.05.2014,

after helping others to make Wesak lanterns and saw a van returning to the

compound through the gate and thereafter saw 2nd, 3rd, 4th, and 6th Appellants

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

157

going up stairs. He also said that at 11.00 p.m. on 22.05.2013, he served tea to

the persons who made Wesak lanterns, and these Appellants were not at

home.

Dias further said in his evidence that after getting up at 5.00 a.m. in the

following morning (23.05.2013) he prepared tea for the 1st Appellant and

swept the garden. At about 6.30 a.m. Krishantha came with Anuradha and took

the van away after speaking to the 1st Appellant. The 3rd and 4th Appellants

too were seen near the van and after Krishantha left, the 3rd Appellant picked

up a T56 weapon that was lying on a concrete slab and taken it into his room.

This weapon was not there when he swept the garden in the early morning.

The High Court at Bar rejected the 4th Appellant’s dock statement in

which he said Krishantha, Anuradha and Dias lied in stating that he drove a

double cab and a van and arrived at Nedimala late in that night. He totally

denied any participation. The Court also considered his accusation against

officers of the CID in implicating him for this crime.

When the evidence that were presented against the 4th Appellant is

considered it is clear that he was not performing a duty of a police driver, who

drove around some officers who were involved in an investigation along with

a suspect as the learned Counsel contended on his behalf. The 4th Appellant

was assigned as the 1st Appellant’s driver and not assigned to any

investigative unit. There was no investigation that the 2nd, 3rd and 5th

Appellant conducted, and the 6th Appellant is neither a suspect nor an

informant to this ‘investigation’ to travel along with the group of serving

police officers, as the 4th Appellant contend. It is the same with the deceased.

The 4th Appellant was obviously instructed by the 1st Appellant to drive the

deceased to a place under the direction of the 5th Appellant. He knew what

was expected of him, when he got into the driver’s seat, replacing Anuradha

who owned the double cab. Anuradha had no place to sit, and finally sat on

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

158

the legs of the 2nd Appellant, until they reached Baddegana to pick up the van.

There is no evidence pointing to the fact that any of the Appellants were

issuing directions on the 4th Appellant to shift from the double cab to the van

and to drive on. He clearly had his instructions spelt out to him and acted

faithfully to follow them.

These items of evidence point to the reasonable inference that he drove

the van to the point where the deceased was killed and brought back his

‘senior’ colleagues from the place of a crime back to the residence of the 1st

Appellant, but only after dropping off the 5th Appellant, who lived just 15 km

away from the place the deceased was shot at. Clearly, this is not an

investigation to which the 4th Appellant could claim he merely performed the

function of a police driver and had no idea of what others did. It is correct to

say that the prosecution had no evidence against the 4th Appellant other than

his act of driving the two vehicles, only if one leaves out the admission, he

made to Krishantha in the following morning (which will be considered next).

But the inferences that could reasonably draw from the proved facts of his

driving the vehicles to and from the crime scene tend to establish that the 4th

Appellant was connected to the others, who abducted the victim and wielded

dangerous weapons under the direction of the person who planned out the

manoeuvres which culminated in the death of the victim.

Secondly, learned Counsel contended that the High Court at Bar erred

when it failed to properly consider the evidence relating to the ‘confessional

statement’ of the 4th Appellant.

The item of “confessional” evidence that had been relied upon by the 4th

Appellant in advancing his contention contains an answer given by him to

Krishantha, who posed the question “fudllao ixcSj fï flf,a" oeka ishdï fl`”,

when he met the 4th Appellant in the following morning at the 1st Appellant’s

residence. The 4th Appellant responded to Krishantha with a smiling face “wms

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

159

ishdï j uerej" jdia uy;a;hf.ka úia;r oek.kak”. Learned Counsel for the 4th

Appellant contended that the said statement attributed to his client by

Krishantha is not an unconditional admission of guilt, as the prosecution wants

it to be taken, but only an instance of giving second hand information about

the fate of the deceased, as he wanted Krishantha to ask the 1st Appellant for a

more descriptive account of what happened to the deceased. Learned Counsel

thereupon submitted that this gives rise to a reasonable doubt as to his guilt

and the High Court at Bar failed to consider this aspect of the said items of

evidence.

In advancing the said contention, learned Counsel did not elaborate

from where the 4th Appellant obtained this item of “second hand

information”, which he passed on to Krishantha, and also the reason as to why

his client claimed credit for what others did by stating “ wms ishdï j uerej.” The

words used by the 4th Appellant to answer Krishantha “ wms ishdï j uerej”,

placed at its lowest, is an admission that he was a part of the group of persons

who were responsible for the murder and thereby qualifies to be taken in as

such. That being an item of admissible evidence against him, the High Court

at Bar rightly decided to accept and act on it. The Court also decided to treat

such evidence as subsequent conduct of that particular Appellant, as they are

not relevant under Section 10 of the Evidence Ordinance, after the murder

was committed.

Extending this submission further, learned Counsel argued that on their

way to Polgahawela, what Krishantha told Anuradha was “ le¿ï, Tyqg fjvs

;sh, ur, od,”, and that indicates Krishantha implicated both the 4th and 5th

Appellant are responsible for the killing of the deceased, and thus it would be

entirely unsafe to accept his evidence as credible in view of the reasoning of

the judgment of Indrananda de Silva v Lt. Gen. Waidyaratne and Others

(1998) 1 Sri L.R. 175. According to Counsel there was no justification to accept

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

160

the prosecution version that a witness could be an accomplice in relation to

one segment of the case and at the same time a non-accomplice in regard to

another department of the same case.

This contention has three components built into it. First, it presupposes

that Krishantha made a specific accusation that the deceased was killed by the

4th Appellant at one point and by the 5th Appellant at another. Secondly,

Krishantha is an accomplice, and his evidence should have been treated as

such. Thirdly, the ratio of Indrananda de Silva v Lt. Gen. Waidyaratne and

Others is applicable to the instant appeal.

Learned Counsel conveniently ignored what the 4th Appellant stated as

“ wms ishdï j uerej” to denote as if his client had said “uu ishdï j uerej” in order

to present his contention that the prosecution, having implicated the 5th

Appellant for the murder of the deceased, now implicates 4th Appellant for the

same murder. The prosecution allegation is that it was the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th and

6th Appellants who committed the murder, and the 5th charge made reference

to Section 32 of the Penal Code. Prosecution did not present any evidence as

to the person who in fact shot the deceased that night, but accused the 2nd, 3rd,

4th, 5th and 6th Appellants have committed his murder, being actuated by

common murderous intention, which they shared among themselves.

The second component that Krishantha is an accomplice had already

been considered earlier on in this judgment and needs no repetition here.

Applicability of the ratio of the judgment Indrananda de Silva v Lt. Gen.

Waidyaratne and Others needs consideration as the last point. This is a

judgment of this Court pronounced in relation to an instance where the

appellant before this Court was tried by a General Court Martial on two

counts. During the preliminary investigation, the appellant made a

confessionary statement and, later during an inquiry conducted for the

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

161

purpose of recording a summary of evidence, also made another statement

from the dock. After a voir dire inquiry, which considered the voluntariness of

the confession, the Court Martial decided to reject same. Then, the prosecution

relied on the dock statement made by the appellant, which the Court

accepted.

In appeal, this Court concluded that “ … the statement from the dock

turned out to be a verbatim repetition of the thirty-page confession made by the

appellant to Lt. Karunasena, which was earlier rejected by the self-same Court after a

voir dire inquiry, as not having been voluntarily made. It is inconceivable by any

stretch of the imagination that this appellant or anyone else, for that matter, could

ever have made a statement from the dock repeating word for word what he is alleged

to have spelled out in detail in a lengthy thirty-page confession seven months earlier.

In any event, there is not even a suggestion that the appellant referred to any

document when he made the statement from the dock. It does not need much

imagination to conclude that, when the appellant told Major Abeywickrema that he

was prepared to make a statement from the dock, what Major Abeywickrema in fact

did, was to simply introduce the earlier thirty-page confession into the summary of

evidence as being the appellant's statement from the dock.”

It appears that the learned Counsel relied on the said judgment to

impress upon us, that the prosecution witness Krishantha made two conflicting

claims in relation to the person who killed the deceased. But that is not the

case. Krishantha and Anuradha did not know what fate befell on the deceased

after they were directed to return home by the 5th Appellant. It was through

the conference call Krishantha had realised what might be the fate that awaits

the deceased. This he conveyed to Fausedeen. Only in the following morning

that he received a conformation from 4th Appellant of what he feared most in

the last night, which happened after they parted ways at Malabe. This fact was

once more confirmed to Krishantha by the 1st and 6th Appellants. I am unable

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

162

to find a similarity either in facts or in the applicable principles of law, in

relation to the appeal before us to the ratio of the judgment cited by the 4th

Appellant.

Learned Counsel, as his third ground of appeal, contended that the

High Court at Bar erred when it expected the 4th Appellant to offer an

explanation in a situation where the prosecution itself failed to establish a

strong prima facie case against him and cited the principles enunciated in the

judgment of Ajith Fernando v Attorney General (2004) 1 Sri L.R. 288, in

support.

Learned Counsel for the 4th Appellant was critical of the prosecution for

its keenness to promote the proposition that in a criminal matter there exists a

burden on the accused person to prove his innocence and also to promote that

the norm that exists in the criminal justice system that there is no burden on

an accused person to prove his innocence is presently outdated. Learned

Counsel submitted that the said principle is so well entrenched in the criminal

justice system, which has not changed, except that the Ellenborough dictum has

introduced a modification to that where in a case where the prosecution has

been able to establish a prima facie case. Only then it becomes incumbent upon

the accused person to offer an explanation. He then quoted Coomaraswamy

(Vol. I, p.21) where learned author stated:

“[T]he recent tendency of the Supreme Court of Sri Lanka also appears

to be to expect an explanation of telling circumstances, though the

failure that is commented on is the failure of the accused to offer

evidence and not to give evidence himself. A party’s failure to explain

damning facts cannot convert insufficient into prima facie evidence, but

it may cause prima facie evidence to become presumptive. Whether

prima facie evidence will be converted into presumptive evidence by the

absence of an explanation depends upon the strength of the evidence and

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

163

that operation of such rules as that requiring a especially high standard

of proof on a criminal charge.”

Learned Counsel submitted that said statement was accepted by a

divisional bench of this Court in Ajith Fernando v Attorney General (2004) 1

Sri L.R. 288 and insisted on the fulfilment of the requirement of a strong prima

facie case against an accused, before the Court expects him to offer an

explanation. He also added, even if the trial Court did hold there was a prima

facie case, no mention was made of the material on which it reached that

conclusion. According to learned Counsel, it was not for the appellate Court

to find material and determine whether there exists a prima facie case against

the 4th Appellant or whether he needed to offer an appropriate explanation.

Since the learned Counsel referred to Ellenborough dictum in a critical

tone, it is important to refer to the view expressed by Amaratunge J in

Attorney General v Potta Naufer (2007) 2 Sri L.R. 107, when an appellant

sought to challenge its authenticity in much stronger terms by stating it is a

non-existent dictum of Lord Ellenborough, and it does not form part of the

judgment in R v Lord Cochrane (1814) Gurney’s Report 479 and therefore is a

“creation by Wills”.

His Lordship, after having undertaken a survey of judicial precents in

England and United State of America dealing with this aspect, concluded (at

p.199) that these “… judicial pronouncements reflect the consensus of judicial

opinion on the effect of an accused person's failure to offer an explanation in the

circumstances referred to in those passages. What those learned Judges have indicated

in their pronouncements is the process of reasoning of a prudent trier of fact, well

informed of the relevant legal principles, in the circumstances referred to in those

pronouncements. In short, they indicate the use of logic and common sense in the

process of reasoning”. His Lordship then added that (at p. 200), “[T]he correct

legal view appears to be that, in civil and criminal proceedings alike, whereas a party's

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

164

failure to testify must not be treated as equivalent to an admission of the case against

him, it may add considerably to the weight of the latter.”

When the prosecution presented the evidence of the 4th Appellant’s own

admission that “ wms ishdï j uerej”, within a matter of few hours since the

deceased was seen alive last, in itself established a prima facie case. Krishantha

saw the deceased alive for the last time when he alighted from the van, when

it stopped on the direction of the 5th Appellant, after passing Kaduwela

junction and turning towards Biyagama. He did not indicate the exact time

when he was told to return home. But Krishantha was in touch with Anuradha

over his mobile phone as they travelled in two different vehicles. The tower

records indicate that two of them communicated with each other at 11.10 p.m.

through Kaduwela tower, 11.12 p.m. through Kaduwela South W tower, 11.14

p.m. through Kaduwela A tower and also at 11.16 p.m., through the same

tower, supporting Krishantha’s narrative that he travelled through Kaduwela

that night separately from Anuradha. The necessity to take these several calls

within a short duration of time arose due to the fact that it was the 5th

Appellant who was issuing instructions, and that he was travelling in the

double cab, driven by Anuradha whereas Krishantha was traveling in the van

driven by the 4th Appellant.

Dias in his evidence said he saw 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 6th Appellants retuning

home at about 1.00 – 1.10 a.m. on 23.05.2013 and they went up to speak to 1st

Appellant.

A few hours later on the same day Ramyalatha Jayasundera was walking

along a lane that connects to Malwana – Dompe main road in Udamapitigama,

Dompe at about 6.45 a.m. As she walked past a land, overgrown with shrubs

and trees called Jayamali Watta, saw a naked man lying on the ground. This

was the body of the deceased. IP Hettiarachchi of Dompe police received

information about the said body at 7.15 -7.30 a.m. on the same day, visited the

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

165

place and made observations. He saw a naked male body lying face down. He

also noted two small holes located just above right ear and a large gaping

injury in front of his head. He observed that the blood from that injury had

pooled near the head had already clotted. The back side of the body had

turned pale. Dr. Hewage, Consultant JMO, who performed postmortem

examination on that body, was of the opinion that his death was due to two

necessarily fatal rifled firearm injuries to the head, although a ligature mark

too was seen around the neck. Since he performed the said examination after a

period of 8 days, is unable to form an opinion as to the estimated time since

death, but noted hypostasis on the front parts of the body and explained that

it was due to body fluids being accumulated in the areas of the body which it

rests on, due to gravity and thereby leaving the upper parts pale, as observed

by IP Hettiarachchi. The police also found a distorted inner core of a T56 bullet,

embedded about 4 inches into the ground right under the place where the

large gaping was noted.

The 4th Appellant joined with others, who by then brought in the

‘abducted’ deceased in a double cab to the residence of the 1st Appellant. One

member of that group carried a T56 weapon with him. The 4th Appellant,

without a direction from any one replaced Anuradha as the driver of the

double cab. When the deceased was transferred to the van, the 4th Appellant

too switched vehicles and drove it once again without anyone issuing him any

direction to do so. Deceased’s blood was found by the Government Analyst in

that van, and confirmed by Dr. Illeperuma, when it matches with the DNA of

the deceased. It is not clear who drove the van, when they returned to

Nedimala in the early hours of 23.05.2013 along with 2nd, 3rd and 6th Appellants.

A T56 weapon was removed from the van, after Krishantha came to pick that

vehicle up after 7.00 a.m. That is the time the 4th Appellant informed

Krishantha “ wms ishdï j uerej”. This was in response to Krishantha’s query

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

166

directed to the 4th Appellant, seeking an answer as to the fate of the man

whom he drove away the previous night in the company of the 2nd, 3rd, 5th and

6th Appellants. The question put to the 4th Appellant speaks for itself. The

question was “fudllao ixcSj fï flf,a" oeka ishdï fl`”. The question clearly

suggested that the 4th Appellant had done something to the deceased, but it

does not necessarily infer that he killed him, as it further queries from him

where the deceased now. The response was “ wms ishdï j uerej”. This was the

opportunity for the 4th Appellant to disclose his alleged limited role of being

only a police driver. But the 4th Appellant voluntarily accepted credit for being

a part of the team that killed the deceased.

Krishantha accepted that the deceased was killed by the 4th Appellant

and others simply on that admission and, on their way to Polgahawela, he told

Anuradha “ le¿ï, Tyqg fjä ;sh, ur, od,d,”. The reference to the 4th Appellant

as “ le¿ï,” is significant. It reflects the impression created in the mind of

Krishantha that it was the team of that the 1st Appellant sent out last night that

was responsible for the death of the deceased, and the 4th Appellant was one

of its willing participants. This being the summery of prosecution case against

the 4th Appellant, during his statement from the dock, it was stated that he

does not know anything about this incident, and that he had only acted as the

driver to the 1st Appellant. The 4th Appellant denied of having said “ wms ishdï

j uerej” in replying to Krishantha, while also totally denying the allegation that

he drove a double cab or a van that night, a position contrary to the one he

had advanced before this Court. He too accused the CID officers of falsely

implicating him to this crime simply because he refused to toe the line the

way they want him to. The 4th Appellant also claimed that he refused the

conditional pardon offered to him as he had done no wrong.

The High Court at Bar, while dealing with the position advanced by the

4th Appellant, in addition to the one in which he totally denied the allegations

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

167

made by the prosecution witnesses, that he was falsely implicated by the

officers of CID, concluded as follows:

“ 4 jk ú;a;slre i|yka lrk wdldrhg Tyq fuu kvqjg iïnkaO lsrSu

i|yd wmrdO mrSlaIK fomd¾;fïka;=fõ úu¾Ylhska jQ m%Odk fmd,sia

mrSlaIl uqKisxyg;a" iyldr fmd,sia wêldrs Ydks wfífialrg;a ;snqKq

wjYH;djh l=ula o hkak i,ld ne,sh h;=h’ tfiau fuu ú;a;slre i|yka

lrk mrsos ls%Idka;g iy wkqrdOg Tjqkaf.a j.lSfuka fírS fuu 4 jk

ú;a;slre fuu wmrdOhg iïnkaO lsrSu i|yd ;snqKq wjYH;djh l=ula o

hkak i,ld ne,sh hq;=h’ fuu ú;a;slre fuu wmrdO i|yd iïnkaO

fkdjQfha kï iïnkaO jQ njg jHdmdrslfhl= jQ ls%Idka;g idlaIs bosrsm;a

lsrSug ;snQ Wjukdj l=ula o@ ls%Idka; iy fuu ú;a;slre w;r ;snqKq

iïnkaO;djh l=ula o@ hk lreKq i,ld ne,sh hq;=h’ ls%Idka; 1 jk

ú;a;slref.a ys;ñ;f=rl= jYfhka isáh oS 1 jk ú;a;slre hgf;a fiajh

l< ks,OdrSkaf.ka we;eï lKavdhula muKla f;`rd f.k tu lKavdhfï

isá 4 jk ú;a;slreg ishdï meyer f.k hdu ms,sn|j fp`okd bosrsm;a

lsrSug wjYH;djhla ;sî we;s nj fuu wêlrKhg fidhd .; fkdyelsh’

wfkla w;g me’id’ 1 wkqrdO me’id’2 ls%Idka; fl`r,f.a iy me’id’ 3

*jqiaãka hk ;sfokdu 4 jk ú;a;slre ishdï meyer .ekSfï ls%hdodufha oS

4 jk ú;a;slre ûiska lrka ,o ls%hdoduhka tlska tl meyeos,s lr oS we;s

w;r tu idlaIs ì| fy,Sug ú;a;sh iu;a ù fkdue;s nj fmkS hhs’ tu

moku hgf;a 4 jk ú;a;slre bosrsm;a lrk ,o ú;a;sjdplh m%lslafIam

lsrSug ;SrKh lrñ’”

Perusal of the process of reasoning adopted by the High Court at Bar in

reaching the said conclusion reveals that it had considered the relative

probabilities of the existence of a valid reason for those officers to falsely

implicate the 4th Appellant to this crime or of any motive entertained by them

in that regard. It is not that the High Court at Bar expected the 4th Appellant to

offer an explanation to a strong prima facie case that had been established by

the prosecution, but when he did offer one on his own, the Court had

undertaken a detailed consideration of the acceptability of the explanation.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

168

The Court was of the view that the detailed description of the relevant facts,

as spoken to by the prosecution witnesses, remained unshaken by the

evidence presented by the 4th Appellant and his witnesses.

This is the basis on which the Court decided to reject his dock statement

and therefore, it is my considered view that the complaint of the learned

Counsel that the High Court at Bar applied the dictum attributed to Lord

Ellenborough without first determining that a strong prima facie case had been

established is devoid of any merit.

One of the remaining complaints about the said judgment concerns

with certain reference made by the trial Court to the 4th Appellant during its

presentation. Learned Counsel invited our attention to the section that stated

(at p. 107 of the judgment)“ ;jo me’i’ 2 ls%Idka; lvqfj, ykaosfha oS wkqrdO iy

le¨ï isá leí tl ÿgq miqj kej; ÿrl:kfhka wkqrdOg l:d fldg 4 ú;a;slref.ka

bosrshg l<hq;= ld¾h úuid isá wdldrh;a ta wkqj wkqrdOf.ka 4 jk ú;a;slre ÿka

Wmfoia jQ ;jÿrg;a lvqfj, myq fldg ìh.u foig hk f,i me’id’ 2 ls%Idka; wkqrdOg

oekqï ÿka moku;a me’id’ 2 ls%Idka; lshd we;’” and also where the trial Court stated

(at p. 775 of the judgment) “ 4 jk ú;a;slreg ishdï meyer f.k hdu ms,sn|j” and

submitted that both these findings of fact were made by that Court without

any evidence to support them.

It was the submission of the 4th Appellant that, in view of the above, the

High Court at Bar made a very serious misdirection on the most imperative

questions and, even if that Court came to a conclusion that a prima facie case

has been made out against him. Hence, it was contended by the 4th Appellant

that the said conclusions are most certainly ex facie defective.

The context in which the said section referred to by learned Counsel at

page 107 made by the Court was, it considered the narrative of Krishantha

describing his journey towards Kaduwela and the role played by the 5th

Appellant during that journey by giving directions via Anuradha, who

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

169

conveyed them through his phone. It is in this context the section referred to

by the learned Counsel appears in that segment of the judgment. It is clear

from the sequence of the narrative, as set out by the Court, it had referred to

the 4th Appellant’s complicity in that part, instead of the 5th Appellant, as the

next part deals with the call initiated by the 5th Appellant and converted to a

conference call by Krishantha. Nowhere in the judgment, I could find a place

where the High Court at Bar imputed criminal liability on the 4th Appellant by

making a reference to the said section, which obviously made an erroneous

reference to him, instead of the 5th Appellant. Obviously, this reference is a

mistake on the part of the High Court at Bar. This is confirmed when the

Court made no reference to the 4th Appellant in dealing with that evidence at

all. Nor did the learned Counsel for the 4th Appellant point out any such

reference in the impugned judgment during his submissions.

On the contrary, the High Court at Bar, in its consideration of the

evidence against the 5th Appellant, referred to the role played by the 5th

Appellant during the entire sequence of events that resulted in the death of

the deceased (at pages 228, 247, 250 and 251 of the judgment). The Court

concluded (at p. 797 of the judgment) that the 3rd, 4th and 6th Appellants joined

the deceased and others on 1st Appellant’s instructions at Nedimala and that

the 5th Appellant had a T56 weapon at that time were established by the

prosecution. Thus, the accidental reference to the 4th Appellant, instead of the

5th, in the said section of the judgment had not resulted in any adverse finding

against him nor did it, at least, give rise to an adverse inference being drawn

against him.

The last of the complaints by the 4th Appellant was that the finding

arrived at by the High Court at Bar that the evidence presented before it does

not indicate that the Attorney General had offered a conditional pardon and

therefore, he uttered a falsehood in this regard could not be sustained.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

170

Learned Counsel tendered a photocopy of a document marked “X” along with

written submissions and states that it is a journal entry from the M.C.

Colombo Case No. B 3729/5/13 for date 01.10.2013.

Perusal of the judgment of the High Court at Bar revealed that the

Court found no evidence that had been presented before it regarding an offer

of a conditional pardon made by the Magistrate to the 4th Appellant or that the

Attorney General had offered a conditional pardon to him. The Court made

no finding that he is a perjurer or lied in his statement from the dock as

submitted by the 4th Appellant. The impugned finding is a correct finding

made by the High Court at Bar since the 4th Appellant, in addition to making a

statement from the dock, did call two witnesses and tendered certified copies

of certain Court proceedings and documents marked 4V1, 4V1A, 4V2, 4V2A,

4V2B, 4V3, 4V3A, 4V4 and 4V4A that were obtained from the record of M.C.

Colombo Case No. B 3729/5/13. But the document “X” was not marked and

tendered by the 4th Appellant through any of his witnesses. This is after the 4th

Appellant made a reference to an offer of a conditional pardon in his

statement from the dock.

There is no application by the learned Counsel made to this Court to

permit reception of additional evidence in appeal, in terms of Section 329(1) of

the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, as the 1st and 6th Appellants did, when

this appeal was taken up for hearing. In any event, this Court, in considering

whether the Court below had arrived at a reasonable conclusion after

considering all the material placed before it, should not take note of any item

of ‘ additional evidence’ that had not been placed before that Court, unless

presented in terms of Section 329.

The 4th Appellant totally denied having driven any vehicle in his dock

statement. At the hearing, learned Counsel submitted that all his client did

was to follow orders and acted only as a driver of the two vehicles. This is

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

171

exactly what the prosecution also presented primarily before the High Court

at Bar through Krishantha and Anuradha, in addition to his admission that“ wms

ishdï j uerej ”. Clearly, the role played by the 4th Appellant in the murder of

Shyiam qualifies to be taken as falling within the statutory provisions

contained in Section 256 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.

The moment the 4th Appellant emerged out of the gate of Nedimala

residence of the 1st Appellant on his instructions, it is highly probable that he

was aware of the fate that awaits Shyiam, as the 3rd Appellant was carrying a

T56 weapon with him. None of the others carried any weapons. This was not

an instance where the 6th Appellant went out in a sightseeing visit, the 3rd

Appellant to act as his personal security carrying a firearm and for the 4th

Appellant was to drive him around. This happened immediately after the 1st

Appellant verified from Krishantha as to his current location, who just ‘taken

in’ the deceased to the double cab and on their way to Nedimala. Krishantha

answered that they are almost there. The 4th Appellant was waiting at the gate

with others for Krishantha and et al to arrive. Once they reached there, no one

instructed the 4th Appellant to take the driving seat, replacing Anuradha.

Krishantha was driving the van from Baddegana, when the 4th Appellant took

over same at Malabe after deceased was transferred to it.

Irrespective of whether he was offered a conditional pardon and/or

whether he declined to accept that offer, the fact remains that he did

participate with the others to take the deceased on his last journey, with full

knowledge and intention of the purpose of that journey. The evidence

presented by the 4th Appellant did not reveal that he had no knowledge of the

purpose of that journey to counter the strong inference that could be drawn

from the prosecution evidence. The difference between the 4th Appellant and

the prosecution witnesses Fausedeen and Krishantha is only the former knew

that the deceased would be put to death. That is the distinction made by the

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

172

High Court at Bar to treat Fausedeen and Krishantha as ordinary witnesses and

not accomplices, as perceived by the Attorney General. Of course, the High

Court at Bar, rightly insisted on corroboration of their evidence on material

particulars.

The fact that the 4th Appellant was offered a conditional pardon, or that

he declined to accept a pardon when offered on the basis that he did no

wrong, will not help him to absolve from criminal liability imputed on him by

the prosecution, based upon sufficiently corroborated evidence of two

prosecution witnesses, who states otherwise. It may be this factor was

highlighted before this Court in support of the 4th Appellant’s claim that he

was pressurised to become a State witness, and his refusal, asserting that he

did no wrong, resulted in him being named an accused. But, when the 4th

Appellant wants to rely on the fact that he was offered a conditional pardon,

that shows he was at least privy to the commission of murder, along with the

others. The allegation that he was made an accused by the CID was already

referred to and rejected. The inference that he knowingly participated in the

crime drawn by the High Court at Bar is confirmed by his own admission “ wms

ishdï j uerej”, sharing credit for what “ wms”, did that night at Dompe, and

thereby bringing him in. Why should he admit something which others did, if

he had no hand in it ? He made the admission, because like the others, he too

did participate in the crime knowingly and voluntarily, claiming his share of

credit for it. In view of foregoing reasons, I find no merit in any of the grounds

of appeal that were urged on behalf of the 4th Appellant at the hearing of the

instant appeal.

5th Appellant

Learned President’s Counsel for the 5th Appellant, while associating

himself with the ground of appeal already presented before this Court by the

1st and 6th Appellants regarding Fausedeen and Krishantha, also sought to

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

173

challenge the judgment of the High Court at Bar on the basis that the High

Court at Bar accepted the evidence presented by the prosecution with all its

faults but opted to reject the explanation offered by the 5th Appellant after

highlighting similar faults, and thereby applied two standards in the

evaluation of the evidence of the two competing sides, contrary to the

principles enunciated in The Queen v Kularatne and Others (1968) 71 NLR

529. He also submitted that the trial Court failed to assess the prosecution

evidence that are in favour of the 5th Appellant.

He also relied on a Court of Appeal Judgment ( Kithsiri v Attorney

General (2014) 1 Sri L.R. 38), where the Court, inserting a quotation from the

judgment of the Indian Supreme Court in D. N. Pandey Vs. State of Uttar

Pradesh AIR 1981 SC 911, said (at p. 43) “… Courts, in evaluating evidence,

should not look at the evidence of an accused person with a squint eye.”

In support of his contention that the trial Court failed to assess the

prosecution evidence that are in favour of the 5th Appellant, learned

President’s Counsel submitted that:

1. Tower records indicate Anuradha’s phone was served by Nedimala

tower at 8.30 p.m. on 22.05.2013 with Krishantha being served by

Balapokuna tower whereas the abduction had taken place at

Kandewatta at 8.39 p.m. on the same day and therefore presence of

Anuradha along with Krishantha for the abduction is reduced to an

almost impossibility. If that is an impossibility then that fact should

equally apply to the 5th Appellant as well,

2. Krishantha’s evidence which indicated that the 6th Appellant told the

1st Appellant in his presence that it was the 5th Appellant who shot

the deceased in the head, could not be accepted as a confession of the

5th Appellant in terms of Section 30 of the Evidence Ordinance, as

Section 10 of that Ordinance has no application at that point of time

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

174

this event said to have taken place. This was due to the reason that

Section 10 could only be utilised during the existence of the

conspiracy and after the completion of the act to which they all

conspired to commit, namely the murder of the deceased, provisions

of that Section could not be utilised to admit that evidence.

The main plank on which the 5th Appellant mounted his challenge to

the validity of his conviction is the decision to reject the contents of his

statement made from the dock. It was contended by Counsel that while

making that statement, the 5th Appellant offered his explanation to the

circumstances under which he had taken several calls on 22.05.2013, that were

relied upon by the prosecution, as items of evidence that are against him.

These calls include a ‘conference call’, the one he made in order to request for

a vehicle from Krishantha to take his wife to Castle Street Hospital, and the

reason for receiving a call from the 6th Appellant’s, initiated through the 1st

Appellant’s phone.

In this regard, it is preferable that a brief reference is made here as to

the contents of the dock statement made by the 5th Appellant.

During his 9-page statement, the 5th Appellant after making a reference

to his tenure in the Police Department, stated that he was placed under the 1st

Appellant only from 09.05.2013 and was assigned to provide security to the

Senior DIG, and in addition was to perform his official duties by conducting

raids along with vice squads. On 21.05.2013, having accompanied the 1st

Appellant to his residence, he found that no specific duty was assigned for

him to perform at Nedimala and, with the approval of the Senior DIG, he

returned home. On 22.05.2013, he was instructed by the 1st Appellant to

accompany Mrs. Vas Gunawardena to Kurunegala to attend a transaction over

a land. After returning from Kurunegala and having waited at Nedimala

residence for some time, the 5th Appellant returned to his home at Dompe with

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

175

permission of the 1st Appellant as he did on the previous night. The 5th

Appellant had an appointment with a Doctor at Castle Street Hospital on

23.05.2013, regarding a medical issue of his wife. In order to attend hospital

for that appointment, the 5th Appellant requested a vehicle from Krishantha on

21.05.2013 and was told to contact him on the following day, which he did.

Krishantha promised to call back with an answer but did not. The 5th Appellant

returned to his house at Kanduboda and on his way had collected some money

from his mother from her residence at Dompe. That night he received a call

from the 1st Appellant’s phone, and it was the 6th Appellant who spoke. The

6th Appellant conveyed that Krishantha was unable to provide a vehicle as he

had to attend a matter in Polgahawela. On 23.05.2013, it rained heavily, and the

5th Appellant decided to put off the appointment with the Doctor to

30.05.2013 and decided to report to work. The 5th Appellant had admitted that

he had two SIMs from Dialog and Hutch networks.

He denied in his statement that he never went to see the location of the

deceased’s factory at Saranakara Road, never introduced to Fausedeen as a best

person working with the 1st Appellant, never had a discussion with the 1st

Appellant away from Krishantha, never went to Balapokuna Road to abduct

any person, denied the claim of Krishantha and Anuradha that he went with

the deceased to Biyagama and returned to Nedimala, denied visiting the

residence of the Krishantha’s brother to pick up a van, never got into the van at

Kaduwela with a T56 weapon, never loaded weapons to a car, never got

involved with any transaction of committing murder.

The 5th Appellant made a counter accusation that the prosecutors

implicated him with these offences due to the fact that his residence at

Kanduboda and maternal house in Dompe are close to the place where the body

of the deceased was found. He further accused that he was implicated to the

murder because he worked under the 1st Appellant.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

176

It would be convenient at this stage to consider the basis on which the

High Court at Bar decided to reject the dock statement of the 5th Appellant,

before venturing into consider the merits of his complaint on the impugned

judgment.

The Court considered his evidence and had a trouble with accepting

his claim of performing duties of conducting raids with the vice squad,

without even signing in or making any entries in the relevant information

books or in any other official documentation. The Court was not convinced of

also with his claim that he returned home as there was no specific duty

assigned to him at Nedimala, despite his own admission that he was to provide

personal security to the 1st Appellant. The Court similarly was not convinced

of his explanation provided to the circumstances under which he initiated and

received calls during the evening of 22.05.2013, particularly in relation to the

‘conference call’. This finding was due to the improbability of calling

Krishantha at 11.39 p.m. to find out the availability of a vehicle for the

following morning.

High Court at Bar also considered the probability of the basis of the 5th

Appellant’s accusation that he was implicated in this incident due to him

being attached to the 1st Appellant’s team and rejected same on the basis that

there was no compelling reason for Krishantha to implicate the 5th Appellant to

the crime. Court also considered the probability of implicating the 5th

Appellant to the crime by the CID officers simply for the reason of residing in

Kanduboda. In view of these considerations, the trial Court decided to reject the

dock statement made by the 5th Appellant.

Returning to the complaint that the High Court at Bar erred in applying

two standards in the evaluation of the evidence of the two sides, contrary to

the principles enunciated in The Queen v Kularatne and Others (1968) 71

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

177

NLR 529, it is important to refer to the principle of law laid down in that

authority. The Court of Criminal Appellant held (at p. 551):

“ … dock statement must be looked upon as evidence subject to the

infirmity that the accused had deliberately refrained from giving sworn

testimony, and the jury must be so informed. But the jury must also be

directed that,

(a) If they believe the unsworn statement, it must be acted

upon,

(b) If it raised a reasonable doubt in their minds about the case

for the prosecution, the defence must succeed, and

(c) That it should not be used against another accused”.

It is important to note in this context that in Yahonis Singho v The

Queen (1964) 67 NLR 8, the Court introduced the ‘intermediate position’ in the

evaluation of a dock statement as it held (at p. 9), “ … if Sirimane's evidence

was neither accepted nor was capable of rejection, the resulting position would have

been that a reasonable doubt existed as to the truth of the prosecution evidence. We

think the omission to direct the jury on what may be called this intermediate position

where there was neither an acceptance nor a rejection of the alibi was a non-direction

of the jury on a necessary point and thus constituted a misdirection.”

Since the High Court at Bar totally rejected the 5th Appellant’s dock

statement, the question of applicability of the intermediate position would

arise only if that rejection could be considered as an unreasonable finding

made by the High Court at Bar, in view of the evidence presented before that

Court.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

178

Upon perusal of the process of reasoning adopted by the High Court at

Bar to arrive at the said conclusion very carefully, it is revealed that the Court

considered the evidence of Fausedeen and Krishantha which the 5th Appellant

sought to contradict by his statement from the dock, before arriving at that

finding. The Court viewed the conflicting claims by considering them side by

side and rejected the dock statement primarily by applying the test of

probabilities. It is this process, learned President’s Counsel found fault with

by citing the judgment of Kithsiri v Attorney General (supra).

The judgment of the Indian Supreme Court, cited by the Court of

Appeal, in D. N. Pandey Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh (supra) held thus:

"Defence witnesses are entitled to equal treatment with those of the prosecution and,

Courts ought to overcome their traditional instinctive disbelief in defence witnesses.

Quite often they tell lies but so do the prosecution witnesses."

There is no doubt that the assessment of evidence transcends the

partisan interest of the competing parties on a disputed but relevant fact in

issue. On one hand the High Court at Bar had a narrative that implicates the

5th Appellant and on the other, there is an alternative narrative to the

prosecution as presented by the 5th Appellant coupled with a denial of the

accusations levelled against him. The evidence of the prosecution witnesses,

particularly Fausedeen, Krishantha and Anuradha presented as testimonies

under oath and were subjected to severe cross examination by all the

Appellants. The evidence presented by the 5th Appellant, through a statement

made from the dock, was a result of him “deliberately refraining” from giving

sworn testimony, as noted by The Queen v Kularatne and Others (supra) and

could not be tested for its truthfulness by cross examination. But the 5th

Appellant had no burden to discharge. If his statement is accepted or could

not be rejected nor accepted, he is entitled to the resultant reasonable doubt

created in the prosecution’s case. The fact that his statement was totally

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

179

rejected by the High Court at Bar is the grievance presented before us by the

learned President’s Counsel.

It is already stated earlier on that the main plank of the 5th Appellant’s

challenge on his conviction is mounted on the rejection of his evidence. In

effect, by rejecting the 5th Appellant dock statement, the High Court at Bar

rejected the alternate narrative offered by him for its consideration vis a vis the

narrative of the prosecution.

Did the High Court at Bar reject the 5th Appellant’s dock statement for a

valid reason ?

The alternative narrative offered by the 5th Appellant in explaining the

purpose of the calls he initiated from his mobile phone and received after

10.00 p.m., on 22.05.2013 was purely for the innocent purpose of securing a

vehicle for his wife to be taken for her medical appointment scheduled for the

following day. The desired effect of the alternative narrative offered by the 5th

Appellant was to impress upon the trial Court that Krishantha was lying when

he attributed a different content to those calls. This alternative narrative was

offered by the 5th Appellant as the tower records indicated that he initiated a

call to Krishantha’s number and also received a call from the 1st Appellant’s

phone.

Tower details of the 5th Appellant’s phone during this time period

indicate that he did initiate a call from his phone ( 077- 2415750) to Krishantha

(077-1303304) at 11.39.33 p.m. on 22.05.2013 through Delgoda- DCS 1 tower.

This call continued for a total duration of 89 seconds. The 5th Appellants

phone ( 077- 2415750) received a call initiated from the 1st Appellant’s phone

(077- 0452711) and served through Nedimala A tower at 12.58.46 on 23.05.2013.

Duration of this phone call is 48 seconds. In between, the 5th Appellant also

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

180

did receive a call, initiated by one PC 61784 Thabrew (077-9022280) at 11.56.44

p.m. on 22.05.2013 for a total duration of 30 seconds (Admission No. 14) .

It is the 5th Appellant’s position with regard to the said tower records

that he wanted to verify from Krishantha of the availability of a vehicle and

that was the sole purpose of the call he initiated at 11.39 p.m. The 5th

Appellant claims he wanted check with Kirhsnahta on this issue, and during

that call Krishantha promised to call him with a definite answer. But

Krishantha did not call back with an answer. Instead, it was the 6th Appellant,

who contacted him using the 1st Appellant’s phone (077- 0452711) at 12.58 a.m.

to convey that Kirshantha is unable to provide a vehicle.

The High Court at Bar considered the probabilities of these conflicting

versions of events. After returning from Kurunegala the 5th Appellant was at

Nedimala residence. Krishantha too was there along with Anuradha at the same

time as per the phone records. These records also indicate that the 5th

Appellant was served by Nugegoda-West 3 tower at 7.56.57 p.m. on

22.05.2013, while Krishantha was served by Col-Dehi-190 tower at 8.19.20 p.m.

and Anuradha was served by Nedimala tower 8.01.28 p.m. The 5th Appellant

admitted in his evidence that he did return to Nedimala that evening after

returning from Kurunegala. Thus, the evidence points to the fact that both the

5th Appellant and Krishantha was there at the 1st Appellant’s residence at the

same time, as claimed by Krishantha. This undoubtedly provided an

opportunity to the 5th Appellant to make enquires from Krishantha in person,

without waiting till the eleventh hour to verify the availability of a vehicle for

him to take his wife to an important medical appointment. The 5th Appellant

does not state that he forgot to check with Krishantha and remembered about

the vehicle late into the night and calling Krishantha at that time was an act of

desperation. His position simply is that he called Krishantha only at 11.39 p.m.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

181

This is not the conduct of an average person, who had such an urgent

requirement of a vehicle for the following morning. Hence, application of the

test of probabilities on this point does not favour the 5th Appellant.

The High Court at Bar was of the view that the claim of the 5th

Appellant that it was the 6th Appellant who spoke through the 1st Appellant’s

phone was to provide an alternative version to the one provided by Krishantha

and Anuradha that the 6th Appellant too travelled with them to Malabe in the

van, along with the deceased and the 2nd to 5th Appellants. The phone records

do not indicate that Krishantha received a call from the 6th Appellant that

night, on behalf of the 5th Appellant, to confirm with him of the availability of

a van for the following morning.

This is a convenient point to refer to a contention advanced by the 1st

Appellant on the telephone call under consideration. This was referred to in

the judgement as the conference call. It was submitted by learned President’s

Counsel that Krishantha had lied under oath in his attempt to pin liability on

the 1st and 6th Appellants, as the analysis of call details contained in WS-2,

tended to this Court with written submissions.

Krishantha’s evidence on this point is, after he received a call from the 5th

Appellant’s phone and he was instructed to collect the van on the following

morning from 1st Appellant’s residence, the 6th Appellant spoke to him

through the 5th Appellant’s phone and wanted Krishantha to initiate a

conference call connecting his father, the 1st Appellant. Krishantha did comply

with that request and 6th and 1st Appellants conversed with each other

through the conference call, while Krishantha, who initiated the conference call

was able to listen to their conversation. Krishantha said after the conversation

between the 6th and 1st Appellants ended, the 5th Appellant hung up, but he

continued with the call he initiated and conversed with the 1st Appellant.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

182

The phone records indicate that the 5th Appellant’s call to Krishantha

continued for a total duration of 89 seconds. The call initiated by Krishantha

connecting the 1st Appellant in a conference call continued for a duration of 50

seconds. This call was initiated by Krishantha halfway through the call

initiated by the 5th Appellant, which was continuing.

Tower records indicate the call received by Krishantha as well as the call

initiated by him to the 1st Appellant. Importantly, both calls ended

simultaneously at 11.41.02 p.m. on 22.05.2013, confirming that Krishantha did

call the 1st Appellant, whilst engaged in a call through the 5th Appellant’s

phone. But it also created an inconsistency in the evidence of Krishantha when

he stated the 5th Appellant hung up halfway, when in fact that call too

continued until Krishantha, and the 1st Appellant ended their call. What

Krishantha stated in evidence was the 5th Appellant had “cut” the call after the

6th Appellant spoke, but he wanted to continue with the call with the 1st

Appellant, in order to ask him for the reason of taking this course of action.

What established by the tower records beyond any doubt is the fact that

Krishantha, whilst engaged in a call with the 5th Appellant, also initiated

another call to the 1st Appellant. What was the urgency that compelled

Krishantha to call the 1st Appellant in that manner? He could have easily taken

that call after the 5th Appellant’s call ended. Krishantha’s explanation is that the

6th Appellant wanted to speak to his father through a conference call initiated

by him, instead of calling directly through the 5th Appellant’s phone after the

call with Krishantha had ended. This explanation fits in perfectly to the

electronic records of the call details and supports the truthfulness of that

assertion.

The High Court at Bar concluded that the position taken up by the 5th

Appellant on this issue is an attempt to introduce the 6th Appellant as the

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

183

person who initiated a call to replace the 1st Appellant, through whose phone,

that particular call was initiated. Learned President’s Counsel also challenged

Krishantha’s evidence that it was a conference call as the witness called by the

prosecution on behalf of the relevant service provider was unable to

specifically confirm that it was a conference call. It could be that Krishantha

may have put the 5th Appellant’s call on hold and, dialled the 1st Appellant’s

number to initiate call or in fact initiated a conference call through which all

three could speak. When Krishantha said 5th Appellant “cut” the call, no

clarification was sought on the basis he said so. It is clear that the perceived

act of “cutting” was not by Krishantha but by the 5th Appellant, who did not

speak, after 6th Appellant came on line. In view of these considerations, the

statement by Krishantha that the 5th Appellant had “cut” the call, when it

actually continued, cannot be the basis of a justification to reject his evidence

in its totality, as this is a trivial inconsistency that could be attributable to a

genuine mistake made by him.

Moving on to another factor connected to the issue under discussion, it

is interesting to note that Krishantha, during his examination in chief itself,

did reveal a pre-emptive defence already prepared for the 5th Appellant by the

1st Appellant, almost similar to the one presented by the 5th Appellant during

his dock statement, providing an alternative narrative.

Krishantha, after realising that the deceased had been killed, was

naturally frightened that he would be arrested for that murder and frequently

visited the 1st Appellant at his residence for advice. During one of those

meeting Krishantha learnt that the body of the deceased was dumped in the

area supervised by the 1st Appellant. Krishantha asked for advice from the 1st

Appellant, in order to prepare himself to face an investigation and the way he

should answer if he was questioned by police over this murder.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

184

The 1st Appellant advised Krishanth to state that:

“jdia ug lsõjd WTj kslï yrs fmd,Sisfhka wrf.k m%YaK lrkak

yeÿfjd;a tosk ojfia uu jdia,d f.or ysáfha" le¨ïg wikSm fj,d

le¨ïj fodïfma f.org .sys,a,d niai,d tkafka lsh,d lshkak lsõjd’

ta hk w;fros jdia lsõjd le¨ï lshk úosyg ug oeka álla

fyd|hs ug f.or hkak wjYH keye" udj wdfh;a f.org

niaikak lsh,d Bg miafi wdfh;a tk .uka le¨ï lshk úosyg

ug lshkak lsõjd le¨ïg álla wudrehs thdj biamsrs;df,a

weâñÜ lrkak lsh,d’ ta ksid ;uhs wms wdfh;a yrj,d wdfõ

lsh,d wdfõ fl,skau jdia,f. f.org’ Bg miafia wdfh;a le¨ï

lsõjd lsh,d lshkak lsõjd i¾ ug fyd|hs udj biamsrs;df,a k;r

lrkak ´fka keye udj f.org .sys,a,d niaikak uu f.or .sys,a,d

friaÜ lr,d tkakï lsh,d’”

Except for his wife’s medical condition, all other details of the 5th

Appellant’s dock statement did match perfectly to the proposed statement

prepared by the 1st Appellant on behalf of him. It is evident from this

prepared version of events, that the 1st Appellant was making an attempt to

line up the movements of the 5th Appellant with the tower details. Of course,

the 5th Appellant suggested the position he had presented to Court, during his

cross examination of Krishantha, who denied such a happening. Strangely,

neither the 1st Appellant nor the 5th Appellant, thought it fit to challenge

Krishantha over this particular segment of evidence that is reproduced above

during their long sessions of cross examination. This is an important

observation since the 5th Appellant did cross examine Krishantha at length to

cover 79 pages of proceedings. Thus, there was uncontroverted evidence

before Court that the alternative narrative presented by the 5th Appellant

during his statement from the dock, is actually a creation by the 1st Appellant,

and made for the benefit of the former and with the expectation to be

presented through Krishantha.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

185

It was created by the 1st Appellant even before Krishantha was arrested

by CCD. Connected to this issue, the fact that the 1st Appellant sought phone

details of his family members along with that of the 2nd Appellant by

surreptitiously introducing their numbers to a pending criminal matter in

order to obtain a Court order for release of that information, becomes very

relevant. When the fact of the 1st Appellant obtaining phone details very

urgently and had them specially delivered to his residence is taken in to

consideration with the fact that he used that information to advise Krishantha

what to say to police, clearly points to a reasonable inference that could be

drawn against the 1st Appellant, that he used his understanding of the

investigative technics of using tower records to trace suspects, in order to

concoct a false narrative on behalf of the 5th Appellant with the intention of

shielding him from punishment, which also could be used to help the 6th

Appellant with his own defence at the same time. It is relevant to note that

Dias, in his evidence did say the 1st Appellant said that only the 5th Appellant

has a problem, after examining phone records.

Therefore, the evidence of the 5th Appellant on this point could clearly

be termed as an artificially created false narrative containing multiple

improbabilities. Thus, the decision taken by the High Court at Bar to reject the

dock statement of the 5th Appellant was made not because of it had applied

evaluation principles differently to him but due to its own inherent defects,

that justified its total rejection.

At the commencement of the 5th Appellant’s contention, it was noted

that he had advanced a contention before this Court stating that the tower

records indicate Anuradha’s phone was served by Nedimala tower at 8.30 p.m.

on 22.05.2013 with Krishantha being served by Balapokuna tower, while the

abduction had taken place at Kandewatta at 8.39 p.m. on the same day.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

186

Therefore, the presence of Anuradha along with Krishantha for the purpose of

abduction at Kandewatta Road is a near impossibility. Learned President’s

Counsel for the 5th Appellant submitted that if it is an impossibility, that

impossibility should equally be applied to the 5th Appellant as well.

It appears that the time of Kandewatta Road ‘abduction’ was placed at

8.39 p.m. by the learned Counsel. In making that submission, he did not

indicate from where he obtained that information. During cross examination

by the 5th Appellant, Krishantha said they left 1st Appellant’s residence at about

8.15 or 8.30 p.m. on 22.05.2013. Tower records indicate that from 7.12 p.m. and

until 8.19 p.m., Anuradha was served by Nedimala tower and at 8.43 p.m. only

he was served by Col-Wel 143-CB indicating a location near Balapokuna Road.

In view of the evidence referred to above, I find no merit in that contention.

The second point raised by the 5th Appellant is related to Krishantha’s

evidence which indicated that the 6th Appellant told the 1st Appellant in his

presence that it was the 5th Appellant who shot the deceased in the head.

Learned President’s Counsel contended that item of evidence should not be

accepted as a confession of the 5th Appellant in terms of Section 30 of the

Evidence Ordinance, and Section 10 of that Ordinance has no application in

view of the point of time at which this event said to have taken place. He

further submitted that Section 10 could be utilised only during the existence of

the conspiracy and with the completion of the act to which they all conspired

to commit, namely the murder of the deceased, provisions of that Section

could no longer be utilised to admit that evidence.

Learned President’s Counsel made this submission regarding the

evidence of Krishantha which indicated that when he met the 1st Appellant,

the 6th Appellant said that it was the 5th Appellant who shot the deceased in

the head. I did not come across a section in the judgment where the trial Court

considered this evidence against the 5th Appellant or in respect of any other

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

187

matter. Contrary to the submission, the High Court at Bar made a specific

pronouncement that it would only admit evidence up to the point of the death

of the deceased under Section 10 of the Evidence Ordinance, but subject to the

limitations imposed under Section 30 and any evidence that relates to the

events that had taken place after the murder, it would be considered only

under Section 8(2) of the Evidence Ordinance, as subsequent conduct of the

person (p.119 of the judgment). When the prosecution led that item of

evidence through Krishantha there were no objection to its admissibility or of

its relevance. The trial Court had on its own imposed that limitation by

following the applicable statutory provisions regarding such evidence.

Thus, in view of the reasoning as referred to above, it is my view that

the several grounds of appeal that were urged on behalf of the 5th Appellant

are without any merit and ought to be rejected.

Learned President’s Counsel, during his submissions, specifically raised

a ground of appeal on behalf of the 6th Appellant when he submitted that the

High Court at Bar gravely erred in rejecting his statement from the dock,

without giving adequate reasons. It was submitted that the 6th Appellant had

taken up the position that he was at home attending to some work related to

his business in the night of 22.05.2013, a fact corroborated by the 5th Appellant.

Furthermore, the 6th Appellant also said in evidence that he used his father’s

phone that night to call his then girlfriend Sheshadri, as evident from tower

records.

The tower records indicate that the phone used by Sheshadri (077-

8034046 – 6V1) received a call from a phone used by 1st Appellant (077-

0452711 – call details marked as P49) at 10.55 p.m. on 22.05.2013, which

continued for a duration of 24 seconds (2V6). This is the call on which this

particular ground of appeal was raised. Thus, if the 6th Appellant’s evidence

that the said call was taken by him is accepted by Court or the Court is unable

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

188

to accept or reject that claim, it raises a reasonable doubt in the prosecution’s

case as it establishes his alibi.

The 6th Appellant, in his dock statement stated that he returned from

Kurunegala with his mother at about 8.30 or 8.45 that evening with the 5th

Appellant. He then put his phone to charge as its battery was low. After

some time, he noted that Sheshadri had sent him a text message to his phone

(077- 7940034 – P54). He thereafter had called her that night, using one of the

three phones used by his father. According to the 6th Appellant, the reason to

use his father’s phone to take calls to Sheshadri instead of his own phone was

clarified to Court by him. This was due to the fact that he used to switch off

his phone during night, in order to avoid his friends constantly troubling him

to get them released through the intervention of 1st Appellant, whenever they

are booked for traffic offences. He emphasised that he used his parents’

phones to call Sheshadri from the time they got to know each other, and this is

why he used the 1st Appellant’s phone that night as well to call Sheshadri.

Learned President’s Counsel invited attention of this Court to the fact

that the 6th Appellant had presented his position consistently by suggesting to

Krishantha that he never got into the double cab with others. Krishantha

denied the said suggestion and replied that he mentioned the 6th Appellant’s

name because he too joined the other to take the deceased from Nedimala. He

emphasised that there was no personal animosity with the 6th Appellant for

him to falsely implicate him. The 6th Appellant suggested that position to

Krishantha once more as the last question put to him during cross examination,

along with suggestion that that he gave a call to Sheshadri that night.

Krishantha’s answer was the question is not clear to him. With that answer his

cross examination was concluded by the 6th Appellant.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

189

The grievance of the 6th Appellant is in relation to this evidence is that

the trial Court rejected his evidence of calling Sheshadri from his home, using

his father’s phone without giving adequate reasons.

The High Court at Bar considered the contents of the dock statement in

detail for over 11 pages of its judgment at the very end and decided to reject

the same. This decision was made by that Court after having observed

following improbabilities and inconsistencies in the sequence of events, as

spoken to by the 6th Appellant, in his statement from the dock.

The 6th Appellant claimed that Krishantha was angry with him for his

resentment for his father in taking up appointment in Colombo. The Court,

having noted that this position was never suggested to Krishantha, concluded

that it was presented for the 1st time by the 6th Appellant in his dock

statement. Court then considered the 6th Appellant’s position that Krishantha

called on the 1st Appellant’s number in late evening. The 6th Appellant

claimed that he declined to give the phone to his father, when requested to do

so by Krishantha, but asked for the reason to talk to him. Krishantha replied

that he wanted to talk to the 1st Appellant over 5th Appellant’s request for a

vehicle for the following morning. The 6th Appellant, having refused the

request, directed Krishantha to make some arrangement to help the 5th

Appellant and to keep him informed. The 6th Appellant thereafter contacted

the 5th Appellant, using his father’s phone once more, to verify the request he

made to Krishantha. Then the 6th Appellant indicated to the 5th Appellant that

his expectation of a vehicle might not work out and it is better he looks for an

alternative arrangement.

The Court noted that the position taken by the 6th Appellant in his dock

statement is an attempt to paint a picture that the phone conversation

Krishantha had with the 1st Appellant that night was in fact between

Krishantha and him. The Court was of the view that it was very unlikely that

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

190

Krishantha, if he was denied access to the 1st Appellant, would not use other

two connections to contact him. The 6th Appellant admitted his father had

three phone connections in his dock statement. The Court also did not find

any reason attributed to by the 6th Appellant, why only this particular call was

denied, when Krishantha had no difficulty in contacting the 1st Appellant

during the entire period under consideration as the call records and his

evidence revealed. It was also noted by the Court that the refusal to hand over

the phone to 1st Appellant when Krishantha requested to do so seemed very

unlikely, given the nature of the relationship he had with the 1st Appellant

and his family. Thus, the position of the 6th Appellant taken on this point

could not be accepted.

When the 6th Appellant, in alluding a reason for Krishantha’s arrest,

said that it was a regular happening as he was known to get into trouble quite

often by assaulting people, the Court noted that the total indifference

displayed by the 6th Appellant, over an arrest of a close family friend, seemed

an artificial claim. It is relevant to note that the 6th Appellant was taken on a

trip to Thailand by Krishantha on his expense a few weeks ago along with his

father and mother.

The Court also considered probabilities of the reasons attributed by the

6th Appellant for evading arrest after the arrest of the 1st Appellant and

decided not to accept them.

With regard to the call to Sheshadri, the High Court at Bar observed (at

p. 788 of the judgment) that the phone records indicate that there was large

number of text messages sent and received by the 6th Appellant using his

phone on that day and noted that his phone was switched off over a specific

period of time. Sheshadri, who would have provided the best evidence that it

was the 6th Appellant, who called her on 1st Appellant’s phone was not called

as a witness. The 6th Appellant sought to offer an explanation for that failure

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

191

by stating that that the CID officers have harassed her to the extent that she

lost interest to live. However, this position was not put to ASP Abeysekera, as

the 6th Appellant did not cross examined him, although he was accused of

fabricating a case against all the Appellants using tower records.

The Court also had the evidence placed before it that the 6th Appellant’s

phone was used during the time period between 7.00 p.m. and midnight on a

regular basis before and after 22.05.2013 and thereby effectively challenging

the validity of his claim that he regularly switches off his phone in the night to

avoid calls from his friends. A Court cannot take a particular item for its

consideration in total isolation, ripped off from the rest of the attendant

circumstances, and evaluate for its credibility by ignoring the rest. The

applicable test being the probability of that version, relevance of the attendant

circumstances, in the evaluation process could not be ignored. It must do so

after only consideration of all the relevant factors, for it is for the Court to

satisfy itself whether a witness’s evidence is a truthful and reliable account of

the events he speaks of. In this instance, if the 6th Appellant was to be afforded

the benefit of doubt created by his evidence, which presented through a

statement from the dock, it must be evidence that is acceptable to Court, or the

Court must find itself to be in a situation of being unable to decide whether to

accept that evidence or to reject.

The specific segment of evidence presented by the prosecution, which

the 6th Appellant sought to contradict by making this claim, is that he spoke to

the 1st Appellant through a conference call initiated from Krishantha’s phone.

The evidence of Krishantha on this point does not reveal a reason for the 5th

Appellant to request him to place 6th Appellant on a conference call to his

father. The fact that 6th Appellant, left Nedimala with others, is spoken to by

Krishantha and Anuradha only. Dias only states that the 6th Appellant was not

at home when he served tea at 11.00 p.m. and saw arriving with others at

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

192

1.00.a.m. Fausedeen is not a witness to this event. High Court at Bar decided to

accept the evidence of Krishantha and Anuradha as truthful accounts of the

events that led to the death of the deceased, upon their narrative being

corroborated in material particulars. It is evident that the 6th Appellant did not

carry his phone with him when he joined others for the journey from Nedimala

to Kaduwela. When he wanted to contact the 1st Appellant, it was obvious he

had to rely on someone else’s phone.

Then why he did not call the 1st Appellant directly from phone of the 5th

Appellant ?

It appears from the evidence that, from the very early stages of the

conspiracy, the 1st Appellant was careful not to leave a trail of phone calls,

which would tend to implicate himself or the others, who carried out his

orders. The advice to use two other SIMs to Krishantha and strongly insisting

on that they used them is indicative of this intention. The fact that 6th

Appellant had travelled with the 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th Appellants leaving his

phone at home cannot be a mere coincidence. It was a deliberate move taken

with due consideration not to leave any electronic record of his journey. Even

in relation to the 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th Appellants , their phones did not register

any activity during this journey, except for the 5th Appellant’s. But these

phones were active when they were at Nedimala per the tower records. Hence,

there is no tower records to indicate the 2nd, 3rd 4th and 6th Appellants

travelled along with the deceased. The inference that the Appellants were

careful not to leave a trail of phone calls is further fortified with the 1st

Appellant’s act of advising Anuradha not to reveal anything about the 6th

Appellant to the investigators, and that too was made after a consultation

with a lawyer, for he knew very well that it is through Krishantha’s and

Anuradha’s verbal assertion only the police could establish the participation of

the 6th Appellant to the abduction and murder. In addition, the 1st Appellant

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

193

had taken extra precaution to call for call details of the 2nd , 6th Appellant as

well as of Sheshadri to assess the ground situation, even before the CCD

discovered Fausedeen as a person who is concerned with the disappearance of

the deceased from CCTV footage. The evidence is that the 6th Appellant too

was aware of the importance of tower reports which might provide

information to implicate him and his father. When offering a new SIM to

Krishantha, sometime after the murder, the 6th Appellant instructed him to use

it thereafter if when contacting his father. All these factors point to the

conclusion that the 6th Appellant’s request to put him through to his father on

a conference call was to hide his presence with the rest of the team, who were

tasked to commit the murder.

Coming back to the call taken to Seshadri through the 1st Appellant’s

phone, it is very likely that the said call of 24 seconds was taken by himself,

knowing very well that he needed to establish an alibi for his son, the 6th

Appellant, being a very natural reaction of a father, who is faced with such a

situation. The High Court at Bar attached a significant weightage to the fact

that there was no reason, either apparent from the evidence or suggested by

the Appellants, for Krishantha (who was treated almost as a family member by

the 1st Appellant and others) to implicate the 6th Appellant at all, simply by

stating that he joined the 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th Appellants to take the deceased

for his last journey. Krishantha could have even suppressed making any

reference of the 6th Appellant at all as he did in so many instances during

investigations. Court also noted that there is no apparent gain for the officers

of the CID making them to fabricate a version to include the 6th Appellant’s

involvement, even if they had entertained some animosity towards the 1st

Appellant for his act of complaining to IGP of the investigative lapses they

made during Kahawatta murders.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

194

I have already referred to the approach of the High Court at Bar to

consider certain items of evidence that were in relation to the events that had

taken place after the death of the deceased, as subsequent conduct of the

particular accused. This is relevant in the present context. While dealing with

evidence which indicate that the 6th Appellant, upon seeing Krishantha was

very worried, tried to instil confidence in him by stating not to worry about

this and his father would look after everything. The 6th Appellant’s

subsequent conduct in making a reference to the manner in which the death of

Shiyam was caused, by making a declaration that he was shot right in the

head, sounded as if he was delighted to have witnessed the last moments of a

man, being put to death. This claim was made by the 6th Appellant when

Krishantha came to meet the 1st Appellant at his residence, looking a very

worried man. But that admission rightly places the 6th Appellant at the crime

scene as he did not quote from anyone but presented that description as an

eyewitness.

The complaint of the 6th Appellant that the High Court at Bar had

rejected his evidence without giving adequate reasons is clearly without merit

and ought to be rejected on that account. It is for these reasons, I find myself

in agreement with the conclusion reached by the High Court at Bar to reject

the evidence of the 6th Appellant, presented before it by way of a statement

from the dock.

At this stage of the judgment, the applications made by the 1st and

6thAppellants under Section 351 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act,

seeking permission of Court to present additional evidence, in the instant

appeal needs to be considered.

On 14.10.2021, learned President’s Counsel for the 1st and 6th Appellants

appraised this Court of two applications tendered to Court, through which

they seek permission to present additional evidence in this appeal. learned

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

195

Addl. SG resisted the applications and the Court provided for an

opportunity for them to be heard in presenting their respective submissions.

The 1st and 6th Appellants, in their respective applications (both of

which are almost identical in content) made under Section 351, read with

Section 451 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act and also read with Article

139(2) of the Constitution, moved this Court to allow admission of additional

evidence in appeal, in order to prevent a serious miscarriage of justice on the

cogent and compelling reasons that were pleaded therein.

In setting out the factual basis of the application, the affirmant Kahawala

Gamage Shyamali Priyadharshani Perera, being the wife of the 1st Appellant and

mother of the 6th Appellant, averred that she was alerted to the fact that some

officers of the CID have made statements in Court proceedings to the effect

that they had previously, at the behest or on instructions of ASP Shani

Abeysekera, fabricated, falsified or manipulated evidence with regard to

alleged weapons belonging to him were discovered from a location in

Kalagedihena, Gampaha and said ASP Shani Abeysekera was arrested and

remanded in connection inter alia with the allegation of having provided false

evidence in a judicial matter.

Upon enquiries being made on this development, it was discovered by

the affirmant that there were similar allegations made before the Presidential

Commission of Inquiry against the former Director of CID. It is the 1st

Appellant’s allegation that ASP Shani Abeysekera, who conducted the

investigations which led to the prosecution of the Appellants before the High

Court at Bar, had manipulated investigations and created false evidence

against him with regard to alleged discovery of a cache of weapons at a land in

Kalagedihena, Gampaha. The affirmant further averred that the said discovery of

weapons was made during the investigation conducted by the ASP Shani

Abeysekera in relation to the death of Syhiam.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

196

Learned President’s Counsel referred to the evidence presented by the

prosecution in the instant appeal through the witness Dias regarding

subsequent conduct of the Appellants. When the said witness stated that a

few days after the murder, at Nedimala residence, a cache of weapons was

loaded into a Maruti Zen car belong to the 6th Appellant on instructions of the

1st Appellant and thereafter it was transferred to a double cab, brought in by

IP Villavarachchi, who then transported them away, the High Court at Bar

considered that evidence. The 1st and 6th Appellants also submitted that the

evidence regarding the cache of weapons was referred to in the judgment of

the High Court at Bar, after accepting evidence of Dias. The Court failed to

note that the prosecution did not call IP Villavarachchi to give evidence before

that Court, although he was already listed as a prosecution witness. He

further submitted that ASP Shani Abeysekera was suggested repeatedly during

cross examination that he fabricated, falsified or manipulated evidence, but

the Court decided to reject them and proceeded to accept his evidence.

With this subsequent development, the 1st Appellant further stated that

fresh evidence, which has come to light through the officers of the CID as well

as other witnesses, if accepted and admitted in appeal, would have a material

bearing and influence on the outcome of his appeal as they are ex facie

credible, being comprised of statements/evidence already forming part and

parcel of judicial proceedings that were recorded by a Magistrates and Special

Presidential Commission. The 1st Appellant therefore moved Court to take

evidence of Neligamage Dileep Asanga Neligama, Ranasinghe Arachchige Chitrani

Sanjeewanie, Rampath Deveyalage Sameera Susantha and Ratnayaka Mudiyanselage

Irosh Chaminda Villavarachchi and admit them in the instant appeal.

In making the application for additional evidence, the 1st Appellant

referred to Sections 351 and 451 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, along

with Article 139(2) of the Constitution.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

197

Before I proceed to consider the merits of the 1st Appellant’s application,

the question whether this Court is legally empowered to receive additional or

fresh evidence should be considered first.

Article 139(2), empowers the Court of Appeal that it “ … may further

receive and admit new evidence additional to, or supplementary of, the evidence

already taken in the Court of First Instance touching the matters at issue in any

original case, suit, prosecution or action, as the justice of the case may require.”

Similarly, Section 351(b) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act too states that

the Court of Appeal, in dealing with an appeal, may “if it thinks it is necessary

or expedient in the interests of justice” it may take additional evidence itself or

direct it to be taken by any judge of an original Court or other person

appointed by the Court of Appeal for that purpose.

Thus, the Court of Appeal was conferred with a discretion to take

additional evidence, subject to the Constitutional and statutory provisions, in

situation where it thinks it is necessary or expedient in the interests of justice.

The instant appeal is a direct appeal from a judgment of a High Court at Bar

constituted by the Chief Justice under Section 451(2). Section 451(3) states

notwithstanding anything contrary an appeal shall lie from any judgment,

sentence or order pronounced at a trial under Section 450 to the Supreme

Court, not to the Court of Appeal.

In Section 451(4) provided for the procedure in preferring an appeal in

such a situation by stating that the “ … provisions of this Code and of any other

written law governing appeal to the Court of Appeal from any judgment, sentence or

order pronounced to the High Court in cases tried without a jury shall, mutatis

mutandis, apply to appeals to the Supreme Court, under subsection (3) from

judgments, sentences or orders pronounced at a trial held before the High Court at

Bar under Section 450.”

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

198

This section, being a provision of an ordinary legislation, alone is

incapable of conferring jurisdiction to this Court, for it is a creature created by

the Constitution itself. However, Article 118, whilst conferring the status of

final appellate Court to the Supreme Court, by sub-Article 118(g), also confers

jurisdiction in respect of such other matters which Parliament may by law vest

or ordain. Thus, the provisions of Section 451(4) which confers jurisdiction to

hear appeals preferred from judgments, sentences or orders pronounced at a

trial held before the High Court at Bar under Section 450 are applicable to this

Court with necessary modifications in terminology. Similarly, the powers

conferred to Court of Appeal under Article 139(2) and by Section 351 applies

mutatis mutandis to this Court as well.

Turning to consider the 1st Appellant’s application, I intend to identify

the basis on which learned Addl.SG raised objections to the two applications

under Section 351. It is her submissions that:

a. the proposed additional evidence is not relevant to the instant

appeal,

b. the proposed additional evidence is not expedient in the interest of

justice,

c. the proposed additional evidence, if admitted would not have an

important influence on the result of the appeal,

d. the proposed additional evidence could not be relied upon as

credible evidence.

Article 139(2) as well as Section 351 of the Code of Criminal Procedure

Act confers a discretion on an appellate Court to permit an application to

receive additional evidence in appeal, not as a mere procedural step in the

admissibility of evidence, but only if it thinks “… it is necessary or expedient in

the interests of justice”.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

199

The discretion thus conferred on appellate Courts must be exercised

with great caution and circumspect and only for the sake of interest of justice.

In Jandiris et al v Deve Renta et al (1932) 33 NLR 200, where it was sought to

admit a document from a case record as an item of fresh evidence in appeal,

McDonnel CJ observed (at p. 201) “[C]ertainly, this power must be exercised with

every caution, partly because the Supreme Court is not in civil matters a Court of

trial but of appeal and review, and chiefly perhaps because of the danger that evidence

not produced below but sought to be produced to it for the first time, will be

manufactured for the occasion. This is a very real danger which was fully before us in

considering the application to admit X.” In Ramasamy v Fonseka (1958) 62 NLR

90, Weerasooriya J, added another qualification by citing a note which

appeared at page 74 of 1 Balasingham’s Notes of Cases, that “ … the fresh

evidence which is sought to be admitted must be of a decisive nature or, to put it in

other words, must be such that on a new trial being ordered would almost certainly

prove that an erroneous decision had been given in the case”.

The authoritative pronouncement on which the 1st and 6th Appellants

strongly relied on was made by Lord Denning, in Ladd v Marshall [1954] 3 All

ER 745, where it was stated (at p.748) that:

“[I]n order to justify the reception of fresh evidence or a new trial, three

conditions must be fulfilled. First, it must be shown that the evidence

could not have been obtained with reasonable diligence for use at the

trial; second, the evidence must be such that, if given, it would probably

have an important influence on the result of the case, although it need

not be decisive; third, the evidence must be such as is presumably to be

believed, or in other words, it must apparently be credible, although it

need not be incontrovertible.”

These tests were adopted by our Courts, in addition to developing its

own jurisprudence, while dealing with the applications to present

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

200

additional/fresh evidence in appeal, in Ratwatte v Bandara (1966) 70 NLR

231 and followed since that judgment ( Dep v Meemeduma (1997) 3 Sri L.R.

379, Ekanayake and Others v Ratranhamy (2013) 1 Sri L.R. 305 and Nizam v

Jaideen and Others ( SC/SPL/LA 230/2012 - decided on 15.02.2016).

Therefore, I intend to consider the merits of the two applications

adopting the three tests, as set out in Ladd v Marshall (supra).

It is the contention of the 1st and 6th Appellants that the evidence which

they now seek to present before this Court was not available at the time of the

trial before the High Court at Bar and had surfaced only after year 2020, that

too from the statements made to Gampaha Magistrate in Case No.

B/3250/2014 by Asanga Neligama, Chiranthi Sanjeewanie, Sameera Susantha and

Irosh Villavarachchi. The 1st and 6th Appellant have annexed copies of these

statements marked as “E” to their application.

Learned Addl. SG, in her submissions invited attention of Court to the

dates on which these statements were made. Asanga Neligama made his

statement on 21.07.2020, along with his wife Chiranthi Sanjeewanie. Sameera

Susantha and Irosh Villavarachchi made their statements to the Magistrate on

23.07.2020. This factor was relied upon by the learned Addl. SG in support of

her contention that the CID, having investigated into the murder, detected

that a cache of weapons was transported to a location from Nedimala.

Villavarachchi, who served as an IP, was the first person to be arrested on

26.02.2014 in this connection and was produced in Colombo Magistrate’s

Court on the following day in Case No. B 3250/2014. The subsequent

investigations conducted by CID discovered a sizable quantity of firearms

from an estate belong to Asanga Neligama at Raniswela, Kalagedihena on

11.03.2014. These weapons included a T56 described as a “lp,a ngT56”.

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

201

With the investigations proceeding on that information, the 1st and 6th

Appellants as well as the 3rd and 4th were arrested and were produced before

Courts as suspects. Learned Addl. SG contends that all suspects of the

Colombo Magistrates Court in Case No. B 3250/2014 had the opportunity to

make complaints against the alleged fabrication of a case by introducing a

cache of weapon to their possession but none of them made any accusation

against ASP Abeysekera. She further submitted that neither did they present

any such accusation of fabrication by introducing a cache of weapons, when

Abeysekera gave evidence before the High Court at Bar and therefore

submitted that the applicants are now trying to have a second bite at the

cherry.

It is evident that ASP Abeysekera was arrested by CCD on 31.07.2020, after

being interdicted from his services, in respect of an allegation of introducing

several firearms and offensive weapons as items that were recovered from an

estate in Raniswela after keeping them in his possession for nine months.

Thereby he was accused of committing offences under Section 2(1)(b) of the

Offensive Weapons Act and Section 22(3) of the Firearms Ordinance in M.C.

Gampaha Case No. B 1536/20.

The sequence of events that preceded the arrest of ASP Abeysekera includes

making of statements by Neligama and his wife, followed by the two police

officers who were attached to the 1st Appellant’s protection. Villavarachchi and

Susantha, who made statements after Neligama, have also featured in Dias’s

evidence. There is no material to suggest that Villavarachchi or Susantha were

prosecuted for commission of any offence related to the instant appeal and

their names were not included in the information exhibited by the Attorney

General, in the High Court of Colombo. The alleged act of fabrication of

evidence against the 1st and 6th Appellants, made by ASP Abeysekera was in

February 2014. Neligama et al made their statements implicating ASP

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

202

Abeysekera only in July 2020, more than six years later. I did not see any

explanation as to why they waited that long to make the allegation against

Abeysekera, upon an incident which they all were privy to.

In Appuhamy et al v The Officer in Charge, Police Station, Pallebedde et al

(1986) CALR Vol.III. 281, Sharvananda CJ emphasised that (at p. 285) “ [F]resh

evidence connotes evidence from a new source – such a source could be oral or

documentary- but it should be a new source.” His Lordship further added that (at

p.286), “[A] party who had ample opportunity to produce certain evidence in the

lower Court but failed to do so, cannot have it admitted in appeal. Evidence which is

not within the knowledge of the party, or which could not be produced in trial in spite

of due diligence can alone be admitted in this Court, provided that it has an important

bearing on the issues in the case.”

More importantly, the proceedings that were instituted against the 1st

Appellant with three others is still pending before that Court. At the time of

this application, facts were reported to Court on the allegation made by the 1st

and 6th Appellant, and ASP Abeysekera was named a suspect, but in that

instance also no prosecution was commenced.

The claim that the cache of weapons was introduced by ASP Abeysekera

would obviously be the defence of the Appellants, if and when they are

formally accused of any offence relating to the cache of weapons. The 1st

Appellant relied on the fact that the report of the Government Analyst, who

carried out various tests on the multiple firearms from the said cache of

weapons, in order to identify the weapon used to commit the murder of

Shiyam returned a negative report, in order to bolster his contention of wilful

fabrication. If this Court were to consider credibility of the allegation levelled

against the 1st Appellant and others or of the allegation against Abeysekera, it

would be inappropriate for this Court to do so collaterally at this juncture, in

view of the fact that these issues, remains facts that are disputed by parties

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

203

and therefore were to be determined by the respective trial Courts, upon

hearing evidence. There is no precedent cited either by the 1st or 6th

Appellants that additional evidence was permitted by an appellate Court,

regarding a matter that was pending before another Court and remains to be

determined.

In view of these considerations, the applicability of the third test, as

pronounced by Denning LJ, namely “the evidence must be such as is presumably to

be believed, or in other words, it must apparently be credible, although it need not be

incontrovertible” should be confined to the already made observation that the

proposed evidence could not be termed as an item of evidence that did not

come to light when the 1st and 6th Appellants were tried, and surfaced only at

a subsequent point of time. The claimed position of making the ‘discovery’ of

that evidence by the Appellants, after the trial before High Court at Bar is not

an acceptable one. Since consideration of the probability of such evidence

being “manufactured for the occasion”, per dicta in Jandiris et al v Deve Renta et

al (supra), would touch upon credibility of the evidence which sought to be

presented, is omitted for the reason that it would be a disputed fact in issue

before a Court of First Instance, where the two Appellants are named as

suspects.

The determinant factor that should be considered in the first component

of the three tests adopted by Denning LJ, whether “the evidence could not have

been obtained with reasonable diligence for use at the trial”, is that Villavarachchi

and Susantha knew that the 1st Appellant was produced before the

Magistrate’s Court in connection with the recovery of the cache of weapons

but chose not to disclose that position.

Villavarachchi himself was named a suspect in that case, and thus, it is

reasonable to expect him to come out with this allegation for the sake of his

own sake . The allegation relating to the cache of weapons, according to these

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

204

witnesses, is a total fabrication in the hands of Abeysekera, and it is a fact they

claimed to have known all along. Clearly the alleged act of fabrication was not

committed in 2020. It was said to have been done in 2014. Nonetheless, they

waited six long years for no apparent reason to make that fact known to

others by making statements under Section 127. Similarly, no explanation was

tendered for their obvious failure to offer that vital evidence during the

proceedings before the High Court at Bar, where they could have easily called

Villavarachchi, Neligama or Susantha as witnesses for the Appellants, if the

prosecution failed in its duty to call them.

The 1st and 6th Appellants, in support of their application under Section

351, relied on an averment of Priyadharshani Perera that she was alerted to the

fact that some officers of the CID have made statements in Court proceedings

to the effect that they had previously, at the behest or on instructions of ASP

Shani Abeysekera, fabricated, falsified or manipulated evidence with regard to

alleged weapons belonging to him. However, the supporting material they

relied on and were tendered along with the application, does not reveal the

fact that some officers of the CID have made statements in Court proceedings

to the effect that they had previously, at the behest or on instructions of ASP

Shani Abeysekera, fabricated, falsified or manipulated evidence with regard to

alleged weapons belonging to him, but only reveal that Neligama, his wife,

Villavarachchi and Susntha alleged that a cache of weapons was introduced. In

view of these considerations, I am not convinced that the 1st and 6th

Appellants have satisfied the first and third of the three tests formulated by

Denning LJ.

Proceeding to consider the second component, that “the evidence must be

such that, if given, it would probably have an important influence on the result of the

case, although it need not be decisive”, attention must once again be turned to

Dias’s evidence and the manner the High Court at Bar dealt with that

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

205

evidence. Learned President’s Counsel already referred to a section of the

impugned judgment where the High Court at Bar considered evidence of Dias

in this regard. He invited attention of this Court to certain pages of the

judgment, where the trial Court reasoned out why it decided to accept that

evidence. He relied on that section of the judgment to impress upon us, in

view of the finding of that Court, proposed additional evidence would

probably have an important influence on the result of the appeal, although it

need not be decisive.

The High Court at Bar in its judgment refers to Dias’s evidence

regarding the cache of weapons from his examination in chief from pages 369

to 371 of the judgment. The Court considered his evidence where he admitted

having uttered falsehood to CID during his first statement and was of the

view that it is probable for a junior ranker not to disclose material that would

implicate a senior officer upon being questioned by other junior police

officers, citing Angulana TAB Appeal. The Court then considered Dias’s

evidence under cross examination by 1st Appellant (pages 373 to 375),

followed by the 2nd Appellant (pages 375 to 377) and assessed the probability

of the 2nd Appellant, being an officer of the police force, sharing a room with

police constable Dias and sleeping on the floor. The Court concluded that, as

these officers are assigned to the security contingent of the 1st Appellant, it

could not be expected that the lodging facilities that were made available to

officers in such a situation may not be similar to the facilities that are available

to them when serving in their respective stations.

Proceeding to consider the cross examination of the 3rd Appellant

(pages 378) the High Court at Bar examined the probability of Dias spying on

the 3rd Appellant by following him, upon being suggested so. Determining

that such a proposition is a very unlikely scenario, the Court noted that the 3rd

Appellant consumed liquor while serving at Nedimala despite his official

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

206

duties. It was also noted by the Court that these factors were not elicited by

the prosecution but by the Appellants themselves during cross examination.

Consideration of the 4th Appellant’s cross examination occurs at pages 379 and

380 which continued with the 5th Appellant’s at page 380. The 6th Appellant’s

cross examination was referred to at page 381 by the High Court at Bar and in

view of a suggestion put to the witness, the Court considered his lack of any

investigative exposure. The evidence indicates that Dias, after joining the force

as a reservist, served as a member of the Special Task Force, before being

assigned to the 1st Appellant. These factors were considered by the High

Court at Bar, in relation to the manner in which he gave evidence as a witness

for the prosecution and during cross examination. At this point, the Court

once again considered the probabilities of loading several T56 weapons which

would have to fit into the boot of a Maruti Zen car.

Contrary to the contention advanced by the 1st and 6th Appellants, the

High Court at Bar did not consider about the cache of weapons in any of the

instances that were highlighted ( pages 369, 370, 381, 382 and 383 of the

judgment) as they were mere reference to the evidence presented by witness

Dias.

The High Court at Bar, in its consideration of each significant item of

circumstantial evidence, acted on the tower records to test for consistency

before accepting its reliability. Perusal of the judgment from page 525, where

the High Court at Bar commenced its exercise of considering the multiple

items of circumstantial evidence presented by the prosecution witnesses,

revealed that there are over forty-five instances it had considered such

evidence and found them to have been corroborated by the other evidence (

pages 525, 526, 527, 529, 531, 532, 533, 539, 541, 542, 544, 548, 550, 553, 556, 557,

558, 561, 563, 564, 565, 566, 568, 569, 570, 572, 575, 577, 578, 579, 580, 581, 585,

586, 587, 588, 590, 592, 594, 600, 602 and 617 of the judgment). Only in page

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

207

589 a reference was made by the trial Court to Dias’s evidence, that too in the

context of the presence of a van in the Nedimala compound, a fact that

witnesses Krishantha, Anuradha and Shenal had already testified to.

The Court also noted that during CI Munashinghe’s evidence (one of

officers of CID who investigated the murder), a reference was made to the fact

that during his investigations, they received information about a “lp,a ng

T56” weapon. The High Court at Bar made its only reference to a cache of

weapons in the impugned judgment, other the instance where it reproduced

the narrative of the witness Dias, was at page 727. In this instance, the Court

was considering the statement made by the 1st Appellant from the dock.

Referring to the fact that the 1st Appellant’s assertion that, whilst serving in

Valachchenai area, he made a discovery of a large stock of weapons at Mannar,

acting on information he received from some LTTE informants. The Court

noted that the 1st Appellant made no assertion in his evidence of formally

handing over that stock of weapons to any authority.

This is a clear indication that the High Court at Bar had utilised other

evidence, that were corroborated by independent sources, to act upon and to

arrive at a finding of guilt against the 1st and 6th Appellants, and, more

importantly, did not utilise the evidence regarding a cache of weapons in its

reasoning as a factor that warrants imposition of criminal liability at all.

Significantly, the High Court at Bar desisted from making even a single

reference to the presence of a “lp,a ngT56” found from the premises of the 1st

Appellant in its impugned judgment, except to make a mere reference to that

fact in the process of reproducing evidence presented by the prosecution.

Thus, it is my considered view that the contention presented by the 1st

and 6th Appellants that the High Court at Bar had considered and acted on the

evidence that related to the cache of weapons is not supported by the material

placed before us and therefore had no impact on the imposition of criminality

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

208

on the two Appellants. Hence, the 1st and 6th Appellants have failed to satisfy

this Court of the second component, “the evidence must be such that, if given, it

would probably have an important influence on the result of the case, although it need

not be decisive” .

In an application made under Section 351 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act for admission of additional evidence in appeal, the operative

criterion for the Court to allow such an application, as formulated by the

Legislature, is “ … if it thinks it is necessary or expedient in the interests of justice.”

Having considered the attendant circumstances that were relied upon by the

1st and 6th Appellants as well as the learned Addl. SG, it is my considered

opinion that their application to lead additional evidence should be rejected,

in view of their failure to satisfy this Court that it is expedient in the interest of

justice, for this Court to exercise its discretion in their favour. The applications

of the 1st and 6th Appellants seeking permission of Court to present additional

evidence in the instant appeal are therefore refused.

Before I part with this judgment, the unreserved assistance rendered to

this Court by learned Presidents Counsel for the 1st, 3rd, 5th and 6th Appellants,

learned Counsel for the 2nd and 4th Appellants and the Senior Additional

Solicitor General, should be recorded with much appreciation. I should also

mention here that this Court also notes with appreciation of the courage of the

CCD officers, which they displayed in carrying out their lawful duties,

without bowing down to the dictates of a then serving Senior Deputy

Inspector General of Police, who personally intervened to prevent an arrest of

a suspect.

In conclusion, I hold that the multiple grounds of appeal that were

presented by the 1st to 6th Appellants do not merit any interference with the

judgment of the High Court at Bar as they failed to disclose sufficient grounds

for such an interference by exercising appellate powers of this Court. The

S.C.TAB No. 01A-01F/2017

209

judgment of the High Court at Bar is hereby affirmed along with the sentences

imposed on each of the Appellants. Accordingly, the appeal Nos. SC TAB

01A to 01F/2017 are dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

VIJITH K. MALALGODA, PC., J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

P. PADMAN SURASENA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

E.A.G.R. AMARASEKARA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

ARJUNA OBEYESEKERE, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT