==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for leave to appeal under Article 128 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka read with Section 5C of the High Court of the provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990, as amended by Act No. 54 of 2006.

SC/Appeal No. SC/APP/60/2021 Madurapperuma Appuhamilage Nimal, SC/LA/Application No. Madurapperuma of Bathgangoda, SC/HCCA/LA/432/2019 Ambepussa, Civil Appellate High Court of Gampaha Case No. WP/HCCA/GPH/138/2009(F) DC Gampaha Case No. 35884/P PLAINTIFF

vs 1. Dissanayake Gamage Dharmasena of

Maveehena, Ambepussa. 2. Meerigama Multi-Purpose Co-operative Society, Main Road, Meerigama. DEFENDANTS And Between

Madurapperuma Appuhamilage Nimal, Madurapperuma of Bathgangoda, Ambepussa, PLAINTIFF - APPELLANT

2

vs 1. Dissanayake Gamage Dharmasena of

Maveehena, Ambepussa. 2. Meerigama Multi-Purpose Co-operative Society, Main Road, Meerigama. DEFENDANTS – RESPONDENTS AND NOW BETWEEN

Madurapperuma Appuhamilage Nimal, Madurapperuma of Bathgangoda, Ambepussa, PLAINTIFF – APPELLANT – PETITIONER – [APPELLANT] vs 1. Dissanayake Gamage Dharmasena of

Maveehena, Ambepussa. 1st DEFENDANT – RESPONDENT – RESPONDENT – [RESPONDENT] 2. Meerigama Multi-Purpose Co-operative Society, Main Road, Meerigama. 2nd DEFENDANT – RESPONDENT -RESPONDENT – [RESPONDENT]

BEFORE : Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

3

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J. M. Sampath K. B. Wijeratne, J. COUNSEL : S. N. Vijithsingh instructed by Mr. Dilhan for the Plaintiff- Appellant- Appellant- Appellant.

Chamara Nanayakkarawasam instructed by Dimuthu Upeksha Fernando for the 1st Defendant – Respondent – Respondent - Respondent. ARGUED ON : 17.09.2025 DECIDED ON : 27.05.2026 M. Sampath K. B. Wijeratne J.

Introduction

The Plaintiff-Appellant-Petitioner-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

“Plaintiff-Appellant”) instituted this action in the District Court of Gampaha

against the Defendant-Respondent-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter

referred to as the “Defendant-Respondent”) seeking the partition of the land

called and known as “Ambagahawatta”.

After the preliminary steps were taken, a commission was issued to Mr. A.

Rupasinghe, Licensed Surveyor, for the preparation of a preliminary plan. Upon

executing the commission, the Commissioner tendered preliminary Plan No.

40/94 dated May 22, 1994 (marked “X”), together with the corresponding report

(marked “X1”).

The corpus surveyed by the Commissioner and depicted in Plan “X” was not

disputed by any of the Defendants-Respondents. However, as it is the duty of the

learned District Judge in a partition action to satisfy himself as to the identity of

4

the corpus, the learned District Judge considered the extent and boundaries of

the corpus and, upon analysis, correctly concluded that the land sought to be

partitioned is that depicted in Plan “X”. The learned District Judge determined

that the 1st Defendant-Respondent was entitled to a one-half undivided share of

the land, leaving the remaining half of the land claimed by the Plaintiff-

Appellant, unallotted.

The learned High Court Judges, sitting in appeal against the judgment of the

learned District Judge dated June 25, 2009, affirmed the findings of the learned

District Judge on the issue of the corpus in their judgment dated June 18, 2015.

Subsequently, upon an application made by the 1st Defendant-Respondent under

Section 771 of the Civil Procedure Code seeking a re-hearing of the appeal, the

learned High Court Judges delivered a fresh judgment on October 2, 2019, in

favour of the 1st Defendant-Respondent.

It is against the said judgment that the present appeal has been preferred, and this

Court has granted leave on the following questions of law:

i. The said judgment of the Provincial High Court is contrary to the law

and is against the weight of evidence led at the trial?

ii. Did the learned Judges of the Provincial High Court err in holding

that the Petitioner had failed to file his written submissions in court

thus failing to support his case with material facts while overlooking

the fact that the Petitioner had already filed his written submissions in

court on 05.05.2015 for the purposes of disposing of the appeal on the

previous occasion and hence the said judgment is bad in law?

At the very beginning, it must be emphasized that, in light of the aforementioned

facts, this Court need not labour over the question of the identity of the corpus.

It is the pedigree pleaded by the Plaintiff-Appellant that calls for consideration.

In his amended plaint dated November 1, 1994, the Plaintiff-Appellant sought

the partition of the land in equal shares between himself and the 1st Defendant-

5

Respondent. The 2nd Defendant-Respondent was added as a party to the amended

plaint, as he holds a mortgage over the 1st Defendant-Respondent’s half share.

The 1st Defendant-Respondent filed an amended statement of claim denying that

Senayake Achchige Podihami alias Babahamy, the mother of Senayake

Achchige Seda Nona, the Plaintiff-Appellant’s predecessor-in-title, owned a half

share of the corpus. The 1st Defendant-Respondent further denied that Senayake

Achchige Seda Nona is the child who derived title from Podihami alias

Babahamy.

Accordingly, the 1st Defendant-Respondent denied the title of the Plaintiff-

Appellant and claimed title to the entire corpus, one-half share on the basis of

his title deed, and the entirety upon prescription.

According to the Plaintiff-Appellant, Senayake Achchige Juwanis Appu and

Senayake Achchige Podihamy alias Babahamy were the original owners of the

corpus, each holding an equal half share. Upon the death of Babahamy, her child,

Senayake Achchige Seda Nona, succeeded as her sole heir.

Senayake Achchige Seda Nona gifted her half share to her nephew,

Madurapperuma Appuhamilage Nimal Madurapperuma, the Plaintiff-Appellant,

by Deed of Gift No. 2182 dated November 18, 1979, attested by P. de Vas, Notary

Public (marked “P2”).

According to the Plaintiff-Appellant, Senayake Achchige Juwanis Appu, the

owner of the remaining half share of the corpus, transferred his undivided half

share to Senayake Achchige Romel Singho by Deed No. 1072 dated December

6, 1915 (marked “P3”), attested by D. B. P. Karunaratna, Notary Public.

Upon the death of Romel Singho, he was survived by his wife, Elisahamy, and

his children, including Senayake Achchige Nandasena, together with his other

children, namely Wijedasa, Lusihamy, Alpinona, and Carolis Singho, who

became his heirs.

Thereafter, Elisahamy and the other siblings of Carolis transferred their

respective rights to him by Deed of Transfer No. 13663 dated December 24, 1956

6

(marked “V9/P4”), attested by B. V. Dharmadasa, Notary Public, thereby vesting

Carolis Singho with the undivided half share of the corpus.

Subsequently, the said Carolis Singho transferred his undivided half share to

Athapattu Pathiranalage Nandawathie by Deed No. 1607 dated January 8, 1961

(marked “V10/P5”), attested by T. R. S. Gunawardhana, Notary Public.

The said Nandawathie transferred her undivided half share to the 1st Defendant-

Respondent, Dahanayake Gamage Dharmasena, by Deed No. 278 dated October

18, 1987 (marked “V11/P6”), attested by Kotuwelle Wijesundara Ekanayake

Mudiyanselage Nandasena, Notary Public.

The 1st Defendant-Respondent mortgaged his half share to the 2nd Defendant-

Respondent, namely the Meerigama Multi-Purpose Co-operative Society, by

Mortgage Bond No. 896 dated April 7, 1993, attested by T. P. Ranjani Ashoka,

Notary Public. However, according to the extracts of the Land Registry (marked

“P8”), the said mortgage bond was discharged on October 13, 1998.

The learned District Judge, having analysed the evidence relating to the

aforementioned pedigree, held that the 1st Defendant-Respondent is entitled to a

half share of the corpus, but that the prescriptive title claimed by the 1st

Defendant-Respondent through Athapattu Pathiranalage Nandawathie had not

been established.

However, the learned District Judge held that the Plaintiff-Appellant failed to

establish the source from which Podihamy alias Babahamy derived her half

share, and that the first title deed relating to the said half share was executed only

in 1979, under which the Plaintiff-Appellant claims title through Seda Nona.

On the aforementioned grounds, the learned District Judge held that no title

passed to the Plaintiff-Appellant under the deed marked “පැ1” and, accordingly,

allotted a half share to the 1st Defendant-Respondent, leaving the remaining half

share unallotted1.

1 Vide page 247 and 248 of the Appeal brief.

7

The learned District Judge based his conclusion on an isolated answer given by

the Plaintiff-Appellant in cross-examination to the effect that Babahamy may

have inherited the property from her father2 who was not disclosed in the

pedigree set out by the Plaintiff- Appellant.

However, the birth certificate of Seda Nona, marked “P1”, confirms that her

mother is Senayake Achchige Babahamy. Accordingly, in the absence of any

evidence to the contrary, it is reasonable to conclude that Seda Nona has inherited

from her mother, Babahamy.

Whenever a pedigree is to be proved in Court, it is well recognized that Courts

are inclined to accept hearsay evidence relating to pedigree. This is because a

pedigree extending over a long period of time is, by its very nature, often beyond

the direct knowledge or lifetime of any single witness.

In P. M. Cooray vs M. A. P. Wijesuriya3 (S.C.), the relevance and admissibility

of such evidence, commonly referred to as hearsay evidence, in partition actions

was considered.

Per Sinnetamby, J.

“The relevant provisions of the Evidence Ordinance in regard to a

Proof of a pedigree are to be found in section 32(5), Section 32(6)

and section 50 (2). I am omitting for the moment proof by the

production of birth, death and marriage certificates. It almost

always happens that birth and death certificates of persons who

have died long ago are not available: in such cases the only way

of establishing relationship is by hearsay evidence. Section 32 (5)

of the Evidence ordinance renders a statement made by a deceased

person admissible.’

Further, when a partition action is instituted, the Plaintiff-Appellant, being

required to commence the pedigree from some point, must necessarily cite an

2 At page 84 of the Appeal brief. 3 P.M Cooray vs M.A.P. Wijesuriya 62 NLR 158.

8

original owner. However, in reality, such a person may not be the very first owner

of the land, as there may have been earlier and successive owners. Such

situations are not uncommon in partition actions.

Indeed, there are instances where the Defendants-Respondents disclose original

owners one or more generations prior to the ancestor cited by the Plaintiff-

Appellant in the pedigree. In such circumstances, Courts, in partition actions,

adopt a practical and contextual approach in determining the original owner of

the land.

This approach was duly considered by Gunawardena J. in Magilin Perera vs

Abraham Perera4(CA), where it was observed that ‘When a partition action is

instituted the plaintiff must perforce indicate an original owner or owners of the

land. A plaintiff having to commence at some point, such owner or owners need

not necessarily be the very first owner or owners and even if it be so claimed

such claim need not necessarily and in every instance be correct because when

such an original owner is shown it could theoretically and actually be possible

to go back to still an earlier owner. Such questions being rooted in antiquity it

would be correct to say as a general statement that it could be well-nigh

impossible to trace back the very first owner of the land. The fact that there was

or may have been an original owner or owners in the same chain of title, prior

to the one shown by the plaintiff if it be so established need, not necessarily result

in the case of the plaintiff failing. In like manner if it be seen that the original

owner is in point of fact someone lower down in the chain of title than the one

shown by the plaintiff that again by itself need not ordinarily defeat the plaintiff's

action. Therefore, in actual practice it is the usual, and in my view sensible,

attitude of the Courts that it would not be reasonable to expect proof within very

high degrees of probability on questions such as those relating to the original

ownership of land. Courts by and large countenance infirmities in this regard, if

infirmities they be, in an approach which is realistic rather than legalistic, as to

4 Magilin Perera vs Abraham Perera [1986] 2 Sri L.R. 208 at page 210 and 211

9

do otherwise would be to put the relief given by partition decrees outside the

reach of very many persons seeking to end their co-ownership.”

The same principle was followed by Abdus Salam J. in Gunasinghe vs

Podiamma and Others (CA) 5.

However, in the impugned judgment, the learned High Court Judges, rightly held

that the learned District Judge erred in concluding that the Plaintiff-Appellant’s

title had not been proved and that such finding was against the weight of the

evidence. Accordingly, the learned High Court Judges held that the Plaintiff-

Appellant is entitled to the remaining half share of the corpus.

Further, the learned High Court Judges, in the same impugned judgment,

affirmed the finding of the learned District Judge and held that the 1st Defendant-

Respondent had failed to establish adverse possession against the Plaintiff-

Appellant and, accordingly, had also failed to establish prescriptive title to the

entire corpus.

It is noteworthy that the learned District Judge held that the 1st Defendant-

Respondent had failed to establish his claim of prescriptive title to the entire

corpus, without setting out a proper analysis of the evidence presented before the

District Court.

It is trite law that the possession of one co-owner is deemed to be the possession

of the other co-owners. In Corea vs Appuhamy, 6 it was held that “A co-owner's

possession is in law the possession of his co-owners. It is not possible for him to

put an end to that possession by any secret intention in his mind. Nothing short

of ouster or something equivalent to ouster could bring about that result”.

In such circumstances, if a co-owner is to succeed in a claim based on

prescription, the claimant must establish possession to the exclusion of the other

co-owners by some overt act. In Maduanwela vs Ekneligoda7(S.C.), Bonser C.J.

observed that “A person who is let into occupation of property as a tenant or as

5 Gunasinghe vs Podiamma and Others [2009]1 Sri L.R. 174. 6 Corea vs Appuhamy [1911] 15 NLR 213. 7 Maduanwela vs Eknaligoda 3 NLR 213.

10

a licensee must be deemed to continue to occupy on the footing on which he was

admitted, until by some overt act he manifests his intention of occupying in

another capacity. No secret act will avail to change the nature of his occupation.

Furthermore, in Chaminda Abeykoon vs Anthony Fernando and Others8 SC

minutes dated 02.10.2018 (S.C), it was held that, after undertaking an analysis

of the judicial precedents relating to the presumption of ouster, particularly in

respect of a claim of prescription by a licensee, Prasanna Jayawardena J. stated

that “ … the requirement that the possession of one co-owner is the possession

of the other co-owners and that an overt act in the nature of ouster must occur

to demonstrate a change of the character of that possession and start running of

prescription in favour of one co-owner, applies with equal force to instances

where a licensee or an agent possesses a property in a subordinate character. In

such instances, an overt act must occur to demonstrate change in the character

of that possession and start the running of prescription in favour of the erstwhile

licensee or agent”, after rejecting the submission of the licensee that, “the

requirement of an overt act applies only in the case of claims of prescription

between co-owners.”

However, in the instant case, the 1st Defendant-Respondent has failed to establish

any such overt act. On the contrary, the 1st Defendant-Respondent admits that

the Plaintiff-Appellant constructed a house on the corpus in 1981. However, it is

stated that such construction was carried out with the permission of the 1st

Defendant-Respondent’s mother.9

Be that as it may, the 1st Defendant-Respondent admits that when his father made

preparations to construct a house on the corpus in 1982, Plaintiff-Appellant

objected, and the attempt was consequently abandoned.10

In light of the aforementioned evidence, although the learned District Judge

arrived at the finding on prescriptive title without an extensive analysis of the

8 Chamindu Abeykoon vs Anthoney Fernando and Others SC Appeal No. 54A/ 2008

9 Vide page 187 and 211 of the appeal brief. 10 Vide page 220 of the appeal brief.

11

evidence, I am of the view that, on the material available before the court, the

conclusion reached, that the 1st Defendant-Respondent failed to establish

prescriptive title, ought to be affirmed. I further observe that, although the

learned High Court Judges in the impugned judgment noted that the learned

District Judge had erred in not properly considering the 1st Defendant’s claim of

prescriptive title, they also observed in the same breath that the 1st Defendant had

not appealed against that finding. Consequently, the said observation of the High

Court Judges cannot be accorded any weight.

Now, I will deal with the observations made by the learned High Court judges

regarding the written submissions filed by each party. The judgment of the Civil

Appellate High Court dated October 2, 2019 set aside the judgment delivered by

the same Court on June, 18 2015, subsequent to an application made by the 1st

Defendant-Respondent under Section 771 of the Civil Procedure Code, and after

a rehearing of the appeal.

At the rehearing, the parties agreed to dispose of the appeal by way of written

submissions. However, although the 1st Defendant-Respondent filed written

submissions (vide page 44 of the Civil Appeal High Court brief), the Plaintiff-

Appellant failed to file written submissions as agreed. Nevertheless, the Civil

Appellate High Court proceeded to consider the appeal and delivered its

judgment dated October 2, 2019.

It is true that the Plaintiff-Appellant had filed written submissions on May 6,

2015, prior to the judgment delivered by the Civil Appellate High Court on June

18, 2015. However, those submissions were not filed in relation to the rehearing

that culminated in the impugned judgment dated October 2, 2019.

Conclusion

In view of the above analysis, the Plaintiff and the 1st Defendant are each entitled

to an undivided half share of the corpus.

Further, I hold that the learned High Court Judges did not err in observing that

the Plaintiff-Appellant had failed to file written submissions for the rehearing.

12

Accordingly, I answer the questions of law on which leave to appeal was granted

as follows:

i. The said judgment of the Provincial High Court is contrary to the law

and is against the weight of evidence led at the trial?

Yes.

ii. Did the learned Judges of the Provincial High Court err in holding that

the Petitioner had failed to file his written submissions in court thus

failing to support his case with material facts while overlooking the fact

that the Petitioner had already filed his written submissions in court on

05.05.2015 for the purposes of disposing of the appeal on the previous

occasion and hence the said judgment is bad in law?

No.

The judgments of both the District Court and the High Court are varied in terms

of the judgment of this Court, and the learned District Judge is directed to enter

an interlocutory decree accordingly. The Plaintiff-Appellant is entitled to the

costs of both the lower courts and this Court.

Appeal is allowed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT