==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Karunawathi Palith Liyanage,

No. 283, Pasyala,

Meerigama.

Petitioner-Petitioner-Appellant

SC APPEAL NO: SC/APPEAL/190/2011

SC LA NO: SC/LA/188/2010

HCCA NO: WP/HCCA/GAMP/REV/14/2008

DC GAMPAHA NO: 28140/L

Vs.

Ratna Lakshmi Jayakodi (nee

Yatawara),

“Rajagaha” Balagalla,

Divulapitiya.

Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent

1. Handunweerage Babynona,

No. 283, Pasyala, Meerigama.

(Deceased)

1A. Palith Liyanage Ariyadasa

(Deceased)

2. Palith Liyanage Ariyadasa,

No. 283, Pasyala, Meerigama.

(Deceased)

2A. Yaspali Liyanage,

2

SC/APPEAL/190/2011

2B. Chalinda Palitha Liyanage,

Both of No. 45, Sri Sugathawansa

Mawatha, 2nd Division, Maradana,

Colombo 10.

Defendant-Respondent-

Respondents

Before: Hon. Justice E.A.G.R. Amarasekara

Hon. Justice Kumudini Wickremasinghe

Hon. Justice Mahinda Samayawardhena

Counsel: Manohara De Silva, P.C. with Hirosha Munasinghe for the

Petitioner-Petitioner-Appellant.

C.E. De Silva with Thilini Wickremasinghe for the Plaintiff-

Respondent-Respondent.

Written Submissions:

By the Petitioner-Petitioner-Appellant on 04.01.2012

By the Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent on 05.03.2012

Argued on: 30.06.2023

Decided on: 07.03.2024

Samayawardhena, J.

The petitioner-petitioner-appellant (appellant) filed this appeal against

the judgment of the High Court of Civil Appeal of Gampaha dated

19.06.2009, whereby the revision application filed by the appellant

against the order of the District Court dated 13.09.2007 was dismissed.

By that order made after an inquiry, the District Court refused to

substitute the appellant in place of the deceased 1st defendant.

3

SC/APPEAL/190/2011

The appellant stated in the revision application filed before the High

Court that she had duly filed an appeal against the order of the District

Court, and that appeal was pending in the same High Court. The

appellant filed the revision application primarily to stay the proceedings

of the District Court and no other reason was given.

The appellant repeated the said facts even before this Court. Let me

reproduce paragraphs 18-20 of the petition dated 17.06.2010 filed by the

appellant seeking leave to appeal from this Court.

18. At the inquiry, the petitioner’s evidence was led and

subsequently the parties tendered their written submissions as

directed by Court. Thereafter the learned District Judge of Gampaha

delivered order dated 13.09.2007 refusing the application of the

petitioner to substitute in place of the original 1st defendant and also

to vacate the ex parte judgment already entered.

19. Being aggrieved by the order dated 13.09.2007, the petitioner

duly filed an appeal against the same and the said appeal is still

pending before the Provincial High Court of the Western Province

holden in Gampaha.

20. The petitioner states that as she would suffer grave and

irreparable damage if writ is executed and she and her family are

evicted from the premises in suit, she filed the above-styled

application for revision dated 27.08.2008 in the Provincial High

Court of the Western Province holden in Gampaha.

The revision application was filed nearly one year after the impugned

order of the District Court. The reason given in the petition for the delay,

namely that the appellant was seriously ill, was not accepted by the High

Court. It was noted that despite the alleged serious illness, the appellant

4

SC/APPEAL/190/2011

had managed to file the appeal within time. The appellant was guilty of

laches when she filed the revision application in the High Court.

Even if the appellant filed the revision application without delay, it is not

a good practice to entertain revision applications to stay the proceedings

in the District Court while the appeal is admittedly pending in the same

court. The law provides for execution of writ pending appeal. If the

appellant thinks that she is not bound by the decree, she will have to

advise herself on what lawful action she should take.

There is no necessity to go into the merits of the matter in this appeal

filed against the dismissal of the revision application.

This court had granted leave to appeal mainly on the question whether

the High Court failed to consider that there was no proper substitution

in the room of the deceased 1st defendant when the case was taken up

for ex parte trial against the 1st defendant.

I answer that question in the negative because there was no necessity for

the High Court to deal with that matter when the appeal was pending.

I affirm the judgment of the High Court on the basis that there was no

justification for entertaining the belated revision application filed against

the order of the District Court, especially when the appeal, according to

the appellant herself, was pending in the same court.

The appeal is accordingly dismissed but without costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

5

SC/APPEAL/190/2011

E.A.G.R. Amarasekara, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court