==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal under an in terms

of Article 127 of the Constitution read with

Section 5(c) of the High Court of the

Provinces (Special Provisions) (Amendment)

Act No. 54 of 2006.

SC/Appeal No. 152/2025 K.G. Abeyrathna

SC/HC/LA No. 189/2022 Galpoththegoda Watta,

SP/HCCA/KEG/66/2020(F) Mederigama, Mawanella.

DC Mawanella Case No.

1194/L

PLAINTIFF

vs

K.G. Wickramasingha

Galpoththegoda Watta,

Mawanella.

DEFENDANT

AND BETWEEN K.G. Wickramasingha Galpoththegoda Watta,

Mawanella.

DEFENDANT-APPELLANT

vs

2

K.G. Abeyrathna Galpoththegoda Watta, Mederigama, Mawanella. PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

K.G. Abeyrathna Galpoththegoda Watta, Mederigama, Mawanella.

PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT- PETITIONER vs K.G. Wickramasingha Galpoththegoda Watta,

Mawanella.

DEFENDANT-APPELLANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. Padman Surasena, C.J. K. Priyantha Fernando, J M. Sampath K. B. Wijeratne, J. COUNSEL : Akila Aluthwatte for the Plaintiff-Respondent- Petitioner.

Dr. Sunil Abeyratne instructed by Buddhika Alagiyawanna for the Defendant-Appellant- Respondent.

3

ARGUED ON : 02.09.2025 DECIDED ON : 12.03.2026

M. Sampath K. B. Wijeratne J.

Introduction

The Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the “Plaintiff”)

instituted an action in the District Court of Mawanella claiming title to Lot No.

8 in the final partition plan No. 75 dated January 18, 1955, made by D. Liyanage,

Licensed Surveyor, in case No. 8699 of the District Court of Kegalle. Upon

issuance of a commission, W.M.L.R. Weerasinghe, Licensed Surveyor, made

Plan No. 3106, marked ‘පැ 7’, wherein he superimposed Lot No. 8 on the final

partition plan No. 75, depicting the aforesaid Lot No. 8 as Lots Nos. 1 and 2 in

his plan No. 3106. Accordingly, the Plaintiff amended his plaint, claiming title

to the said Lots Nos. 1 and 2 in Plan No. 3106 (පැ 7).

The original owner of Lot No. 8, as admitted at the trial, was Kehelpannala

Gedara Punchi Appuhamy, who was declared the owner of the subject matter by

the final partition decree in Case No. 8699/P. The said Punchi Appuhamy, by

deed of gift No. 27286 dated September 30, 1968 attested by G.C.H. Molligoda,

Notary Public, marked as ‘පැ 2 (අ)’ gifted the subject matter to his son

Kehelpannala Gedara Amarasinghe in consideration of the natural love and

affection. The donee, Amarasinghe predeceased Punchi Appuhamy, and after the

death of Amarasinghe, Punchi Appuhamy revoked the deed of gift No. 27286

(‘පැ 2 (අ)’) by deed of revocation No. 2020 dated August 10, 1977 (පැ 3), attested

by F. G. W. Godakumbura, Notary Public.

Thereafter, on the same day, Punchi Appuhamy gifted the subject land to his

other son, Kehelpannala Gedara Abeyrathne, the Plaintiff, by deed of gift No.

2021, attested by the same Notary Public. The Defendant, in his evidence,

admitted that the Plaintiff is the owner of Lot No. 8 in plan No. 75 (‘පැ 2’) and

4

is held and possessed by the Plaintiff1. Therefore, the Plaintiff’s title to the

subject land was not in dispute. It is also common ground that the Defendant is

the owner of adjoining Lot No. 7 in Plan No. 75 (‘පැ 2’) and is held and possessed

by the Defendant2.

The pivotal issue for determination at the trial was whether the Defendant had

perfected prescriptive title to the disputed portion of the Plaintiff’s land by reason

of continuous, uninterrupted, and adverse possession for the requisite statutory

period.

It is admitted that both the Plaintiff and Defendant derive their title to their

respective lots from the final partition decree in case No. 8699 in the District

Court of Kegalle. Both the Plaintiff and Defendant took out commissions on two

different surveyors to survey the two lots owned by them. The Plaintiff’s land,

Lot No. 8 and the Defendant’s land Lot No. 7, in Plan No. 75 (‘පැ 2’) were

resurveyed and were superimposed on both the Plaintiffs Plan No. 3106 (‘පැ 7’)

and the Defendant’s Plan No. 5882 (‘වි 1’) made by K.S. Panditharathna,

Licensed Surveyor. Not only the Plaintiff’s Plan ‘පැ 7’ but also the Defendant’s

Plan ‘වි 1’ confirms that the Defendant has encroached into Lot No. 8 belonging

to the Plaintiff. However, a slight difference in the extent of the encroachment

could be observed between the two plans made by the two commissioners.

According to ‘පැ 7’, the encroachment is 1.5 perches (Lot No. 1), whereas in

plan ‘වි 1’, it is 1.53 perches (Lot No. 5), being a difference of 0.03 perches. Be

that as it may, the Defendant claimed that he had prescribed to the encroached

extent.

The Plaintiff’s action being one of rei vindicatio, the burden of proving title rests

on the Plaintiff. Only upon the establishment of the Plaintiff’s title does the

burden shift to the Defendant to prove the character in which he possesses the

1 Vide Defendant’s evidence at pages 83, 84 and 86. 2 Vide paragraph 6 of the Plaint, evidence of the Plaintiff at Page 57 of the appeal brief, and evidence of the Defendant at page 79/80/83/85 of the appeal brief.

5

disputed land. In the present case, the Defendant did not dispute the Plaintiff’s

title to Lot No. 8 before the District Court.

Accordingly, the learned District Judge of Mawanella entered the judgment in

favour of the Plaintiff and granted reliefs (අ) and (ආ) sought in the amended

plaint, namely, a declaration of title to the land described in the schedule to the

plaint and ejectment of the Defendant from the encroached portion thereof. The

learned District Judge further dismissed the counterclaim of the Defendant,

which sought a declaration that he was the lawful owner of the disputed portion

of land.

Being aggrieved by the Judgement of the learned District Judge, the Defendant

appealed to the Civil Appellate High Court where an argument was raised for the

first time that the revocation of deed of gift No. 27286 (පැ 2 (අ)) after the demise

of the donee is invalid. The learned High Court Judges upheld the Defendant’s

position and held that the revocation is invalid. Accordingly, the learned High

Court judges dismissed the action of the Plaintiff.

The Plaintiff then sought leave to appeal against the judgment of the High Court.

Having heard the submissions of the parties, this Court decided to grant Leave

to Appeal on the following three questions of law;

"

1. Has the Defendant challenged the title of the Plaintiff in the trial by way

of raising an issue?

2. If the answer to question No. [1] is in Negative, in view of the failure on

the part of the Defendant to establish his claim to the disputed portion

of Lot 1 of Plan No 3106 dated 05.10.2013. whether the Plaintiff is

entitled to eject the Defendant from that portion of land?

6

3. In the circumstances of this case, is the Plaintiff entitled in any case, to

eject the Defendant on the basis that the Plaintiff’s title was not

challenged by the Defendant in the trial?”3

Analysis

In the case before us, Deed of revocation No. 2020 (‘පැ 3’) was neither put in

issue nor objected to at the time of marking. As also asserted by the Supreme

Court in the case of Sri Lanka Ports Authority and another vs Jugolinija - Boal

East,4 that if no objection is taken at the closure of a case, documents read in

evidence, are evidence for all purposes of the law. Thus, in the case of Violet

Perera vs Rupa Hewawasam5 Court of Appeal refused to look into the

admissibility of the documents in issue as they had not been objected to at the

District Court.

At this stage the pertinent question arises as to whether this question could have

been raised in appeal for the first time.

In the Supreme Court case of Talagala vs Gangodawila Co-operative Stores

Society6 it held that “Where a question which is raised for the first time in appeal

is a pure question of law and is not a mixed question of law and fact, it can be

dealt with.”

The rationale for the inference that a pure question of law which does not require

the ascertainment of new facts can be raised for the first time in appeal is the

principle that findings of primary facts by a trial Judge who hears and sees

witnesses should not be lightly disturbed on appeal.

However, if a question of law mingled with facts raised for the first time in

appeal, where that point might have been put forward in the Court below under

one of the issues raised, and the Court which hears the appeal has before it all

3 Journal Entry dated 02.09.2025. 4 (1981) 1 Sri L R 18. 5 [1985] 1 Sri LR 229. 6 48 NLR 472.

7

the materials required to decide the question, then the appeal Court can decide

on such an issue.7

This has been very well articulated in the case of Leechman Co. Ltd vs Rangalle

Consolidated Limited8 where it was held that

“Where the point depends upon a question of fact which is disputed

and should be determined on evidence, then it cannot be taken up for

the first time in appeal unless the facts necessary for the determination

appear in the evidence and are not in dispute at all.”

As I have already stated above, in the case before us, both the deed of gift and

the deed of revocation had been marked without any objection. In light of the

above analysis, the validity of the Deed of Revocation is a mixed question of law

and fact. Where the Respondents failed to place the relevant factual

circumstances in issue, or waived any objection by accepting ‘පැ 3’ in evidence

before the original court, such matters cannot be raised for the first time on

appeal. As a result, the title of the Plaintiff must be deemed to have been

admitted. Sri Lanka's system of administration of justice being adversarial in

nature, this Court does not have the freedom of a wild horse to embark on a

voyage of discovery to decide on issues that are not presented before the judge

for adjudication.

As stated earlier, in the instant case, the learned High Court Judges set aside the

Judgement of the learned District Judge acting under the principles of Kandyan

law. For the High Court judges to rule on the validity of the deed of revocation,

first, it needed to be established that the Deed of Gift (‘පැ 2 (අ)’) is governed by

Kandyan law. In the circumstances, the revocability of said deed becomes a

mixed question of law and fact. Since the Deed of gift was never put in issue,

there was no necessity for the Plaintiff to lead evidence regarding the applicable

law, and there is not even an iota of evidence regarding the said facts. Therefore,

7 Setha vs Weerakoon 49 NLR 225. 8 [1981] 2 Sri LR 373.

8

learned High Court judges erred in law in setting aside the judgment of the

learned District Judge on that basis.

Be that as it may, since the learned High Court Judges have set aside the

judgment of the learned District Judge considering the validity of the deed of

revocation, let me also address the issue whether there is a valid revocation in

the case before us.

Under the Roman Dutch law, the common law of this country, a deed of gift

cannot be revoked without a decree of court unless the right to revoke is reserved

in the deed itself. Even in such instances Court would allow revocation only in

certain exceptional circumstances such as ingratitude, donor having children

after a gift of great value, and being prejudicial to the legitimate portion of the

donor’s children due to its magnitude.9 Revocation of Irrevocable Deeds of Gift

on the Ground of Gross Ingratitude Act, No. 5 of 2017, has now entrenched the

revocation of irrevocable deeds of gift on the ground of gross ingratitude only

on an order made by a competent court.

However, Kandyan law, unlike the general law, allows the donor to revoke any

Deed of Gift during his lifetime unless it falls within the purview of any of the

exceptional grounds provided under Kandyan Law Declaration and Amendment

Ordinance 39 of 1938 as amended by Act No 25 of 1944.

Section 4 of the Kandyan Law Declaration and Amendment Ordinance reads as

follows;

“Section 4 (1) Subject to the provisions and exceptions hereinafter contained, a

donor may, during his lifetime and without the consent of the donee or of any

other person, cancel or revoke in whole or in part any gift, whether made before

or after the commencement of this Ordinance, and such gift and any instrument

effecting the same shall thereupon become void and of no effect to the extent set

forth in the instrument of cancellation or revocation:

9 See Pererira, The Laws of Ceylon, 2nd Edition- page 610.

9

Provided that the right, title, or interest of any person in any

immovable property shall not, if such right, title, or interest has

accrued before the commencement of this Ordinance, be affected or

prejudiced by reason of the cancellation or revocation of the gift to

any greater extent than it might have been if this Ordinance had not

been enacted.

(2) [….]”

Accordingly, ordinarily deed of gift under Kandyan law is revocable irrespective

of whether the donee consented or not. Even in instances where the subject

matter of such Deed of Gift has been passed for a valuable consideration, still

the donor’s right to revoked remain unaffected. Hence in the Court of Appeal

case of Muthubanda and Another vs Gunaratne,10 held as follows;

“Section 4 (1) of the Kandyan Law Declaration and Amendment Ordinance

clearly reserves to the donor a right to revoke a gift and section 5 (1) (d) provides

for the renunciation of the right to revoke. These two sections taken together

clearly spell out the donor’s right to revoke and hence on a plain reading of the

two sections it is my view that the donee by a subsequent retransfer to a 3rd party

could not defeat the donor's [sic] right to revoke.”

In the Court of Appeal case of Sirisena vs Eyelyn de Silva11 where the donor

revoked the deed of gift, 16 days after the death of the original donee, the Court

rejecting the argument of the learned Counsel for the heirs of the original donee

held that;

“I am inclined to take the view that under the Kandyan Law the heirs be they

minors or majors get no better interest than the original donee and they all get

only a contingent interest. Therefore, once the deed of gift is revoked the said

contingent interest terminates and the donor re-acquires title. As section 4(1) of

10 [1999] 3 Sri L R 1. 11 [2003] 2 Sri L.R 255.

10

the Kandyan Law Declaration Amendment Ordinance specifically states that the

consent of the donee or any other person is not required covers the contingent

rights of the heirs of the deceased and they forfeit their rights on revocation of

the deed of gift by the donor.”

However, as I have already noted above, the right to revocation of a donor is

subject to the qualifications provided in Section 5 of the Kandyan Law

Declaration and Amendment Ordinance.

Section 5

(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of section 4 (1), it shall not be lawful for a

donor to cancel or revoke any of the following gifts where any such gift is made

after the commencement of this Ordinance: -

(a) any gift by virtue of which the property which is the subject

of that gift shall vest in the trustee or the controlling

viharadhipati for the time being of a temple under the provisions

of section 20 of the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance or in any

bhikkhu with succession to his sacerdotal pupil or pupils or

otherwise than as pudgalika for the benefit of himself and his

heirs, executors, administrators or assigns;

(b) any gift in consideration of and expressed to be in

consideration of a future marriage, which marriage has

subsequently taken place;

(c) any gift creating or effecting a charitable trust as defined by

section 99 of the Trusts Ordinance;

(d) any gift, the right to cancel or revoke which shall have been

expressly renounced by the donor, either in the instrument

effecting that gift or in any subsequent instrument, by a

declaration containing the words " I renounce the right to

11

revoke " or words of substantially the same meaning or, if the

language of the instrument be not English, the equivalent of

those words in the language of the instrument:

Provided that a declaration so made in any such subsequent

instrument shall be of no force or effect unless such instrument

bears stamps to the value of five rupees and is executed in

accordance with the provisions of the Prevention of Frauds

Ordinance or of the Deeds and Documents (Execution before

Public Officers) Ordinance.

(2)[…]”

Accordingly, even if the deed states that the gift is absolute and irrevocable, if

the right to revoke is not renounced with the words " I renounce the right to

revoke " or similar words, such deed can be revoked.

Thus, in P. B. Ratnayake vs M. S. B. J. Bandara,12 the Supreme Court held that

“The words “absolute and irrevocable” are only adjectival description of the

gift but the essential requirement is a transitive verb of express renunciation.

Words merely of further assurance are insufficient. The use of the words

“absolute and irrevocable” and “to hold the premises for ever” do not satisfy

the requirement of section 5(1)(d) of the Ordinance. Deed 8247 was revocable.”

A similar view has been expressed in the Court of Appeal case of Somalatha

and Others vs Wickremasinghe and Others13 where it was observed that;

“Kandyan Law gives the right to a Donor without the consent of the Donee or

any other person, such as the life interest holder, to cancel or revoke any gift by

an instrument in writing in conformity with the law. Therefore, the question of a

12 [1990] 1 SRI.L.R. 156. 13 [2002] 2 Sri LR 347.

12

unilateral revocation [argument (ii) above] without notice to the donee does not

arise for consideration. […]

The basic question to be asked in gifts seeking exception to come under section

5 (1) (d) is not how strongly the gift had been expressed but whether there had

been a deliberate and express renunciation by the donor of his right to revoke.

In other words, the donor, conscious of his right to revoke under Kandyan Law,

should have expressed in words similar to the words mentioned in section 5 (1)

(d) that he was renouncing his right to revoke. In the instant case the words

expressed (2D2 and 2D3 above) were descriptive of the nature of the gift. That

is, the donor explained deed No. 531 that he was giving a gift which was

irrevocable and absolute under all circumstances. He did not say that he was

renouncing his right to revoke such an "irrevocable and absolute" gift. The

section expected such renunciation in words similar to what is mentioned in

section 5 (1) (d), if a gift was to be considered as an exception to the general

rule of revocability of gifts under Kandyan Law.” [emphasis added]

For the aforementioned reasons, I am of the view that the learned High Court

judges erred in holding that the revocation of a deed of gift is not possible when

the donee is not alive.

Since the title of the Plaintiff to the corpus in question is not disputed, next I will

deal with the question as to whether the Defendant has established a prescriptive

title that will operate adversely to the paper title of the Plaintiff.

For the Defendant to succeed in his claim for prescriptive title, the onus is on

him to satisfy all ingredients set out in section 3 of the Prescription Ordinance

No. 22 of 1871 as amended. Accordingly, the Defendant must prove undisturbed

and uninterrupted possession by a title adverse to or independent of that of the

Plaintiff in such action for ten years prior to the institution of the action.

In the case before us, the Defendant seems to suggest to the Court that the portion

that said to have been encroached by him is in his possession as per a

determination made by the District Court in a partition action. He claims that the

common fence that was erected including Plaintiff’s portion of land, is the fence

13

erected by Defendant’s father as per the judgment of the partition action filed in

Kegalle District Court.

“ප්‍ර - තමන් කියා සිටියා මේ මෙදීමට මයෝජිත ඉඩමයි තමන්මේ ඉඩමයි අතර මපාදු

මායිම පියා හැදුව මායිම කියලා?

උ - ඔව්

ප්‍ර - ඒ වමේම තමන් කියනවා දිස්ත්‍රික් අධිකරණමයන් මවන් කල මායිම තමා

තිමයන්මන් කියලා?

උ – ඔව්”

He has repeatedly confirmed his assertion in the cross examination.

උ- පියා හිටවපු වැට. මවන වැටක් හිටවලා නැ. එක වැටයි තිමයන්මන්. දිස්ත්‍රික්

උස්ත්‍ාවිමයන් මෙදු වැට තමයි තිමයන්මන්

(Appeal brief page 87)

ප්‍ර- තමුන්ට විරසිිංහ මහතාමේ කැෙලි අිංක. 01 ගත්තත්, පණ්ඩිතරත්න මහතමේ

5882 පිඹුමේ කැෙලි අිංක. 5 ගත්තත්, ඒ මකාටස්ත්‍ර තුල මපාදු මයිමක් මලස්ත්‍ තමුන්

කියන්න උත්ස්ත්‍ාහ කරන කලු මේඛාව මකාටස්ත්‍ මකායි කාලමේ වැටහිර ගස්ත්‍ර

හිමටව්වාද කියලා තමුන්ට කීමට හැකියාවක් නැහැ කියලා මයෝජනා කරනවා?

උ- ස්ත්‍රවාමිනි වැටහිර ගස්ත්‍ර මම හිමටව්මව් නැහැ. අමේ පියා විසින් හිටවපු වැට

තිමයන්මන්. මම එක වැටක්වත් හිමටව්මව් නැහැ.

(Appeal brief page 90)

I am unable to accept the Defendant's contention that the District Court executed

a writ of possession in a way that wrongfully encroached on another person’s

14

portion. This seriously questions the Defendant's credibility and reliability as a

witness.

The very version of the Defendant’s story is shaken by the evidence of the

licensed surveyor and Court Commissioner L.R. Weerasinghe, who clearly

identifies the Defendant's encroachment into the Plaintiff’s portion.

“කැෙලි අිංක.7 ට ඈදාමගන තිමෙනවා කැෙලි අිංක. 8හි මකාටස්ත්‍ක්. ඒ ෙව

හදුනා ගන්න පුළුවන් වුනා. ඒ මකාටස්ත්‍ මමේ පිඹුමේ කැෙලි අිංක1 න් දක්වලා

තිමෙනවා. කැෙලි අිංක 1 නැමගනහිරට ඇති කළු පාට මේඛාමවන් මපන්වලා

තිමෙනවා. පැලඉනි වැටක් මපන්ුේ කර තිමෙනවා. මදමගාලමලෝ අතර බුක්ති

විදින වැට මපන්ුේකර තිමෙන්මන්. ඒ අුව කැෙලි අිංක.1 කියන්මන්

විත්තිකරු පැමිණිලිකරුමේ ඉඩමමන් අලලාගත්ත මකාටස්ත්‍ක කියන්මන්

ලියනමේ මහතාමේ අිංක.75/8 කැෙැලල. කැෙලි අිංක.8 කියන එක මේ නඩුමව්

පැමිණිලිකරුට තිමෙන ඉඩම.”

(Appeal brief page 72)

The evidence of the licensed surveyor falls in line with the Plaintiff’s version of

the story. It is the contention of the Plaintiff that the Defendant had erected a new

fence on or around August 03, 2011, encroaching upon the land of the Plaintiff.

The land that was encroached upon is also depicted by Lot 1 in Plan No 3106

dated October 05, 2013.14 This was affirmed by the brother of Plaintiff at the

examination- in-chief.

‘මමේ ඉඩමයි වික්‍රමසිිංහමේ ඉඩමයි අතර මම දන්නා කාලමේදී මායිේ මලස්ත්‍

වැටහිර තිබුණා. එය පරණ මායිමක්. එමහම බුක්ති විඳමගන එන මකාට

සිද්ධධියක් වුනා.

විත්තිකරු ෙලහත්කාරමයන් වැට කපලා තිමෙනවා. පරණ වැට ගලවා

අලුමතන් වැටක් ගැහුවා.’

(page 57 of appeal brief)

14 Paragraph 7 of the Plaint.

15

Furthermore, the Defendant in this case, has not at any point identified the time

period from which he has begun to possess the corpus in question adversely to

the Plaintiff. When he was questioned as to the commencement of the

prescriptive possession, he had failed to identify the starting point of his

prescriptive period.

“ප්‍ර - බුක්තියක් ආරේභ වූ ආකාරයක් ගැන තමුන් කියන්න දන්මන් නැහැ කියලා

මයෝජනා කරනවා?

උ - මම දන්නා කාලමේ සිට බුක්ති වින්ද වැට”

(Appeal brief page 91)

If one is unable to point to a specific act or series of acts to show that his

possession has become adverse, how can one claim a prescriptive title?

Samayawardhene J. in Athukoralalage Don Chandrasekera vs Athukoralalage

Don Sarathchandra and others15observed that, “Mere possession is not

prescriptive possession. It should be adverse possession known to the real

owner. Adverse possession should continue uninterruptedly for 10 years. For

mere possession to become adverse possession, there should be an overt act for

the real owner and the Court to understand the starting point of prescriptive

possession. [..]The 10-year period begins to run from that point, not from the

mere act of possession, as not every instance of possession qualifies as

prescriptive possession.” [emphasis added]

The evidence that the Defendant primarily relied on to prove his continuous

possession is the cultivation of certain trees. However, mere cultivation of certain

plants does not itself suffice to prove ‘adverse possession’ as required under

section 3 of the Prescription Ordinance. This is evident by the evidence given by

Defendant himself at the cross examination.

“ප්‍ර- තමුන්ලා ඒ මකාටස්ත්‍ට කාලාවමරෝධය යටතට අවුරුදු 10 ක් බුක්ති වින්දා

15 SC APPEAL NO: SC/APPEAL/30/2016, SC Minutes of 04.07.2024.

16

කියන්න කිසිම ස්ත්‍ාධකයක් නැහැ කියලා මයෝජනා කරනවා. ?

උ- පියා ඉන්න කාලමේ පටන්ම ඒ මකාටස්ත්‍ බුක්ති වින්දා.

ප්‍ර-පැමිණිලිකරුමේ මකාටස්ත්‍ක් අලලාමගන් තමුන්ලා භුක්ති වින්දා කියන්න

තමුන්ට කිසිදු මලඛණගත ස්ත්‍ාක්ියක් මහෝ වාචික ස්ත්‍ාක්ියක් නැහැ කියලා

මයෝජනා කරනවා ?

උ-මම දන්මන් නැහැ ඒක කියන්න මමේ මදමවිපිමයෝ ඉන්න කාලමේ සිට

තමා බුක්ති විදින්මන්. ඒක කියන්න මම දන්මන් නැහැ.”

(Appeal brief page 90)

As held by several decisions of the Supreme Court,16 a prescription is an

illegality made legal. Here law does not intend to confer any premium on the

wrongdoing of a person in wrongful possession but rather seeks to penalize a

person who has slept on his own rights. Accordingly, the Court would rather

follow a strict approach in allowing claims of prescription. Unless a party

seeking to establish a prescriptive title proves all the elements required to

establish such a title to the satisfaction of the Court, the Court would not hesitate

in disallowing such a claim. When evaluating the totality of evidence, I am of

the view that Defendant has failed to establish a prescriptive title to the corpus

in question as required by law.

Accordingly, the Defendant is not entitled to succeed his claim of prescriptive

title, and therefore the Plaintiff is entitled to eject the Defendant from that portion

of land that is in dispute.

Conclusion

I answer questions of law raised in the following manner;

16 Corea vs Iseris Appuhamy (1911) 15 NLR 65 at 78, Kiriamma vs Podibanda [2005] BLR 9 at 11, Fathima Naseera vs Mohamed Haris (CA/818/96(F), CA Minutes of 11.07.2012, Sumanawathie vs Sirisena (CA/830/98(F), CA Minutes of 10.03.2014.

17

1. Has the Defendant challenged the title of the Plaintiff in the trial by way of

raising an issue? No

2. If the answer to question No 1 is in Negative, in view of the failure on the

part of the Defendant to establish his claim to the disputed portion of Lot 1

of Plan No 3106 dated 05.10.2013. whether the Plaintiff is entitled to eject

the Defendant from that portion of land? Yes

3. In the circumstances of this case, is the Plaintiff entitled in any case, to eject

the Defendant on the basis that the Plaintiff’s title was not challenged by the

Defendant in the trial? Yes

I affirm the Judgment of the learned District Judge. The judgment of the learned

High Court Judges is set aside.

Appeal is allowed. The Appellant is entitled to costs of this court and the courts

below.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

P. Padman Surasena, C.J.

I agree.

CHIEF JUSTICE

K. Priyantha Fernando, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT