1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application in terms of Article 126 of the Constitution of the Democratic

S.C. FR Application No.1. H.D.S. Wimalarathna524/2012 No. 209, Mahabopitiya, Alawwa.

PETITIONER

Vs.

1. D.M.S.K. Dassanayake,

Inspector of Police,Police Station, Alawwa.

2. Senaratna,

52524, Police Constable,Police Station, Alawwa.

3. A.B. Mahinda Pushpakumara

Inspector of Police,Officer-in-Charge,Police Station, Alawwa.

4. Lal Kumara

20167, Police Sergeant, Police Station, Alawwa.

5. Karunarathna,,

32182,Police Sergeant,Police Station, Alawwa.

6. Inspector General of Police,

2

Police Head Quarters,Colombo 01.

7. Hon. Attorney-general,

Attorney- General’s Department,Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

BEFORE: A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J. Menaka Wijesundera, J. & M. Sampath K. B. Wijeratne J.

COUNSEL: P.K. Prince Perera with S. Panchacharam for the Petitioner.

Razik Zarook, PC for the 1st - 5th Respondents.

Ms. V. Hettige, ASG for the 6th and 7th Respondents.

ARGUED ON : 30.05.2025

DECIDED ON: 18.09.2025

M. Sampath K. B. Wijeratne J.

Introduction

The Petitioner filed this application in terms of Articles 17 and 126 of the

Constitution seeking inter alia a declaration that his fundamental rights guaranteed

under Articles 11, 13(1) and 13(2) of the Constitution were infringed by the 1st to 5th

Respondents who are police officers attached to Alawwa Police station;

compensation in a sum of Rs. 3 million from 1st to 5th Respondent and to direct the 7th

Respondent, the Attorney General to institute criminal proceedings under the

3

Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or

Punishment Act, No. 22 of 1994, against the 1st to 5th Respondents who are liable for

the infringement of the Petitioner’s fundamental rights under Article 11 of the

Constitution.

The Petitioner’s complaint is that he was subjected to torture, cruel, inhuman and

degrading treatment by the 1st to 5th Respondents using the colour of their office

whilst he was unlawfully arrested and detained in the Alawwa police station.

Accordingly, this Court granted leave to proceed on the alleged violation of the

Petitioner’s fundamental rights guaranteed under Article 11, 13(1) and 13(2) of the

Constitution.1

Petitioner’s version of the Case

According to the Petitioner, on 12.06.2011 at around 8.15 a.m. when he reported for

duty in the Abans Alawwa branch where he worked as a sales assistant, he came to

know that the shop has been broken into. On the same day 1st and 2nd Respondents

together with two other Police officers have come to his workplace and have taken

the Petitioner to Alawwa Police station without informing him of the reasons for the

arrest. When he was taken to the backside of the Alawwa Police station, the 3rd

Respondent who is the OIC of Alawwa Police station had arrived. After learning who

the Petitioner was, the 3rd Respondent had slapped the Petitioner’s face twice and as a

result of these assaults the Petitioner had fallen down. The Petitioner claims that

there was a bed in the place which was also used to assist the torture inflicted upon

the Petitioner.

The Petitioner describes the torture he was subjected to while he was

unlawfully detained at the Alawwa police station in the following manner;

'' පලමු වග උත්තරකරු විසින් මාගේ කකුලට මාංචු දමලා ඇද

කකුලට අනෙක් මාංචුව දමන ලදි. එලෙස දමා පලමු

1 Journal entry dated 01.10.2012.

4

වගඋත්තරකරු පෙත්සම්කරුව බිම ඉන්දවන ලදි. එලෙස

ඉන්දවන ලද්දේ පෙත්සම්කරුගේ කකුල් දෙක දිග ඇරය. 3 වන

වග උත්තරකරු විසින් වේවැලක් ගෙනවිත් පෙත්සම්කරුගේ

කකුල් දෙකේ යටි පතුල් වලට පහර දෙන ලදි. මෙම පහර

කෑමෙන් දැඩි වේදනාවක් දැනුන අතර එම වේදනාව හිස්

මුදුනින් පිට ව්ය. පලමු වගඋත්තරකරු එම ස්ථානයෙන් පිටව

ගොස් නයි කොච්චි වගයක් ෂොපිං බෑගයක දමා ගෙන

ගෙනෙන ලදි එම නයි කොච්චි ටික 2 වන වග උත්තරකරුට 1

වන වගඋත්තරකරු විසින් දෙන ලදි. 2 වන වග උත්තරකරු

එම නයි කොච්චි ටික තලා ලේන්සුවකට ගෙන පොඩ්

පොට්ටනියක් හදලා එතන තිබුන වතුර බෝතලයක් අරගෙන

ලේන්සුවෙන් හදා ඇති පොඩ් පොට්ටනියකට දමා ඒක ගෙන 1

වන වගඋත්තරකරුට දෙන ලදි. 2 වගඋත්තරකරු ව්සින්

පෙත්සම්කරුගේ ඇස් උඩටම සිටින සේ ඔලුව අල්ලා ගන්නා

ලදි. 1 වන හා 3 වන වග උත්තරකරුවන් විසින් මාරුවෙන්

මාරුවට වතුරෙන් පොගවා තිබු තලන ලද නයි කොච්චි සහිත

පොට්ටනිය පෙත්සම්කරුගේ ඇස් දෙකට නාසයට නලළට

කටට මිරිකන ලදී.”

On the same day at or about 7.30 PM, the Petitioner was further tortured by 1st,

2nd, 4th and 5th Respondents after stripping down the garments of the Petitioner

forcibly.

“ඉන් පසුව 1,2.4 සහ 5 වග උත්තකරුවන් පෙත්සම්කරුගේ අත්

දෙකයි කකුල් දෙකයි එතන තිබූ ලණුවකින් ගැට ගසන ලදී.

එතන කබඩ් දෙකක් තිබුණි. 1,2 4 සහ 5 වන වග

උත්තකරුවන් විසින් යකඩ ඉන්නක් ගෙන එම යකඩ ඉන්න

5

ගැට ගසා තිබූ පෙත්සම්කරුගේ අත් දෙකයි කකුල් දෙකයි

අතරින් දමා 1 සහ 2 වන වගඋත්තරකරුවන් විසින් ගල්

ඉන්නේ එක පැත්තක්ද 4 සහ 5 වග උත්තරකරුවන් විසින් ගල්

ඉන්නේ අනිත් පැත්තද අල්ලා කබඩ් දෙක උඩ සිටින සේ රදවන

ලදී. එසේ රදවා පලමු වගඋත්තරකරු විසින් පෙත්සම්කරුව

තල්ලු කරන ලදී. දෙවන වගඋත්තරකරු විසින් කුඩු කල නයි

කොච්චි ඉහත සදහන් පරිදි ගෙනවිත් වතුර දමා

පෙත්සම්කරුගේ ඇස් දෙකටත් මුහුණටත් පුරුෂ ලිංගයටත්

වතුරෙන් පොගවා තිබූ කොච්චි පොට්ටනිය මිරිකන ලදී.

එලෙස මිරිකීම 1,2 සහ 4 වග උත්තකරුවන් විසින්ද මාරුවෙන්

මාරුවට කරන ලදී. මෙලෙස පෙත්සම්කරු පැය 3 පමණ එල්ලා

තබන ලදී. ඉන් පසුව 1,2,4 සහ 5 වගඋත්තරකරුවන් විසින්

එතනින් යන ලදී. පැය තුනකට පමණ පසුව 1,2, 4 සහ 5 වන

වග උත්තරකරුවන් පැමිණ පෙත්සම්කරුව ලිහා බිමට ගන්නා

ලදී. ඉන් පසුව 1,2 4 සහ 5 වන වගඋත්තකරුවන් මාරුවෙන්

මාරුවට පෙත්සම්කරුගේ අත් වලට පාදයට පිටට අතින් පයින්

සහ කොටුවලින් පහර දෙන ලදී.”

After obtaining Petitioner’s signature to some papers forcibly, he was put into a

detention cell and subsequently produced before the magistrate of Warakapola at his

residence on or about 6.30 pm by the 1st and 2nd Respondents on or around

08.06.2011. The Petitioner was also threatened by the 1st and 2nd Respondent to not to

disclose that he was assaulted in the Police station.

The Petitioner was enlarged on bail on 21.06.2011. On the same day he was admitted

to Kurunegala teaching hospital and was examined by the JMO on or about

30.06.2011. Upon being discharged, the Petitioner has complained to Human Rights

Commission of Sri Lanka (hereinafter ‘HRCSL’). After an inquiry the HRCSL has

6

issued a recommendation dated 24.08.2012 which ordered the 1st Respondent to pay

a sum of Rs. 25,000 and each 2nd, 4th and 5th Respondents to pay a sum of Rs. 7,500.

It was informed to the Court that the Petitioner has received a money order from 1st

,2nd, 4th and 5th Respondents pursuant to HRCSL recommendations for a sum

amounting to forty-seven thousand five hundred, but that has not been encashed by

the Petitioner as he wishes to proceed with this application.2

The 1st to 5th Respondents’ Version of Event

The Respondents contend that the Petitioner was lawfully arrested on 18.06.2011

pursuant to an investigation on a complaint made on 13.06.2011 and was duly

produced before the Magistrate on the same day. The 1st to 5th Respondents contend

that on the day he was taken into custody, he attempted to escape and run away from

the Police custody and as a result, sustained injuries to the hands and feet. According

to 1st to 5th Respondents’ version, the injuries depicted in the Medico-Legal Report

(MLR) are due to this attempted escape.

The 1st to 5th Respondents further submit that since they have already paid the

compensation that the Human Right Commission has ordered to pay to the Petitioner,

he is not entitle to seek further relief from this Court.

However as already noted above, the Petitioner has not acknowledged the

compensation offered by the Respondents as he wishes to pursue this application.

Time Bar objection

The preliminary objection of the Respondents was that the Application of the

Petitioner has been filed outside the mandatory period of one month stipulated in

Article 126(2) of the Constitution and on that basis, the Respondents moved to have

this application dismissed in limine.

2 Journal entry dated 21.02.2013.

7

Article 126(2) of the Constitution reads as follows:

Article 126(2) -“Where any person alleges that any such fundamental

right or language right relating to such person has been infringed or is

about to be infringed by executive or administrative action, he may

himself or by an attorney-at-law on his behalf, within one month

thereof, in accordance with such rules of court as may be in force,

apply to the Supreme Court by way of petition in writing addressed to

such Court praying for relief or redress in respect of such infringement.

Such application may be proceeded with only with leave to proceed

first had and obtained from the Supreme Court, which leave may be

granted or refused, as the case may be, by not less than two judges.”

(emphasis added)

However, Section 13 (1) of the Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka Act

No. 21 of 1996 provides as follows:

Section 13 (1) - “Where a complaint is made by an aggrieved party in

terms of section 14, to the Commission, within one month of the alleged

infringement or imminent infringement of a fundamental right by

executive or administrative action, the period within which the inquiry

into such complaint is pending before the Commission, shall not be

taken into account in computing the period of one month within which

an application may be made to the Supreme Court by such person in

terms of Article 126(2) of the Constitution.”

In the case of A.M.K. Aththanayake v. H. W. S. Udayakumara, IP of Police and

Others,3 Justice Padman Surasena (now Chief Justice of Sri Lanka) quoting Justice

3 S.C. F.R. Application No. 412/ 2015, S.C.M 27-06-2024.

8

Janak De Silva in Thilangi Kandambi v State Timber Corporation and others4

observed that,

“The initial view was that mere production of a complaint made to the

Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka within one month of the

alleged infringement is sufficient to get the benefit of the provisions in

section 13(1) of the Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka Act No. 21

of 1996[…]However, the correct position is that a petitioner must show

evidence that the Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka has

conducted an inquiry regarding the complaint or that an inquiry is

pending. Simply lodging a complaint is inadequate.”

In Ranasinghe Arachchige Nadeesha Seuwandi Ranasinghe and another v

Ceylon Petroleum Storage Terminals Limited5 that,

“ … in view of the provisions of Section 13(1) of the Human Rights

Commission Act, time would not run during the pendency of

proceedings before the Human Rights Commission and such time will

not be taken into account in computing the period of one month within

which an application may be made to this Court in terms of Article

126(2) of the Constitution.”.

In the case before us not only the Petitioner has filed a complaint in the HRCSL but

also has received recommendations to which he is not satisfied. Therefore, in

computing one month period, the period in which the inquiry was pending has to be

excluded.

4 S.C. F.R. Application No. 452/2019, S.C.M 14.12.2022.

5 SC FR No. 244/2017 – S.C.M of 22.02.2019.

9

In order to consider whether the Petitioner has complied with Article126(2), the

following dates stated in the paragraph 1 of the Written Submissions of the Petitioner

would be of relevance:

“He was enlarged on bail on 21.06.2011. On the same day he got

admitted to the Kurunegala teaching hospital. He was examined by the

JMO on 11 am on 30.06.2011. He was discharged from the hospital on

30.06.2011. He made a complaint to the Human Right Commission on

18.07.2021 (P2). An inquiry was held before the Human Right

Commission. (P4-P7). The Human Right Commission had made it’s

recommendation on 14.08.2012(P 11) whereas he received the

recommendation through normal post on 27.08.2012, and he filed this

application before your Lordships Court on 05.09.2012.”

In the case of Saman v Leeladasa,6 it was held that,

“Here, the Petitioner was hospitalised from 2.12.87 until his release,

and was thus prevented from taking immediate action to petition this

Court for redress : an impediment, to the exercise of his fundamental

right (under Article 17) to apply to this Court, caused by the very

infringement complained of. Further, the fact that he had been

assaulted, or that an injury had been inflicted on him, would not per

se bring him within Article 11 ; whether the treatment meted out to him

would fall within Article 11 would depend on the nature and extent of

the injury caused ; until the Petitioner had knowledge, or could with

reasonable diligence have discovered, that an injury sufficient to bring

him within Article 11 had resulted, time did not begin to run.”

Similarly, in Gamaethige v Siriwardana7, Mark Fernando J had held that,

6 [1989] 1 Sri LR 1.

7 (1988) 1 Sri L.R. 384 at p.402.

10

“… in exceptional cases, on the application of the principle lex non

cogit ad impossibilia, if there is no lapse, fault or, delay on the part of

the petitioner, this Court has a discretion to entertain an application

made out of time.”

On the application of that principle, time did not begin to run in this case until

30.06.2011, the date in which he was discharged from the hospital. As the HRCSL

made its recommendations on 14.08.2012 and the instant application was made on

05.09.2012, the Petitioner’s application is well within the one-month time period

stipulated by Article 126(2) of the Constitution. Therefore, I am of the opinion that

there is no merit in the preliminary objection taken up by the Respondent, and must

necessarily be overruled.

Purported violation of Article 11 of the Constitution

Article 11 of the Constitution provides that,

Article 11 -“No person shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman

or degrading treatment or punishment.”

Here it is important to note that Article 11 of the 1978 Constitution is an entrenched

provision with no restrictions whatsoever.

United Nations Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman and

Degrading Treatment or Punishment defines torture in Article 1 of the Convention

as follows:

Article 1 -“For the purposes of this Convention, the term ‘torture’

means any act by which severe pain or suffering, whether physical or

mental, is intentionally inflicted on a person for such purposes as

obtaining from him or a third person information or a confession,

11

punishing him for an act he or a third person has committed or is

suspected of having committed, or intimidating or coercing him or a

third person, or for any reason based on discrimination of any kind,

when such pain or suffering is inflicted by or at the instigation of or

with the consent or acquiescence of a public official or other person

acting in an official capacity. It does not include pain or suffering

arising only from, inherent in or incidental to lawful sanctions.’

This convention has been signed and ratified by the government of Sri Lanka and has

also incorporated into the domestic law of Sri Lanka through Convention Against

Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment Act No. 22

of 1994.

Article 12 of the Act No 22 of 1994 provides:

Article 12 -“torture” with its grammatical variations and cognate

expressions, means any act which causes severe pain, whether physical or

mental, to any other person, being an act which is―

(a) done for any of the following purposes that is to say―

(i) obtaining from such other person or a third person,

confession; or any information or

(ii) punishing such other person for any act which he or a

third person has committed, or

(iii) is suspected of having committed; or intimidating or

coercing such other person or a third person; or

(b) done for any reason based on discrimination

and being in every case, an act, which is, done by, or at the

instigation of, or with the consent or acquiescence of, public officer

or other person acting in an official capacity.”

12

Our Courts have sought to interpret what amounts to ‘cruel, inhuman and degrading

treatment’ under Article 11 of the Constitution in different cases that have come

before it.

Justice Sharvananda in his treatise, Fundamental Rights in Sri Lanka (A

Commentary) [(1993) at page 69] has pointed out that,

“The fundamental nature of the right of freedom from torture or

inhuman treatment is emphasized by the fact that it is an absolute right

subject to no restriction or derogation under any condition, even in

times of war, public danger or other emergency. This human right from

cruel or inhumane treatment is vouched not only to citizens, but to all

persons, whether citizens or not, irrespective of the question whether

the victim is a hard-core, criminal or not.”

In Kumara v Silva, Sub-Inspector of Police, Welipenna and Others8 this Court noted that,

“Article 11 refers to torture separately from cruel, inhuman or

degrading treatment or punishment similarly to Article 5 of the

Universal Declaration of Human rights, Article 7 of the International

Covenant on Civil and Political Rights as well as Article 3 of the

European Convention which had referred to torture separately from

inhuman, degrading treatment or punishment. The importance of the

right to protection from torture has been further recognized and steps

had been taken to give effect to the universally accepted safeguards by

the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or

Degrading Treatment or Punishment signed in New York in 1984,

which has been accepted in Sri Lanka by the enactment of Act No. 22 of

8 [(2006) 2 Sri LR 236 at page 244.

13

1994 on the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or

Degrading Treatment or Punishment.”

Atukorale J. in Amal Sudath Silva v Kodituwakku Inspector of Police and Others9

commenting on Article 11 of the Constitution held as follows,

“Article 11 of our Constitution mandates that no person shall be

subjected to torture, or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or

punishment. It prohibits every person from inflicting torturesome, cruel

or inhuman treatment on another. It is an absolute fundamental right

subject to no restrictions or limitations whatsoever. Every person in

this country, be he a criminal or not, is entitled to this right to the

fullest content of its guarantee. Constitutional safeguards are generally

directed against the State and its organs. The police force being an

organ of the State is enjoined by the Constitution to secure and

advance this right and not to deny, abridge or restrict the same in any

manner and under any circumstances. Just as much as this right is

enjoyed by every member of the police force, so is he prohibited from

denying the same to others, irrespective of their standing, their beliefs

or antecedents. It is therefore the duty of this court to protect and

defend this right jealously to its fullest measure with a view to ensuring

that this right which is declared and intended to be fundamental is

always kept fundamental and that the executive by its action does not

reduce it to a mere illusion.”

The ‘cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment’ is not limited to the physical force used

or any physical pain thereby caused but also extend to dignity of a person as a human

being. Therefore, in the case of Subasinghe v Police Constable Sandun and

Others10 this Court held that,

9 [(1987) 2 Sri LR 119 at page 126-127.10 [1999] 2 Sri L.R. 23.

14

“The fact that the petitioner was taken handcuffed in a private vehicle

to the Dankotuwa town and ‘exhibited’ in the manner spoken to by the

petitioner in my view, is an affront to the petitioner’s dignity as a

human being and amounts to ‘degrading treatment’ within the meaning

of Article 11.”

The conduct complained of in the case at hand, as I have already noted above,

includes infliction of severe pain and suffering to the Petitioner accompanied by

humiliation of torturing him while stripping him naked.

The Medico-Legal Report that has been tendered before this Court, supports the

Petitioner’s version of the facts of the case rather than 1st to 5th Respondents’ version.

According to the Judicial Medical Officer (JMO), the statement made by the

Petitioner at the time of being admitted to Kurunegala teaching hospital is compatible

with the history of the injuries. Further MLR identifies around 11 injuries in the body

of the Petitioner where one of which has been identified as an injury that falls within

the category of grievous injury. “foot drop of right led [sic]- he cannot walk properly

with right foot due to nerve damage and temporary paralysis”.

HRCSL following an investigation and upon examination of images of injuries

submitted by the Petitioner, notes that statements made by 1st to 5th Respondents

regarding the Petitioner’s injuries that were reported in the MLR were owing to

Petitioner jumping out of the moving vehicle is not compatible with the nature and

the situation of the injuries in question. The HRCSL is in the opinion that these

injuries are result of a torture inflicted upon the Petitioner.

When considering all the evidences tendered before this Court together with the

observation of the HRCSL, I am of the opinion that the Petitioner has been subjected

to ‘torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment’ within the

meaning of Article 11 of the Constitution.

15

Alleged violation of Article 13(1) and 13(2) of the Constitution

The Petitioner submits that the arrest and detention of the Petitioner was in

contravention of the Constitution and provisions of the Code of Criminal

Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 (as amended).

Article 13 (1) of the Constitution provides as follows:

Article 13 (1) -“No person shall be arrested except according to

procedure laid down by law. Any person arrested shall be informed of

the reason for his arrest”

Section 23 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 lays down the

procedure in which a lawful arrest can be done which reads as follows:

Section 23 (1)-“In making an arrest the person making the same shall

actually touch or confine the body of the person to be arrested unless

there be a submission to the custody by word or action and shall inform

the person to be arrested of the nature of the charge or allegation upon

which he is arrested.

Section 23 (2)- If such person forcibly resists the endeavour to arrest

him or attempts to evade the arrest, the person making the arrest may

use such means as are reasonably necessary to effect the arrest.”

Section 32 (1) (b) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 as

follows:

Section 32 (1) – “Any peace officer may without an order from a

Magistrate and without a warrant arrest any person –

(a) (…..)

16

(b) who has been concerned in any cognizable offence or against

whom a reasonable complaint has been made or credible information

has been received or a reasonable suspicion exists of his having been

so concerned;

(c) –(i)(…..)

In Corea v Queen 11 Gratien J. held that,

“A police officer acts illegally in Ceylon (as in England) if he arrests a

man without a warrant on a mere " unexpressed suspicion " that a

particular cognizable offence has been committed-unless, of course, "

the circumstances are such that the man must know the general nature

of the offence for which he is detained" or unless the man "himself

produces the situation which makes it practically impossible to inform

him "

As clearly enumerated above, the narration of events by the parties are vastly

different and contradictory. So are the date and time the alleged event took place.

Even though there are no clear evidence supporting the date of arrest of the

Petitioner, particularly the affidavit of one Balagalla Ralalage Susantha Sampath

presented before HRSCL support the Petitioner’s version that he was in Police

custody on 16.06.2011, the date which is prior to the date which the arrest claimed to

have taken place by the 1st to 5th Respondents. Therefore, it is probable that the

Petitioner’s version that he was arrested without giving reasons or having reasonable

grounds to do so.

Here it is noteworthy that the Petitioner was acquitted of all the charges by the

learned the Magistrate by order dated 03.09.2012 under which the questionable arrest

was done, that formed the basis for the instant application.

11 55 NLR 457.

17

In the case Gerald Mervin Perera v. Suraweera, Officer-In-Charge, Police Station

Wattala and Others12 Court held that,

“Further, had the Respondents been acting bona fide when they

arrested the Petitioner, they would have promptly recorded his

statement, and would then have either produced him before a

Magistrate or released him. The fact that they failed to record a

statement (or if the IB extracts are accurate, waited ten hours to do so)

strongly suggests that they did not, even subjectively, believe that he

had committed an offence, but were merely hoping that something

would turn up. It is also probable that the Petitioner was not given a

reason for arrest.”

Similarly in the case of G.S.T.P. Akalanka v. Wijesinghe and Others13 Thurairaja,

PC, J. made the following observation:

“This Court observes that if there had been a reasonable suspicion that

the Petitioner was in some manner involved in the alleged theft due to

a name divulged by an arrested suspect, the officers should have

followed the correct procedure and made an ‘official arrest’ of the

Petitioner as prescribed by law. The blatant disregard of the relevant

procedure by the Respondents leads to the finding that the Petitioner

was illegally arrested and detained contrary to Article 13 of the

Constitution.”

Once a person is arrested, such person ought to be brought before the judge of

the nearest competent court.

Article 13(2) of the Constitution thus provides:

12 (2003) 1 Sri LR 317.

13 SC FR 46/2018, SCM dated 21.10.2021.

18

Article 13(2) -“Every person held in custody, detained or otherwise

deprived of personal liberty shall be brought before the judge of the

nearest competent court according to procedure established by law and

shall not be further held in custody, detained or deprived of personal

liberty except upon and in terms of the order of such judge made in

accordance with procedure established by law.”

Section 37 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 reads;

Section 37 -“Any peace officer shall not detain in custody or otherwise

confine a person arrested without a warrant for a longer period than

under all the circumstances of the case is reasonable, and such period

shall not exceed twenty-four hours exclusive of the time necessary for

the journey from the place of arrest to the Magistrate.”

The Petitioner claims that he was unlawfully detained at the Alawwa Police Station

for a period of over 144 hours which is a clear violation of aforesaid provisions in the

Constitution and the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979. The contention

of the Petitioner regarding unlawful detention is also supported by the following

observation made by the HRCSL consequent to an investigation that was conducted

upon the Complaint of the Petitioner.

“මෙහිදි සලකා බැලිය යුතු කරුණ වන්නේ පැමිණිලිකරු

අත්අඩංගුවට ගන්නා ලද්දේ 2011.06.12 දින ද එසේත්

නොමැතිනම් වගඋත්තරකරුවන් සදහන් කරන ආකාරයට

2011.06.18 දිනයේද යන්නයි.

මේ පිළිබඳ සලකා බැලීමේදි 2011.06.12 දින අත්අඩංගුවට ගත්

බව පැමිණිලිකරු ප්‍රකාශ කල ද එය ඔප්පු කිරීමට ප්‍රමාණවත්

වෙනත් සාක්ෂි පැමිණිලිකාර පාර්ශවය ඉදිරිපත් කිරිමට

19

අපොහොසත් වී ඇත. නමුත් පැමිණිල්ල වෙනුවෙන් සාක්ෂියක්

ලෙස දිව්රුම් ප්‍රකාශයක් ඉදිරිපත් කරන ලද බලගල්ල

රාළලාගේ සුසන්ත සම්පත් යන අය ප්‍රකාශ කර ඇත්තේ

2011.06.16 වන දින පස්වරු 4.00 ට පමණ තමා දිවුලපිටිය

පොලිස් ස්ථානයෙන් අත්අඩංගුවට ගෙන අලව්ව පොලිසියට

භාර දෙන විට අලව්ව පොලිසියේ සිර මැදිරියේ දුමින්ද සම්පත්

විමලරත්න යන අය ඉතා අපහසුවෙන් සිටිනු දුටු බවත් ඔහුගේ

අත් වල, කකුල් වල, පිටේ තුවාල තිබෙනු දුටු බවත් ඔහු ඉතා

අපහසුවෙන් සිටිනු දුටු බවත්ය.

ඒ අනුව එම සාක්ෂිය පිළිගත හැකි සාක්ෂික් බව පෙනි යන

අතර, සැකකරු 2011.06.16 වන දින පස්වරු 4.00 ට පමණ

පොලිස් අත්අඩංගුවේ සිටි බව සනාථ වන සාක්ෂියකි.

සැකකරු අධිකරණය වෙත ඉදිරිපත් කර ඇත්තේ 2011.06.18

වන දින බැවින් පැය 24 කට වඩා වැඩි කාලයක් රඳවා තබා

ගෙන ඇති බව නිරීක්ෂණය වී ඇත.”

Upon consideration of all the aforementioned facts, this Court finds that the

rights of the Petitioner guaranteed under Article 13(1) and Article 13(2) have

been violated.

Can this Court review the decision of the HRCSL?

The Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka (HRCSL) is an independent

Commission established in 1997 pursuant to the enactment of the Human Rights

Commission Act No. 21 of 1996. The Commission has a broad mandate as well as

powers, inter alia, to investigate into any complaints of fundamental rights violations

or imminent fundamental rights violations and grant suitable redress, including

compensation.

20

As correctly pointed out by Yasantha Kodagoda, PC, J in Chandana Suriyarachchi

and Others v Secretary Ministry of Defence and others,14

“[I]t must be appreciated that the investigational, inquisitorial and

dispute resolution mechanisms created by the HRCSL Act is aimed at

inter-alia providing the public a mechanism to which they may have

convenient and expeditious access for the resolution of disputes arising

out of the alleged infringement of their fundamental rights and to

obtain relief, without having to access the Constitutional mechanism by

invoking the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court. In the circumstances,

for the purpose of having fundamental rights related disputes resolved

and to obtain relief, if they choose to, the public need not go through

what is now observable as being a cumbersome, complicated, time-

consuming and possibly expensive method of judicial adjudication of

disputes.”

The investigations, findings and observations of HRCSL provides valuable assistance

to Court in dispensing the justice. However, the Supreme Court is not bound by such

findings or investigations of the HRCSL. The recommendations or orders that are

being made by HRCSL could be reviewed by the Supreme Court.

In the case of Chandana Suriyarachchi and Others v. Secretary Ministry of

Defence and others (supra) Yasantha Kodagoda, PC, J. further states:

“the creation of an independent, para-judicial or administrative state

(nevertheless independent) institution statutorily empowered to engage

in investigation and inquiry, ascertainment of the truth, possessing

authority to engage in dispute resolution pertaining to infringement of

human rights, and for the performance of a multitude of other functions

aimed at the promotion and protection of human rights, is a globally

14 SC/FR/ 329/2017, SCM 12.01.2023.

21

recognized, critically important norm. An independent, competent and

effective national human rights institution is a cornerstone of a

country’s mechanism for the promotion and protection of human rights.

In Sri Lanka’s context, it is aimed at subordinately augmenting the role

of the Supreme Court in the area of disputes arising out of alleged

infringement / imminent infringement of fundamental rights.

The investigative, inquisitorial and dispute resolution mechanisms

provided for in the Act are subordinate and alternate to the

Constitutional mechanism created by Article 17 read with Article 126

of the Constitution for the protection of fundamental rights through

judicial adjudication of disputes pertaining to the infringement and

imminent infringement of fundamental rights. A careful consideration

of the provisions of the Act clearly reveals that the HRCSL has not been

created to make inroads towards the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.

Nor has the Commission been established to create a parallel system

for judicial or quasi-judicial adjudication of disputes.”

Hence in the event a person comes before the Supreme Court against decision made

by HRCSL, such decisions can be quashed, modified or implemented by this Court.

State Responsibility

The learned State Counsel on behalf of the 6th to 7th Respondents submit that

subsequent to the inquiry, indictment was filed against 1st to 3rd Respondents and

prompt actions have been filed against the accused Police officers of Alawwa Police

station, and urge the Court to absolve the state for the alleged violation of the

fundamental rights of the Petitioner. The Learned state Counsel rely on the cases of

Kanda Udage Malika vs D.M.Abeyratna and others 15and Gunawardene vs Perera

and others16 to support his position.

15 SC/FR/157/2014, SCM 21.05.2021.

16 [1983] 1 SRI LR 305.

22

In Amal Sudath Silva v Kodituwakku Inspector of Police and Others (supra)

Atukorale, J. dealing with strongly condemns torture while in police custody in the

following manner;

“This court cannot, in the discharge of its constitutional duty,

countenance any attempt by any police officer however high or low, to

conceal or distort the truth induced, perhaps, by a false sense of police

solidarity. The facts of this case have revealed disturbing features

regarding third degree methods adopted by certain police officers on

suspects held in police custody. Such methods can, only be described as

barbaric, savage and inhuman. They are most revolting to one’s sense

of human decency and dignity particularly at the present time when

every endeavour is being made to promote and protect human rights.

Nothing shocks the conscience of a man so much as the cowardly act of

a delinquent police officer who subjects a helpless suspect in his

charge to depraved and barbarous methods of treatment within the

confines of the very premises in which he is held in custody. Such

action on the part of the police will only breed contempt for the law

and will tend to make the public lose confidence in the ability of the

police to maintain law and order. The petitioner may be a hard-core

criminal whose tribe deserve no sympathy. But if constitutional

guarantees are to have any meaning or value in our democratic set up,

it is essential that he be not denied the protection guaranteed by our

Constitution.”

In the aforementioned case Atukorale, J. went on to hold the state vicariously liable

for the acts committed by its errant officers.

“…However as the petitioner has established that he has been

subjected to torture and cruel treatment by the police, whoever they be,

23

when he was under arrest, the State is liable to pay compensation to

the victim of such action.”

The blatant violations of law and order and the abuse of the powers by the Police

officers who are responsible to uphold law and justice should be strongly

condemned and punished. However, in my view, it is illogical to impose the liability

on the state for acts committed by such errant officers to fulfill their own personal

agendas in the context where state has already taken appropriate steps to bring such

officers before law.

A similar view has been adopted in the case of Kanda Udage Malika v D.M.

Aberathna and others,17 where Thurairaja, PC, J. quoting Soza J. in Goonewardene

v. Perera and Others (supra) made the following observation.

“It is illogical to hold the state responsible for acts committed by such

officers in pursuing their personal vengeance without the authorization

or knowledge of the persons in authority. This was also highlighted in

Goonewardene v. Perera and Others [1983] 1 Sri LR 305 (Soza, J.) as

follows,

‘The State no doubt cannot be made liable for such infringements as

may be committed in the course of the personal pursuits of a public

officer of to pay off his personal grudges. But infringements of

Fundamental Rights committed under colour of office by public officers

must result in liability being cast on the State.’

In light of the above, the phrase 'colour of office is not limited to

whether or not the officers were in official uniform but includes factors

surrounding the conduct of the officers and the authority given to them.

In the instant case the acts committed by the errant officers were not

17 SC/ FR/ 157/2014, SCM 21.05.2021.

24

committed under the supervision or the orders of a senior officer. The

state has not in any manner approved nor shall approve such conduct.

In considering the facts laid before this court the acts of the officers

were conducted in their personal capacity and not in the 'colour of

office.’.”

Deterrence is of prime importance in awarding compensation in the context of

violations of fundamental rights, because the impugned conduct is the very action

that the framers of the Constitution sought to avoid. However, when a court awards

compensation against the state, it is ultimately the taxpayers’ money which is being

expended to make up for such commission or omission on the part of government

officials.

Thus, I am of the opinion that, as the burden of compensation against the state has to

be born by ordinary tax payers, state should not be imposed with the burden of

compensating the victims of such wrongful acts on the part of its errant officers

unless there is evidence to the effect that state through its omission is responsible for

encouraging or continuance of such discreditable conduct. In the event the state has

proceeded against such deviant officers, it is more appropriate for the court to

directly hold the deviant officer personally liable rather than the state.

In the instant case, as the state has fully co-operated to serve justice to the Petitioner

by instituting criminal proceedings in the High Court of Kurunegala against 1st to 3rd

Respondents in accordance with the provisions of the Convention against Torture and

other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment Act, No. 22 of 1994, I

hold that liability need not be imposed on the state for the wrongdoings of the 1st to

5th Respondents and the said officers themselves are personally liable for their

discreditable conduct.

25

Conclusion

In the above premise, I declare that the fundamental rights of the Petitioner

guaranteed under Articles 11, 13(1) and 13(2) of the Constitution have been infringed

by executive and administrative action.

Accordingly, acting under Article 126(4) of the Constitution which empowers the

Supreme Court to grant such relief as it may deem just and equitable in the

circumstances in respect of any petition referred to it under Article 126(2), I order

a. The 1st Respondent to pay Rs. 50,000 (Fifty thousand rupees) from his

personal funds in addition to the Rs. 25,000 ordered by HRCSL.

b. The 2nd to 5th Respondents to pay a sum of Rs. 25,000 each, (Twenty -five

thousand rupees) in addition to Rs. 7,500 ordered by HRCSL from their

personal funds.

as compensation to the Petitioner within six months from the date of this

judgment.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J.I Agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Menaka Wijesundera, J.I Agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT