==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

3. Yapa Arachchige Amarasiri alias

Wijenayakage Amarapala

Udahawatta, Thiriwanagoda, Katuwana.

4. Yapa Arachchige Malhami,

Udahawatta, Thiriwanagoda,

Katuwana. (Deceased)

4A. Yapa Arachchige Amarasiri alias

Wijenayakage Amarapala

Udahawatta, Thiriwanagoda,

Katuwana.

Defendant-Respondent-Appellants

SC/APPEAL/169/2018

WP/HCCA/TA/35/2008 (F)

DC WALASMULLA 1006/P

Vs.

Wijenayakage Albert,

Kajjugahakoratuwa,

Thiriwanagoda, Katuwana.

Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent

1. Wijenayakage Dayawathie,

Udagahawatte,

Thiriwanagoda, Katuwana.

2. Wijenayakage Kusumawathie,

C/O Gambara Kade,

Haburugala, Sooriyawewa.

Defendant-Respondent-Respondents

2

SC/APPEAL/169/2018

Before: Hon. Justice Mahinda Samayawardhena

Hon. Justice K. Priyantha Fernando, J.

Hon. Justice M. Sampath K.B. Wijeratne

Counsel: Shantha Jayawardena with Hirannya Damunupola for the

Defendant-Respondent-Appellants.

Harshana Ananda with Lahiru Widushanka for the Plaintiff-

Appellant-Respondent.

Saman Liyanage with Nuwan Hewawitharana for the 1st

Defendant-Respondent-Respondent.

Saman Liyanage with Krishantha Elpitiya for the 2nd

Defendant-Respondent-Respondent.

Argued on: 29.09.2025

Written submissions:

By the 3rd and 4A Defendant-Respondent-Appellants on

31.10.2025.

By the 1st and 2nd Defendant-Respondent-Respondents on

31.10.2025.

Decided on: 13.01.2026

Samayawardhena, J.

The plaintiff instituted this action naming two defendants, seeking partition

of the land described in the schedule to the plaint in the proportion of ½

share to the plaintiff and ¼ share each to the 1ˢᵗ and 2ⁿᵈ defendants. The

3rd and 4th defendants made claims at the preliminary survey, and on that

basis, they were added as parties. There is no contest among the plaintiff

and the 1ˢᵗ and 2ⁿᵈ defendants. The contest is between the plaintiff and the

1ˢᵗ and 2ⁿᵈ defendants, on the one hand, and the 3ʳᵈ and 4ᵗʰ defendants, on

the other. The plaintiff and the 1ˢᵗ and 2ⁿᵈ defendants claim title to the land

on the basis of deeds, whereas the 3ʳᵈ and 4ᵗʰ defendants claim title by

prescription.

3

SC/APPEAL/169/2018

After trial, the District Court dismissed the action on the ground of non-

identification of the corpus. On appeal, the High Court of Civil Appeal

reversed the judgment of the District Court and ordered partition as prayed

for in the plaint. While rejecting the prescriptive claim of the 3ʳᵈ and 4ᵗʰ

defendants, the High Court held that they were nevertheless entitled to

compensation for improvements as claimed before the surveyor. Hence, this

appeal by the 3ʳᵈ and 4ᵗʰ defendants. This Court granted leave to appeal on

the question whether the High Court erred in rejecting the prescriptive title

claimed by the 3ʳᵈ and 4ᵗʰ defendants.

The original owner of the land was Andriyas. He gifted an undivided ½ share

of the land to his wife, Balahamy, by deed P2. Balahamy thereafter gifted

that ½ share to their son, the plaintiff, by deed P3. Andriyas also lived with

his wife’s younger sister, Malhamy, as husband and wife. Malhamy was the

4ᵗʰ defendant, and the 1ˢᵗ to 3ʳᵈ defendants are the children born of that

union. The 1st and 2nd defendants are daughters and the 3rd defendant is a

son. Andriyas gifted the remaining ½ share of the land to the 1ˢᵗ and 2ⁿᵈ

defendants by deed 1V1, subject to the life interest of Balahamy. Balahamy

subsequently renounced her life interest in favour of the 1ˢᵗ and 2ⁿᵈ

defendants by deed 1V2 to enable them to obtain a bank loan by offering

the property as security.

According to the surveyor’s report, Balahamy also presented herself as a

claimant, although she was not added as a party to the action. These

circumstances demonstrate that all parties acted as one family, without

discord, for a considerable period of time. The 4ᵗʰ defendant, Malhamy, died

pending this appeal, and her son, the 3ʳᵈ defendant, was substituted in her

place. Malhamy did not give evidence at the trial due to her advanced age.

In this backdrop, it would be an uphill task for the 3ʳᵈ and 4ᵗʰ defendants to

establish prescriptive title to the entire land, unless there is cogent evidence

for adverse possession to the exclusion of all others.

4

SC/APPEAL/169/2018

When did the 3rd and 4th defendants commence prescriptive possession?

What was the overt act that changed the character of their possession from

subordinate to adverse? Learned counsel for the 3ʳᵈ and 4ᵗʰ defendants

submitted, both in oral argument and in the post-argument written

submissions, that the 3ʳᵈ defendant, in his evidence, stated that he

constructed a new house on the land in or about 1985-1986 after

demolishing the old house built by their common father, Andriyas, and that

this constituted a clear overt act changing the character of the 3rd

defendant.

I carefully examined the evidence of the 3ʳᵈ defendant. He does not state

that he deliberately demolished the old house as part of an assertion of

adverse possession and thereafter constructed a new one. The old house

was not a solid house. It was a wattle and daub house consisting of two

rooms and a verandah (ඒ ගෙය කාමර ගෙකක් සහ ඉස ගතාප්පුවක් තිබිච්ච ගෙයක්. ග ාල්

අතු ගහායල ස ියන් ගෙයක්). What the 3rd defendant states is that this house

collapsed or broke down, most probably due to its temporary nature and

age, and that the present house was constructed thereafter (ඒ ගෙය කැඩුනා.

ෙැන් තියන ගෙය හැදුගේ 85 දී).

The evidence further reveals that the house was not constructed in a single

day, and that no objection was raised by any of the other parties at the time.

The present action was instituted in the year 2000. There is no long

possession since the construction of the new house to give rise to a counter

presumption of ouster.

Given the close relationship, marked by mutual tolerance and co-existence,

among the parties as members of the same family, the nature of the

possession of the 3ʳᵈ and 4ᵗʰ defendants, and all the attendant

circumstances, I am unable to accept that the construction of a new house

constitutes an overt act sufficient in law to alter the character of the 3ʳᵈ

5

SC/APPEAL/169/2018

defendant’s possession so as to found a claim of prescriptive title to the

entirety of the land.

There is no need to interfere with the judgment of the High Court. The

question of law on which leave to appeal was granted is answered in the

negative and the appeal is dismissed. I make no order as to costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

K. Priyantha Fernando, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

M. Sampath K.B. Wijerathne, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court