==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 14

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal under and in

terms of Article 128 (2) of the Constitution

of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

S.C. Appeal No: Director General,

85/2022 Commission to Investigate Allegations

of Bribery or Corruption,

SC (SPL) Leave to Appeal No: No. 36, Malalasekara Mawatha,

237/2020 Colombo 07.

COMPLAINANT

Court of Appeal No: Vs.

CA 260/2007

Imbulana Liyanage Dharmawardana

High Court of Colombo: No. 145/53, Walawuwatta,

HC 1172/1996 Weliweriya.

ACCUSED

AND BETWEEN

Imbulana Liyanage Dharmawardana,

No. 145/53, Walawuwatta,

Weliweriya.

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

Page 2 of 14

Director General,

Commission to Investigate Allegations

of Bribery or Corruption,

No. 36, Malalasekara Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

Imbulana Liyanage Dharmawardana,

No. 145/53, Walawuwatta,

Weliweriya.

ACCUSED-APPELLANT-PLAINTIFF

Vs.

Director General,

Commission to Investigate Allegations

of Bribery or Corruption,

No. 36, Malalasekara Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT-

RESPONDENT

Before : Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

: Dr. Sobhitha Rajakaruna, J.

: Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

Page 3 of 14

Counsel : Saliya Pieris, P.C. with Pasindu Tilakaratne

instructed by Manjula Balasooriya for the Accused-

Appellant-Appellant.

: Sudharshana de Silva, P.C., ASG instructed by

Anuradha Siriwardhana, ADG for the Complainant-

Respondent-Respondent.

Argued on : 31-10-2025

Written Submissions : 25-10-2022 (By the Accused-Appellant-Plaintiff

: 20-01-2023 (By the Complainant-Respondent-

Respondent)

Decided on : 02-04-2026

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

This is an appeal preferred by the accused-appellant (hereinafter referred to

as the appellant) on being aggrieved of the judgment dated 18-09-2020

pronounced by the Court of Appeal.

From the said judgment, the appeal challenging his conviction for the charges

preferred against him before the High Court of Colombo was dismissed while

varying the sentence imposed by the High Court after the conviction.

When this matter was supported on 06-09-2022 for leave to appeal from the

impugned Court of Appeal judgment, leave was granted on the questions of

law as set out in sub-paragraphs (a) and (c) of paragraph 15 of the petition

dated 28-10-2020.

Page 4 of 14

The said questions of law under which Leave to Appeal was granted read as

follows,

a. Whether the prosecution has failed to establish the charge in the

indictment beyond reasonable doubt, given the failure of the

prosecution to investigate the entirety of the legitimate income of the

petitioner and his wife.

c. Whether the learned High Court Judge of Colombo and Their Lordships

of the Court of Appeal erred in fact and in law when they failed to bring

their mind to the inadequacy of the document marked P-20 to establish

the case of the prosecution.

At the hearing of this appeal, this Court heard the submissions of the learned

President’s Counsel in support of his argument that the appeal should

succeed.

This Court also heard the arguments of the learned Additional Solicitor

General (ASG) as to his stand, where it was argued that there is no basis

before the Court to interfere with the judgment of the Court of Appeal as well

as the judgment pronounced by the High Court. This Court also had the

benefit of considering the written submissions of the parties in determining

this appeal.

This is a matter where the appellant was indicted before the High Court of

Colombo by the Director General of the Commission to Investigate Allegations

of Bribery or Corruption for committing an offence in terms of section 23A (3)

of the Bribery Act that,

a. Between the period of 31-03-1990 and 31-07-1992 he acquired the

ownership of properties as listed in schedule A of the indictment which

he could not have acquired utilizing his known income that he earned

during the period.

b. During the same period the appellant acquired the sums of money and

property as mentioned in schedule B of the indictment utilizing the

money he could not have acquired using his known income.

Page 5 of 14

The appellant was an Assistant Superintendent of Sri Lanka Customs during

the relevant period. After a protracted trial, where the case has been heard de

novo, on four occasions, the learned Judge of High Court of Colombo of his

judgment dated 23-03-2007 found the appellant guilty as charged.

Having considered the evidence placed before the trial Court, it has been

determined by the learned trial Judge that during the relevant period the

appellant has spent a sum of Rs. 619,425/- in excess of his known income,

and accordingly, has found the appellant guilty as charged.

After having considered the appellant’s plea in mitigation and other relevant

factors, the learned Judge of the High Court has sentenced him in the

following manner.

1. For a period of 4 years rigorous imprisonment.

2. For a fine of Rs. 2,500/-, and in default, 6-month imprisonment.

3. For a fine of Rs. 1,200,000/- in terms of section 26A of the Bribery Act,

and in default, 5-year rigorous imprisonment.

4. In case of default on paying the fines, the period of imprisonment shall

be consecutive to each other.

When this conviction and the sentence was challenged before the Court of

Appeal by the appellant, having considered the appellant’s known income and

his arguments in that regard, Their Lordships of the Court of Appeal have

found no reason to interfere with the conviction.

However, having considered the appellant’s age and other relevant

circumstances, it has been decided to substitute the 4-year rigorous

imprisonment imposed upon him with a period of 2-year rigorous

imprisonment suspended for a period of 10 years. Apart from the above,

having affirmed the fine of 1.2 million, the learned Judges of the Court of

Appeal have varied the default sentence to a term of 18 months imprisonment.

At the hearing of this appeal, it was the contention of the learned President’s

Counsel on behalf of the appellant that in an action of this nature, it is the

paramount duty of the investigators to properly investigate the known income

Page 6 of 14

of the person against whom they are conducting an investigation in terms of

section 23A (3) of the Bribery Act.

It was his submission that no proper investigation had been conducted in

relation to the appellant’s income and in as much, the investigators had failed

to properly investigate his wife’s income, which should have been considered

in calculating the appellant’s known income for the relevant period.

It was also his submission that the document marked P-20 produced through

the Chief Accountant of Sri Lanka Customs to establish the income that had

been received by the appellant during the period as rewards was admittedly

not a document that reflects the entire income he received as rewards from

Sri Lanka Customs.

He relied on the evidence of the relevant witness where he has admitted under

cross-examination that the said document was issued based on the records

that can be found in his office, where the witness has stated to a question

raised on behalf of the appellant that all the reward money received by the

appellant may not have been included in the list.

It was his position that the difference between the known income of the

appellant and the expenses during the period being around Rs. 600,000/-,

when considering the unsatisfactory nature of the investigations carried out,

it is quite apparent that the prosecution has failed to prove the necessary

ingredients of the charge preferred against the appellant. It was his

submission that the learned trial Judge, as well as the learned Judges of the

Court of Appeal, failed to appreciate the above, and was of the view that both

the judgments cannot be allowed to stand.

It was the submission of the learned ASG on behalf of the respondent that the

learned trial Judge and Their Lordships of the Court of Appeal have

considered independently to each other the contention of the appellant that

the prosecution has failed to establish his known income in a proper manner

and have correctly concluded that it was not so. It was his submission that

in an action under section 23A of the Bribery Act, once the prosecution proves

the necessary ingredients of the section beyond reasonable doubt, a reverse

Page 7 of 14

burden is cast upon a defendant to establish his defence on the balance of

probabilities to the satisfaction of the trial Court. It was his submission that

the defendant has failed to discharge that burden and his claim that his wife’s

income was not considered, his reward money earned as a Customs Officer

for the period has not been properly accounted for, and also the other

arguments placed in his written submissions where he has stated that the

income from his coconut estate has also not been properly accounted for, are

matters that cannot be accepted due to the conflicting nature of evidence

placed before the trial Court. It was his submission that since both the trial

Court as well as the appellate Court, in their well-considered judgements,

have considered all these relevant facts and the law, there is no basis for this

Court to interfere with the said judgments.

Having considered the arguments advanced by the parties before this Court

in relation to the matter under appeal, although the penal section in relation

to the alleged offence is section 23A (3) of the Bribery Act as mentioned in the

indictment, I find it prudent to reproduce the relevant section 23A in full for

the better understanding of my judgment.

23A. (1) Where a person has or had acquired any property on or

after March 1, 1954, and such property-

(a) being money, cannot be or could not have been-

(i) part of his known income or receipts, or

(ii) money to which any part of his known receipts has or had

been converted; or

(b) being property other than money, cannot be or could not

have been-

(i) property acquired with part of his known income, or

(ii) property which is or was part of his known receipts, or

(iii) property to which any part of his known receipts has or

had been converted,

Page 8 of 14

then, for the purposes of any prosecution under this section, it

shall be deemed, until the contrary is proved by him, that such

property is or was property which he has or had acquired by bribery

or to which he has or had converted any property acquired by him

by bribery.

(2) In subsection (1), ‘income’ does not include income from

bribery, and 'receipts' do not include receipts from bribery.

(3) A person who is or had been the owner of any property which is

deemed under subsection (1) to be property which he has or had

acquired by bribery or to which he has or had converted any

property acquired by him by bribery shall be guilty of an offence

punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term of not more than

seven years and a fine not exceeding five thousand rupees:

Provided that where such property is or was money deposited to

the credit of such person's account in any bank and he satisfies

the court that such deposit has or had been made by any other

person without his consent or knowledge, he shall not be guilty of

an offence under the preceding provisions of this subsection.

(4) No prosecution for an offence under this section shall be

instituted against any person unless the Commission has given

such person an opportunity to show cause why he should not be

prosecuted for such offence and he has failed to show cause or the

cause shown by him unsatisfactory in the opinion of such

Commission.

(5) For the purposes of this section, where a spouse or unmarried

child under the age of eighteen years of a person has or had

acquired any property movable or immovable on or after March 1,

1954, it shall be presumed until the contrary is proved that such

property was acquired by such person aforesaid and not by such

spouse or unmarried child, as the case may be.

Page 9 of 14

(6) In any prosecution for an offence under this section a certificate

from the Chief Valuer with regard to the value of any immovable

property or the cost of construction of any building on such

property shall be sufficient proof of such value and cost of

construction unless and until the contrary is proved.

In this subsection, ‘Chief Valuer’ means the Chief Valuer of the

Government, and includes any Senior Assistant Valuer, or

Assistant Valuer of the Government Valuation Department.

(7) For the purpose of this section ‘a person’ shall mean any person

whomsoever, whether or not such person can be shown to have

been concerned with any act referred to in section 18 or section

20 or whether or not he is public officer within the meaning of this

Act.

The relevant section 23A clearly provides that once the prosecution

establishes that the accused person acquired any property being money or

any other property other than money, cannot be or could not have been part

of his known income or receipts, it shall be deemed, until the contrary is

proved by him that such property is or was property which he has or had

acquired by bribery or to which he has or had converted any property acquired

by him through bribery.

However, it is settled law that the initial burden is on the prosecution to

establish that it carried out a full investigation as to the known income of the

accused person for the burden to be shifted towards the accused.

In the case of Kakulandara Vs. Director General CIABOC (2006) 3SLR 90,

it was stated that;

“The burden lies with the prosecution to prove that the charges were filed

only after a thorough investigation of the known income of the accused.

If this was challenged the prosecution should satisfy court that such an

investigation was done. If persons are brought before court without such

investigation, the prosecution would in effect be expecting the defence to

Page 10 of 14

prove the innocence of the accused. The prosecution must prove its case

without leaving part of the evidence to be provided by the accused.”

The Supreme Court, having considered the provisions in the Bribery Act, and

the relevant law in relation to the proof required by the prosecution in terms

of section 23A of the Act, in the case of L. C. Fernando Vs. Republic of Sri

Lanka (1979) II NLR 313 at 319, held as follows;

“The law which creates the offence is subsection 3 to section 23A. A

person who owns property which is deemed to be property, (a) which he

has acquired by bribery or (b) to which he has converted property

acquired by bribery is guilty of an offence. Section 90 defines what

bribery is. The prosecution then has to prove, beyond reasonable doubt,

that the appellant owned such property. Subsection 1 to section 23A

states what is deemed to be property acquired by bribery. Where it is

shown that a person to whom the section applies has acquired property,

within the requisite period, movable or immovable and it is shown that

he could not have acquired such property from his known income or

known receipts or it is shown that it is not property to which any part of

his known receipts has been converted that property is deemed to be

property (a) acquired from bribery or (b) to which he has converted

property acquired from bribery and that person who owns such property

is guilty of an offence under section 23A (3) of the Act. The offence then

depends on the legal presumption. But that legal presumption will apply

to the property and will only last “until the contrary is proved by him”.

The legislature has clearly stated by whom “the contrary” is to be proved.

It is not by the prosecution. It is by “him”, that is the person who owns or

acquires such property. He knows best how he acquired it. It is within

his special knowledge. Consequently, he is in a position to show that it

was not acquired from bribery. What is it that “he” has to prove or, as the

learned trial Judge stated, contrary of what? Contrary of “that such

property is property acquired by him by bribery”. He has to prove that

the property was not acquired from income or receipts from bribery, i.e.,

Page 11 of 14

the property was not acquired from any gratification accepted in

contravention of part II of the Bribery Act.”

In the matter under appeal, there is no dispute as to the stated acquisition of

property and money by the appellant other than the contention that the wife’s

income had not been given credit in favour of the appellant’s known income.

Although the appellant has claimed in his evidence that he received an income

of around Rs. 324,000/- for a period of 9 months since the acquisition of his

coconut estate, and it has not been included as his known income by the

prosecution, it needs to be noted that it is an admitted fact that his income

from the coconut estate was Rs. 28,000/- for the relevant period. It is the

same sum he has declared in his declaration of assets and liabilities as a

government servant, which has drawn the attention of the learned High Court

Judge as well as the Court of Appeal.

The main contention as to the known income of the appellant has been that

the investigators failed to properly investigate his wife’s income, which should

have been calculated in favour of his known income.

It has been the evidence of the investigating officer that he could not

determine that the wife of the appellant is self-employed, and is engaged in

cake making and selling various types of ornamental plants. It was his

position that though the plaintiff may have stated in his statement that his

wife earns about Rs. 4,000/- per month from self-employment, since he did

not produce any proof to substantiate his claim, there was no basis for him

to calculate such an amount towards the known income of the appellant.

Under cross-examination, it has been suggested to the witness that the

appellant’s wife earns Rs. 4,000/- per month from her cake business, and a

profit of around Rs. 2,000/- per month from her ornamental plant business

amounting to Rs. 150,000/- per annum for which the witness has replied

that, if there was some documentary proof in that regard, he could have

accepted that fact.

It is clear to me from the judgment of the learned Judge of the High Court and

the appellate judgment of the Court of Appeal that this aspect has been well

Page 12 of 14

considered by both the Courts in order to determine whether the prosecution

should have given credit to such a sum before filing action against the

appellant.

As correctly considered, there are no documentary proof to establish that the

appellant’s wife was engaged in such self-employment during the relevant

period other than the oral testimony of the appellant. The learned Judge of

the High Court has considered the declaration of assets and liabilities

tendered by the appellant to the relevant authority for the year 1990, marked

P-18 (අ) by the prosecution during the trial. The appellant has stated in the

asset declaration that his wife possesses about Rs. 75,000/- through her daily

earnings and by keeping part of the reward money earned by him with her,

without specifying what her daily income is. Other than that, the appellant

has not declared that the wife earns about Rs. 150,000/- per annum as

claimed when the investigating officer was cross-examined before the trial

Court. As considered correctly, if his wife was a person who earned a sum of

that nature per annum, it would have been more than the annual basic salary

of the appellant himself. Under such circumstances, there should be some

documentation as to the purchase of material, maintaining a bank account,

and other financial transactions relating to the claimed self-employment,

where there was none. It is my view that under the circumstances, there was

nothing more for the prosecution to investigate in relation to the income of

the appellant’s wife, which justifies non-inclusion of such an income in favour

of the appellant’s known income.

It is my view that when it was the turn of the appellant to lead evidence and

establish that the prosecution has failed to give credit to all his known income,

he could have led evidence that can be accepted before the trial Court in that

regard, rather than making claims as to his wife’s income without

substantiating the same.

In my view, his wife would have been the best witness who could have given

evidence on behalf of the appellant in this regard. The appellant has not

thought it fit to call his wife to give evidence.

Page 13 of 14

Another factor worth mentioning is the appellant’s admission in his evidence

that although his wife paid income tax for her share earnings in a company

called Singha Enterprises, she has not declared her self- employment income

to the Inland Revenue Department.

For the reasons as considered above, I find no basis to agree with the

submissions of the learned President’s Counsel that the prosecution has

failed to conduct a thorough investigation as to the income of the appellant’s

wife. On the contrary, it is my considered view that there was no basis for the

investigators to give credit to such a claimed income as the known income of

the appellant. I find that the appellant has failed to establish before the trial

Court on the balance of probabilities that such an income should have been

given credit in favour of him by the investigators.

The other position taken up during the hearing of this appeal was that the

document marked P-20 does not reflect all the monies received by the

appellant as cash rewards.

It has been established that the payment of incentives has been paid only

from 1994 for Custom Officers, and such incentives cannot be part of the

document marked P-20. I find that since P-20 was an official document issued

by the relevant authority as to the income earned by the appellant for the

relevant period, there would have been no basis for the prosecution to

disregard that document other than relying on it. The document P-20 refers

to Rs. 493,521.40/- as his reward income. If it was the contention of the

appellant that he received much more than what the official document states,

since such rewards and other payments would definitely be accounted for by

the relevant authority, or at least by the appellant himself by showing when

he received such additional reward money and whether he deposited such

amounts in his bank accounts or elsewhere, he should have produced

evidence in order to establish his claim. The appellant, other than claiming

that P-20 was not a complete statement as to his reward income, has failed

to substantiate his claim in a manner acceptable to the trial Court, even

though his burden was only on the balance of probabilities.

Page 14 of 14

As considered correctly by Their Lordships of the Court of Appeal, although

the learned trial Judge has incorrectly stated in the judgment that the

document marked P-20 was an admitted document, I find that the said

determination has not caused any prejudice to the appellant since P-20 has

been well considered by the trial Judge to determine whether there is merit in

the appellant’s claim that all his reward money has not been accounted in the

document marked P-20. I am of the view that the prosecution has established

beyond reasonable doubt the appellant’s known income, and the fact that the

appellant has spent more than Rs. 619,425. 00/- during the relevant period

more than his known income.

I am of the view that the appellant has failed to discharge the burden cast

upon him as to the proven discrepancy in his income and his spending in the

balance of probabilities before the trial Court.

For the reasons as considered above, I find no basis to interfere with the

conviction of the appellant by the High Court and the appellate judgment of

the Court of Appeal in that regard, where the appellant has been given further

concessions in relation to his sentence.

Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed for want of any merit. The judgment

dated 23-03-2007 by the learned Judge of the High Court of Colombo and the

appellate judgment dated 18-09-2020 of the Court of Appeal are affirmed.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Dr. Sobhitha Rajakaruna, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court