SC Appeal 110/2018

1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA In the matter of an Appeal Jayasooriya Kuranage Romold Dickson Sumithra Perera. New Road Wennappuwa. Plaintiff SC Appeal 110/2018 SC/HCCA/LA 481/2017 NWP/HCCA/KUR/198/2011(F) DC Marawila Case No. 1727/S Vs-

1. Jayasooriya Kuranage Padma Jenat Jasintha Perera. Kolinjadiya, Wennappuwa. 2. Jayasooriya Kuranage Awanthi Nisansala Madushani Perera 3. Thalahitigamage Dona Rupika Priyadarshani. Both of Sadasarana Mawatha, Dummalakotuwa Defendants AND

SC Appeal 110/2018

2

Jayasooriya Kuranage Awanthi Nisansala Madushani Perera 2nd Defendant-Appellant Vs Jayasooriya Kuranage Romold Dickson Sumithra Perera.

New Road Wennappuwa. Plaintiff-Respondent

1. Jayasooriya Kuranage Padma Jenat Jasintha Perera. Kolinjadiya, Wennappuwa. 3. Thalahitigamage Dona Rupika Priyadarshani. Sadasarana Mawatha, Dummalakotuwa, Dankotuwa 1st and 3rd Defendant-Respondents AND NOW BETWEEN Jayasooriya Kuranage Awanthi Nisansala Madushani Perera 2nd Defendant-Appellant- Petitioner-Appellant Vs Jayasooriya Kuranage Romold Dickson Sumithra Perera.

New Road Wennappuwa.

SC Appeal 110/2018

3

Plaintiff-Respondent-

Respondent-Respondent

1. Jayasooriya Kuranage Padma Jenat Jasintha Perera. Kolinjadiya, Wennappuwa. 3. Thalahitigamage Dona Rupika Priyadarshani. Sadasarana Mawatha, Dummalakotuwa, Dankotuwa 1st and 3rd Defendant-Respondents- Respondents- Respondents

Before: Sisira J. de Abrew, J L.T.B.Dehideniya J & S. Thurairaja PC, J Counsel: M.C.Jayaratne PC with T.C.Weerasuriya A.M.Nilanthi Abeyratne, H.A.Nishari and H. Hettiarachchi for the 2nd Defendant-Appellant- Petitioner-Appellant. Hilary Livera with Gange Livera for the Plaintiff-Respondent- Respondent-Respondent Argued on : 1.3.2019 Written submission tendered on : 21.2.2019 by the 2nd Defendant-Appellant-Petitioner-Appellant Decided on: 3.4.2019

SC Appeal 110/2018

4

Sisira J. de Abrew, J

The Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as

the Plaintiff-Respondent) filed this action against the Defendants praying,

inter alia, that Deed No.11489 dated 23.8.1994 attested by

A.A.Madurapperuma Notary Public be declared null and void on the basis

that the 2nd Defendant who is the daughter of the Plaintiff-Respondent failed

and neglected to look after him. The 1st Defendant-Respondent-Respondent-

Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the1st Defendant-Respondent) prayed in

her answer that that the 2nd Defendant-Appellant-Petitioner-Appellant

(hereinafter referred to as the 2nd Defendant-Appellant) was holding the

property in dispute on a constructive trust on behalf of the Plaintiff-

Respondent. The 1st Defendant-Respondent is the sister of the Plaintiff-

Respondent and the 2nd Defendant-Appellant is the daughter of the Plaintiff-

Respondent. The 2nd Defendant-Appellant moved for a dismissal of the action

of the Plaintiff-Respondent.

The learned District Judge by her judgment dated 27.12.2011, held that the

2nd Defendant-Appellant holds the property in dispute on behalf of the

Plaintiff-Respondent on a constructive trust which is the relief sought by the

1st Defendant-Respondent. The Plaintiff-Respondent did not appeal against

the said judgment. Being aggrieved by the said judgment of the learned

District Judge, the 2nd Defendant-Appellant appealed to the Civil Appellate

High Court and the said court by its judgment dated 28.9.2017 affirming the

judgment of the learned District Judge dismissed the appeal. Being aggrieved

by the said judgment of the Civil Appellate High Court, the 2nd Defendant-

Appellant has appealed to this court. This court by its order dated 25.7.2018

SC Appeal 110/2018

5

granted leave to appeal on questions of law stated in paragraphs 9(b),(c) and

(e) of the petition of appeal dated 8.11.2017 which are set out below.

1. Did their Lordships of the Civil Appellate High Court err in law by

ignoring the principle enunciated in the case of Muthalibu Vs Hameed

52 NLR 97 whereas the Petitioner and the Plaintiff-Respondent-

Respondent has a ‘Loco Parentis’ connection as the Plaintiff-

Respondent-Respondent being the father of the Petitioner?

2. Did their Lordships of the Civil Appellate High Court err in law by not

accepting the fact that the attendant circumstances establishing the

case were verily proved that the said deed of transfer bearing No.11489

(P11) dated 23.08.1994 attested by A.A Madurapperuma, Notary

Public, executed by the 1st Respondent-Respondent under the direction

of the Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent (Petitioner’s father) was solely

for the benefit, welfare and wellbeing of the Petitioner who was a

minor, as at the time of said transfer.

3. Did their Lordships of the Civil Appellate High Court err in law by

granting a relief as prayed for in the prayer (a) to the answer dated

22.11.2007 of the 1st Defendant-Respondent-Respondent, but in fact at

the trial or thereafter she did not dare to raise an issue on her behalf and

the learned District Judge of Marawila while dismissing the action of

the Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent granted a relief to a party who has

not raised any issue in the trial?

The most important question that must be decided in this case is whether

the2nd Defendant-Appellant holds the property in dispute on behalf of the

SC Appeal 110/2018

6

Plaintiff-Respondent on a constructive. I now advert to this question. The

Plaintiff-Respondent, who is the owner of the property in dispute, by Deed

No.339 (P7) attested by M.J.M.D. Jayasinghe dated 1.2.1987 transferred the

property in dispute to his sister, the1st Defendant-Respondent. Later on

23.8.1994, the 1st Defendant-Respondent on the instructions of the Plaintiff-

Respondent, by Deed No.11489 marked P11 attested by A.A

Madurapperuma, Notary Public transferred the property in dispute to the 2nd

Defendant-Appellant. It is undisputed that the possession of the property in

dispute was not transferred to the 1st Defendant-Respondent or the 2nd

Defendant-Appellant after the execution of Deeds Nos. 339(P7) and

11489(P11). According to the evidence of the Plaintiff-Respondent, he is in

possession of the property in question. The 1st Defendant-Respondent in her

evidence stated that the property in question was only nominally transferred

to her and that she did not purchase the property although the consideration

mentioned in Deed No.339 was Rs.30,000/- . According to her evidence, she

did not pay the consideration mentioned in the deed. The Notary Public who

attested the Deed No.339 too in his attestation states that the consideration did

not pass in his presence. The 1st Defendant-Respondent in her evidence at

page 94 further says that the property in question was transferred to her by the

Plaintiff-Respondent by Deed No.339 for the purpose of obtaining a loan.

From the above evidence, it is clear that the Plaintiff-Respondent has only

nominally transferred the property in dispute to the 1st Defendant-Respondent

and that he has not transferred the beneficial interest of the property in dispute

to the 1st Defendant-Respondent.

SC Appeal 110/2018

7

Learned counsel for the 2nd Defendant-Appellant cited the judgment in the

case of Muthalibu Vs Hameed 52 NLR 97 wherein Dias J (Swan J agreeing)

held as follows:

It is a well settled principle of Equity, which is recognized by

section 2 of the Trusts Ordinance, that where a father or person in

„loco parentis‟ purchases property in the name of his child or wife

there is a strong initial presumption that such transfer was

intended for the advancement of such child or wife, and the

provisions of section 84 of the Trusts Ordinance do not apply to

such transaction.

It is seen in the said case (Muthalibu Vs Hameed 52 NLR 97) the father

bought the property in the name of his son. Therefore the facts of the above

case are different from the facts of the present case. Thus the principle

enunciated in the Muthalibu Vs Hameed (supra) has no application to the

present case. In order to answer the question whether the 2nd Defendant-

Appellant holds the property in dispute on behalf of the Plaintiff-Respondent

on a constructive trust, it is necessary to consider section 83 of the Trust

Ordinance which reads as follows.

“Where the owner of property transfers or bequeaths it, and it

cannot reasonably be inferred consistently with the attendant

circumstances that he intended to dispose of the beneficial interest

therein, the transferee or legatee must hold such property for the

benefit of the owner or his legal representative.”

In Piyasena Vs Don Vansue[1997] 2SLR 311 Wigneswaran J held as follows.

SC Appeal 110/2018

8

“A trust is inferred from attendant circumstances. The trust is an

obligation imposed by law on those who try to camouflage the

actual nature of a transaction. When the attendant circumstances

point to a loan transaction and not a genuine sale transaction the

provisions of section 83 of the Trust Ordinance apply.”

The Plaintiff-Respondent in his evidence says that he did not transfer the

beneficial interest of the property in dispute to the 1st Defendant-Respondent

(sister of the Plaintiff-Respondent). As I pointed out earlier, the Plaintiff-

Respondent has only nominally transferred the property in dispute to the 1st

Defendant-Respondent. The 1st Defendant-Respondent too in his evidence, at

page 92, admits that she did not purchase the property in dispute. Therefore

from the evidence of the 1st Defendant-Respondent, it can be safely concluded

that she has not become the owner of the property in dispute. At the time the

Deed No.339 marked P7 was executed no consideration was paid by the 1st

Defendant-Respondent to the Plaintiff-Respondent. The Plaintiff-Respondent

continued to be in possession of the property in dispute even after the Deed

No.339 marked P7 and the Deed No.11489 marked P11 were executed. This

position was not disputed by the 2nd Defendant-Appellant. At this stage it is

relevant to consider the judgment in the case of Ehiya Lebbe Vs A. Majeed 48

NLR 357 wherein the Dias J observed the following facts.

“Plaintiff, on P 1 of 1943, conveyed a certain land to the

defendant. On the same day by P 2 non-notarial document, the

defendant agreed to re-convey the land to the plaintiff on payment

of the sum of Rs. 250 within two years. The defendant refused to

re-transfer on tender of the money within the time. The

SC Appeal 110/2018

9

Commissioner found on the facts that when plaintiff executed P1,it

was never in the contemplation of either party that the defendant

was to hold the property as absolute owner but only till plaintiff's

debt to the defendant of Rs. 250 was repaid.” Dias J held as

follows:

“In the circumstances the defendant was a trustee for the plaintiff

in terms of section 83 of the Trusts Ordinance.

To shut out the non-notarial document P 2 would be to enable the

defendant to effectuate a fraud and that section 5 (3) of the Trusts

Ordinance would apply;”

Dias J at page 359 further held as follows:

“There are certain tests for ascertaining into which category a

case falls. Thus if the transferor continued to remain in possession

after the conveyance, or if the transferor paid the whole cost of

the conveyance, or if the consideration expressed on the deed is

utterly inadequate to what would be the fair, purchase money for

the property conveyed-all these are circumstances which would

show whether the transaction was a genuine sale for valuable

consideration, or something else.”

In Fernando Vs Thamel 47 NLR 297 Howaed CJ observed the following

facts.

“By notarial deed the plaintiffs conveyed a land to the defendant.

On the same day the defendant gave the plaintiffs an informal

SC Appeal 110/2018

10

document by which he undertook to give a retransfer of the land

within a period of three years on payment of a certain sum.

There were circumstances tending to show that the transfer of the

land was to be in trust and establishing fraud on the part of the

defendant. It was proved that no money was paid by the defendant

on the day of transfer, that he merely undertook to free the

property from a mortgage which it was subject to, that the

plaintiffs were reluctant to grant the transfer and only did so on

an agreement to retransfer and that there was gross disparity

between the price and the value of the property.”

Howard CJ held as follows: “The informal document was

admissible to prove that the defendant held the property in trust

for the plaintiffs.”

G.P.S. de Silva CJ in the case of Premawathi vs. Gnanawathi [1994] 2 SLR

171 held as follows:-

“An undertaking to reconvey the property sold was by way of a

non-notarial document which is of no force or avail in law under

section 2 of the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance. However the

attendant circumstances must be looked into as the plaintiff had

been willing to transfer the property on receipt of Rs. 6000/-

within six months but could not do so despite the tender of Rs.

6000/- within the six months as she was in hospital, and the

possession of the land had remained with the 1st defendant and

the land itself was worth Rs. 15,000/-, the attendant circumstances

SC Appeal 110/2018

11

point to a constructive trust within the meaning of section 83 of

the Trusts Ordinance. The "attendant circumstances" show that

the 1st defendant did not intend to dispose of the beneficial

interest.”

In Dayawathi and Others vs. Gunaskera and Another [1991] 1SLR 115 the

facts set out in the headnote are as follows:-

The Plaintiff bought the property in suit in 1955. He started

construction work in 1959 and completed in 1961. The Plaintiff, a

building contractor, needed finances in 1966 and sought the

assistance of the 2nd defendant with whom he had transactions

earlier. This culminated in a Deed of Transfer in favour of the 1st

Defendant, who is the mother of the 2nd Defendant and the 2nd

Defendant being a witness to the Deed. The property was to be re-

transferred within 3 years if Rs. 17,000/- was paid. The Plaintiff

defaulted, in his action to recover the property, the Plaintiff

succeeded in the trial Court in establishing a constructive trust.

The Court of Appeal reversed the judgment on the sole ground

that the agreement was a pure and simple agreement to re-

transfer.”

This Court (His lordship Justice Dheeraratne) in the above case held as

follows:

“(i) The Prevention of Frauds Ordinance and Section 92 of the

Evidence Ordinance do not bar parole evidence to prove a constructive

trust and that the transferor did not intend to pass the beneficial

SC Appeal 110/2018

12

interest in the property.

(ii) Extrinsic evidence to prove attendant circumstances can properly

be received in evidence to prove a resulting trust.”

In order to consider whether a transaction mentioned in a deed attested by a

Notary Public is a genuine sale transaction or whether the transferee holds the

property in question on a constructive trust on behalf of the transferor, the

following matters would be relevant.

1. The transferor continued to remain in possession after the execution

of the deed by which the transferee claims ownership of the

property.

2. If the transferor paid the whole cost of the conveyance.

3. If the consideration expressed on the deed is utterly inadequate

when compared to the actual value of the property at the time of

the conveyance.

4. On the day of the conveyance, the transferee, by a non-notarial

document, agreed to re-convey the property to the transferor on

fulfillment of certain conditions stated in the said non-notarial

document.

5. If the transferor did not intend to pass the beneficial interest in the

property to the transferee.

SC Appeal 110/2018

13

If the court, on evidence, finds that one or more of the aforementioned

matters have been established, court is justified in holding that transferee

holds the property on a constructive trust on behalf of the transferor.

In the present case, the Deed No 339 marked P7 was executed by the

Plaintiff-Respondent in the name of the 1st Defendant-Respondent and after

the execution of the said deed the Plaintiff-Respondent continued to be in

possession of the property in dispute. The consideration of the said deed did

not pass.

When I consider all the aforementioned matters and the legal literature, I hold

that the 1st Defendant-Respondent has not become the owner of the property

in dispute by Deed No 339 (P7); that she was only a trustee of the property in

dispute; and that the 2nd Defendant-Appellant has not become the owner of

the property in dispute. It has to be noted here that the 1st Defendant-

Respondent being the trustee of the property in dispute could not have

transferred the property in dispute to the 2nd Defendant-Appellant and as such

the 2nd Defendant-Appellant has not become the owner of the property in

dispute on the strength of Deed No11489 marked P11.

When I consider all the aforementioned matters, I hold that Section 83 of the

Trusts Ordinance applies to the facts of this case and that the 2nd Defendant-

Appellant holds the property in dispute on behalf of the Plaintiff-Respondent

on a constructive trust. For the above reasons, I answer the 1st and the 2nd

questions of law above in the negative. Learned counsel for the 2nd

Defendant-Appellant at the hearing before us submitted that he would not

support the 3rd questions of law above.

SC Appeal 110/2018

14

For the aforementioned reasons, I affirm the judgment of the Civil Appellate

High Court dated 28.9.2017 and dismiss this appeal with costs.

Appeal dismissed.

Judge of the Supreme Court.

L.T.B. Dehideniya J

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court.

S. Thurairaja J

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court.