1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of a Leave to Appeal

Application against the refusal to

enforce an Arbitral Award by the

High Court under and in terms of

section 31(1) of the Arbitration Act

No. 11 of 1995.

Orient Financial Services

Corporation Limited,

No: 46, 48,

Dr, N.M. Perera Mawatha,

Kota Road,

Borella.

Petitioner

Supreme Court Case No:- SC/Appeal/42/2015

Commercial High Court Case No:- HC/ARB/55/2012

Vs

1. Ranepuradewage Upathissa

No. 272/4,

Himbutana Patugama

Mulleriyawa,

Angoda.

2. Ranepuradewage Bandula

No. 37/11, Chappell Lane,

Nugegoda.

No. 23A,

2

Chappell Lane,

Nugegoda.

3. Kalinga Gamini Silva,

No. 105,

Mahinda Mawatha,

Wellampitiya.

4. Nakalandage Marvin

Perera,

No. 138/10,

Pamunuwila Road,

Gonawila.

Respondents

AND NOW

Orient Financial Services

Corporation Limited,

No: 46, 48,

Dr, N.M. Perera Mawatha,

Kota Road,

Borella.

Petitioner-Appellant

Vs

1. Ranepuradewage Upathissa

No. 272/4,

Himbutana Patugama

Mulleriyawa,

Angoda.

3

2. Ranepuradewage Bandula

No. 37/11, Chappell Lane,

Nugegoda.

No. 23A,

Chappell Lane,

Nugegoda.

3. Kalinga Gamini Silva,

No. 105,

Mahinda Mawatha,

Wellampitiya.

4. Nakalandage Marvin Perera,

No. 138/10,

Pamunuwila Road,

Gonawila.

Respondents-Respondents

AND

Orient Financial Services

Corporation Limited,

No. 46, 46,

Dr. N. M. Perera Mawatha,

Kota Road,

Borella.

Petitioner

Supreme Court Case No:- SC/Appeal/46/2015

Commercial High Court Case No:- HC/ARB/55/2012

Vs.

4

1.Ranepuradewage Upathissa,

No. 272/4,

Himbutana Patumaga,

Mulleriyawa,

Angoda.

2. Ranepuradewage Bandula,

No. 37/11, Chappell Lane,

Nugegoda.

No. 23A,

Chappell Lane,

Nugegoda.

3. Kalinga Gamini Silva,

No. 105,

Mahinda Mawatha,

Wellampitiya.

4. Nakalandage Marvin Perera,

No. 138/10,

Pamunuwila Road,

Gonawala.

Respondents

AND NOW

Orient Financial Services

Corporation Limited,

No. 46, 48,

Dr. N. M. Perera Mawatha,

Kota Road,

Borella.

5

Presently known as

Orient Finance PLC,

No. 75, Arnold Rathnayake Mawatha,

Colombo 10

Petitioner-Appellant

Vs

1. Ranepuradewage Upathissa,

No. 272/4,

Himbutana Patugama,

Mulleriyawa,

Angoda.

2. Ranepuradewage Bandula

No. 37/11, Chappell Lane,

Nugegoda.

No. 23A,

Chappell Lane,

Nugegoda.

3. Kalinga Gamini Silva,

No. 105,

Mahinda Mawatha,

Wellampitiya.

4. Nakalandage Marvin Perera,

No. 138/10,

Pamunuwila Road,

Gonawila.

Respondent-Respondent

6

Before : Priyantha Jayawardena PC, J

Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J

Counsel : Nishkan Parathalingam with Upeka Sooriyapatabadige for the Petitioner-

Appellant in SC/Appeal/42/2015 and SC/Appeal/46/2015 .

W. Madawalagama for the Respondent-Respondent in SC/Appeal/42/2015 and

SC/Appeal/46/2015

Argued on : 29th March, 2023

Decided on : 25th September, 2023

Priyantha Jayawardena PC, J

The above appeals were taken up for hearing as the parties informed court that the questions of

law where Leave to Appeal were granted by this court are identical. Hence, both parties agreed to

consolidate and take up the two appeals and to have one judgment in respect of both appeals.

Facts of the case

These two appeals were filed to set aside the two Orders of the learned High Court Judge dated 2nd

of December, 2012 which refused to enforce an arbitral award made against the respondents-

respondents (hereinafter referred to as the respondents).

The 1st and 2nd respondents had entered into a Master Finance Lease Agreement bearing

Agreement No. ML 06175 dated 27th of September, 2006 with the petitioner-appellant (hereinafter

referred to as the appellant-company), who has been engaged in lease financing business to

obtain lease finances to purchase equipment/vehicles from time to time. In terms of the said

7

agreement, each vehicle obtained on a lease was added to it by a separate schedule made to the

said agreement.

The 3rd and 4th respondents were the guarantors to the said Master Finance Lease Agreement and

furnished an indemnity to secure the lease finance facilities given on the said agreement.

The said Master Finance Lease Agreement provided for the parties to enter into addenda to the

said agreement when and where a vehicle is taken on a lease finance basis by the respondents.

Such addenda were considered as part and parcel of the said Master Finance Lease Agreement.

Further, Clause 19 of the said agreement stated that, if the 1st and 2nd respondents fail to comply

with the terms and conditions of the said agreement, the appellant-company may, inter alia, request

the respondents to make all the payments due under the Master Finance Lease Agreement.

Furthermore, if the said respondents fail to make payments, the appellant-company may terminate

the said agreement.

Moreover, Article 36 of the said Master Finance Lease Agreement stated that in the event of a

dispute arising from any default or non-observance of the terms and conditions contained in the

said agreement by the 1st and 2nd respondents, including the default and/or delay in paying lease

rentals, such disputes shall be submitted to arbitration.

The said the Master Finance Lease Agreement defined the term equipment schedule as follows;

The term of each equipment schedule hereto is subject to any and all conditions

and provisions set forth herein as may from time to time be amended. Each

equipment schedule be substantially in the form annex hereto and made part hereof

shall incorporate therein all the terms and conditions as Lessor and Lessee have

agree upon such equipment schedule is enforceable according to the terms and

conditions therein. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this Master

Lease Agreement and any equipment schedule hereto the provisions of equipment

schedule shall prevail with respect to that equipment.

[emphasis added]

Further, Clause 36 of the Master Finance Lease Agreement contained an arbitration agreement. It

reads as follows;

8

Article 36: Arbitration Clause

In the event of any default or non-observance by the Lessee of the terms and

conditions contained in this Master Finance Lease Agreement including the default

and/or delay in paying lease rentals or in any other case and in the event of any

dispute, difference or question or matter which may from time to time and any time

hereinafter arise or occur between Lessor and Lessee of their respective

representatives or permitted assigns touching or concerning or arising out of, and

in relation to or in respect of this Master Finance Lease Agreement or any

provision matter or thing contained herein or the subject matter thereof, or the

operation interpretation or construction hereof or of any clause hereof or as to the

rights duties or liabilities of either party hereunder or in connection with the

premises or their respective representatives or permitted assigns including all

questions that may arise after the termination or cancellation of this lease, such

disputes, differences or question or matter may, notwithstanding the remedies

available under this Master Finance Lease Agreement or in law, be submitted for

Arbitration by a sole Arbitrator to be appointed by the parties if such appointment

is not practicable two arbitrators one to be appointed by the Lessor and the other

by the Lessee and an additional Arbitrator to be appointed by the two Arbitrators

and if either party refuses to appoint an arbitrator, by the sole arbitrator appointed

by the other party.

[emphasis added]

After the parties entered into the said Master Finance Lease Agreement, at the request of the 1st

and 2nd respondents, the appellant-company had purchased a Renault Prime Mover bearing

registration No. 480044 described in the schedule (L 060263) to the Master Finance Lease

Agreement for the purpose of leasing the same to the 1st and 2nd respondents.

Thereafter, on the following day, another lease finance facility was obtained by the 1st and 2nd

respondents for the Tantri 40-foot trailer bearing chassis No. T2773706 under the said Master

Finance Lease Agreement. In the second instance, the parties had executed an addendum to the

said Master Finance Lease Agreement (L060273).

However, the respondents had failed and/or neglected to pay the monthly installments set out in

the said Master Lease Financing Agreement in respect of both the equipment referred to in the

9

schedules to the Master Finance Lease Agreement. Hence, the appellant-company had sent several

Letters of Demand to the respondents, requesting them to pay the arrears.

As the respondents did not pay the arrears set out in the said Master Finance Lease Agreement, the

disputes that arose from the non-payment of installments were referred to two separate arbitrations

in terms of Article 36 of the said agreement by the appellant.

Both references to arbitration were taken up separately for arbitration, and the 1st respondent had

participated in both of the said arbitrations and had moved for time to settle the claims.

Accordingly, the arbitrator had granted time for the 1st respondent to reach a settlement. However,

as the parties could not reach a settlement in both arbitrations, both arbitrations had proceeded and

the appellants had filed evidence by way of two separate affidavits in both arbitral proceedings in

support of their claims against the respondents. Thereafter, the learned Arbitrator made two

separate awards in favour of the appellant-company on the 15th of February, 2011. Further, the

said arbitral awards had been delivered to the respondents in terms of the Arbitration Act No. 11

of 1995 (hereinafter referred to as the Arbitration Act).

Subsequently, the appellant-company had filed two separate applications in the High Court against

the respondents for the enforcement of the said arbitral awards. In both the said applications the

appellant had filed copies of the Master Finance Lease Agreement entered between the appellant

and the 1st and 2nd respondents, schedules No. L 0602273 and L 060263 to the said agreement

(filed separately in the relevant application), Guarantee and Indemnity for the Master Lease

Agreement bearing contract No. ML 060175, Letters of Demands sent to the respondents, Notices

of arbitration sent to the respondents, Notice sent by the Arbitration Centre to the respondents

along with the registered Article, arbitral proceedings of 22nd of November 2010 and 14th of

December, 2010, the arbitral awards dated 15th of February, 2011, and the proof of posting of the

arbitral awards to the respondents. All the aforementioned documents were certified by the

claimant company and an Attorney-at-Law prior to them filing in court.

Thereafter, the 1st, 2nd and 3rd respondents have filed an Answer supported by an Affidavit to the

said applications objecting to the enforcement of the arbitral awards.

Further, both the said applications for the enforcement of arbitral awards were taken up together

for inquiry, and the parties had made oral submissions. Thereafter, they had tendered their

respective written submissions. In the submissions, the respondents, inter alia, submitted that the

applications for enforcement of arbitral awards should not be allowed as it was not possible to

10

have two arbitrations in respect of one arbitration agreement, and thus the arbitral awards made in

the said arbitrations were against the public interest. Furthermore, the appellant-company had not

filed a certified copy of the entire agreement between the parties along with the application for

enforcement of the arbitral award. It is pertinent to note that both parties referred to the provisions

of the Civil Procedure Code in support of their respective cases and requested the court to apply

the provisions of the Civil Procedure Code in considering their cases.

Judgment of the High Court

Thereafter, the learned High Court Judge delivered one Order in respect of both the applications

on the 2nd of December, 2013 refusing to enforce the arbitral awards on the basis that a copy of the

arbitration agreement had not been filed in court by the appellant-company in terms of section

31(2)(b) of the Arbitration Act and two arbitrations had been held with respect to one agreement.

Questions of Law

Being aggrieved by the said Order of the learned High Court Judge, the appellant-company sought

leave to appeal from this court, and this court granted leave to appeal on the following question of

law:

Has the learned High Court Judge erred in his order dated 02.12.2013 in holding

that the Petitioner was obliged to file a complete contract under section 31(2)(b) of

the Arbitration Act No. 11 of 1995 in enforcement proceeding.

Further, the respondents raised the following the question of law;

whether the Petitioner has filed an original or a duly certified copy of the

arbitration agreement.

The issues that need to be considered in the instant appeal are whether the appellant-company was

required to file;

(a) the entire Master Finance Lease Agreement with schedules; or

(b) only the original arbitration agreement, or

(c) a certified copy of the arbitration agreement

11

under section 31(2)(b) of the Arbitration Act No. 11 of 1995 along with the applications for

enforcement of the arbitral awards.

Enforcement and setting aside of Arbitral Awards

Section 2 of the Arbitration Act states that all arbitral proceedings that commenced in Sri Lanka

after the appointed date are governed by the said Act.

Arbitral proceedings commence by a party giving notice of arbitration to the other party to the

arbitration agreement and referring the alleged dispute to arbitration. Thereafter, one or more

Arbitrators are appointed by the parties to the arbitration agreement depending on the arbitration

clause. Upon the arbitral tribunal being constituted, the arbitration proceedings will commence by

giving notice to the parties to the arbitration agreement. Further, the arbitration proceedings are

concluded the Arbitrator/s should deliver the arbitral award in writing and signed by the

Arbitrator/s of the arbitral tribunal. Further, a copy of the said award should be served on the

parties. Furthermore, an arbitral award is final and binding on the parties subject to applications

that may be made under sections 31 and 32 of the Arbitration Act.

In terms of section 31(1) of the Arbitration Act, a party to an arbitration agreement pursuant to

which an arbitral award is made may, within one year after the expiry of fourteen days of the

making of the award, apply to the High Court for the enforcement of the award.

Section 31(2) of the Arbitration Act states;

An application to enforce the award shall be accompanied by

(a) The original of the award or a duly certified copy of such award; and

(b) the original arbitration agreement under which the award purports to have

been made or a duly certified copy of such agreement.

[emphasis added]

Accordingly, in terms of section 31(2)(b) of the Arbitration Act, when filing an application to

enforce an arbitral award, the party seeking to enforce the arbitral award is required to file the

original arbitration agreement or a duly certified copy of such agreement on which the arbitral

award was made along with the said application.

12

Furthermore, section 32 of the Arbitration Act sets out the procedure for making an application to

the High Court for setting aside an arbitral award. In that, it states such an application may be made

within sixty days of the receipt of the award. Further, the said section sets out the grounds on which

an award can be set aside.

Moreover, where applications for the enforcement of an arbitral award and also to set aside an

arbitral award are filed in the High Court, section 35 of the Arbitration Act requires to consolidate

such applications and to be taken up together for inquiry. The said section was considered in

Trinco Maritime (PVT) Limited v Ceylinco Insurance Co. Limited [2010] 1 SLR 163, where it

was held that the law contemplates consolidation of applications made to set aside and to enforce

the award.

In this regard, it is important to note that it is mandatory to comply with the time frame stipulated

in sections 31 and 32 of the Arbitration Act. A similar view was expressed in Airport and Aviation

Services (Sri Lanka) Ltd. v Buildmart Lanka (Pvt) Ltd [2010] 1 SLR 292, where it was held;

It is therefore quite clear that even on a plain reading of the section

an application for the purpose of setting aside an arbitral award by the High Court

must be made within a time period of sixty days and the said period is taken into

account from the receipt of the award by the party making such application to the

High Court

[emphasis added]

Further, a similar view was expressed in Lanka Orix Leasing Company Limited v Weeratunga

Arachchige Piyasad, SC/Appeal/113/2014 (SC Minutes 5th of April, 2019).

However, prior to allowing an application for enforcement of an arbitral award, the court is

required to satisfy that there is no cause to refuse the recognition and enforcement of the award,

and the application is in conformity with the mandatory requirements set out in section 31(2) of

the said Act. Further, a party who has been made a respondent to such an application is not

precluded from drawing the attention of the court, if the petitioner has not complied with the

mandatory requirements stipulated in the said section notwithstanding the fact that such a party

has not filed an application to set aside the award in terms of section 32 of the said Act. In such

instances, the court is required to take such matters into consideration when deciding the

application for enforcement.

13

Has the appellant-company complied with section 31(2)(b) of the Arbitration Act?

In the instant appeal, the appellant-company has filed a copy of the arbitration agreement certified

by an Attorney-at-Law on which notices of arbitration were given to the respondents along with

the applications for the enforcement of the arbitral awards under consideration.

As stated above, appellant-company filed certified copies of the said Master Finance Lease

Agreement and the relevant schedules (separately in each application), which contained the

arbitration agreement on which the dispute between the parties were referred to arbitration and

the arbitral tribunal was established along with both the applications for enforcement of the awards.

Particularly, Clause 36 of the aforesaid agreement contained the arbitration agreement where all

the parties agreed to refer any disputes arising or concerning the said agreement settled by

arbitration.

However, the learned High Court Judge had refused to allow the enforcement of both the arbitral

awards on the basis that the entire agreement entered between the parties was not filed in court in

terms of section 31(2)(b) of the Arbitration Act No. 11 of 1995 and two arbitrations cannot be held

in respect of one arbitration Clause.

Section 31(2) of the Arbitration Act states;

An application to enforce the award shall be accompanied by

(a) the original of the award or a duly certified copy of such award; and

(b) the original arbitration agreement under which the award purports to have

been or a duly certified copy of such agreement.

For the purposes of this subsection a copy of an award or of the arbitration

agreement shall be deemed to have been duly certified if

(i) it purports to have been certified by the arbitral tribunal or, by a member of

that tribunal, and it has not been shown to the Court that it was not in fact so

certified; or

(ii) it has been otherwise certified to the satisfaction of the court.

[emphasis added]

14

It is pertinent to note that section 31(2)(b) of the Arbitration Act does not require a party to file the

complete contract/agreement in which the arbitration Clause is included in an application for

enforcement of an arbitral award. On the contrary, the said section only requires the petitioner to

file either the original arbitration agreement or a duly certified copy of such agreement.

Section 3(1) of the Arbitration Act states:

An arbitration agreement may be in the form of an arbitration clause in a

contract or in the form of a separate agreement.

[emphasis added]

Further, section 3(2) of the said Act states that an arbitration agreement should be in writing. In

terms of the section 3(2), it shall be deemed to be in writing if it is contained in a document signed

by the parties or in exchange of letters, telexes, telegrams or other means of telecommunication

which provide a record of the agreement.

Furthermore, section 12 of the Arbitration Act states;

An arbitration agreement which forms part of another agreement shall be deemed

to constitute a separate agreement when ruling upon the validity of that arbitration

agreement for the purpose of determining the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal.

[emphasis added]

Hence, an arbitration Clause in an agreement or a contract is recognised as a separate contract,

distinct and independent from the main contract. In the circumstances, section 31(2) of the

Arbitration Act only requires to file either the original arbitration agreement or a duly certified

copy of the arbitration agreement entered between the parties.

It is pertinent to note that in the matters under reference the parties did not enter into separate

agreements/contracts for the purpose of obtaining the two lease financing facilities to purchase the

prime mover and the trailer under reference. As stated above, there was one Master Finance Lease

Agreement and two schedules to the said agreement which are part and parcel of the said

agreement. Further, as stated above, the arbitration Clause was included in said Master Finance

Lease Agreement and it was applicable to the entire agreement which include the said schedules

to the agreement.

15

It is pertinent to note that, there can be circumstances where it is not possible to file the original

arbitration agreement in court, including instances where there are multiple applications for

enforcement of arbitral awards. Thus, the Arbitration Act has made provisions to cater to such

instances by including a provision to file a duly certified copy of the arbitration agreement with

applications for the enforcement of arbitral awards. The phrase a duly certified copy requires the

court to satisfy itself that a copy of the original arbitration agreement has been filed in court. In

the case of Kristley (Pvt) Limited v The State Timber Corporation [2002] 1 SLR 228 the copies

of the awards tendered with the claimants application certified by an Attorney-at-Law were held

as duly certified copies within the meaning of section 31(2)(ii) of the Arbitration Act. It was

further held that even in a case where the copy of the award filed with the application is not a duly

certified copy, the application for enforcement may not be summarily rejected without giving an

opportunity to tender duly certified copy as the word accompany in section 31(2) has been

included in the said section purposively and thus, it should be interpreted widely. In that judgment,

Fernando, J held at pages 239 and 240;

The learned High Court Judge failed to give full effect to clause (ii) of section 31

(2). That clause unambiguously provides for a mode of certification additional to

that prescribed by clause (i). But, for that clause certification by the Registrar of

the Arbitration Centre would not have been acceptable. Clause (ii) requires the

High Court in each case, having regard to the facts of the case, to decide whether

the document is certified to its satisfaction. The learned Judge erred in laying down

a general rule founded on a virtual presumption of dishonesty which totally

excludes certification by an Attorney-at-Law regardless of the circumstances. The

position might have been different if the application for enforcement had been

rejected promptly on presentation, for then there might well have been insufficient

reason to be satisfied that the copy was indeed a true copy: and that would have

caused no injustice, as the claimant could have filed a fresh application. But, I

incline to the view that even at that stage the application should not have been

summarily rejected. The claimant should have been given an opportunity to tender

duly certified copies interpreting accompany in section 31 (2) purposively and

widely (as in Sri Lanka General Workers Union v Samaranayake and Nagappa

Chettiar v. Commissioner of Income Tax.) Undoubtedly, section 31 (2) is

mandatory, but not to the extent that one opportunity, and one opportunity only,

will be allowed for compliance. In the present case, however, the order was not

16

made immediately, but only after the lapse of the period of one year and fourteen

days allowed for an application for enforcement. By that time, the learned Judge

had consolidated the proceedings: hence he could not have ignored the certified

copies filed in the STCs application, which admittedly, were identical in all

material respects to the copies tendered with the claimants application. He had

also to consider (even if he was not bound by it) the admission in the STCs

statement of objections that those copies were duly certified, as well as the fact

that, by them, the claimant had also tendered copies certified in terms of clause (i).

it was on all that material that the learned Judge had to decide whether the copies

had been certified to his satisfaction. In deciding that issue, he was perfectly correct

in noting that the Court had to ensure that it gave judgment according to the

award (cf section 31 (6)) : the object of section 31 (2) was to ensure that the High

Court did have true copies of the award. It was not reasonable, on the facts of this

case, to conclude that the copies initially filed were anything but true copies of the

originals. There was not even the faintest suspicion or suggestion that they were

inaccurate.

Furthermore, a careful consideration of section 12 of the said Act shows that the sole purpose of

the requirement to file the arbitration agreement along with an enforcement agreement is to

ascertain whether the arbitral tribunal had the jurisdiction to make the award sought to be conferred

by the High Court.

Therefore, I am of the view that the learned High Court Judge erred in his Orders dated 2nd of

December, 2013 when he held that the appellant-company is required to file the complete contract

that contained the arbitration agreement in terms of section 31(2)(b) of the Arbitration Act when

filing an application to enforce the arbitral award. Further, the learned High Court Judge erred in

law and fact when he did not act on the certified copy of the arbitration agreement filed along with

the application for enforcement by the appellant.

Is it possible to refer several disputes to arbitration based on one arbitration agreement?

Section 50 of the said Act defines the term arbitration agreement as follows;

17

Arbitration Agreement means an agreement by the parties to submit to

arbitration all or certain disputes which have arisen or which may arise between

them in respect of a defined legal relationship whether contractual or not.

[emphasis added]

A careful consideration of the said section shows that unlike civil actions filed in the District Court,

the Arbitration Act provides a simple and flexible procedure to resolve disputes between the parties

that are subject to the said Act. It is pertinent to note that the phrase all or certain disputes which

have arisen or which may arise between them allows the parties to refer all or some of the disputes

between them to arbitration. Further, the phrase which have arisen or which may arise between

them allows the parties to refer disputes when and where they arise.

Thus, the appellant-company was entitled in law to refer the disputes arising from or concerning

the arbitration Clause in the said Master Lease Financing Agreement jointly or separately to

arbitration to resolve the disputes between the parties. In view of the above, I am of the view that

the learned High Court Judge erred in law by holding that it is not possible to have multiple

arbitrations based on one arbitration agreement.

Does the Arbitration Act No. 11 of 1995 allow to file an answer in enforcement of arbitral

awards?

It is noteworthy to mention that in the instant appeals, the 1st, 2nd and 3rd respondents have filed an

answer supported by an affidavit objecting to the enforcement of both arbitral awards. However,

there is no provision in the Arbitration Act to file an answer in an application for enforcement of

an arbitral award. As stated above, only objections can be filed by a respondent in such an

application.

Conclusion

In the circumstances, I am of the view that the following questions of law should be answered as

follows;

18

Has the learned High Court Judge erred in his order dated 02.12.2013 in holding that the Petitioner

was obliged to file a complete contract under section 31(2)(b) of the Arbitration Act No. 11 of

1995 in enforcement proceeding.

Yes

Whether the Petitioner has filed an original or a duly certified copy of the arbitration agreement.

Yes, the appellant has filed a duly certified copy of the arbitration agreement.

Therefore, both appeals are allowed. I set aside the Orders of the learned High Court Judge dated

2nd of December, 2012 and grant the reliefs prayed for in the petitions No. SC/Appeal/42/2015 and

No. SC/Appeal/46/2015 filed in the High Court.

Further, I direct the learned High Court Judge to enter decree in terms of section 31(6) of the

Arbitration Act.

The Registrar is directed to send this judgment to the relevant High Court to act in terms of the

law.

I order no costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J

I Agree Judge of the Supreme Court

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J

I Agree Judge of the Supreme Court