==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of Section 5(C) of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No19 of 1990 as amended by Act No.54 of 2006. Sellapperuma Thilakasiri Fernando of No.12, Nirmala Mawatha Panadura. Plaintiff Vs. S.C. Appeal No.54/2018 SCHCCA LA No. 253/2017 Civil Appellate High Court No. WP/HCCA/KAL/ 216/2012(F) D.C. Panadura Case No.1783/L Meregngnage Somasiri Salgadu (Deceased) 1a. Gamage Siriyawathie 1b. Meregngnage Dinesha Sanjeewani Salgadu 1c. Meregngnage Nadeesha Dilhani Salgadu 1d. Meregngnage Sadun Kanchana Salgadu All of No.10, Uyan Kele Cross Road, Panadura Substituted- Defendants AND Sellapperuma Thilakasiri Fernando of No.12, Nirmala Mawatha Panadura. Plaintiff-Appellant

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2018

2

Vs. 1a. Gamage Siriyawathie 1b. Meregngnage Dinesha Sanjeewani Salgadu 1c. Meregngnage Nadeesha Dilhani Salgadu 1d. Meregngnage Sadun Kanchana Salgadu All of No.10, Uyan Kele Cross Road, Panadura Substituted- Defendant-Respondents And Now Between

1a. Gamage Siriyawathie 1b. Meregngnage Dinesha Sanjeewani Salgadu 1c. Meregngnage Nadeesha Dilhani Salgadu 1d. Meregngnage Sadun Kanchana Salgadu All of No.10, Uyan Kele Cross Road, Panadura Substituted- Defendant-Respondent- Appellants Vs. Sellapperuma Thilakasiri Fernando of No.12, Nirmala Mawatha Panadura. Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent BEFORE : S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J. ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J. ARJUNA OBEYESEKERE, J. COUNSEL : Rasika Dissanayake with Punarjith Isuranga for the Substituted-Defendant-Respondent-Appellants

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2018

3

Harindra R. Banagala for the Plaintiff-Appellant- Respondent ARGUED ON : 07th November, 2023 DECIDED ON : 25th, February, 2026

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

The Plaintiff instituted a Rei Vindicatio action in the District Court of

Panadura and sought inter alia a declaration of title to the property described in

the schedule to the Plaint, eviction of the Defendant and damages calculated in a

sum of Rs.500.00 a month until vacant possession is handed over. The Plaintiff, in

describing the devolution of paper title claimed that he acquired title to the land

upon execution of Deed of Transfer No. 5990, attested by Weerasekera Notary

Public on 15.06.2002. The Plaintiff further averred that, despite his demand for

the possession of the property made by serving a Notice to Quit, the Defendant

continued to remain in possession of the same, without any legal right or any

entitlement to do so, from 01.05.1995. The Plaintiff also asserted that the

Defendant disputed his ownership to the property on the basis that the latter had

acquired prescriptive title over the corpus.

In his Answer, the Defendant denied the Plaintiff’s title to the corpus and

took up the position that his parents, who had paper title to the disputed

property, made a verbal promise that he would be given the ownership to the

same. He further claimed that in fulfilling that promise, his siblings have vacated

from the property sometime around 1979, after handing over its possession to

him. The Defendant accordingly claims that, since then he has held that property

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2018

4

adverse to the interests of any other claimants and thereby acquired prescriptive

title to the same. On that assertion, the Defendant made a cross claim against the

Plaintiff, by which he sought a declaration of title to the corpus.

The parties have thereupon proceeded to trial. They recorded two

admissions and a total of 11 issues between them. Issue No. 10 was amended

later on expanding the scope of the original issue, which has been raised over the

claim of prescription of the Defendant.

The Plaintiff gave evidence on his behalf and called no other witnesses

before closing his case. The original Defendant had passed away mid trial and

his wife, the substituted Defendant (hereafter referred to as the Defendant) has

offered evidence under oath and called an official witness from the Election

Commission, in order to prove the extract of the electoral register, which were

tendered to Court marked V3, V4, V5, V6 and V7 respectively.

The District Court, in delivering its judgment at the conclusion of the

evidence, dismissed the action of the Plaintiff and decided to grant the

declaratory relief sought by the Defendant after accepting his acquisition of

prescriptive title over the corpus.

The Plaintiff preferred an appeal against the said judgment. The primary

complaint presented before the appellate Court by the Plaintiff was that the

Defendant had accepted the position suggested by the Plaintiff that they merely

resided in the corpus with the acceptance of Evylin Soysa as its lawful owner and,

with that acknowledgement of someone else’s title, the Defendant thereafter

cannot claim acquisition of title to the corpus merely on the fact of long

possession, which she expects the trial Court to be taken as an adverse or

independent possession against the interests of other claimants. The High Court

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2018

5

of Civil Appeal accepted this contention and has proceeded to set aside the

judgment of the original Court and allowed the appeal. The appellate Court is of

the view that once the Plaintiff proved title to the property the substituted

Defendant is expected to establish her right to be in possession. It also held that

the evidence indicate that she is in possession of the corpus as a mere licensee of

the original owner. The appellate Court has taken ‘admission’ as a factor that ran

contrary to the claim of adverse and independent possession against the true

owner and the Defendant is not entitled to claim prescription.

Thereupon, the Defendant, by her petition dated 08.05.2017, sought Leave

to Appeal against the said judgment. After the said petition of the Defendant was

supported on 19.02.2018, this Court decided to grant Leave to Appeal to the

questions of law that are set out in paragraph 17(a), (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f) of the

said petition. However, at the hearing of the instant appeal, the parties have re-

framed those questions of law, with permission of Court, which are now read as

follows;

(a) Were the original defendant or the substituted defendant

licensees of the plaintiff as held by the High Court of Civil

Appeal?

(b) Did the plaintiff come to Court and based his case on the

footing that the original defendant was a licensee of the

plaintiff?

(c) Has the High Court of Civil Appeal, in allowing the appeal of

the plaintiff, considered the prescriptive rights of the

defendant in the correct perspective?

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2018

6

(d) In the circumstance pleaded, has the original defendant

prescribed to the corpus?

(e) Is granting damages to the plaintiff correct and according to

law in the circumstance pleaded in the case?

(f) In the circumstances, is the judgment of the High Court of

Civil Appeal correct and according to law?

Since the determination of these six questions of law necessarily involves

the examination of the relevant factual considerations relied on by the Courts

below, I think it is important that a brief narrative of the evidence presented by

the contesting parties before the trial Court should be made at this stage of the

judgment.

The original Defendant, who was born in 1952, lived in the thatched house

constructed by his parents on the corpus. The parents of the Defendant have

indicated their intention to confer their rights over the corpus to the Defendant. It

appears that the Defendant is the only male child of his parents. Since 1979, the

Defendant continued his possession of the corpus and developed same by

planting several coconut and king coconut trees and enjoyed the fruits. He also

made improvements to the house from time to time.

Merennage Indrani Salgado is the original Defendant’s sister, who married

the Plaintiff in the year 1980. The Plaintiff claimed that he derived title to the

corpus from the Deed of Gift No. 5990 (P1) of 15.06.2002, executed by his wife,

who in turn had acquired that title upon execution of the Deed of Transfer No.

2306 (P2) of 23.12.1997 by her own sister Merennage Chitrani Salgado. Chitrani

Salgado acquired title to the corpus from her mother Warusahennedige Evlyn Soysa,

upon execution of Deed of Transfer No. 5058 (P3) on 01.11.1995. Evlyn Soysa in

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2018

7

turn had acquired her title from Lewishennedige Newton Nanadapala Fernando, with

the execution of the Deed of Transfer No. 25240 (P4) on 12.05.1984. This was after

a period of little over six months from the execution of the Deed of Transfer No.

24700 (P5) on 24.10.1983, executed by Warusahennedige Evlyn Soysa in favour of

said Lewishennedige Newton Nanadapala Fernando.

It is to be noted that Evlyn Soysa and Lewishennedige Newton Nanadapala

Fernando are the parents of the Defendant.

In recital of the Deed of Transfer No. 24700 (P5), Warusahennedige Evlyn

Soysa claims that her title to the corpus is derived upon a Deed of Gift No. 1710 of

05.08.1982. The Plaintiff tendered a notarial document, bearing No. 1710 marked

as P6. The instrument P6, which had been executed on 06.12.1968, in fact refers to

a partnership agreement between two parties who had nothing to do with the

title to the corpus. The document P6, is supposed to be the instrument by which

the title was acquired by the original owner of the corpus from whom it was

allegedly devolved up to the Plaintiff, through P5 to P1. All these instruments

were objected to by the Defendant and marked subject to proof. The Defendant

also moved the trial Court to exclude these documents from the proceedings by

renewing his objection at the close of the Plaintiff’s case as they were not proved

by him presenting any evidence of due execution. The Examination in Chief of

the Plaintiff consists only of a description of the devolution of title as pleaded in

his Plaint.

The claim of acquiring title to the corpus made by the Defendant was put to

the Plaintiff during cross-examination in support of the issue raised on that

point. The Plaintiff stated in his evidence that when he visited the corpus soon

after acquisition of its title in 2002, his brother-in-law, the original Defendant,

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2018

8

had acted in a hostile manner towards him and declared his ownership to the

same. The Plaintiff conceded that he could not make even a survey plan of the

corpus for the purpose of annexing it to his Plaint. But he was unable to attribute

any reason for that failure. When the Defendant suggested that he was already in

possession, even before his sister executed the notarial instrument in 1997 by

which his wife has acquired paper title to the corpus the latter conceded.

The Plaintiff also admitted that when the mother of the Defendant was

living, he was made aware of a prior family arrangement that had been resolved

in favour of the Defendant for him to get the ownership of the corpus, the then

family home. The Plaintiff had no answer to offer when he was suggested that all

he did was write a deed to a land which had already been prescribed by the

Defendant. He also conceded that he could neither accept nor reject the

suggestion that the Defendant occupied the corpus since 1979. However, the

Plaintiff, in support of his position has taken up in his evidence that the

Defendant is occupying the land with leave and license, and stated that they

have allowed the Defendant to occupy the corpus with their permission, from

about eight years ago, when the latter complained that he had no place to go.

Since the original Defendant has died before the Plaintiff’s case was closed,

his wife, who was substituted, gave evidence in support of the Defendant’s case.

She married the Defendant in March 1976 and settled in the house built on the

corpus taking it as their matrimonial home. She tendered a survey plan No. 2775,

marked as V1, prepared by licensed surveyor L.W.L. de Silva on 01.06.1982, in

which the corpus is depicted as an allotment of land shown therein as Lot No. C,

which is in an extent of 8.65 perches. The Defendants have planted four coconut

trees which are now over 20 years. She also stated that after the wattle-and-daub

house that stood on that land had collapsed, it was the Defendant who put up

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2018

9

the wooden planked house with a corrugated sheet roof, which is now standing

on the corpus and that they had lived on that land for nearly 35 years.

The original Defendant’s parents too apparently lived in that house. The

Defendant’s mother Evlyn Soysa died in 2002 and his father died in 1990. The

Defendant had other 8 siblings. The substituted Defendant also became aware of

the family arrangement that the Defendant was to be given the ownership of the

corpus.

The connection to the main water supply for the corpus was applied under

the name of Evlyn Soysa, the mother of the Defendant, but it was they who paid

for the water consumption, despite the fact that the Plaintiff has taken steps to

transfer the connection of water supply under his name but at a later point in

time.

In cross-examination, the substituted Defendant conceded that the

Defendant’s parents never made a notarial instrument to transfer the ownership

of the corpus in favour of their son, the original Defendant, although they

promised to do so.

Learned Counsel for the Defendant, during the hearing of the instant

appeal, submitted that the High Court of Civil Appeal, in setting aside the

judgment of the original Court was satisfied that the Plaintiff has established his

title to the corpus and it was for the Defendant to establish her right to occupy the

same, but the appellate Court failed to note that in fact the Plaintiff has failed to

establish his title to the corpus. Learned Counsel thereupon invited attention of

this Court that the title deeds relied on by the Plaintiff marked P1 to P7 were

marked subject to proof when they were tendered by him in evidence. At the

close of the case for the Plaintiff, the substituted Defendant re-iterated her

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2018

10

objection to the admissibility of those title deeds as they were not proved. He

then referred to the judgment of Sri Lanka Ports Authority and another v

Jugolina Boat East (1981) 1 Sri L.R. 18, where it was held “ [i]f no objection is taken

when at the close of the case documents are read in evidence, they are evidence for all

purposes of the law. This is the cursus curiae of the original Civil Courts.” Hence, the

learned Counsel for the Defendant submitted that there was no evidence

establishing the title of the Plaintiff to the corpus before Court and therefore the

order of dismissal of his action, rightly made by the District Court, should not

have been interfered with by the appellate Court.

The other contention advanced by the learned Counsel for the

Defendant was that the premise on which the High Court of Civil Appeal

allowed the Plaintiff’s appeal was that the substituted Defendant in her evidence

has accepted that they possessed the corpus with leave and license and thereby

defeated the claim of acquiring prescriptive title over it. He pointed out from the

pleadings and issues that it never was the Plaintiff’s case and even in his

evidence no such factual claim was made by him. Therefore, learned Counsel

argues that, when the Plaintiff has failed to establish his paper title to the corpus

which made him disentitle to the declaratory relief he has sought from Court;

and in contrast, the Defendant has clearly established that they held corpus

adverse to the interest of the Plaintiff and his predecessors in title, the Defendant

is entitled to the declaratory relief that has been prayed for.

In order to counter the submissions of the Defendant, learned Counsel for

the Plaintiff contended that there was no challenge whatsoever to the evidence of

the Plaintiff when he presented his devolution of title to the corpus, and the

objection of the Defendant to the title deeds taken was belatedly and that too was

taken only at the stage of marking P2 onwards. Since the title deed P1 conveyed

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2018

11

title to Evlyn Soysa, and the admission made by the Defendant, while conceding

to the position that, it was Evlyn Soysa who owned the corpus before the Plaintiff

derived his title to it, clearly established the primary requisite imposed on a

plaintiff in a Rei Vindicatio action of proving the paper title to the disputed

property. Moving on to the claim of prescription, learned Counsel for the

Plaintiff further submitted that as the substituted Defendant accepted the lawful

ownership of Evlyn Soysa to the corpus, that admission made her disentitle to

maintain the position that her possession could be treated as one, adverse or

independent to that of the title of the said Evlyn Soysa. This is further buttressed

with the admission of the substituted Defendant that the water bills are issued in

the name of the Plaintiff, who is the true owner of the property.

Considering the tenor of the questions of law that were raised in the

appeal of the Defendant and the different contentions that were advanced during

the submissions of the learned Counsel for the contesting parties, it appears to

me that the primary contention presented before this Court could be identified as

the one made regarding the failure of the Plaintiff to prove his title to the corpus.

Hence, the decision to restore his action, made by the High Court of Civil

Appeal, after overturning the dismissal of same made by the trial Court, becomes

erroneous.

Perusal of the proceedings of 28.06.2007 before the District Court revealed

that the Plaintiff had tendered the Deed No. 5990, marked as P1 and its schedule

as P1a, followed by Deed No. 2306, marked as P2. Only at that stage, the

Defendant raised objections to the admission of deeds P1 and P2 as evidence in

the case. The Court, acting on the said objection has accepted them ‘subject to

proof’. This is the reason why the learned Counsel for the Plaintiff contended that

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2018

12

P1, by which conferred title to his client, was marked without any objection by

the original Defendant.

The Plaintiff, in his endeavour to establish the devolution of title in

relation to the corpus, commenced that process by making the Deed No. 5990 (P1)

as the first title deed and thereafter proceeded to mark the said title deed that

preceded the already marked one. In that, the Plaintiff followed the order of

devolution of title in the reverse order, as he commenced marking a series of title

deeds, commencing with P1 and ending with the Deed No. 1710 (P6). It appears

that the Plaintiff, in tendering the Deed No. 1710 (P6) as an item of evidence in

support of his claim to the title, expected the trial Court to treat the said deed P6,

as the one executed by the ‘original owner’ of the corpus, by which its title was

transferred in favour of his mother-in-law, Evlyn Soysa. After Evlyn Soysa, all the

deeds that were executed in relation to corpus, are the transfers of title made

within the family members of the Plaintiff, barring two.

After P6, Evlyn Soysa, by execution of Deed No. 24700 (P5) transferred her

title to the corpus to one Lewishennedige Newton Nandapala Fernando, who

thereafter re-transferred the title back to Evlyn Soysa by executing Deed No.

25240 (P4) in less than a period of six months. Thereafter, Evlyn Soysa transferred

her title to one of her daughters Merennage Yalani Salgado by execution of Deed of

Transfer No. 5058 (P3) on 01.11.1995. Merennage Yalani Salgado thereupon

transferred title in favour of one of her sisters, Merennage Indrani Salgado, by

execution of Deed No. 2306 (P2) on 23.12.1997, although Yalani Salgado is named

in P3 as the transferee, the recital itself states that she only deputised for another

sister, who was not in Sri Lanka during that time, Merennage Chitrani Salgado. It

was Merennage Indrani Salgado who executed the Deed of Gift No. 5990 (P1) in

favour of her husband, the Plaintiff, on 16.06.2002.

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2018

13

Thus, it is clear that the title of the corpus could be traced back to the

‘original owner’, the executant of the Deed No. 1710 (P6). This is because, in the

recital of P5, it is stated that Evlyn Soysa by execution of that deed, transferred

her title conferred on her by “Deed of Gift No. 1710, executed on 05.08.1982 and

attested by Notary Public M.J.T. Silva.” The said deed is the notarial instrument

executed by the ‘original owner’ of the corpus transferring his title to Evlyn Soysa.

The Plaintiff tendered a notarially executed document, bearing the No. 1710,

marked as P6. This document is bound to the original case record as a production

of the case for the Plaintiff, which had been initialled by the trial Judge, as

mandated by Section 154 of the Civil Procedure Code, and found in pages 246 to

249. The Plaintiff, by way of a motion dated 23.05.2012, tendered the documents

P1 to P9 to Court, after the substituted Defendant closed her case. In that Motion

too, the deed P6 is described as “Deed of Gift No. 1710, executed on 06.07.1968 and

attested by Notary Public M.J.T. Silva” whereas that deed pleaded by the Plaintiff

had been executed on 05.08.1982 as per the Plaint and referred to as so in P5.

Strangely, the heading of the document P6, states that it is a “Deed of

Partnership”, which sets out the several conditions on which the two parties to

that instrument, namely Mohamed Fareed Mohamed Rizam and Siri Suriyage

Premadasa Fernando. It is also noted that the P6 was attested by Notary Public

Arthur Neville De Zilva on 06.07.1968, and not a “ Deed of Gift No. 1710, executed on

05.08.1982 and attested by Notary Public M.J.T. Silva” as the Plaintiff claimed.

It is obvious that, if the Plaintiff was to derive title to the corpus in respect

of which he sought a declaration of title from Court, that his mother-in-law,

Evlyn Soysa, should have the right of ownership to the corpus derived from the

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2018

14

“Deed of Gift No. 1710, executed on 05.08.1982 and attested by Notary Public M.J.T.

Silva”. This Deed of Gift, for the reasons best known to the Plaintiff, was not

tendered before the trial Court and instead, a totally irrelevant document had

been tendered to Court. This cannot be a mistake on the part of the Plaintiff as

the Motion indicates that he was aware of the difference in the date of execution.

Thus, it is an incontrovertible fact that there is no evidence to satisfy the trial

Court of the title derived from the original owner to Evlyn Soysa, which

eventually flowed down to the Plaintiff. Due to this very reason, the Rei

Vindicatio action of the Plaintiff must necessarily fail.

Furthermore, it is highlighted that the reception of the deeds P1 to P6 as

evidence for the Plaintiff was objected to by the original Defendant. That

objection was re-iterated when the Plaintiff read in the documents P1 to P6 at the

close of his case. Therefore, I am inclined to accept the submissions of the

learned Counsel for the Defendant, that the documents marked P1 to P6 were not

proved by the Plaintiff. In the circumstances, even if the contention of the

Plaintiff that the substituted Defendant did not object at the point of marking P1,

is accepted, that would not inject life to his already dying case, which he starved

of important evidence in relation to the origin of his title. There is no question

that the Plaintiff has failed to tender the real “Deed of Gift No. 1710, executed on

05.08.1982 and attested by Notary Public M.J.T. Silva” to the trial Court and prove

its due execution.

The other contention presented by the learned Counsel for the Defendant

before this Court that remains to be considered is the one regarding the

determination made by the High Court of Civil Appeal that; the substituted

Defendant accepted that they possessed the corpus with leave and license of the

mother of the original Defendant. He pointed out that it is clear from the

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2018

15

pleadings and issues that it never was the Plaintiff’s case and even in his

evidence, he made no such factual claim.

This aspect of the case arose for consideration of Court due to an answer

given by the substituted Defendant in response to a suggestion made by the

Plaintiff. Relevant segment of the proceedings that contain the questions and

answers considered by the appellate Court in this regard is reproduced below;

“m%( oeka idlaIslre kvqjg wod, foamf,a ;uqka ysáfha meñKs,slref.a ujf.a

leue;a; msg@

W( Tõ’ iajdó mqreIhd Wmka ia:dkh’

m%( oeka meñKs,slref.a ujf.a leue;a; msg b|,d 2002 uefrk fldg

meñKs,slref.a ujf.a leue;a; msg ;uqka ysáh lshkafka@

W%( Tõ’”

The trial Court considered that evidence and concluded that despite the

acceptance of the original mother’s ownership over the corpus, the Defendant

continued to possess the same as a property over which he had title. The Court

also noted that the continued possession claimed by the original Defendant

commenced from 1979 and, in commencing that possession, he did not obtain

leave and licence of his mother, and acted on the family arrangement. The Court

further noted the fact that the Defendant is a licensee was not raised as a trial

issue and the Plaintiff, at that stage but presented a case significantly different to

the one he already pleaded in appeal solely placing reliance on that item of

evidence.

However, the High Court of Civil Appeal has chosen to act on that item of

evidence and decided to allow the appeal of the Plaintiff. The appellate Court

held that it is settled law that a licensee cannot claim prescription rights against

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2018

16

the owner. Perusal of the process of reasoning adopted by the appellate Court in

arriving at the determination to allow the appeal indicated that it was persuaded

by the fact that the original Defendant came into possession and continued to

possess the corpus under his mother and due to that reason, his long possession

cannot be considered as an adverse possession in the light of the principles

enunciated in the judgment of De Silva v Commissioner of Inland Revenue

(1978) 80 NLR 292.

Learned Counsel for the Defendant is correct when he submitted that the

Defendant is a licensee of his mother was not the Plaintiff’s case. But that is not

the sole reason why the appellate Court denied the declaratory relief sought by

the Defendant. The High Court of Civil Appeal considered the acceptance of the

substituted Defendant that her husband possessed the property under his

mother as a factor that militates against the claim of acquisition of prescriptive

title, apparently following the dicta of the judgment in Sopinona v Pitipana-

Arachchi and Others (2010) 1 Sri L.R. 87, “ [W]here any person’s possession was not

originally adverse, and he claims that it has become adverse, the onus is on him to prove

it. In doing so, he is required not only to prove intention on his part to possess adversely,

but also a manifestation of that intention to the true owner against whom he sets up his

possession.”

The evidence of the substituted Defendant clearly indicated that her

husband, the original Defendant, was born in the thatched house that stood on

the corpus and lived there until his death. It is therefore obvious, that since then

not only the Defendant, but all his siblings have lived under their parents in that

house as one family. The undisputed evidence is that in 1979 there was this

family arrangement by which the original Defendant was allowed to acquire

ownership of the house. The original Defendant’s father died in 1980, after the

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2018

17

said arrangement was made known to all members of the family but his mother

died few years later. It is also evident that only the original Defendant and his

family occupied and possessed the corpus since 1979 but the other siblings have

moved away, obviously acting on that family arrangement.

It is also evident that the first of the deeds in relation to the title of the

corpus was executed in 1982, in favour of Evlyn Soysa, mother of the original

Defendant. Despite the fact that any time before the execution of P1, by which

the Plaintiff became the owner, none of his predecessors in title never made any

attempt to impose the right of ownership in respect of the corpus by taking

possession of the corpus, until Evlyn Soysa’s death in 2002. Incidentally, the

Plaintiff acquired title in June 2002 and for the first time since 1979, he disputed

the original Defendant’s possession of the corpus. The instant action was

instituted in January 2004, and, by then more than ten years have lapsed since

the original Defendant became the de facto owner of the corpus, consequent to the

said family arrangement in 1979. The Defendant planted coconut and king

coconut trees and enjoyed fruits. He constructed a new house when the 35-year-

old thatched house became uninhabitable to his family.

Thus, the evidence presented before the trial Court made it is more

probable that the original Defendant, who was initially occupying the corpus

under his parents, changed the character of his occupation, after the

implementation of the said family arrangement by converting his continued

occupation into possession, as understood in the law of property, by changing

the character of his legal entitlement to remain on that property.

Since the appellate Court convinced itself of the status of the original

Defendant as a licensee on the evidence of the substituted Defendant, it is

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2018

18

necessary to examine the question and answer once more to assess the context in

which this admission was made.

The section of the proceedings that has direct relevance to this point is as

follows;

“m%( oeka idlaIslre kvqjg wod, foamf,a ;uqka ysáfha meñKs,slref.a ujf.a

leue;a; msg@

W( Tõ’ iajdó mqreIhd Wmka ia:dkh’

m%( oeka meñKs,slref.a ujf.a leue;a; msg b|,d 2002 uefrk fldg

meñKs,slref.a ujf.a leue;a; msg ;uqka ysáh lshkafka@

W%( Tõ’”

It is clearly discernible from the line of questioning that the substituted

Defendant was asked about the manner in which the original Defendant

occupied the house in a legalistic sense. The substituted Defendant, being a

house wife of a fisherman, who died mid trial because his vessel capsized, was

narrating what she learnt from her husband when she declared this is the house,

in which her husband had lived since his birth. The 2nd question put to the

substituted Defendant is a double barrel question. While questioning her that

since his birth the original Defendant lived in that house under his mother, the

scope of the question was altered mid-sentence to include that he lived under the

mother when she died in 2002. The substituted Defendant answered with a yes,

obviously without realising the effects of what she had accepted in answering

affirmatively to that question.

Having elicited that answer, the Plaintiff then strangely suggested to the

substituted Defendant that there was also a family arrangement, which she also

confirmed with a similar answer. This important item of evidence unfortunately

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2018

19

was left out of the consideration when the High Court of Civil Appeal

determined the evidence of the substituted Defendant to hold that they lived in

that property under leave and license of Evlyn Soysa.

The evidence is clear that the original Defendant did not pay rent, did not

surrender produce off the property, did make improvements to the property as

he wished and did not obtain permission from anyone and possessed the corpus

undisturbed and uninterrupted for over ten years prior to the institution of the

action.

After undertaking a careful analysis of the evidence presented before the

trial Court, I am of the considered view that the substituted Defendant has

satisfied the trial Court that her continued possession of the corpus since 1979,

qualifies to be accepted as proof of undisturbed and uninterrupted possession by

a defendant by a title adverse to or independent of that of the Plaintiff,

unaccompanied by payment of rent or produce, or performance of service or

duty or by any other act by the possessor, from which an acknowledgement of a

right existing in another person would fairly and naturally be inferred, in terms

of Section 3 of the Prescription Ordinance.

In view of the multiple reasons set out above in detail, I now proceed to

answer the several questions of law in the following manner;

(a) Were the original defendant or the substituted defendant

licensees of the plaintiff as held by the High Court of Civil

Appeal ? No.

(b) Did the Plaintiff come to Court and based his case on the

footing that the original defendant was a licensee of the

Plaintiff ? No.

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2018

20

(c) Has the High Court of Civil Appeal, in allowing the appeal of

the plaintiff, considered the prescriptive rights of the

defendant in the correct perspective ? No.

(d) in the circumstance pleaded, has the original Defendant

prescribed to the corpus ? Yes.

(e) is granting damages to the plaintiff correct and according to

law in the circumstances pleaded in the case ? Does not arise as

the action should be dismissed.

(f) in the circumstances, is the judgment of the High Court of

Civil Appeal correct and according law ? No.

Therefore, the impugned judgment of the High Court of Civil Appeal is

hereby set aside and the judgment of the District Court is restored. The District

Court is directed to enter decree accordingly.

The appeal of the Defendant is accordingly allowed with costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

ARJUNA OBEYESEKERE, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT