==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Dissanayaka Mudiyanselage

Senarath Bandara Dissanayaka,

16, Uplands, Kandy.

Plaintiff

SC APPEAL NO: SC/APPEAL/74/2016

HCCA KANDY NO: CP/HCCA/Rev/16/2010

DC KANDY NO: 168/2004/L

Vs.

Muthukuda Wijesuriya Arachchige

Jayantha Nishantha Wijesuriya,

103, Polgolla, Kandy.

Defendant

AND

Muthukuda Wijesuriya Arachchige

Jayantha Nishantha Wijesuriya,

103, Polgolla, Kandy.

Defendant-Petitioner

Vs.

Dissanayaka Mudiyanselage

Senarath Bandara Dissanayaka,

2

SC/APPEAL/74/2016

16, Uplands, Kandy.

Plaintiff-Respondent

AND NOW

Dissanayaka Mudiyanselage

Senarath Bandara Dissanayaka,

16, Uplands, Kandy.

Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant

Vs.

Muthukuda Wijesuriya Arachchige

Jayantha Nishantha Wijesuriya,

103, Polgolla, Kandy.

Now at

16, Uplands, Kandy.

Defendant-Petitioner-Respondent

Before: Hon. Justice P. Padman Surasena

Hon. Justice Mahinda Samayawardhena

Hon. Justice K. Priyantha Fernando

Counsel: Sumedha Mahawanniarachchi with Nishan Balasooriya for

the Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant.

Dr. Sunil Cooray for the Defendant-Petitioner-Respondent.

Written Submissions:

By the Appellant on 14.09.2016

Argued on: 11.01.2024

Decided on: 27.02.2024

3

SC/APPEAL/74/2016

Samayawardhena, J.

Background

The plaintiff filed this action in the District Court of Kandy on 16.06.2004

seeking a declaration of title to the land in suit and ejectment of the

defendant therefrom. Halfway through the trial, on 09.10.2009, the case

was settled whereby the defendant agreed to purchase the property from

the plaintiff for a sum of Rs. 2,750,000 on or before 31.12.2009. If

payment was not made, it was agreed that the plaintiff is entitled to the

judgment, and he can get the writ executed to eject the defendant without

prior notice. The defendant did not pay, notwithstanding further

extended time was granted for it.

The fiscal went to the land on 26.02.2010 to execute the writ but as the

land could not be properly identified, writ was not executed.

The fiscal went to the land again on 19.03.2010 with surveyor Weerakoon

and other officers to execute the writ. However, according to the fiscal’s

report, although the surveyor showed the land (Lot 21 of Surveyor-

General’s plan No. 641 dated 19.02.1978), the defendant, under the

influence of liquor, prevented the fiscal from executing the writ. Upon

reading the fiscal’s report, it is abundantly clear that the writ was not

executed at all.

The defendant made an application dated 17.03.2010 to the District

Court to issue a commission to identify the land and call for a valuation

report. The Court suspended the execution of the writ until the matter

was looked into. The plaintiff filed objections to this application. After

inquiry (vide journal entry Nos. 61, 63, 64 of the District Court case

record), the District Judge refused this application by order dated

25.05.2010 and ordered the fiscal to execute the writ.

4

SC/APPEAL/74/2016

The fiscal executed the writ on 01.06.2010.

The defendant then made an application to the District Judge dated

02.06.2010 seeking to set aside the order dated 25.05.2010. The

defendant argued that when the fiscal was obstructed in executing the

writ on 19.03.2010, the judgment-creditor was required to make the

application under section 325 of the Civil Procedure Code. Since this was

not done, he contended that the order to re-issue the writ on 25.05.2010,

was given per incuriam. The defendant moved to vacate the order. The

District Judge by order dated 04.06.2010 rejected this application on the

basis that, if the writ could not be executed due to the conduct of the

defendant, the Court could re-issue the writ under section 337 of the

Civil Procedure Code.

The defendant filed a revision application in the High Court of Civil

Appeal of Kandy seeking to set aside the orders of the District Court dated

25.05.2010 and 04.06.2010. The High Court accepted the said argument

of the defendant that it was mandatory on the part of the plaintiff to have

come before the District Court under section 325 when the fiscal was

obstructed in executing the writ. The High Court, by judgment dated

27.01.2011, set aside both orders of the District Court and restored the

defendant to possession.

The plaintiff is before this Court against the judgment of the High Court.

Although leave was granted against the judgment of the High Court on

several questions, during the argument, learned counsel for both parties

conceded that the essential question of law to be decided by this Court is

whether, when the fiscal was resisted in executing the writ by the

judgment-debtor, the judgment-creditor shall necessarily make the

application under section 325 or if the Court can re-issue the writ under

section 337(3) of the Civil Procedure Code.

5

SC/APPEAL/74/2016

I accept that the execution of a writ is a complicated area of law,

particularly due to the various procedural intricacies involved and the

potential challenges that may arise during the enforcement process. Due

to this complexity, the judgment-debtor raises numerous technical

objections in a rather convoluted fashion, hindering the judgment-

creditor from enjoying the fruits of his victory. The case at hand provides

a good example. The judgment-creditor in this case has been unable to

execute the writ for 14 long years. With this in mind, in Fawsan v. Majeed

Mohamed and Others (SC/APPEAL/135/2017, SC Minutes of

31.03.2023) I dealt with this area of law quite extensively.

The instant case is a straightforward one. The judgment-debtor

obstructed the fiscal to execute the writ under the influence of liquor. The

fiscal reported it to Court. The Court re-issued the writ. The fiscal

executed it and ejected the defendant. The High Court restored him to

possession on the basis that the judgment-creditor did not make the

application under section 325 of the Civil Procedure Code.

The defendant judgment-debtor made one application before the District

Court prior to the execution of the writ, and another after the execution

of the writ. The District Court, after inquiry, refused both applications. It

was not the contention of the judgment-debtor that he paid the money in

satisfaction of the decree and therefore the writ should not be executed.

His purported objection related to the identification of the property.

Although the property was properly identified with the assistance of a

surveyor, the defendant, under the influence of liquor, did not allow the

fiscal to execute the writ. He also moved to call for a valuation report.

There was absolutely no necessity to call for a valuation report. It is

obvious that he was adopting dilatory tactics to delay the execution of the

writ. In such circumstances, does the Court lack jurisdiction to re-issue

the writ? Is it necessary to conduct another inquiry upon an application

6

SC/APPEAL/74/2016

made by the judgment-creditor under section 325? The answer should

be in the negative.

What is the duty of fiscal in the execution of writ?

Section 324 is an important section, but this section is often

misinterpreted hindering the fiscal from executing the writ. It is argued

that, in case of resistance, the fiscal has no authority to execute the writ

but he must report it to Court. This is a misconception. Section 324 reads

as follows:

324. (1) Upon receiving the writ the Fiscal or his officer shall as soon

as reasonably may be repair to the ground, and there deliver over

possession of the property described in the writ to the judgment-

creditor or to some person appointed by him to receive delivery on

his behalf, and if need be by removing any person bound by the

decree who refuses to vacate the property:

Provided that as to so much of the property, if any, as is in the

occupancy of a tenant or other person entitled to occupy the same as

against the judgment-debtor, and not bound by the decree to

relinquish such occupancy, the Fiscal or his officer shall give delivery

by affixing a copy of the writ in some conspicuous place on the

property and proclaiming to the occupant by beat of tom-tom, or in

such other mode as is customary, at some convenient place, the

substance of the decree in regard to the property; and

Provided also that if the occupant can be found, a notice in writing

containing the substance of such decree shall be served upon him,

and in such case no proclamation need be made.

(2) The cost (to be fixed by the court) of such proclamation shall in

every case be prepaid by the judgment-creditor.

7

SC/APPEAL/74/2016

Once the Court issues the writ of execution to the fiscal, section 324(1)

authorises the fiscal to deliver possession either to the judgment-creditor

or his nominee “if need be by removing any person bound by the decree

who refuses to vacate the property”. However, if there is “a tenant or other

person entitled to occupy the same as against the judgment-debtor”, the

fiscal can deliver constructive or symbolic possession. An empty claim or

a mere objection to the execution of the writ shall not prevent the fiscal

from executing the writ. The objection shall be well-founded and the fiscal

shall be prima facie satisfied that there is a bona fide claim, not a sham

designed to frustrate the execution of the writ by the judgment-debtor or

someone acting on his behalf.

In the Supreme Court case of Weliwitigoda v. U.D.B. De Silva and Others

[1997] 1 Sri LR 51, at the time of execution of the writ, the 1st respondent

made a claim to tenancy but did not support his claim with documentary

evidence. The fiscal executed the writ and delivered possession of the

premises to the appellant. The Court of Appeal quashed the writ of

execution. On appeal to the Supreme Court, whilst setting aside the

judgment of the Court of Appeal, Kulatunga J. (with G.P.S. De Silva C.J.

and Ramanathan J. concurring) held at page 55:

The powers of Fiscal in executing a writ are set out in S.324 of the

Code which requires him to deliver possession of the property to the

judgment creditor “if need be by removing any person bound by the

decree who refuses to vacate the property”. However, if there is a

tenant or other person “entitled to occupy the same as against the

judgment-debtor, and not bound by the decree to relinquish such

occupancy” the Fiscal can only give symbolic possession viz. by

affixing a copy of the writ on the property and taking other steps,

required by the proviso to S.324.

8

SC/APPEAL/74/2016

As regards the requirement to give symbolic possession, it does not

appear that the Fiscal is bound to do so on the basis of a mere claim

of tenancy, which is not in any way supported by facts. Such a

claimant may become liable to removal as an agent, servant or other

person, bound by the decree. The 1st respondent was not residing on

the premises in dispute. His claim was that he was a sub-tenant

under the judgment debtor and in that capacity used some of the

buildings on the premises to conduct a school. However, he has not

placed any material before the Fiscal to support that claim. If so, he

became liable to be removed, in view of his empty claim subject,

however, to his right to make an application under S.328 of the Code.

It seems to me that the 1st respondent acted in the belief that if he

merely claimed to be a tenant the Fiscal was ipso facto barred from

giving the appellant vacant possession of the property; and that if

the fiscal then attempted to remove him, he was entitled to resist,

whereupon the Fiscal ought to have reported such resistance to

Court. If this were the law and the occupants have such a

“right” to resist execution, effective execution of writs would

indeed be impeded. I am of the view that a claim under the

proviso to S.324 cannot be entertained unless it is prima facie

tenable.

I am in total agreement with these dicta of Kulatunga J.

In the instant case, the person who resisted the fiscal was not a third

party but the judgment-debtor himself. Upon careful examination of the

execution proceedings set out in the Civil Procedure Code, it becomes

evident that the judgment-debtor has virtually no defence except to claim

that he has already satisfied the decree.

9

SC/APPEAL/74/2016

Section 325

Section 325 of the Civil Procedure Code was amended by Act Nos. 20 of

1977, 53 of 1980 and 79 of 1988. Section 325 as it stands today reads

as follows:

325. (1) Where in the execution of a decree for the possession of

movable or immovable property the Fiscal is resisted or obstructed

by the judgment-debtor or any other person, or where after the officer

has delivered possession, the judgment-creditor is hindered or

ousted by the judgment-debtor or any other person in taking

complete and effectual possession thereof, and in the case of

immovable property, where the judgment-creditor has been so

hindered or ousted within a period of one year and one day, the

judgment-creditor may at any time within one month from the date

of such resistance or obstruction or hindrance or ouster, complain

thereof to the court by a petition in which the judgment-debtor and

the person, if any, resisting or obstructing or hindering or ousting

shall be named respondents. The court shall thereupon serve a copy

of such petition on the parties named therein as respondents and

require such respondents to file objections, if any, within such time

as they may be directed by court.

(2) When a petition under subsection (1) is presented, the court may,

upon the application of the judgment-creditor made by motion ex

parte, direct the Fiscal to publish a notice announcing that the Fiscal

has been resisted or obstructed in delivering possession of such

property, or that the judgment-creditor has been hindered in taking

complete and effectual possession thereof or ousted therefrom, as

the case may be, by the judgment-debtor or other person, and calling

upon all persons claiming to be in possession of the whole or any

part of such property by virtue of any right or interest and who object

10

SC/APPEAL/74/2016

to possession being delivered to the judgment-creditor to notify their

claims to court within fifteen days of the publication of the notice.

(3) The Fiscal shall make publication by affixing a copy of the notice

in the language of the court, and, where the language of the court is

also Tamil, in that language, in some conspicuous place on the

property and proclaiming in the customary mode or in such manner

as the court may direct, the contents of the notice. A copy of such

notice shall be affixed to the court-house and if the court so orders

shall also be published in any daily newspaper as the court may

direct.

(4) Any person claiming to be in possession of the whole of the

property or part thereof as against the judgment-creditor may file a

written statement of his claim within fifteen days of the publication

of the notice on such property, setting out his right or interest entitling

him to the present possession of the whole property or part thereof

and shall serve a copy of such statement on the judgment-creditor.

The investigation into such claim shall be taken up along with the

inquiry into the petition in respect of the resistance, obstruction,

hindrance or ouster complained of, after due notice of the date of

such investigation and inquiry has been given to all persons

concerned. Every such investigation and inquiry shall be concluded

within sixty days of the publication of the notice referred to in

subsection (2).

In terms of section 325(1), the judgment creditor may at any time within

one month from the date of resistance, obstruction, hindrance or ouster

make an application to Court for relief. In addition, if the property is an

immovable property, such hindrance or ouster shall fall within one year

and one day of such delivery of possession.

11

SC/APPEAL/74/2016

If the argument of learned counsel for the defendant is accepted, for

instance, if the judgment-debtor resisted the fiscal in executing the writ,

but, due to some reason, the judgment-creditor could not complain to

Court within one month from the date of such resistance under section

325, or if his application, having been filed within one month, was

dismissed on a technical ground, he would have no option but to institute

a fresh action against the judgment-debtor. Accepting such an argument

would clearly result in a travesty of justice.

If the judgment-creditor fails to make the application within one month,

this failure will not disqualify him from making an application for

execution of the writ in terms of section 337. If the judgment-creditor’s

complaint falls outside the timeframe specified in section 325(1), the

procedure outlined in section 325 and related sections will not be

applicable. In such cases, for example, the provisions for imprisonment

(as contemplated in section 326(1)(c)) and contempt of court proceedings

(as contemplated in section 330) will not apply.

As the District Judge rightly pointed out in the order dated 04.06.2010,

there was no necessity for a section 337 inquiry. The Court had the power

to re-issue the writ under section 337.

Section 337

After the Civil Procedure Code (Amendment) Act, No. 53 of 1980, section

337 reads as follows:

337. (1) No application (whether it be the first or a subsequent

application) to execute a decree, not being a decree granting an

injunction, shall be granted after the expiration of ten years from-

(a) the date of the decree sought to be executed or of the decree,

if any, on appeal affirming the same; or

12

SC/APPEAL/74/2016

(b) where the decree or any subsequent order directs the

payment of money or the delivery of property to be made on

a specified date or at recurring periods, the date of the default

in making the payment or delivering the property in respect

of which the applicant seeks to execute decree.

(2) Nothing in this section shall prevent the court from granting an

application for execution of a decree after the expiration of the said

term of ten years, where the judgment-debtor has by fraud or force

prevented the execution of the decree at some time within ten years

immediately before the date of the application.

(3) Subject to the provisions contained in subsection (2), a writ of

execution, if unexecuted, shall remain in force for one year only from

its issue, but-

(a) such writ may at any time, before its expiration, be renewed

by the judgment-creditor for one year from the date of such

renewal and so on from time to time; or

(b) a fresh writ may at any time after the expiration of an earlier

writ be issued,

till satisfaction of the decree is obtained.

Simply stated, in terms of section 337(1), no application to execute the

decree shall be allowed after 10 years from the date of the decree or, if

there was an appeal, after 10 years from the date on which the decree

was affirmed on appeal.

In cases where the decree or any subsequent order directs the payment

of money over a period of time on part payments or the delivery of

property on a specified date, the 10-year period is calculated from the

date of the default in making such payment or delivery of such property.

13

SC/APPEAL/74/2016

However, as per section 337(2) if the judgment-debtor has by fraud or

force prevented the execution of the decree within that period, the rigidity

of this rule is relaxed. In such circumstances, the 10-year period begins

to run from the date of removal or cessation of such malady or disability.

The 10-year period should be interpreted broadly in favor of the decree

holder, not against him. For example, if the judgment-debtor had

fraudulently held himself out of reach of the legal process, the Court shall

take cognizance of this in calculating the 10-year period.

Wood Renton C.J. in Fernando v. Latibu (1914) 18 NLR 95 held that the

systematic evasion of service by a judgment-debtor constitutes “fraud”

within the meaning of that term as used in section 337.

This judgment was cited with approval by Wanasundara J. in Union Trust

Investment Ltd v. Wijesena and Another (SC/APPEAL/91/2012, SC

Minutes of 06.03.2015) when the Court allowed the execution of writ 10

years after the date of the decree on the basis of “fraud” in a case where

the judgment-debtor had evaded service of notice of writ inter alia by

changing his address.

In the Supreme Court case of Mohamed Azar v. Idroos [2008] 1 Sri LR

232 at 241, Amaratunga J. held:

The time bar prescribed by section 337(1) commences to operate only

from the date on which the judgment creditor becomes entitled to

execute the writ, and as such it has no application to a case where

the judgment creditor is prevented by a rule of law from executing

the writ entered in his favour. The time bar will apply in cases where

the judgment creditor after becoming entitled to obtain the writ has

slept over his rights for ten years.

14

SC/APPEAL/74/2016

Under section 337(3), introduced by Act No. 53 of 1980, a writ of

execution remains in force for only one year from its issue. It can be

renewed before its expiration for another one year from the date of such

renewal and so on, continuously. If renewal is not done within the year,

fresh writs can be issued until the satisfaction of the decree, provided the

application is within the 10-year period mentioned above.

Before the said amendment, once an application to execute a decree had

been allowed under section 337(1), no subsequent application to execute

the same was allowed unless the Court was satisfied that on the last

preceding application “due diligence” had been exercised to procure

complete satisfaction of the decree. This was removed by the amendment.

Irrespective of due diligence, the judgment-creditor can now make

successive applications for writ until satisfaction of the decree.

If the judgment-creditor did not or could not in law make the application

under section 325 in case of resistance or obstruction or hindrance or

ouster, he can make the application under section 337 within 10 years

as provided therein for a fresh writ/re-issue of writ subject to section 347.

Technical objections

The defendant’s objection is a technical objection. It is not based on

merits. In execution proceedings, there is no room for technical

objections. The Court shall focus on the substance rather than the form.

It is the duty of the Court in such proceedings to facilitate the judgment-

creditor to enjoy the fruits of his victory. The decree should not merely be

a paper decree. It must be translated into practical and effective relief,

enforcing the judgment-creditor’s rights.

In Brooke Bond (Ceylon) Ltd v. Gunasekara [1990] 1 Sri LR 71 at 81 it

was observed that the provisions relating to execution proceedings

should not be construed in such a way as to lightly interfere with a

15

SC/APPEAL/74/2016

decree-holder’s right to reap the fruits of his victory as expeditiously as

possible.

In Ekanayake v. Ekanayake [2003] 2 Sri LR 221 at 227, Amaratunga J.

held:

Execution is a process for the enforcement of a decreed right, mere

technicalities shall not be allowed to impede the enforcement of such

rights in the absence of any prejudice to the judgment debtor.

In Nanayakkara v. Sulaiman (1926) 28 NLR 314 at 315 Dalton J. stated:

As observed by the Privy Council in Bissesur Lall Sahoo v.

Maharajah Luckmessur Singh (6 Indian Appeals 233) in execution

proceedings, the Court will look at the substance of the transaction,

and will not be disposed to set aside an execution upon merely

technical grounds, when the execution has been found to be

substantially right.

This view has received strong endorsement in an array of decisions

including Wijewardene v. Raymond (1937) 39 NLR 179 at 181 per Soertsz

J., Latiff v. Seneviratne (1938) 40 NLR 141 at 142 per Hearne J.,

Wijetunga v. Singham Bros. & Co. (1964) 69 NLR 545 at 546 per Sri

Skanda Rajah J. and Leechman & Co. Ltd. v. Rangalla Consolidated Ltd.

[1981] 2 Sri LR 373 at 380 per Soza J.

In Samad v. Zain (1977) 79(2) NLR 557, the plaintiff filed five applications

for writ. While the fifth one was pending, he passed away. The substituted

judgment-creditor filed a sixth application for writ, which was refused on

the ground that the plaintiff had failed to exercise “due diligence” to

procure execution in the previous attempts. The Supreme Court opined

that section 337 should not be construed rigidly against the judgment-

16

SC/APPEAL/74/2016

creditor. Wanasundera J. with the concurrence of Tennekoon C.J. and

Rajaratnam J. stated at 563:

The Supreme Court has always been disposed to overlook

technicalities in dealing with execution proceedings. Hearne, J. in

Latiff vs. Seneviratne quoted the words of the Privy Council to the

effect that-

“In execution proceedings, the Court will look at the substance of the

transaction, and will not be disposed to set aside an execution upon

merely technical grounds, when the execution has been found to be

substantially right.”

We would be interpreting the relevant provisions unduly harshly if

we were to deny the appellant relief in the circumstances of this

case. I would, therefore, allow the appeal with costs both here and

below. The petitioner would be entitled to take out writ of execution

with a view to obtaining satisfaction of the decree of which he is the

assignee.

In Dharmawansa v. People’s Bank and Another [2006] 3 Sri LR 45, the

Court of Appeal quoted Samad v. Zain in interpreting the provisions of

the execution proceedings broadly.

Vide also the judgment of De Sampayo J. in Suppramanium Chetty v.

Jayawardene (1922) 24 NLR 50 and the separate judgments of Sirimane

J. and Alles J. in Perera v. Thillairajah (1966) 69 NLR 237.

Conclusion

On the facts and circumstances of this case, the District Court was

correct in re-issuing the writ. The execution of the writ by the fiscal on

01.06.2010 is lawful.

17

SC/APPEAL/74/2016

The High Court was in error when it decided that the District Court had

no power to re-issue the writ without an application made under section

325 and restored the defendant to possession.

The question of law is answered as follows: When the fiscal is resisted or

obstructed by the judgment-debtor, it is not mandatory for the judgment-

creditor to make an application under section 325 of the Civil Procedure

Code in order to get the writ re-issued.

I set aside the judgment of the High Court and affirm the orders of District

Court dated 25.05.2010 and 04.06.2010 and allow the appeal.

The defendant shall pay to the plaintiff Rs. 150,000 as costs of this

appeal.

Judge of the Supreme Court

P. Padman Surasena, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

K. Priyantha Fernando, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court