==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of Section 5 C(1) of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No.54 of 2006. Mawanane Hewa Gnanadasa Polwatte , Ambalangoda Plaintiff(Deceased) Mawanane Hewa Shantha Railway Quarters, Railway Station, Koggala Substituted-Plaintiff Vs. S.C. Appeal No.54/2020 SCHCCA LA No. 60/2019 Civil Appellate High Court Galle No. SP/HCCA/GA/ 114/2013(F) D.C. Balapitiya No. P/3769 1. Sembakuti Walter Near Post Office, Polwatta, Ambalangoda. 2. Walpita Gamage Danasiri Woodland Watta Gonapinuwala. 3. Kathaladuwa Bulathge Kulathunga, 184, Polwatta, Ambalangoda.

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2020

2

4. Kathaladuwa Bulathge Thanuja Dilrukshi 231E, Nilammahara, Bokundara, Piliyandala. 5. Santhiyagu Chandana De Silva, 180, Polwatta, Ambalangoda Defendants AND 1. Walpita Gamage Danasiri Woodland Watta Gonapinuwala. 2nd Defendant-Appellant Vs. Mawanane Hewa Shantha Railway Quarters, Railway Station, Koggala Substituted-Plaintiff-Respondent. 1. Sembakuti Walter Near Post Office, Polwatta, Ambalangoda. 3. Kathaladuwa Bulathge Kulathunga, 184, Polwatta, Ambalangoda. 4. Kathaladuwa Bulathge Thanuja Dilrukshi 231E, Nilammahara, Bokundara, Piliyandala. 5. Santhiyagu Chandana De Silva, 180, Polwatta, Ambalangoda.

1st 3rd,4th, & 5th Defendant-Respondents

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2020

3

AND NOW Santhiyagu Chandana De Silva, 180, Polwatta, Ambalangoda. 5th Defendant-Respondent- Appellant Vs. 01. Walpita Gamage Danasiri Woodland Watta Gonapinuwala. 2nd Defendant-Appellant- Respondent 02. Mawanane Hewa Shantha Railway Quarters, Railway Station, Koggala Substituted-Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent. 03. Kathaladuwa Bulathge Kulathunga, 184, Polwatta, Ambalangoda. 04. Kathaladuwa Bulathge Thanuja Dilrukshi 231E, Nilammahara, Bokundara, Piliyandala. 3rd & 4th Defendant-Respondent- Respondents BEFORE : S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J. ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J. ARJUNA OBEYESEKERE, J. COUNSEL : Viran Fernando for the 5th Defendant-Respondent- Appellant.

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2020

4

Rajeev Amarasuriya with Ruvindu Bandara, Ms. Sumudu Nanayakkara, and Ms. Dulanga Nanayakkara for the 2nd Defendant-Appellant-Respondent and Subst. Plaintiff- Respondent- Respondent. Krishan Fernandupulle for the 3rd and 4th Defendant- Respondent-Respondents ARGUED ON : 10th January, ,2024 DECIDED ON : 25th February, 2026

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

This appeal arises out of a partition action instituted by the Plaintiff

in the year 2004, by which he sought to partition a land called “Lot No. B

of Merenna Watta”, in an extent of 01 Rood and 12.9 Perches, in terms of the

share allocation pleaded in the Plaint, and based on the devolution of title

as described therein in respect of each of the co-owners.

The District Court, by its judgment, decided to partition the land.

The 2nd Defendant preferred an appeal against the said judgment of

the original Court, in appeal No. SP/HCCA/GA/114/2013(F), whereas

another party too preferred an appeal against same judgment in appeal

No. SP/HCCA/GA/114A/2013(F). The appeal of the 2nd Defendant in

appeal No. SP/HCCA/GA/114/2013(F) was allowed by the High Court of

Civil Appeal, by its judgment. The 5th Defendant, thereupon sought Leave

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2020

5

to Appeal against the said judgment of the High Court of Civil Appeal

from this Court in application No. SC/ HCCA/LA/60/2019.

The Plaintiff, 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th Defendants have resisted the 5th

Defendant’s application for Leave to Appeal.

On 03.07.2020, this Court granted Leave to Appeal to the 5th

Defendant on the following questions of law, which were formulated by

him in sub paragraphs (b) and (e) of paragraph 17 of the petition dated

21.02.2019 and reproduced below;

Have their Lordships erred in failing to appreciate that the

law as set out in the recent judgment of your Lordships

Court in SC Appeal No. 172/2013 dated 27.01.2017 that a

Court cannot consider the issue of prescription for the first

time in appeal?

Have their Lordships erred in failing to appreciate that the

learned District Judge of the District Court of Balapitiya had

correctly recognised the existence of a trust between the 5th

Defendant and the substituted Plaintiff’s brother?

The Plaintiff, in his Plaint filed before the District Court of Balapitiya,

claimed that the original owner of the land sought to be partitioned is one

Anthoney Luvinis Perera alias Simon Lionel Wickramasuriya,(In deeds the name

referred to as Samson Lionel Wimalasuriya) who acquired his title upon a

Deed of Partition No. 23895, executed on 29.06.1932. The rights of the

original owner were succeeded by his five children, who each inherited an

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2020

6

undivided 1/5 share of the corpus. According to the pedigree pleaded by

the Plaintiff, the share allocation of the corpus was set out as 1/15 to the

Plaintiff, 6/15 to the 1st Defendant and 2/15 to the 2nd Defendant, leaving

6/15 undivided shares un-allotted, on account of two other children of the

original owner, whose whereabouts are not known to the Plaintiff.

In the instant appeal, the underlying dispute is confined to the 2nd

and 5th Defendants., who both relied on the said devolution of title in

support of their respective claims, commencing from the 1/5th share of

Anthoney Kuladewa Gamini Gilfred Wimalasuriya, one of the five children of

the original owner.

The Plaintiff described the devolution of title in relation to the 2nd

Defendant in his Plaint as follows. Gilfred Wimalasuriya transferred his

rights to Winifreeda Fernando by executing Deed No. 343 on 13.11.1974 (P6),

who in turn transferred her rights to Padmini de Silva by Deed No. 1722 on

11.12.1976 (P7). The 5th Defendant received Padmini de Silva’s rights by

Deed No. 2507, executed on 25.12.1980 (P8), and thereafter “transferred”

those rights in favour of Manane Hewa Priyantha by Deed No. 7053 on

29.11.1991 (P9). Thereafter, Priyantha has transferred his rights to the 2nd

Defendant by execution of Deed No. 8366 on 13.08.1996 (P10). The 2nd

Defendant in turn has transferred 1/3rd share of his rights over the corpus

in favour of the Plaintiff by Deed No. 4903 on 10.06.1998 (P11).

The core of the dispute between the 2nd Defendant and the 5th

Defendant lies in the Deed No. No. 7053 on 29.11.1991 (P9), which was

executed by the latter, in favour of Manane Hewa Priyantha by Deed of

Transfer No. 7053, on 29.11.1991. This notarial instrument was relied on by

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2020

7

the Plaintiff by marking same as P9 whereas the 5th Defendant too relied

on same, by marking it as 5V34.

The share allocation made by the Plaintiff in relation to other parties

is not challenged in either of the Courts below and thus lies outside the

scope of this appeal.

It is the position of the 2nd Defendant that the said Deed No. 7053 is

an outright transfer of the rights stated therein, and has been executed in

favour of the transferee over valuable consideration that has passed

between the two parties. However, the 5th Defendant has averred in his

Statement of Claim that the said “transfer”, in fact is not an absolute

transfer but a conditional transfer that has been executed for the purpose

of security, in relation to a loan of Rs.40,000.00 obtained from the mother of

Priyantha, following an oral agreement between them to re-transfer the title

of the property once the said loan amount is fully settled. The 5th

Defendant further alleged that he obtained the said amount in two

instalments and it was before the release of the second instalment, that the

said deed was executed.

The 5th Defendant asserted in his Statement of Claim that he never

intended to part with the beneficial interest he had over the portion of land

described in the schedule to the said deed at any point in time and was in

its possession, ever since the execution of P8. The 5th Defendant therefore

claimed that the said transferee, Priyantha, has held that property “for the

benefit of the owner” in trust and therefore pleaded that, since there was a

constructive trust established in terms of Section 83 of the Trusts

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2020

8

Ordinance, the subsequent transfers that were made after the execution of

Deed No. 7053 (P9) are voidable.

The points of contest commencing from Nos. 11 to 21, were raised

before the trial Court by the 5th Defendant, and formulated in line with the

said position taken up by him in the Statement of Claim. The trial Court, in

its judgment concluded that the 5th Defendant, in executing the Deed of

Transfer No. 7053 (P9/5V34) did not intend to part with the beneficial

interest over the portion of land to Priyantha, who held that title in trust on

behalf of the 5th Defendant. Therefore, the Court concluded that the deeds

that were executed consequent to Deed of Transfer No. 7053 (P9/5V34),

carried no title. The trial Court accordingly allocated 1/5 undivided share

to the 5th Defendant, off the corpus.

In appeal, the 2nd Defendant raised a ground of appeal on the basis

that the claim of constructive trust relied upon by the 5th Defendant is

already prescribed and therefore, the trial Court erred in accepting the

latter’s rights over the corpus, which he in fact had transferred in favour of

Priyantha, by execution of the Deed of Transfer No. 7053 (P9/5V34). The

appellate Court, having noted that the prescription period for constructive

trusts being three years, decided that when reckoned from the date of

refusal by Priyantha to re-transfer the property, the claim of constructive

trust was already prescribed, when the Plaintiff instituted the partition

action.

This conclusion was reached by the High Court of Civil Appeal on

the evidence that indicated the position, that when the 5th Defendant

sought relief from the Debt Conciliation Board over this particular loan

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2020

9

transaction, his application was dismissed by that Board, with a direction

that he should seek his remedy from the District Court. Since the dismissal

of the 5th Defendant’s application was made by the Debt Conciliation

Board on 05.11.1996 (5V29), the High Court taken up the view that the 5th

Defendant has slept over his rights and owing to that reason, his claim of

constructive trust should not have been allowed to put in as a Point of

Contest, by the trial Court. The appellate Court therefore rejected the

contention of the 5th Defendant that the issue of prescription could not be

taken by the 2nd Defendant for the first time in appeal stage with the

statement that “… if the matter to be decided is a mixed question of fact and law

still it could be raised for the 1st time in appeal if all the necessary facts are

contained in the evidence recorded”. The High Court of Civil Appeal relied

on the reasoning of the judgment of Leechmen and Company Ltd., v

Rangalla Consolidated Ltd., (1991) 2 Sri L.R. 373, in making the said

pronouncement.

Learned Counsel for the 5th Defendant, in his submissions before

this Court, contended that the High Court of Civil Appeal has fallen into

grave error when it accepted the position that the issue of prescription

could be taken for the first time in an appeal, whereas a contrary position

was explicitly laid down in the judgment of this Court in Tilakaratne v

Chandrasiri and another (SC Appeal 172/2013 – decided on 27.01.2017),

even though as the learned Counsel submits, that Prasanna Jayawardena J

has taken a “ more liberal view” in writing the said judgment on that

identical issue. Learned Counsel for the 5th Defendant further contended

that the trial Court has very carefully considered all the attendant

circumstances before satisfying itself that the 5th Defendant established

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2020

10

existence of a constructive trust, in the execution of the Deed of Transfer

No. 7053 (P9/5V34) in favour of Priyantha, a finding which the 2nd

Defendant did not challenge seriously.

Learned Counsel for the 2nd Defendant’s contention is that, in the

judgment of Tilakaratne v Chandrasiri and another (supra) this Court

accepted the position that the issue of prescription could be raised in

appeal for the first time if “…. it might have been put forward in the Court

below under someone or other of the issues framed”, and the Point of Contest

No. 15 which was framed to the effect that, whether the 5th Defendant

repeatedly requested Priyantha to repay the amount mentioned in the deed

and the said person failed to take any action to re-transfer the property,

qualifies to be termed as such an issue. With regard to the submissions

made on the attendant circumstances, learned Counsel for the 2nd

Defendant challenged the competency of the surveyor who issued a

valuation to the property described in Deed of Transfer No. 7053

(P9/5V34), the valuation on which the 5th Defendant relied on to highlight

the gross inadequacy of the ‘consideration’ said to have passed between

the parties in relation to the execution of the said notarial instrument

P9/5V34.

In view of the submissions made on behalf of the 5th and 2nd

Defendants by their respective Counsel, I think it is appropriate to

consider the attendant circumstances that the trial Court has considered in

arriving at the conclusion that a constructive trust is established.

Perusal of the judgment of the trial Court indicated that the said

Court had the opportunity of considering following factors that were

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2020

11

presented before that Court as attendant circumstances in support of the

claim made by the 5th Defendant;

i. Mother of the Plaintiff and her son, the transferee

(Priyantha) were engaged in money lending business

during the relevant time and this fact was proved by the

5th Defendant with documentary evidence. That

material indicated that when Mother lent money it was

the Plaintiff who kept accounts, on behalf of his mother,

ii. the 5th Defendant lodged a complaint to Debt

Conciliation Board over the loan transaction in relation

to P9/5V34 in the year 1996, which confirms the

consistency of his claim that the purpose of execution of

the said deed was providing security for the loan

amount,

iii. The evidence clearly indicated that the Lot No. C,

depicted in the preliminary plan, was in possession of

the 5th Defendant throughout, despite the execution of

the Deed P9/5V34 (as admitted by the Plaintiff), and a

caveat was registered by him in the Land Registry in

relation to the disputed portion of land under his

possession. It was the 5th Defendant who registered the

ownership of that parcel of land in the local authority

and paid annual assessment rates,

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2020

12

iv. The Plaintiff, during cross-examination admitted that a

deed has been accepted as security to a loan (vide

proceedings at pages 119 and 137 of the appeal brief),

v. The Plaintiff or the 2nd Defendant failed to call

Priyantha, the transferee of P9/5V34, to counter the

assertions made by the 5th Defendant that the said

transferee held the disputed property for his benefit.

Neither the Plaintiff nor the 2nd Defendant had any

personal knowledge as to the circumstances that led to

the execution of P9/5V34,

vi. The demeanour and deportment of the 5th Defendant in

presenting evidence pertaining to the loan obtained,

coupled with an oral agreement and the circumstances

associated with the execution of P9/5V34, made it a

more probable version, when compared to the position

relied upon by the 2nd Defendant asserting the contrary,

vii. The attestation to deed P9/5V34 indicates that the

consideration of Rs. 40,000.00 was not paid at the time

of execution of the deed P9/5V34 before the Notary, but

the transferee has admitted payment of same in an

unspecified date, but before the act of execution,

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2020

13

viii. Father of the 5th Defendant instituted an action against

the Plaintiff and the other Defendants in the District

Court of Balapitya in case No. 2426/L, over a dispute

that erupted between these very same parties over the

portion of land he occupied. The said action was settled

by the parties. The defendants in that action have

agreed to a pay Rs. 42,500.00 to the plaintiff, in lieu of

renunciation of his rights over the Lot No. C2 of Plan

No. 2407, leaving same to the said defendants.

After a careful consideration of all the material that were presented

before the trial Court on the issue of constructive trust by the 5th

Defendant, I fully endorse the finding made in favour of the said

Defendant by that Court.

The contention of the 2nd Defendant is that the reliance placed on the

value of the property in P9/5V34 in the valuation report in order to show

the “gross inadequacy” of the consideration said to have passed in executing

P9/5V34, cannot be relied upon because it has not been issued by a

qualified valuer but by a surveyor, who does not have any such

qualification, must be examined next.

This contention need not be considered in detail as the trial Court

did not necessarily base its finding on the constructive trust on this report.

But it must be pointed out that when the 5th Defendant, during cross-

examination by the 2nd Defendant, stated that the property in P9/5V34,

was worth more than Rs. 150,000.00 at the time of execution of that notarial

instrument (vide page 266 of the appeal brief), there was no challenge

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2020

14

coming from the 2nd Defendant to the said factual assertion made by the 5th

Defendant. The 2nd Defendant, who had all the opportunity to counter that

claim with relevant material, chose not to when his opponent made a

specific claim of value. Thus, the facts that have not been challenged

during cross-examination could be acted on by Courts as proved in terms

of Section 3 of the Evidence Ordinance.

With that factual backdrop in mind, I now turn to consider the

question of the claim of prescription taken up for the first time in appeal

by the 2nd Defendant.

Neither the 2nd Defendant nor the Plaintiff have taken the issue of

whether the claim of constructive trust is prescribed in their respective

pleadings that were tendered before the trial Court. Similarly, no point of

contest was raised before the trial Court by either party, in spite of the fact

that the 5th Defendant, primarily relied on the claim of constructive trust,

in order to retain the rights that were ‘transferred’ to Priyantha by execution

of deed P9. Thus, the 5th Defendant had no opportunity whatsoever to

counter any position taken by the others who wants the Court to rule that

his claim of constructive trust was already prescribed. The trial Court too,

in the absence of any point of contest on this aspect of the 5th Defendant’s

case, confined its judgment to the dispute identified by the parties and set

out in their respective points of contest. After considering the totality of

the evidence, the District Court decided to accept the 5th Defendant’s said

claim.

Being aggrieved by the said judgment, the 2nd Defendant, in his

petition addressed to the High Court of Civil Appeal set out several

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2020

15

grounds of appeal on which he intends to challenge the validity of the

impugned judgment of the trial Court. The Petition of Appeal of the 2nd

Defendant dated 09.12.2013, does not contain any ground of appeal on the

issue that the claim of constructive trust is prescribed. This is

understandable, as there was no specific finding made by the trial Court,

determining this particular aspect, in either way. Thus, it is reasonable to

conclude that the 2nd Defendant raised the question; whether the claim of

constructive trust is prescribed, was before the appellate Court for the first

time, and that too only at the argument stage.

Learned Counsel for the 5th Defendant referred to the treatise by

Prof. C.G. Weeramantry on Law of Contract (at p 866), along with the dicta

of the judgments Brampy Appuhamy v Gunasekera (1949) 50 NLR 253 and

Tilakaratne v Chandrasiri and another (supra) where the principle; an

issue of prescription could not be taken up by a party for the first time in

appeal, was explicitly laid down. He further contended that the exception

to this prohibition is, if it is only a pure question of law, as recognised in

Tilakaratne v Chandrasiri and another (supra).

In this instance, learned Counsel submitted, that the determination

of the issue of prescription of the claim of constructive trust raised by the

5th Defendant is dependent on the following questions of facts mixed with

law, in addition to several others similar questions;

a. Were the deeds executed subject to a verbal promise to re-

transfer?

b. Was a demand made for the re-transfer from the original

transferee?

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2020

16

c. Were demands for re-transfer made from the subsequent

transferees?

d. Has the promise of re-transfer been subsequently

acknowledged?

Learned Counsel for the 2nd Defendant sought to counter this

contention by placing reliance on the quotation from Arulampikai v

Thambu (1944) 45 NLR 457 reproduced by Jayawardena J in Tilakaratne v

Chandrasiri and another (supra) which states that a new issue may be

raised in appeal only if “… it might have been put forward in the Court below

under some, one or other, of the issues framed” and the point of contest No. 15

satisfies that requirement. I am unable to agree with that contention for the

reason, that the context in which the said Point of Contest was framed,

relates to the circumstances that might have a bearing on his effort to

establish a constructive trust over deed P9. It is also to note that it was

framed before the trial Court by the 5th Defendant and not the 2nd

Defendant.

Perusal of the evidence of the 5th Defendant indicate that he made

several demands to have the property re-transferred from Priyantha as well

as from his mother, being the parties whom he knew from childhood. The

5th Defendant admitted that he made several such demands before making

his application to the Debt Conciliation Board for relief. The High Court of

Civil Appeal reckoned the period of prescription from the date of

dismissal of that application. The application was dismissed by the Board

on 05.11.1996 (5V29).

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2020

17

But the evidence is clear on the point that the 5th Defendant has

made repeated requests to re-transfer even thereafter.

The father of the 5th Defendant has registered a caveat in respect of

land in which the parties have entered into a settlement (5V45). He was

informed by the Land Registry on 10.06.1998, that the Deed No. 4903 (P11)

was presented to that office for registration (5V42). Thus, if at all the date

of reckoning should have been 10.06.1998. This factor would not have

helped the 5th Defendant, if the issue of prescription was taken up at the

correct time, but the High Court of Civil Appeal made a factual error,

when it ignored 5V42 and the 5th Defendant’s admission that he did not

take any action despite that notice, to count the starting of the prescriptive

period.

The 5th Defendant asserted that whenever he met Priyantha, he

repeatedly requested him for the re-transfer and he was ready to redeem

the property, after payment of monies due to the transferee in full. During

cross-examination by the 2nd Defendant, the 5th Defendant maintained the

position that he repeatedly made efforts to have the property re-

transferred and even visited Priyantha’s sister, who resides in

Gonapinuwala, and pleaded with another brother of Priyantha called

Shantha in this regard but was unsuccessful. This evidence clearly indicates

that attempts were made by the 5th Defendant after the dismissal of his

application by the Debt Conciliation Board. However, there is no probing

into these claims made by the 5th Defendant, when he was cross-examined

by the 2nd Defendant seeking to clarify when exactly these efforts were

made by him.

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2020

18

Basnayaka CJ, in Brampy Appuhamy v Gunasekera (supra) has held

that (at p. 255); “[I]t is settled law that when, as in the case of Sections 5, 6, 7, 8,

9, 10 and 11 of the Prescription Ordinance, the effect of the statute is merely to

limit the time in which an action may be brought and not to extinguish the right,

the Court will not take the statute into account unless it is specially pleaded by

way of defence”.

The underlying rationale to this principle is clearly set out by

Jayawardena J, in Tilakaratne v Chandrasiri and another (supra) when his

Lordship observed that;

“[I]n view of the aforesaid nature of the defences of prescription set

out in Sections 5 to 10 of the Prescription Ordinance, the long

standing rule is that such a defence should be raised at the trial so

that the Plaintiff has a fair opportunity of meeting it by leading

evidence to counter the defence that his claim in that action is time

barred or, if the Defendant has shown the action to be plainly time

barred, choosing to abandon the action and seek another avenue of

relief without delay. As Chitty [Contracts 25th Ed., at p.1051-1052]

points out, ‘… the effect of limitation under the Limitation Act 1980

is merely to bar the plaintiff’s remedy and not to extinguish his

right. Limitation is a procedural matter, and not one of substance,

and it has to be specially pleaded by way of defence’. Further, it

hardly needs to be stated that, a Plaintiff who has no inkling that the

Defendant intends to rely on a defence on prescription, will be

unfairly subjected to grave prejudice if he has to confront an issue of

prescription raised for the first time in appeal, which he had no

opportunity of countering at the trial.”

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2020

19

It is clear from the multiple factors referred to above in this

judgment that the issue of prescription in relation to the claim of

constructive trust in this instance is not purely a question of law but a

question of law mixed with facts. In the pronouncement made by this

Court in Tilakaratne v Chandrasiri and another (supra) to the effect that

“… a new issue may be raised in appeal only if it is “a pure question of law” and

that a “mixed question of law and fact” cannot be raised for the first time in

appeal” is undoubtedly applicable to the circumstances in the instant

appeal as well.

I am fortified in my said view, as this Court, in the judgment of

Ranaweera Menike v Rohini Senanayake (1992) 2 Sri L.R. 180, held (at

p.181)that “ [A] matter that has not been raised before might, nevertheless, be a

ground of appeal on which the appellate Court might base its decision, provided it

is a pure question of law; or; if the point might have been put forward in the Court

below under one of these issues raised, and the Court is satisfied (1) that it has

before it all the facts bearing upon the new contention, as completely as would

have been the case if the controversy had arisen at the trial, and (2) that no

satisfactory explanation could have been offered by the other side, if an

opportunity had been afforded it, of adducing evidence with regard to the point

raised for the first time in appeal.” (emphasis added). The 2nd Defendant’s

plea of prescription taken up first time in appeal cannot be taken as a one

that qualifies any of these factors.

In view of the reasons set out in the preceding sections of this

judgment, I now proceed to answer the two questions of law; on which the

instant appeal was heard and referred to at the very outset of this

judgment in the affirmative, and in favour of the 5th Defendant.

S.C. Appeal No. 54/2020

20

The impugned judgment of the High Court of Civil Appeal is

accordingly set aside and the judgment of the District Court is hereby

restored.

The appeal of the 5th Defendant is accordingly allowed with costs.

The District Court is directed to expeditiously proceed with the partition of

the land in terms of its judgment, according to law.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

ARJUNA OBEYESEKERE, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT