==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal to the Supreme

Court under and in terms of Section 5C of the

High Court of the Provinces (Special

Provisions) (Amendment) Act No. 54 of

2006, against the Judgment dated 21/06/2013

of the Provincial High Court of the Western

Province holden in Colombo in case bearing

No. HC (Civil) 90/2008/MR.

Triad Advertising (Pvt) Ltd.,

53/3, Gregory’s Road,

Colombo 07.

Plaintiff

Supreme Court Case No: SC/CHC/Appeal/48/2013 HC/CIVIL/90/2008/MR

Vs.

Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12.

Defendant

AND NOW

2

Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

Defendant-Appellant

Vs.

Triad Advertising (Pvt) Ltd.,

53/3, Gregory’s Road, Colombo 07.

Plaintiff-Respondent

Before: Justice Murdu N.B. Fernando, PC

Justice A.H.M.D. Nawaz

Justice A.L. Shiran Gooneratne

Counsel: Susantha Balapatabendi, PC, ASG, with R. Gooneratne, SC, for the

Defendant-Appellant.

Jagath Wickramanayake, PC, with Migara Doss for the Plaintiff-

Respondent.

Argued on: 07/05/2024

Decided on: 26/07/2024

3

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

By Plaint dated 18/03/2008, Triad Advertising (Pvt) Ltd., the Plaintiff-Respondent

(hereinafter sometimes referred to as (‘the Plaintiff-Company’) filed this Action No.

Commercial High Court HC/CIVIL/90/2008/MR against the Honorable Attorney

General (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Defendant-Appellant’) and sought to recover a

sum of Rs. 4,865,313.98/- together with legal interest against the Defendant-Appellant.

The action of the Plaintiff-Company was set out in 7 causes of action and an alternative

cause of action based on unjust enrichment.

In the 7 causes of action, the Plaintiff-Company pleaded that it provided particular

services to the Ministry of Education and/ or the Government of Sri Lanka in relation

to the compilation and printing of books titled, “Nana Dhashakayaka Subha Waruna”,

“Education for Economic Development and Prosperity”, Investing in our Future” and

“Sahasara Thaksala”. According to the said Plaint dated 18/03/2008, the 1st, 2nd and 3rd

causes of action accrued to the Plaintiff-Company on or about September 2005, the 4th

and 5th on or about November 2005, and the 6th and 7th causes of action on or about

February 2005.

The Plaintiff-Company inter alia, prayed;

I. for the recovery of a sum of Rs. 4,865,313.98 from the Defendant-Appellant

with legal interest from the date of the institution of the action, in 1 to 7 causes

of action.

II. in the alternative, for the recovery of a sum of Rs. 4,865,313.98 from the

Defendant-Appellant with legal interest from the date of the institution of the

action, based on unjust enrichment.

4

The Defendant-Appellant filed Answer dated 01/08/2008, and in paragraph 1 of the

said Answer stated that, the alleged causes of action of the Plaintiff-Company are

prescribed and therefore, this matter should be dismissed in limine.

In paragraph 8 of the said Answer, the Defendant-Appellant inter alia, stated that,

a. at no time had the Plaintiff and the Ministry of Education enter into a contract to

procure the goods and services referred to in the Plaint;

b. the Ministry of Education never called for tenders in accordance with the

Government Guide Lines on Tender Procedures nor was there any award made

to the Plaintiff; and

c. the Ministry is not in receipt of the printed material referred to in the Plaint or

that such goods and services were required to be supplied by the Plaintiff

Company.

The Defendants pleaded for a dismissal of the action.

Having considered the pleadings, the evidence led in Court and the written submissions

tendered by the respective parties, the learned Commercial High Court Judge, by

Judgment dated 21/06/2013, held in favour of the Plaintiff-Company and awarded the

reliefs prayed for in paragraphs (a), to recover a sum of Rs. 4,865,313.98 from the

Defendant-Appellant with legal interest from the date of the institution of the action on

all seven causes of action and paragraph (c), to recover costs.

Being aggrieved by the said Judgment of the Commercial High Court the Appellant-

Defendant filed Petition dated 19/08/2013 in this Court, whereby, inter alia, has sought

the said Judgement dated 21/06/2013 delivered by the Commercial High Court be set

aside.

The Plaintiff’s action before the Commercial High Court can be briefly summarized as

follows;

5

It is in evidence that the Managing Director of the Plaintiff-Company Dilith Jayaweera,

by letter dated 14/02/2007 (P16), captioned “Outstanding payments”, has written to

Ariyarathne Hewage, Secretary of the Ministry of Education, stating;

“With reference to the letter dated October 2, 2006 and the continue follow ups with

the relevant parties’ concern, we hereby inform you that we are still not in receipt of the

above payment. We would very much appreciate your immediate intervention for

expediting the payment without further delay.”

By letter dated 27/02//2007 (P18), the said Ariyarathne Hewage, has informed Dr. Tara

De Mel, the former Secretary of the said Ministry, with reference to listed invoices

submitted by the Plaintiff-Company amounting to Rs. 4,952,127.48 for “activities

completed during the year of 2005”, that payments could not be made due to the non-

availability of relevant information and supporting documents and there is no evidence

found to show that the tender procedure was followed.

Responding to the said letter dated 27/02/2007, by letter dated 26/03/2007 (P19), Dr.

De Mel confirmed “that the services you mentioned in your letter were delivered after

the required processes were completed by the Ministry. The relevant documentation in

this regard should be available at the Ministry.” (Emphasis added)

Consequently, by letter dated 04/04//2007 (P20), with reference to letter dated

12/01/2007, Ariyarathne Hewage informed the Director General of Public Finance that,

as confirmed by Dr. Tara De Mel, all printing requirements have been completed and

handed over to the Ministry. By the said letter dated 04/04/2007, Hewage sought

approval for the said payment. The said letter was copied to the Respondent company,

and received by them on 16/04/2007.

Since the payment was not made, the Plaintiff-Company sent a letter of demand dated

05/09/2007 (P22), addressed to the said Ariyarathne Hewage, Secretary of the Ministry

of Education. The Defendant-Appellant did not respond to the said letter of demand.

6

The Defendant-Appellant argues that the action of the Plaintiff-Company is prescribed

under Section 8 of the Prescription Ordinance because it was not filed within one year

from the date the debt became due. The relevant invoices in support of the 1st, 2nd and

3rd causes of action are dated 30/09/2005, the 4th and 5th causes of action are dated

30/11/2005, and the 6th cause of action is dated 24/02/2005. Given that the Plaint was

filed on 18/03/2008, nearly three years after the said dates, the Defendant-Appellant

argues that the action is time-barred.

It was also the contention of the Defendant-Appellant that, Section 12 of the

Prescription Ordinance does not apply since document marked ‘P20’, could not be

considered as a written acknowledgment of debt, for the reasons, that the said letter;

a) signed by the Secretary to the Ministry does not reference or infer the exact

amount to be paid.

b) contains a condition requiring prior approval from the Department of Public

Finance to fulfill the payment. Therefore, it does not amount to an

acknowledgment.

c) written by the Secretary to the Ministry of Education, addressed to the Director

General of Public Finance, and not to the plaintiff.

Section 8 of the prescription ordinance reads as follows:

“No action shall be maintainable for or in respect of any goods sold and delivered, or

for any shop bill or book debt, or for work and labour done, or for the wages of artisans,

laborers, or servants, unless the same shall be brought within one year after the debt

shall have become due.”

Section 8 of the Prescription Ordinance sets out a one-year limitation period of initiating

legal action in matters, as reflected in that section. For instance, if an action in respect

of goods sold and delivered is not brought within the specified period, the debt is

considered prescribed and unenforceable.

7

Section 12 of the Prescription Ordinance states thus;

“In any of the forms of action referred to in sections 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, and 11 of this

Ordinance, no acknowledgment or promise by words only shall be deemed evidence of

a new or continuing contract, whereby to take the case out of the operation of the

enactments contained in the said sections, or any of them, or to deprive any party of the

benefit thereof, unless such acknowledgment shall be made or contained by or in some

writing to be signed by the party chargeable, or by some agent duly authorized to

enter into such contract on his behalf…”(emphasis added)

In terms of Section 12 of the Prescription Ordinance, a written acknowledgment signed

by the party chargeable or by an agent duly authorized, can take the action out of the

operation of the enactments contained in the said section, and shall be deemed as

evidence of a new or continuing contract, beyond the initial limitation period.

When considering, what constitutes a written acknowledgment of debt under Section

12 of the Prescription Ordinance, Drieberg J. in Hoare and Co. vs. Rajaratnam1. cited

with approval the case of Fettes vs. Robertson2, where Bankes L.J. noted;

“Never to lose sight of the fact that what a plaintiff has to prove is a promise express

or implied, to pay the debt, made within six years before action, and that any

consideration of an acknowledgement is merely for the purpose of seeing whether the

acknowledgement is expressed in such language that an unqualified promise to pay can

be implied from it.” (emphasis added)

A similar view was expressed by Soertsz J. in Perera vs. Wickremaratne3

“It has frequently been laid down that when there is an acknowledgment of a debt

without any words to prevent the possibility of an implication of a promise to pay it, a

1 Hoare and Co v Rajaratnam (1932) 34 NLR 219 2 Fettes v Robertson (1921) 37 TLR 581 3 Perera v Wickremaratne (1942) 43 NLR 141, 142

8

promise to pay is inferred. Much more, then, must such a promise be inferred when the

acknowledgment is coupled with an expression of desire to pay”

In essence, when an individual acknowledges their indebtedness without indicating any

intention to refuse payment, the legal presumption is that they are implicitly promising

to fulfill the said obligation.

Prof. C.G. Weeramantry, in “The Law of Contracts”4, has deliberated about the

Prescription Ordinance, pertaining to matters of procedure, observing the close

relationship between Ceylon and Indian law. He states that, historically Indian courts

have strictly interpreted limitation Acts, by holding back existing rights of parties.

However, a more contemporary perspective advocates that, these statutes should be

interpreted according to plain meaning of their language, and “In case of doubt, courts

are required as far as possible to place upon the statute a construction favorable to

the plaintiff so as to keep the cause of action alive.” (emphasis added)

In order to reject the application of the said letter marked ‘P20’, the Defendant-

Appellant submits that P20 does not specify the exact amount owed by the Defendant

to the Plaintiff.

The Defendant-Appellant has cited the case of S. Albert vs. S. Sivakumar SC5 and

relied on the following pronouncement which states;

"The acknowledgment is in writing and refers to the exact amount that the appellants

are pursuing. Most significantly, it is signed by the Respondent."

It is to be noted that this particular extract of the Judgement does not state that the

acknowledgment shall refer to the exact amount of debt for it to be valid, instead it

notes that the document in question contained the exact amount and considers it as an

4 Prof CG Weeramantry, The Law of Contracts Vol II (1999) (Chapter IV, 802) 5 SC (CHC) Appeal No 05/2007 (SC Minutes, 23 January 2023)

9

acknowledgment of the debt (Emphasis added). The relevant potion of the said

Judgment is cited below in its entirety for purpose of clarity-

"It is seen that the heading of P7 makes specific reference to the invoices marked P2

and P4. It is followed by an unequivocal statement that arrangements will be made to

pay the outstanding balance within one year. The acknowledgment is in writing and

refers to the exact amount that the Appellants are pursuing. Most significantly, it is

signed by the Respondent. P7 is thus both an acknowledgement of the debt and an

undertaking to pay it within one year".

The reasoning of the Court in the case cited above, was that the document in that

particular case did refer to the exact amount, yet, did not make reference to an exact

value of the debt to be included as a strict requirement for all acknowledgments under

the law. The inclusion of the amount of debt in the said document was only to strengthen

its validity as an acknowledgment of the debt, in that case.

As noted earlier, P20 is a letter written by Ariyaratne Hewage, Secretary Ministry of

Education to the Director General Treasury dated 04/04/2007.

What was communicated by the said letter marked ‘P20’, is reproduced below-

—udf.a iudxl yd 2007.01.12 oske;s ,smshg wu;rjhs.

tu ,smsfha i|yka uqøK lghq;= ish,a,u wjYH;djhka wkqj iïmQ¾K fldg

wud;HdxYhg NdroS we;s nj tjl wOHdmk f,alïj isá ffjoH rdgd o fu,a uy;añh

úiska o wuqKd we;s ,smsh u.ska ikd: lr we;'

ta wkqj wod< f.ùï lsÍu i|yd wkque;sh ,ndfokafka kï uekú'˜

The said letter captioned, “Bill payments for printers” makes reference to a previous

letter (which is not before Court), that all printing requirements were completed and

handed over to the Ministry, and seeks approval for payment. This letter is duly signed

10

by the Secretary, Ministry of Education and copied to the Managing Director of the

Plaintiff-Company.

In this letter, it is important to note the words —tjl wOHdmk f,alïj isá ffjoH rdgd

o fu,a uy;añh úiska o wuqKd we;s ,smsh u.ska ikd: lr we;'˜

It noted that, apart from the signatory (the Secretary Ministry of Education), confirming

the receipt of the printed material, the former Secretary Dr. Tara De Mel has also

confirmed the same fact.

In terms of Section 12 of the Prescription Ordinance, there is no statutory requirement

for an acknowledgement to contain the exact value of the debt or the value of the debt

to be specified. The statutory requirement is simply that the acknowledgment must be

in writing and signed by the party chargeable or by an agent duly authorized.

Accordingly, P20, is a clear and sufficient acknowledgement of the debt, which comes

within the purview of Section 12 of the Prescription Ordinance.

As held in the case of State of Jammu and Kashmir vs. Shital Singh Sharan Singh6

“Admission of any precise amount is not necessary for bringing it within the meaning

of an acknowledgement under the act. It is sufficient of the debtor admits that something

is due or maybe due. Once an admission is made of subsisting amounts, there is a clear

acknowledgement of liability to render accounts and to pay whatever is due”

Secondly, the Defendant-Appellant contends that the letter marked ‘P20’ is conditional

and therefore, does not amount to a written acknowledgment of debt. The Appellant

makes this argument based on the case of Hoare and Co. vs. Rajaratnam7

In the above case, the Court looked at whether an acknowledgment of debt containing

a request for additional time to pay could amount to a valid acknowledgement. In the

6 [AIR 1956 J&K 51] 7 (n 1)

11

said case, N.R. Rajaratnam having acknowledged his debt in a letter to Hoare & Co.,

Colombo, requested an extra two months for payment due to financial difficulties.

Hoare & Co. did not grant this request and instead, demanded immediate payment. The

Court inter alia, held that an acknowledgment with a condition such as a request for

more time requires acceptance of that condition by the creditor to be a valid

acknowledgement. Since Hoare & Co. did not accept the condition, the

acknowledgment did not give the company that benefit.

The facts in Hoare & Co. vs. Rajaratnam8 are clearly distinguishable from the facts

in the case at hand.

The letter marked ‘P20’ is a request for approval of payment. The position of the

Department of Public Finance is that the payments cannot be completed because there

are no documents to substantiate that the tender procedure was followed or that the

material in question were delivered to the Ministry.

It was argued by the Defendant-Appellant that, during the tenure of the former

Secretary, approval of the Department of Public Finance was not obtained by the

Ministry of Education to procure services without adhering to the proper tender

procedure and/ or without maintaining the relevant documentary proof.

The letter marked ‘P18’, written by the Secretary to the Ministry of Education

addressed to the former Secretary, lists six items described as “the following activities

completed during the year of 2005” together with the relevant payments to be made to

the Plaintiff-Company. In this letter, the Secretary states that “payment for these

services could not be made due to non-availability of the relevant information and the

supporting documents.” In response, the former Secretary of the Ministry, by letter

dated 26/03/2007 (P19), confirms that the services mentioned were delivered after the

8 Ibid

12

required processes were completed by the Ministry also states that “the relevant

documentation in this regard should be available at the Ministry.”

In her evidence before Court, the former secretary has constantly asserted her position

that the Ministry of Education has no issue with the services provided by the Plaintiff

Company, further claimed that their cost proposals were both submitted to and

accepted by the Ministry and that the services were fully performed by the Plaintiff

Company. Her testimony before Court also revealed that the Ministry compared the

proposals with other competitors and selected the most suitable (the costs proposals

together with the said printed material was tendered to Court by the Plaintiff-Company,

marked ‘P2’ to ‘P15’, and admitted without any objection).

In Sampath Bank PLC vs. Kaluarachchi Sasitha Palitha9, Justice Murdu Fernando

P.C, J. considered whether a conditional acknowledgment of debt falls within the

purview of Section 12 of the Prescription Ordinance therein, also looked into the facts

which led to the decision in Hoare and Co. vs. Rajaratnam10.

In Sampath Bank PLC vs. Kaluarachchi Sasitha Palitha11, in answer to a question of

law;

“Does a conditional acknowledgment of the debt come within the purview of Section

12 of the Prescription Ordinance?” the Court held that;

“Section 12 of the Prescription Ordinance very clearly indicates that acknowledgment

should not be by words but be in writing. It does not state that the acknowledgment

should be unqualified or unconditional. It only speaks of acknowledgment of a debt.”

9 [SC Appeal No 21/2017] 10 (n 1) 11 (n 9)

13

The Court further held that;

“Clearly, P5 was a letter which acknowledged a debt and came within the purview of

Section 12 of the Prescription Ordinance. In the said circumstances, the High Court

was in error in holding that P5 was not an acknowledgment of the debt. It is observed

that the High Court did not consider nor refer to Section 12 of Prescription Ordinance

in its judgement when it analyzed P5 and thus, glossed over the question of extension

of the prescriptive period when an acknowledgment of the debt is foreseen”.

The Court cited with approval the Court of Appeal Judgment in Rampala and others

vs. Moosajees Ltd and another12.

Where, a letter from the Managing Agents on behalf of the estate owner, stated;

"immediately we hear from them, we will let you know what arrangements have been

made with regard to the repayment of the outstanding account," which was considered

to be an acknowledgment of debt.

The Court also cited with approval the case of Perera vs. Wickremaratne13, where

Soertsz J. in answering this precise question, ‘by an acknowledgement of debt, has the

plaintiff a right to recover the debt by virtue of Section 12 of the Prescription

Ordinance’, held,

“ ‘I wish to settle’ is not merely an acknowledgment of the debt from which a promise

to pay can be inferred but it is an acknowledgment with an express declaration of a

desire to pay. It has frequently been laid down that when there is an acknowledgment

of a debt, without any words to prevent the possibility of an implication of a promise to

pay it, a promise to pay is inferred. Much more, then, must, such a promise be inferred

when the acknowledgment is coupled with an expression of desire to pay.”

12 (1983) 2 SLR 441 13 (1942) 43 NLR 141

14

The Indian case Shapoor Freedom Mazda vs. Durga Prasad Chamaria14, has favored

the ‘liberal approach’ as referred to earlier in this Judgment, in interpreting the

documents to ensure that legitimate claims are not rejected due to technicalities, it

observed that;

“It is often said that in deciding the question as to whether any particular writing

amounts to an acknowledgement, is not very useful to refer to judicial decisions on the

point. The effect of the words used in a particular document must inevitably depend

upon the context in which the words are used and would always be conditioned by the

tenor of the said document, and so unless words used in a given document are identical

with words used in a document judicially considered, it would not serve any useful

purpose to refer to judicial precedents in the matter”.

It was the view of the Court that;

“If the statement is fairly clear then the intention to admit the jural relationship may be

implied from it. The admission need not be express but must be made in circumstances

and in words which the court can reasonably infer that the person making the admission

intended to refer to a subsisting liability as at the date of the statement.”

It was also submitted by the Defendant-Appellant that the documents marked ‘P18’ and

‘P19’, were correspondence between government officials, as such had the effect of an

internal memo, and should not be relied upon by the Plaintiff-Company. The said

documents were presented before the trial court to be construed by the trial judge. At

that stage, documents P18 and P19 were admitted without any objection. In the

circumstances, I find that there is no tenable argument presented to be considered by

this Court, in appeal, and see no reason to deal with it any further.

14 AIR 1961 SC 1236

15

I wish to place on record that the Indian courts have discussed the implications of such

correspondence and determined as amounting to an acknowledgement of debt, a

continued recognition of the existing debt which extends the period of limitation.

In the case of Indian Bank, Madras vs. State of Tamil Nadu15, the Indian Bank sought

to recover dues from the State of Tamil Nadu. The bank provided various written

correspondence exchanged between the bank and the State officials. These documents

included letters and official memos, all signed by representatives of the State of Tamil

Nadu, which discussed the outstanding loan amounts, acknowledged the debt, and

included discussions on repayment schedules.

The correspondence between the bank and the State authorities spanned a significant

period. The bank argued that these documents were acknowledgments of the debt and

therefore should extend the limitation period.

“Suit was filed by bank for recovery of debt against guarantors. It was shown by terms

of deeds of guarantee that guarantee was continuing. Suit will be governed by article

55 of the Limitation Act. So long as the account was live, i.e. neither settled no refused

by guarantors to carry out the obligation, period of limitation would not start running.

It would start running from the date of breach. Therefore, it was held that suit filed

within three years from the date of notice by bank invoking guarantees, such suit was

within period of limitation.”

(Chaudri on limitation page 766)16

Thirdly, that the letter marked ‘P20’, written by the Secretary of the Education Ministry

is addressed to the Director General of Public Finance, not to the Appellant-Company

and therefore, it cannot be considered as a valid acknowledgement.

15 AIR 2002 Mad 423 16 Chaudhri M, Law of Limitation 766

16

In the given circumstances, it is important to note that the said document marked ‘P20’,

was copied to the Managing Director of the Plaintiff-Company. The validity of the said

acknowledgement, if interpreted in the manner as suggested by the Appellate-

Defendant, inevitably, would abundant the ordinary grammatical interpretation of the

statute and be wholly contradictory to the main objective and its ‘dominant intention.’

As observed earlier, Professor C.G. Weeramantry favoured a contemporary approach

where, statutes should be interpreted according to plain meaning of their language.

Therefore, in accordance with the intention of the legislature, an equitable construction

of P20 would certainly mean that there is a valid acknowledgement of debt existing in

favour of the Plaintiff-Company.

The criteria in which a document is construed is a function of the Court, in that we find,

the equitable construction of the said letter P20, falls nothing short of an

acknowledgement of an accrued liability of the Defendant-Appellant, the contents,

when duly communicated to the Respondent-Company, clearly comes within the

confines of Section 12 of the Prescription Ordinance.

In Maniram Seth vs. Seth Rup Chand17 the Court stated that, an acknowledgment of

debt under the Limitation Act need not be specifically addressed to the creditor. The

key requirement is that the acknowledgment is documented, signed, and indicates a

subsisting liability.

In the case of Bengal Silk Mills vs. Ismail G Hossain18, the court addressed the issue

of whether entries in a balance sheet can serve as an acknowledgment of debt under

Section 18 of the Limitation Act, 1963. The court ruled that an acknowledgment of

liability does not need to be specifically addressed to the creditor to be valid. The Court

asserted;

17 (1905) 33 IA 165 (PC) 1058 18 AIR 1962 Cal 115

17

“----in other words, an acknowledgement of debt need not be made to the creditors”19

The Plaintiff-Company claims that by P20 the Defendant-Appellant has acknowledged

its debt, and therefore, it extended the limitation period for initiating this action. The

said letter shows that the Ministry of Education has acknowledged the said debt and

was awaiting the approval of the treasury for the payment to be made. In the said letter,

which was copied to the Plaintiff-Company, the Defendant-Appellant discussed the

outstanding debt with reference to ‘all printing requirements completed and handed

over to the Ministry’ and sought approval for payment. The said letter was typed written

and signed by the Secretary Ministry of Education, which on all fours, embrace a

continuing recognition of the outstanding debt.

P20 read in its entirety, makes no reference that the debt owed to the Plaintiff-Company

is conditional. The said letter has clearly acknowledged the Plaintiff-Company of an

existing debt. The intention of the legislature manifested in Section 12 of the

Prescription Ordinance, in plain words, is an ‘acknowledgment of a continuing

contract’. P20 is clearly within that manifestation.

In the above circumstances, this Court is of the view that letter P20, a valid

acknowledgement of a subsisting liability was sufficient to extend the limitation period,

under Section 12 of the Prescription Ordinance and, the action filed by the Plaintiff-

Company in the Commercial High Court was well within the time period prescribed in

that section.

For these reasons set out above, the Judgment of the Commercial High Court dated

21/06/2013 is hereby affirmed. We find that Triad Advertising (Pvt) Ltd., the Plaintiff-

Company, is entitled to recover a sum of Rs. 4,865,313.98 from the Defendant-

Appellant, representing the Ministry of Education and/ or the Government of Sri Lanka,

19 Awasthi SK, Law of Limitation (Act No. 36 of 1963) Along with Amendments (2009) 416

18

with legal interest from the date of the institution of the action, as prayed for in prayer

(a) of the said Plaint, and also for incurred costs in the Commercial High Court as well

as in this Court.

Appeal dismissed.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Murdu N.B. Fernando, PC J.

I agree

Judge of the Supreme Court

A.H.M.D. Nawaz J.

I agree

Judge of the Supreme Court