SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 1

IN THE SUPREME COURT

OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of Article

128 of the Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Veerasamy Sivathasan

Pillaiyar Kovil,

Uppukulam,

Mannar.

1st Accused – 1st Appellant – Appellant

Vs.

SC Appeal 208/2012

CA Appeal No. 46/2008

HC Vavuniya Case No. HCV/1946/07

Honourable Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

Complainant – Respondent – Respondent

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 2

Before : B.P. Aluwihare, PC, J

Yasantha Kodagoda, PC, J

Janak De Silva, J

Appearance: Anil Silva, PC with Nandana Perera, instructed by Gowry

Thavarasha for the 1st Accused – 1st Appellant - Appellant.

Ayesha Jinasena, PC, Additional Solicitor General with Chathuranga

Bandara, State Counsel for the Complainant – Respondent -

Respondent.

Argued on: 22nd January, 2021

Written Submissions:

For the 1st Accused – 1st Appellant – Appellant filed on 4th January

2013 and 16th February 2021.

For the Complainant – Respondent - Respondent filed on 16th

February 2021.

Decided on: 15th December, 2021

Yasantha Kodagoda, PC, J

This judgment relates to an Appeal against a judgment of the Court of Appeal. The

impugned judgment of the Court of Appeal resulted in the dismissal of an Appeal against

a conviction and sentence imposed on the Appellant before this Court (1st Appellant

before the Court of Appeal) by the High Court of Vavuniya. By the same judgment, the

Court of Appeal had allowed the Appeal of the 2nd Appellant before the Court of Appeal,

and accordingly acquitted him.

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 3

The two Appellants before the Court of Appeal had been indicted in the High Court of

Vavuniya by the Honourable Attorney-General for having on or about 16th August 2004,

in Mannar, trafficked 1,503 grammes of Diacetyl Morphine (Heroin) and in the course of

the same transaction, for having possessed the same quantity of heroin. Thereby, the

Honourable Attorney-General had alleged that both accused had committed offences in

terms of sections 54A (b) and 54A (d), respectively, of the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous

Drugs Ordinance, as amended by Act No. 13 of 1984. It is common ground that the two

accused who are brothers were indicted on the footing that these offences had been

committed by them jointly. Following a trial before the High Court of Vavuniya, both

Accused were found “guilty” of having committed the afore-stated offences. Accordingly,

they were convicted, and sentenced to serve life imprisonment. Both Accused appealed

to the Court of Appeal against their convictions and sentences, and following argument,

the Court of Appeal allowed the Appeal presented on behalf of the 2nd Accused – 2nd

Appellant, and set aside his conviction and sentence. The conviction and sentence of the

1st Accused (the present Appellant) was affirmed, and accordingly his Appeal was

dismissed.

Having considered a Petition seeking Special Leave to Appeal against the afore-

mentioned judgment of the Court of Appeal, this Court has been pleased to grant Special

Leave to Appeal on the following three questions of law, which are reproduced verbatim:

(i) Did the learned Judges of the Court of Appeal misdirect themselves in not

considering the defence version at all, and affirming the conviction of the

Appellant?

(ii) Did the learned Judges of the Court of Appeal misdirect themselves when they

failed to consider that although credibility of a witness is primarily the function

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 4

of the trier of facts, when the said trier of facts has failed to analyse the defence

evidence and has deprived the accused of his constitutional protection to a fair

trial, a duty is cast on the Court of Appeal to ensure that a miscarriage of justice

does not occur?

(iii) Did the learned Judges of the Court of Appeal misdirect themselves when they

failed to appreciate that the learned trial judge did not analyse the evidence led

by the prosecution with caution resulting in a miscarriage of justice?

Case for the prosecution

Albeit brief, the case for the prosecution is that the commission of the offences of

trafficking and possession of heroin, jointly committed by the two accused was detected

on 16th August 2004, in Mannar, by officers of the Police Narcotics Bureau (PNB).

According to prosecution witnesses Inspector of Police (IP) C.K. Welagedera and Woman

Sub Inspector of Police (WSI) Dayanee Gamage (who had been promoted as a Woman

Inspector of Police at the time of the trial), the commission of offences was detected sequel

to an information received by WSI Gamage from a personal informant of hers and an

ensuing raid (planned detection of the committing of the offence) conducted by officers

of the PNB.

Upon receipt of information, WSI Gamage had communicated its contents to IP

Welagedera. On 15th August 2004, a team of police officers of the PNB which included IP

Welagedera and WSI Gamage left Colombo to Mannar. On the way, at Medawachchiya

(located on the Anuradhapura – Mannar Road), WSI Gamage met with the informant and

discussed matters with him. Thereafter, the informant proceeded to Mannar. On the early

hours of the 16th, WSI Gamage received further information from the informant, and

accordingly, the PNB officers also proceeded to Mannar. They met the informant near the

Mannar Hospital.

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 5

Based on the guidance given by the informant (who proceeded with them), the team had

gone up to the Pillaiyar Kovil (also referred to as the Sithy Vinayagar Alayam Kovil) in

Uppukulam, Mannar. According to the testimony of WSI Gamage, they stopped the van

in which they were travelling near a culvert opposite the kovil. Two persons were seen

standing in front of the entrance to the kovil. The informant pointed them out and said

that they were the drug traffickers he previously referred to, and that there was heroin in

the bag one of them was carrying. (As the informant did not testify at the trial, the

contents of the information received are inadmissible and hence were not treated as

substantive evidence against the accused. However, it is admissible and relevant for the

limited purpose of providing an explanation of the conduct of the two PNB officers. Thus,

the afore-stated reference to what the informant told the two PNB officers.)

Consequently, IP Welagedera and WSI Gamage got down from the van. The driver of the

van was asked to drive the van away to Mannar town and drop off the informant.

According to IP Welagedera, the two accused were seen initially standing near some

pillars that were at the entrance to the kovil, and was subsequently seen walking out of

the kovil. IP Welagedera saw the 1st Accused carrying a bag (referred to by him as a

‘polysack bag’ and by WSI Gamage as a ‘manure bag’, which is evidently colloquial

synonyms) and the 2nd accused walking besides him. IP Welagedera approached the 1st

accused, introduced who he was to the two accused, and attempted to apprehend him

while taking control of the bag the 1st Accused was carrying. Both accused resisted. The

2nd Accused started assaulting IP Welagedera and attempted to regain control of the bag,

which by that time was under the control of IP Welagedera. Meanwhile, the 1st Accused

put his hand around the neck of IP Welegedera and clutched his neck. WSI Gamage

intervened. In the ensuing struggle, WSI Gamage bit the hand of the 1st Accused and

thereby relieved IP Welegedera. In the meantime, she apprehended the 2nd Accused and

hand-cuffed him. Soon thereafter, IP Welagedera arrested the 1st Accused. At this time,

two other persons came towards IP Welagedera and WSI Gamage. The two police officers

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 6

assumed that they came to aid the two apprehended accused. Thus, two police sergeants

of the PNB team who had previously got down from the van, arrested those two persons

as well. PNB officers were able to apprehend them (Veerasamy Sivabalan and

Wickremasinghe Gunasinghe) without much difficulty.

According to prosecution witnesses, the incident involving the arrest of the two accused

and the other two suspects had given rise to a commotion in the area. There is some

evidence that IP Welagedera was assaulted. In the circumstances, the officers had

concerns about their security. Thus, they rushed away from the scene along with the four

suspects in the two vans they travelled in, and proceeded initially to Medawachchiya.

WSI Gamage reported what had happened to SSP Pujitha Jayasundera who was their

superior officer (at that time, the officer-in-charge of the PNB). On his instructions, on the

same day they proceeded to Anuradhapura, and instead of producing the suspects before

the Magistrate of Mannar (before whom, ordinarily the suspects ought to have been

produced), they produced all four suspects before the Magistrate of Anuradhapura. On

the request of the PNB (made in terms of section 82(3) of the Poisons, Opium and

Dangerous Drugs Ordinance), the learned Magistrate had issued permission for the PNB

to detain the suspects in police custody for a period not exceeding seven days.

Subsequently, the suspects had been brought to Colombo and detained at the PNB

Headquarters. This had been to facilitate the conduct of further investigations. On the

19th, the suspects had been taken to Mannar, and on the 20th produced before the

Magistrate of Mannar. On an application by the PNB, the learned Magistrate had

discharged suspect Sivabalan from the proceedings. The other suspects had been placed

in remand custody. On a subsequent occasion, once again on an application by the PNB,

suspect Wickremasinghe Gunasinghe had also been discharged by Court.

The position of IP Welagedera supported by the testimony of WSI Gamage is that, on an

examination of the polysack bag, it transpired that inside the bag was a black colour parcel

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 7

on which the term ‘tulip’ was printed. This parcel was found to contain four smaller

parcels containing a brown colour powder, which they believed to be heroin. Subsequent

investigations conducted using a field test kit had revealed that the powder which the 1st

accused was carrying inside the polysack bag contained heroin. These parcels were later

sealed and forwarded directly by the PNB to the Government Analyst, for analysis and

report. By his report dated 5th October 2004 (produced by the prosecution marked “P9”),

the Government Analyst had reported that the gross weight of the powder that was

received by his department inside sealed parcels, weighed 4,120 grammes. An analysis

of the powder revealed that it contained 1,503 grammes of Diacetyl Morphine (heroin).

The evidence relating to the submission of the productions recovered during the raid to

the Government Analyst (the integrity of the chain of evidence regarding the

productions) and the findings and related expert opinion of the Government Analyst has

not been challenged by the Defence.

Case for the defence

Three witnesses including the two accused, testified for the defence. The first defence

who testified was Veerasamy Sivabalan - the elder brother of the accused. It is necessary

to note that the trial procedure pertaining to the receipt of the defence evidence had been

flawed, in that, Sivabalan had been permitted to testify before the two accused testified.

Section 201 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act regulates the receipt of defence

evidence in a criminal trial in the High Court presided over by a judge of the High Court

sitting without a jury. Though section 201 does not specifically state so, when the defence

is called and the accused indicates that he will be giving evidence either from the witness

box or by making a statement from the dock, the testimony of the accused must be first

received by Court, before permitting other defence witnesses to testify. That procedure is

adopted to prevent the accused from listening to the testimonies of other defence

witnesses and then shaping his evidence in a particular manner, so as to make it

compatible with the testimonies of other defence witnesses who testified before him. In

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 8

The Queen v. Tennakone Mudiyanselage Appuhamy, 60 NLR 313, Chief Justice Basnayake

has observed that permitting an accused to testify after other defence witnesses have

testified, is contrary to the practice of both our country and England. Requiring the

accused to give evidence (if he chooses to) before other witnesses on his behalf testify,

should be necessarily adhered to, unless due to attendant circumstances, doing so is not

possible. Where this procedure has not been followed and following the correct

procedure was possible, as in this case, the evidence of the accused would be of little

value.

Be that as it may, according to Sivabalan, his residence is situated very close to the Sithy

Vinayagar Alayam Kovil. The two accused lived with him. On 16th August 2004 around

11.00 – 11.45am, as a child of his had not returned from school, he ventured out in search

of the child. On that occasion, he saw three people dragging a known person - one

Wickremasinghe Gunasinghe alias Ragu and attempting to put him into a van. Sivabalan

went up to them, and made inquiries. Then, he had also been apprehended by a member

of the team that had apprehended Ragu, and bundled him into the van. He shouted for

his safety. His brothers (the two accused) who were at the nearby kovil, came running

towards the van. A fight erupted between them and those who apprehended Ragu and

him. In the process, Sivabalan had been assaulted. He had also heard a gunshot.

Consequently, the group had put the two brothers of the witness (the two accused) into

the van, and the van had left the area. The witness denies that any heroin was found in

the possession of either of the accused or from the possession of anyone else.

Subsequently, all four of them had been taken to the Anuradhapura police station. He

had been questioned and his statement had been recorded. The rest of the narrative

regarding subsequent events is similar to evidence given by prosecution witnesses.

The second witness for the defence was the 1st accused (Appellant) Sivathasan. According

to his testimony, he and his younger brother Pavadasan, are Davil players. They regularly

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 9

perform at the kovil. At the time of the incident, he and Pavadasan had been inside the

kovil. When he heard his elder brother Sivabalan shouting, he along with Pavadasan had

rushed out. He saw Sivabalan being dragged into a van by some persons. He went up to

the group of persons and started to assault them. Subsequently, he and his brother had

also been bundled into the van and taken away. He denies that at the time he was

apprehended, he had in his possession any offensive substance.

The testimony of the 2nd accused – Pavadasan, is parallel to that of Sivathasan. He too

denies having along with Sivathasan, been in possession of heroin.

Submissions made on behalf of the Appellant

Learned President’s Counsel for the Appellant submitted that, as in the instant matter,

when there are two divergent narratives as to how the incident occurred, the trier of facts

(High Court judge) without superficially looking at the evidence presented by the

prosecution, should have carefully analysed the evidence, including that of the defence,

and arrived at a final decision. His position is that the learned judge of the High Court

had believed the evidence of the two prosecution witnesses on the basis that there were

no ‘reasonable contradictions observed’ (quoting words contained in the judgment of the

learned judge of the High Court). On the other hand, the learned judge had disbelieved

the testimony of defence witness Sivabalan, notwithstanding the absence of any

contradictions per-se; that being, notwithstanding Sivabalan having made a prompt

statement in a hostile situation. Learned President’s Counsel further submitted that in

those circumstances, the evidence of Sivabalan should not have been rejected.

Turning on to the prosecution evidence, learned counsel for the Appellant submitted that

the two key witnesses for the prosecution, namely Welagedera and Gamage were

experienced officers of the PNB, and had been trained to give evidence based on notes

purported to have been written immediately after the raid. Under such circumstances, he

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 10

submitted that it would in any event be difficult to find contradictions in their

testimonies. He submitted that therefore, the testimonies of prosecution witnesses should

have been considered cautiously. He further submitted that there were inter-se

contradictions between the testimonies of IP Welagedera and WSI Gamage, regarding the

manner in which accused were arrested. Learned judge of the High Court had ‘brushed

them aside’, on the basis that, ‘what one person had seen the other witness need not necessarily

have seen’. Counsel’s position was that the learned judge had gravely misdirected himself

in assessing the evidence of the two prosecution witnesses, which in the circumstances of

the case amounted to a denial of a fair trial.

Learned President’s Counsel for the Appellant also submitted that the learned judge of

the High Court had misdirected himself in having formed the view that there existed a

contradiction between the testimonies of Sivabalan and the Appellant. This purported

contradiction arose due to the cross-examination of Sivabalan, regarding the alleged

existence of a ‘room’ or a ‘mudam’ for the two accused, inside the kovil. It was submitted

that, the Appellant had testified that while he did not have a ‘room’ inside the kovil, they

had been given a ‘mudam’ which was situated within the kovil premises. According to

Sivabalan too, the accused did not have a ‘room’ inside the kovil but they had been given

a ‘mudam’ by the kovil authorities, which was situated within the kovil ‘premises’ on the

Kovil Road. He thus submitted that Sivabalan had not contradicted himself, nor had a

contradiction arisen between the testimonies of Sivabalan and the Appellant. He

submitted that this purported non-existent contradiction was not a valid ground for the

rejection of Sivabalan’s testimony.

Learned counsel also submitted that, if Sivabalan’s evidence is accepted, at the lowest, it

creates a ‘reasonable doubt’ regarding the case for the prosecution, and hence the Appellant

would be entitled to an acquittal.

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 11

It was further submitted by the learned President’s Counsel, that the Appellant (1st

accused) and the 2nd Accused gave evidence under oath and were subjected to cross-

examination. Their evidence did not give rise to any contradictions or omissions, and

there were no contradictions inter-se between their testimonies. He submitted that

therefore, there was no basis for the Court to have rejected their testimonies.

Finally, learned President’s Counsel submitted that the failure on the part of the

Appellant to show a reason for the officers of the PNB to have fabricated a story and

falsely implicate him and the 2nd Accused, should not be viewed as a factor that

strengthens the case for the prosecution or ipso facto justifies the rejection of the case for

the defence.

In view of the foregoing submissions, learned President’s Counsel for the Appellant

submitted that the conviction of the Appellant cannot be sustained in law, and hence

should be set aside and the Appeal be allowed.

Submissions made on behalf of the Respondent

Learned Additional Solicitor General representing the Respondent prefaced her

submissions by submitting that the questions of law raised on behalf of the Appellant

were based on ‘frivolous and unsupported grounds’, and therefore should be answered by

this Court in the negative. She submitted that the duty of an appellate court is to be

satisfied affirmatively, that the prosecution’s case was ‘substantially true’ and that the guilt

of the appellant has been ‘established beyond reasonable doubt’. Unless the appellant has on

reasonable grounds satisfied the appellate court that the trial judge had erred in arriving

at the finding of guilt, the Court of Appeal cannot reverse the finding of the trial judge.

She highlighted that in this matter, the Court of Appeal had arrived at its findings, having

carefully examined the evidence placed before the High Court by the prosecution and by

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 12

the defence. She submitted that when considering the evidence, the Court of Appeal had

been conscious of the denial of the commission of the offence by the defence.

Learned ASG submitted that the Court of Appeal had initially considered the credibility

of prosecution witnesses, and satisfied itself regarding the credibility of the two key

witnesses, namely Inspectors Welagedera and Gamage. The Court of Appeal had

considered the particular aspect of the case which revolved around WSI Gamage’s

testimony that she bit the hand of the 1st accused and thereby relieved IP Welagedera

from the firm grip of the 1st accused, and that aspect of the prosecution’s narrative not

having been testified to by IP Welagedera. Citing certain observations of Justice Shiranee

Tilakawardane in The Attorney General v. Sandanam Pitchi Mary Theresa, [2011] 2 Sri

L.R. 292, and those contained in Bharwada Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai v. State of Gujarat, AIR

1983 SC 753, the learned Additional Solicitor General submitted that “it was human for IP

Welagedera to not have recalled the incident of ‘biting’, which resulted in his release of the 1st

Accused – Appellant who had tightened the grip”. She further submitted that in the impugned

judgment, the Court of Appeal has observed that, “… when things occurred in rapid

succession it would not be possible for some witnesses to observe as well as certain other witnesses,

the sequence and the things that happened.” She submitted that, as concluded by both the

High Court and the Court of Appeal, this particular omission in IP Welagedera’s

testimony had not affected the credibility of prosecution witnesses and the overall case

for the prosecution.

Learned Additional Solicitor General further observed that the learned trial judge had

the benefit of observing the demeanour and deportment of both key witnesses for the

prosecution. They had been subjected to lengthy cross-examination. She submitted that

“their Lordships had been mindful of the priceless advantage the trial judge had over the Court of

Appeal in observing the demeanour and deportment of the witnesses … their Lordships had been

reluctant to disturb the findings of the learned trial judge …”. Learned Additional Solicitor

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 13

General brought to the attention of this Court the following paragraph in the impugned

judgement:

“A witness may not observe and remember better than another, the manner in which the

incident took place, especially when he was the person who was attempting to subdue and

overpower a criminal in order to apprehend him with the contraband, rather than a witness

who observes the incident. The person really involved may sometimes be oblivious to the

blows he received and the injuries suffered or how and the manner in which he received

and suffered, his primary concern being the arrest of the accused, come what may.”

Learned ASG submitted that in view of the prosecution having established “a very strong

prima facie case against the accused … the defence had to offer an explanation for their conduct”.

She submitted that the Court of Appeal had given due consideration to the evidence

presented on behalf of the defence. She quoted the following passage contained in the

impugned judgment of the Court of Appeal:

“… in considering the totality of the evidence, the judge could not be faulted for his

conclusions and findings with regard to the 1st Accused – Appellant.”

Learned Additional Solicitor General in her post-argument written submissions

submitted that “… although their decision confined to a single sentence, a careful perusal of the

judgment proves that their Lordships had arrived at this conclusion only after giving due

consideration to the culpability of the two accused and their conduct”. Referring to the acquittal

of the 2nd accused by the Court of Appeal, learned ASG submitted that, “… judges of the

Court of Appeal did not disbelieve the prosecution witnesses or doubted their credibility in entering

the acquittal, but had purely acted in abundance of caution”.

Due to the defence of ‘denial of the commission of the offence’, learned ASG submitted

that it was necessary to consider whether there was any basis to doubt whether

prosecution witnesses had falsely implicated the accused due to some personal

animosity. She submitted that the accused being previously unknown to the prosecution

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 14

witnesses, and the detection having been conducted in Mannar whereas the witnesses

were from Colombo, militates against the possibility of a false implication of the accused

by PNB officers. Furthermore, that the gross quantity of heroin detected being 4.12 kg

(with a net weight of 1,503 grammes of pure heroin), necessitates the possibility of an

‘introduction’ being ruled out. She further submitted that the Court of Appeal had

observed that there was no reason suggested by the Accused – Appellants as to the

motive or a very good reason to foist such a large quantity of heroin on the 1st accused

and then arrest the 1st and 2nd accused – Appellants.

Referring to the position of the defence, learned ASG submitted that the defence version

was presented to the High Court for the first time only after the case for the defence

commenced, and that the position of the defence was not suggested to the two main

witnesses for the prosecution during their cross examination.

In this regard, the learned ASG submitted the following:

“It is to be noted that courts have considered the importance of a party putting its case in cross-

examination to the witnesses of the other party. This will facilitate the opposing party to challenge

such positions. It is a rule of essential justice that whenever the opponent has declined to avail

himself of the opportunity to put his case in cross examination, it must follow that the evidence

tendered on that issue ought not to be accepted. Sri Lankan Courts have followed this line of

thinking with approval.”

Learned ASG also highlighted the fact that the defence did not present the testimony of

Wickremasinghe Gunasinghe alias Ragu, who could have supported the defence position,

particularly as he was, according to the defence, the first person to have been

apprehended by PNB officers.

In conclusion, learned ASG submitted that, the Court of Appeal had very carefully

examined the evidence submitted by both the prosecution as well as the defence and

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 15

following careful consideration had decided that the decision of the learned trial judge to

convict the 1st Accused – Appellant was correct and can be justified.

In view of the foregoing, learned ASG for the Respondent submitted that the questions

raised by the Appellant should be answered in the negative, and that this Appeal should

be dismissed.

Consideration and analysis of the evidence

The Appellant launched challenges against his conviction, from two frontiers.

(i) That the version presented by the prosecution is not credible, and hence should

be rejected in toto. This assertion was made by learned President’s Counsel

alternative to the main submission that the prosecution had failed to prove its

case beyond reasonable doubt. In both these scenarios, if the Appellant is

successful, the accused-appellant would be entitled to an acquittal.

(ii) That the defence version gives rise to a minimum of a reasonable doubt

regarding the case for the prosecution, and hence the Appellant should have

been acquitted. This assertion is premised upon the footing that, should the

case for the defence give rise to a reasonable doubt, the accused would be

entitled to an acquittal.

These two issues are necessarily inter-related. A case for the prosecution not being proven

beyond a reasonable doubt, arises out of the existence of a reasonable doubt emanating

from the case for the prosecution itself. Nevertheless, for clarity, I will deal with these

two issues separately. The second argument will be considered first, and consideration

will be given to whether the defence version is credible and gives rise to a minimum of a

reasonable doubt regarding the case for the prosecution.

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 16

Does the case for the defence give rise to a minimum of a reasonable doubt?

A reasonable doubt is a real or actual and a substantial doubt, as opposed to an imaginary

or flimsy doubt that may arise in the mind of the decider of facts (judge or the jury, as the

case may be), following an objective consideration of all the attendant facts and

circumstances. It is a doubt founded on logical and substantial reasoning (well-founded)

which a normal prudent person with not less than average intelligence and learnedness

in men, matters and worldly affairs, would naturally and inevitably develop in his mind

following a comprehensive, objective, independent, impartial and neutral consideration

of the totality of the evidence and associated attendant circumstances. It is a doubt that

makes the case for the prosecution significantly less probable to have occurred than in

the manner purported to have occurred.

A reasonable doubt is not the type of doubt that arises due to incorrect, abnormal or

unreasonable comprehension of testimonies and other material which amount to

evidence presented at the trial, or due to irrational fear, inappropriate sympathy, or

unjustifiable mercy. It is not a doubt that develops in the mind of an imbecile, indecisive

or timid person, or in a weak or vacillating mind. A shadow of a doubt, an imaginary

doubt, a vague doubt or a speculative or trivial doubt should not be confused with a

reasonable doubt. A reasonable doubt is not a doubt that a partisan individual with

vested interests would entertain in his mind, or a doubt that such a person would

advocate that purportedly exists.

The principle that the prosecution must prove its case beyond reasonable doubt and the

accused is entitled to an acquittal if there exists a reasonable doubt, has been engraved in

the criminal justice system of this country and in the rest of the common law world. That

is to ensure that only those actually guilty of having committed crimes are convicted and

the innocent are acquitted. Thus, the application of this principle should cause the

advancement of the primary objective of criminal justice (that being ‘the conviction of the

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 17

guilty through a lawful and fair trial and if found guilty the imposition of an appropriate

punishment, and the acquittal of the innocent) and not frustrate it.

In Shivaji Sahebrao Bobade & Anr. v. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1973 SC 2622, the

Supreme Court of India has commented that, “the cherished principles of the golden thread of

proof beyond reasonable doubt which runs through the web of our law should not be stretched

morbidly to embrace every hunch and degree of doubt. … Only reasonable doubts belong to the

accused. Otherwise any practical system of justice will break down and lose credibility with the

community.”

In Dharm Das Wadhwani v. The State of Uttar Pradesh, 1974 Cri. LJ (SC) 1249, the

Supreme Court of India has observed that, “… The rule of benefit of reasonable doubt does

not imply a frail willow bending to every whiff of hesitancy. Judges are made of sterner stuff and

must take a practical view of legitimate inferences flowing from evidence, circumstantial or direct.

…”

In Wijesekera (Excise Inspector) v Arnolis, (1940) [17 CLW 138], Justice Wijeyewardene

has held that “… it is not every kind of doubt the benefit of which an accused person is entitled.

An accused person could claim only the benefit of a reasonable doubt. It is always possible to

conjure up a doubt of a very flimsy nature. But an accused person cannot be acquitted on the

ground of such doubt…The guilt or innocence of an accused person must be determined on

evidence and not on some suggestion made in the course of an argument…”.

If the testimonies provided by Sivabalan and the two accused are true, the testimonies of

IP Welagedera and WSI Gamage are totally false other than for the fact that the incident

in issue occurred on 16th August 2004 near the Pillaiyar Kovil (also known as the ‘Sithy

Vinayagar Alayam Kovil’) in Uppukulam, Mannar. Further, if the defence version is true,

the arrest and custody of the two accused, Sivabalan and Wickremasinghe Gunasinghe

alias Ragu had been without any valid reason and had been unlawful. Thus, in those

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 18

circumstances, one would expect them to have reacted in a different manner, without

succumbing in silence to the allegedly unlawful conduct of the PNB officers. Had they

initiated legal action against the officers for having unlawfully arrested them (which

action they were not legally obliged to take), it would have enabled them to have got

themselves vindicated. Neither of the accused nor Sivabalan claim to have taken such

action. That, to say the least, is somewhat surprising.

According to the defence version, the string of events surrounding the arrest of

Wickremasinghe Gunasinghe alias Ragu, Sivabalan, and the two accused had commenced

when the police team apprehended Wickremasinghe Gunasinghe alias Ragu for no valid

reason. In fact, the defence version offers no explanation as to why PNB officers would

have wanted to apprehend Wickremasinghe Gunasinghe. Thus, the all-important

probabilities factor does not support the defence version. Wickremasinghe Gunasinghe

would have been in an ideal position to reveal what exactly happened. According to the

case record relating to the trial proceedings, the defence has not even attempted to

procure his attendance at the trial by moving for the issue of summons on him. As

pointed out by the learned Additional Solicitor General, the absence of the testimony of

Wickremasinghe Gunasinghe alias Ragu in support of the position of the defence, casts a

doubt regarding the authenticity of the position of the defence.

Learned Counsel for the Appellant relied heavily on the testimony given by defence

witness Sivabalan, who is admittedly the elder brother of the two accused. Therefore, he

is to be treated an ‘interested witness’, who would have certainly wanted to protect his

two brothers from being convicted. That a particular witness is an ‘interested witness’

causes a negative impact on the assessment of that witness’s credibility. In The Attorney

General v. Sandanam Pitchi Mary Theresa, [(2011) 2 Sri L.R. 292], which was brought to

the attention of this Court by the learned ASG, Justice Shiranee Tilakawardane has made

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 19

the following observations regarding the assessment of credibility of interested

witnesses:

“… not all witnesses are reliable. A witness may fabricate or provide a distorted account

of the evidence through a personal interest or through genuine error. … A key test of

credibility is whether the witness is an interested or disinterested witness. …

when considering the evidence of an interested witness who may desire to conceal

the truth, such evidence must be scrutinized with some care. The independent

witness will normally be preferred to an interested witness in case of conflict. Matters of

motive, prejudice, partiality, accuracy, incentive and reliability have all to be weighed.

Therefore, the relative weight attached to the evidence of an interested witness

who is a near relative of the accused or whose interests are closely identified with

one party may not prevail over the testimony of an independent witness. …”

(Emphasis added by me.)

It is noteworthy that Justice Tilakawardane had made these observations in the course of

commenting upon the credibility that may be attached to the testimony given by a

defence witness, who in that case was a sister of the accused. In that case, the evidence of

an officer of the PNB which was sought to be contradicted by presenting the evidence of

this particular defence witness, was rejected by Court, primarily on the footing that she

was an interested witness and therefore had reasons to give false evidence to secure the

acquittal of the accused. The observations of Justice Tilakawardane in this regard is of

particular relevance to this Appeal, as defence witness Sivabalan is a brother of the two

accused.

Furthermore, a careful scrutiny of the proceedings of the trial, reveals that the main

position taken up by the defence, that (i) Wickremasinghe Gunasinghe alias Ragu was

initially apprehended for no valid reason, (ii) thereafter when Sivabalan approached the

police to find out why Wickremasinghe Gunasinghe alias Ragu was being bungled into a

van, he was arrested, and (iii) the two accused were thereafter apprehended, has not been

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 20

put in the form of specific suggestions to either IP Welagedera or WSI Gamage, when

they testified. It has not been suggested to prosecution witnesses that the team of police

officers initially apprehended Wickremasinghe Gunasinghe alias Ragu, then

apprehended Sivabalan and bungled both of them into the police van, well before the

two accused were arrested. All what has been suggested to prosecution witnesses is that

at the time the two accused were arrested, they did not have anything offensive in their

possession, and thus a mere denial of the accusation against them.

In Mananage Susil Dharmapala v. Officer-in-Charge, Special Crimes Division, Colombo

(SC Appeal No. 155/14, SC Minutes of 28th June 2021) this Court has observed the

following:

“It is necessary to observe that suggestions are in fact a component of a comprehensive

cross-examination. Suggestions are factual assertions or propositions put to a

witness during cross-examination by the counsel conducting such cross-examination,

for the purposes of (i)impeaching the credibility and testimonial trustworthiness of a

witness, (ii) attempting to elicit an item of evidence favourable to the party on whose behalf

the cross-examination is being conducted, such as an admission, (iii) indicating to Court

the position of the party on whose behalf the cross-examination is being conducted,

regarding the testimony given by the particular witness, and (iv) indicating to Court the

position of the party on whose behalf the cross-examination is being conducted,

the overall case of the opposing party.” (Emphasis added by me.)

It would therefore be seen that suggestions to prosecution witnesses are very important,

and inter-alia serve as an opportunity for the defence to place before prosecution

witnesses the position of the defence. It enables the Court to take early cognizance of the

position of the defence, and also enable prosecution witnesses to respond to the defence

position. That the defence placed before Court their position at the first available

opportunity also enables it to satisfy the ‘test of spontaneity’. Therefore, it is of

importance that the defence uses this opportunity to specifically and in unambiguous

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 21

terms indicate both to the Court and to prosecution witnesses, the position of the defence.

Should the defence not make use of this opportunity and take up a particular position for

the first time during the case for the defence, that position will suffer from the weakness

of ‘belatedness’. Furthermore, when the defence takes up its position belatedly, without

putting it to prosecution witnesses, it is not possible to check its veracity. A belatedly

taken up defence position would affect the credibility that may be attached to defence

witnesses who testify in support of that position, and will also have a negative impact on

the evidential weight that could be attached to the position of the defence. I must record

my agreement with the submission made in this regard by the learned Additional

Solicitor General. Her submission in this regard reflects the cursus curiae of both this Court

and that of the Court of Appeal on this matter.

According to a suggestion made by learned counsel for the accused to IP Welagedera, the

heroin which the prosecution claims to have been in the possession of the 1st Accused

(Appellant) had been found by the police on a bicycle parked near the kovil. However,

none of the defence witnesses have testified that they saw an occurrence to that effect. It

is to be noted that the contents of a suggestion unsupported by evidence, does not have

any evidential value. In The King v Andris Silva, [(1940) 41 NLR 433], Moseley, SPJ held

that it was not a misdirection to tell the jury that they must not pay the slightest attention

to any suggestion put to a witness in cross-examination, unless such suggestion is

supported by proof. Thus, a suggestion unsupported by evidence serves hardly any

purpose.

Another suggestion made to IP Welagedera has been, that at the time of the incident the

two accused were playing drums inside the kovil. Neither of the accused have testified

to that effect. In fact, such suggestions which are not subsequently supported by

evidence, negatively affect the bona-fides of the party that made such suggestions.

Furthermore, in their testimonies, the accused have not explained why they were inside

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 22

the kovil at that particular time. Furthermore, if at the time the other two suspects were

apprehended, the two accused were inside the kovil and they came out when they heard

their brother Sivabalan shouting ‘ayyo’ (as claimed by the accused), they could have

provided some corroborative evidence to that effect from an independent person who

was at the kovil at that time, such as a Poosari. [Also referred to as a ‘Pujari’, a Poosari is a

Hindu priest who performs pooja (temple rituals) in a Kovil (Hindu temple).]

Whether or not the two accused had a room inside the kovil proper or whether it was in

the form of a ‘mudam’ in the compound of the kovil, and whether there existed a

contradiction within the testimony of Sivabalan or between the testimonies of the

Appellant and Sivabalan, were matters highly debated between the learned President’s

Counsel for the Appellant and learned Additional Solicitor General for the Respondent.

As to whether there are such contradictions cannot be conclusively determined

particularly because neither party has clarified whether the term ‘mudam’ is synonymous

with the word ‘room’ and the exact coverage which comes within the purview of the

‘kovil premises’ and the ‘compound of the kovil’. Further, the Appellant and Sivabalan

had testified in Tamil language and what was used by both the Court of Appeal and the

Supreme Court was an English translation of the trial proceedings. In the circumstances,

this Court has decided not to pronounce a finding on that matter. In any event, this Court

is of the view that a determination on that matter would not be necessary for the final

determination of this Appeal, due to the abundance of reasons which justifies the

conclusion reached by this Court.

The testimony provided by the defence does not tender any explanation from where the

PNB officers had obtained the polysack bag containing over 4 kilogrammes of a brown

powder (which contained over 1 kilogramme of heroin). Even according to the defence,

the PNB officers did not have any pre-existing reason (such as a previous unsuccessful

raid) or any animosity which may have propelled the PNB, to foist heroin on the

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 23

Appellant and fabricate a case. It is inconceivable that the PNB officers carried with them

this large quantity of heroin from Colombo to be foisted on either the Appellant or any

other person. If they found the heroin parcel from the kovil, why should they fabricate a

‘story’ revealing that the heroin was recovered from the possession of the Appellant?

Furthermore, according to the defence version, PNB officers initially apprehended

Wickremasinghe Gunasinghe alias Ragu. Thus, according to the defence, he had been the

prime target of the PNB. If so, why did not PNB officers ‘fabricate a story’ alleging that it

was Wickremasinghe Gunasinghe who had heroin in his possession? Thus, in my view,

the version of the defence is riddled with substantial improbabilities and questions which

beg answers.

In view of the foregoing, it is necessary to point out that, neither the High Court nor the

Court of Appeal can be faulted for not having placed any reliance on the position and

alleged version of events presented to the High Court by the defence. Both Courts have

in my view, rightly rejected the defence evidence. The conclusion reached by the learned

judges, that through the testimonies presented by the three defence witnesses, the

defence has not cast a reasonable doubt regarding the case for the prosecution, is in my

opinion well-founded.

Is the case for the prosecution of such nature that it should be rejected in its totality?

In the alternative, has the prosecution proved its case beyond a reasonable doubt?

The answer to the first question above, should be founded upon a consideration of the

totality of the case for the prosecution. If the evidence for the prosecution (i) suffers from

inherent improbabilities or is otherwise ex-facie incredible and therefore the judge

discredits the totality of the evidence on the part of the prosecution, (ii) even if taken at

its highest and accepted fully, is insufficient to prove the ingredients of the offence (and

thereby the commission of the offence charged against the accused), or (iii) does not give

rise to a minimum of a strong prima-facie case against the accused, then, the case for the

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 24

prosecution should be rejected, and the accused should be acquitted. That could be done

either in terms of section 200 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act at the end of the case

for the prosecution, or following a consideration of the defence evidence if any, at the

time of the pronouncement of the verdict. If at the time of the closure of the case for the

prosecution, one out of the three afore-mentioned deficiencies in the case for the

prosecution is detected, then the learned trial judge shall, acting in terms of section 200

of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, acquit the accused. The accused should be

acquitted, without placing an unnecessary and heavy burden on him of having to

continue facing the trial.

Though learned President’s Counsel for the Appellant couched and presented an

argument alleging that the case for the prosecution should be rejected in its totality, he

did not advance a basis for moving for the total rejection of the case for the prosecution.

His actual focus was on the ground that the case for the prosecution viewed particularly

in the light of the case for the defence, was not credible, and hence the prosecution had

failed to prove its case beyond a reasonable doubt. His position was that when viewed

from the context of the evidence presented by the defence, the prosecution had failed to

prove its case beyond reasonable doubt. Thus, the focus of this part of the judgment

would be on whether the prosecution had proven its case beyond reasonable doubt.

Relying on evidence presented to Court by the prosecution, it is the legal duty (burden

of proof) of the prosecution to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt. That is to prove

its case to an extent which does not leave room for a reasonable doubt to arise. That is a

high degree of proof, which gives rise to a mental state of satisfaction, to be convinced

that the accused had committed the offence.

Former Chief Justice of India M. Monir in Law of Evidence (5th edition, 1994) (which is a

commentary on the Indian Evidence Act, 1 of 1872), at page 353, has stated the following:

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 25

“The basic principle of criminal jurisprudence is that a person must be presumed to be

innocent until his guilt has been established beyond reasonable doubt. A criminal trial

begins with the presumption as to the innocence of the accused, and that presumption

continues right up to the time when, after considering all the evidence, the Court comes to

the conclusion that the commission of an offence by the accused has been proved beyond

the pale of reasonable doubt. … There is no burden on the accused to prove his innocence.

The difficulty of proving the necessary ingredients of the offence is no ground for exempting

the prosecutor from that duty.”

Marcus Stone in Proof of Fact in Criminal Trials (published by W. Green & Son, 1984,

at page 354), has explained ‘proof beyond reasonable doubt’ in the following manner:

“The standard of proof required for conviction, i.e. beyond reasonable doubt, is stated in terms of

belief and not as a degree of probability ... Proof beyond reasonable doubt transcends any

acceptance of probability when it produces that state of belief. A tribunal of fact could not convict

unless it was actually convinced of guilt to that extent. It must believe in the reality of guilt. A

mere mechanical comparison of probabilities, however strong this might point to guilt, would not

be enough. The criterion is human and not mathematical. It is a judgment that the facts are

established. …

The phrase ‘beyond reasonable doubt’ is the essential verbal formulation which has been devised

by law to express the necessary standard of belief for a criminal conviction. Attempts to improve

on or to elaborate on that formulation are discouraged by appeal courts. The phrase appears to be

as precise as any other words which could be substituted for it. Proof of facts in court inevitably

falls short of absolute certainty, as was said by Lord Guthrie: “Outside the region of mathematics,

proof is never anything more than probability. It is for the Court in each case to say whether the

probability is so slight, or so equally balanced by counter-probabilities, that nothing more results

than a surmise; or whether the probabilities are so strong and so one-sided as to amount to legal

proof. The abstract possibility of mistake can never be excluded.”

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 26

…The standard of proof beyond reasonable doubt refers to the verdict, which is based on the

cumulative effect of the whole of the evidence. It may be thought to be a question of law or of logic

whether the standard should also apply to each item of evidence upon which a conviction is

based…”

As regards the standard of proof to be satisfied in a criminal case, there is no doubt that

the prosecution must prove its case beyond reasonable doubt. However, one must take a

realistic and pragmatic view of what can be reasonably expected of a prosecution. It is

important in my view to bear in mind that a prosecution cannot be expected to prove its

case to a degree of mathematical accuracy or scientific certainty. The degree of accuracy

and certainty that a prosecution can be reasonably expected to satisfy is much less. That

is quite natural, as prosecutions have to rely primarily on human testimony, which is

subject to the inherent frailties associated with human observation, memory, recollection,

and verbal articulation through oral testimony.

The following type of questioning and questions, (i) repetitive and unnecessarily lengthy

cross-examination, (ii) strategically worded questions founded on non-existent or

irrelevant facts, a confusing mixture of facts or on trivial matters, (iii) questions using an

inappropriately aggressive tone, reverberating noise or intimidating body language, (iv)

questions asked without reasonable grounds, (v) indecent or scandalous questions and

(vi) questions intended to insult or annoy, can blur memory, cause confusion, instill fear,

embarrass, or cause stress, trauma and strain in the mind of a witness. It is the duty of

the trial judge to control proceedings and forbid questions which an Attorney-at-Law is

precluded or disentitled in terms of the Evidence Ordinance and professional ethics from

asking, or are inappropriate, and are aimed at or may result in the obstruction of the

course of justice, causing secondary victimization of victims of crime who testify or

denying witnesses the entitlement of testifying at a fair trial. Such questions adversely

affect the ability of the witness to provide a truthful and detailed account of the incident

with clarity and precision. The impact of such unlawful or inappropriate cross-

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 27

examination is compounded by the fact that to most lay witnesses, the sheer atmosphere

of our Courts can be quite alien, intimidating and fear generating. It is the duty of the

trial judge to prevent or control such unlawful or inappropriate cross-examination, and

to provide witnesses a conducive environment in which they could testify without any

fear or favour. The absence of a conducive environment can have the effect of subverting

the course of justice.

Unfortunate delays in the commencement and completion of criminal trials, and long and

unjustifiable intervals between successive trial dates (which must be avoided,

particularly as in terms of the proviso to section 263(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure

Act, trials must be conducted on a day-today basis unless doing so is impracticable, in

the literal sense of the word ‘impracticable’) are contributory factors that have an adverse

impact on the accuracy and quality of human testimony. This is because human

testimony is primarily based on human memory, which tends to fade away and get

adversely affected due to the passage of time. Indeed, if the testimony of a witness

contains intentionally uttered falsehood, such testimony must be rejected, particularly if

there is no legal justification to separate the truth from the falsehood. Nevertheless,

unintentional errors which may creep into or be embedded in human testimony should

not result in the total rejection of the testimony of any particular witness.

The reasons enumerated above necessitate the adoption of a pragmatic view when

assessing and determining the credibility of a witness and the trustworthiness of his

testimony. Criteria pertaining to the assessment of credibility and testimonial

trustworthiness must be applied, acutely conscious of the backdrop of all the attendant

facts and circumstances, including (i) the background and profile of the relevant witness,

(ii) circumstances pertaining to the initial observation, (iii) developments that may have

occurred during the interval between the initial observation and the giving of evidence,

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 28

(iv) the situation that prevailed when the witness testified, and (v) the nature of the

examination-in-chief, cross-examination and re-examination.

Natural defects in human testimony which are to be expected due to the afore-stated

factors, should not be misconstrued as giving rise to a reasonable doubt. A reasonable

doubt is not a theoretical legal construct which should be applied to enable a perpetrator

of crime to secure an acquittal.

In Miller v. Minister of Pensions, [(1947) 2 A.E.R. 372] Lord Denning has explained

what proof beyond reasonable doubt is, in the following lucid manner:

“…the evidence must reach the same degree of cogency as is required in a criminal case before an

accused person is found guilty. That degree is well settled. It need not reach certainty, but it must

carry a high degree of probability. Proof beyond reasonable doubt does not mean proof beyond the

shadow of a doubt. The law would fail to protect the community if it admitted fanciful possibilities

to deflect the course of justice. If the evidence is so strong against a man as to leave only a remote

possibility in his favour which can be dismissed with the sentence, ‘of course it is possible, but not

in the least probable’, the case is proved beyond reasonable doubt, but nothing short of that will

suffice.”

The trier of facts as well as appellate court judges should not fall prey to the

argumentative theorizing and magnification given to theoretical, flimsy or imaginative

doubts developed through a theatrical performance of skillful and robust advocacy of an

ingenious counsel. The judge must decide objectively and dispassionately, upon a

mature, realistic, pragmatic and fearless consideration of the totality of evidence and the

entirety of the attendant facts and circumstances. During such consideration, he must

take into account not only the evidence presented by both parties, but inferences and

presumptions recognized by the law which arise out of such evidence, and matters in

respect of which a judge is entitled to take judicial notice.

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 29

If a reasonable doubt exists, the cursus curiae of our courts and those of the rest of the

common law world which recognize the adversarial system of criminal justice, insist on

the ‘presumption of innocence’, which unequivocally demands that the benefit of that

reasonable doubt accrues to the benefit of the accused and that the accused be acquitted.

Learned President’s Counsel for the Appellant emphasized that in this case, the

prosecution had not proven its case beyond reasonable doubt. In order to prove a case

beyond reasonable doubt, the prosecution must present to Court the testimonies of

witnesses who are subsequently assessed and determined by the trial judge or the jury,

as the case may be, to be ‘credible’. The trial Court must be able determine that the

prosecution witnesses are not only credible, but that their testimonies are ‘trustworthy’

as well. For the prosecution to plead that the testimonies of their witnesses be accepted

as being truthful of the facts deposed to by such witnesses, those two primary conditions

must be satisfied. Thus, the trial judge must be able to assess and determine that

prosecution witnesses on whose testimonies the prosecution relied on, are credible and

their testimonies are trustworthy. Furthermore, the testimonies so provided by such

witnesses must be compliant with section 5 of the Evidence Ordinance, and thus should

relate to only ‘facts in issue’ and ‘relevant facts’. Their oral testimonies pertaining to such

facts should also be ‘admissible’. Such oral evidence testified to by prosecution witnesses,

along with other evidence, if any, of the prosecution’s case (such as documentary

evidence, real evidence, contemporaneous audio-visual recordings and computer

evidence) must be capable of proving the ingredients of the offence(s) to the extent

provided in section 3 of the Evidence Ordinance.

A consideration of the totality of the evidence should result in the trier of facts being

convinced that the case for the prosecution is true, and that the accused is guilty of having

committed the offence he has been charged with. Merely developing (i) a case for the

prosecution giving rise to suspicion that the accused ‘may’ have committed the offence

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 30

or that it is ‘probable’ that the accused committed the offence, (ii) a case theory founded

on ‘conjecture’ that it was the accused who committed the offence, or (iii) a state of mind

in the trial judge or the jury (as the case may be) that the case for the prosecution is ‘more

probable’ than the case for the defence, is wholly insufficient. On a whole, the prosecution

must, relying on cogent evidence of a high degree of probative value presented to Court

through its own witnesses, be capable of proving its case beyond reasonable doubt. That

threshold reflects a high degree of sufficiency of evidence, which is adequate to

eliminate a reasonable doubt and vacate the presumption of innocence.

The prosecution must prove its case beyond reasonable doubt, relying on its own

evidence. Colloquially, it is often said that the prosecution must ‘stand on its own legs’.

The following observations of Justice P.R.P. Perera, in Karunadasa v OIC, Motor Traffic

Division, Police Station, Nittambuwa, [(1987) 1 Sri L.R. 155] are of great importance.

“It is an imperative requirement in a criminal case, that the prosecution must be

convincing, no matter how weak the defence is, before a court is entitled to convict on it. It

has necessarily to be borne in mind that the general rule is that the burden is on the

prosecution, to prove the guilt of the accused. The prosecution must prove their case apart

from any statement made by the accused or any evidence tendered by him. The weakness

of the defence must not be allowed to bolster up a weak case for the prosecution. This rule

is based on the principle that every man is presumed innocent until the contrary is proved,

and criminality is never presumed. This presumption is so fundamental and strong that in

order to rebut it, the crime must be brought home to the accused, beyond reasonable doubt.

There is only one final question in every criminal case; does the evidence establish beyond

a reasonable doubt the guilt of the accused?

In The Attorney General v Rawther, Ennis, J states thus “The evidence must establish the

guilt of the accused, not his innocence. His innocence is presumed in law, from the start of

the case, and his guilt must be established beyond a reasonable doubt.” “

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 31

Save exceptional situations [where, the dictum of Lord Ellenborough said to be contained

in R. v. Lord Cochrane has been recognized, such as in The King v. Seeder de Silva [41 NLR

337] and Seetin v. The Queen [68 NLR 316], and the rule of law arising out of logical

reasoning and the application of rules of evidence recognized in Ilangatilaka and Others v.

The Republic [(1984) 2 Sri L.R. 38], Basnayake v. OIC, Special Crimes Detection Unit,

Anuradhapura [(1988) 2 Sri L.R. 50], The Attorney General v. Potta Naufer and Others [(2007)

2 Sri L.R. 144], and Somaratne Rajapakse and Others v. Honourable Attorney General [(2010) 2

Sri L.R. 113] would be applicable], for the purpose of discharging its burden of proving

the case against the accused beyond reasonable doubt, the prosecution cannot take

advantage of and through prosecutorial argumentation seek the strengthening of the case

for the prosecution by (i) the accused having elected to exercise his right to remain silent,

(ii) the weaknesses of the case for the defence, or (iii) the case for the defence having been

proven by the prosecution to be false.

In view of the foregoing analysis of the law, and in the light of the submissions made by

learned President’s Counsel for the Appellant and learned Additional Solicitor General

for the Respondent, it is necessary to consider the testimonies provided by the two key

prosecution witnesses; IP Welagedera and WSI Gamage, with the view to determining

whether the prosecution has proven its case beyond reasonable doubt.

The position advanced on behalf of the Appellant was that there exists an irreconcilable

contradiction inter-se between the testimonies given by IP Welagedera and WSI Gamage.

That submission is founded upon the testimony given by IP Welagedera not having

contained details of - (i) the resistance shown by the two accused against their arrest, (ii)

the action taken by WSI Gamage to secure control of the situation that spontaneously

arose, (iii) the manner in which she was able to loosen the grip the 1st accused had on IP

Welagedera, and (iv) the manner in which she brought the 2nd Accused under control and

arrest him. Particularly in view of the artful, strenuous and compelling manner in which

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 32

the learned President’s Counsel for the Appellant advocated this point, I examined the

proceedings relating to the testimonies given by these two prosecution witnesses with a

high degree of attention and circumspection.

The examination of the proceedings and related evidence revealed the following:

IP Welagedera has not provided any testimony which ‘contradicts’ the testimony given

by WSI Gamage. However, it remains a fact that, IP Welagedera has not provided details

regarding the manner in which WSI Gamage assisted him in apprehending the two

accused. He has stated that WSI Gamage participated with him in arresting the two

accused. He has also briefly stated that the accused showed resistance towards their being

arrested. On a consideration of the totality of IP Welagedera’s testimony, it appears that

his testimony has been confined to his role in the arrest of the two accused and what he

personally witnessed. It is necessary to note that, the learned State Counsel who had

conducted the prosecution, has also not questioned IP Welagedera about the role

performed by WSI Gamage or regarding the manner in which she assisted him.

Furthermore, it appears from the testimony given by WSI Gamage that her action

towards relieving IP Welagedera from the grip of the 1st Accused was spontaneous and

momentary. Thus, it is quite possible as well as probable that IP Welagedera may not

have noticed what exactly WSI Gamage did to secure his release from the clutches of the

1st Accused. In the circumstances, I am unable to agree with the submission of learned

President’s Counsel for the Appellant that the difference in the testimonies of IP

Welagedera and WSI Gamage affect their credibility and testimonial trustworthiness. I

am of the view that the submission made in this regard by learned Additional Solicitor

General that the purported omission in the testimony of IP Welagedera does not

reasonably affect the credibility that may be attached to him, is quite plausible and hence

acceptable. It is also pertinent to note that both the learned judge of the High Court and

the learned judges of the Court of Appeal have paid attention to this aspect of the case,

and concluded for reasons given in their respective judgments, that the purported

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 33

discrepancy between the testimonies of the two key prosecution witnesses does not cast

a doubt regarding the case for the prosecution.

As regards the submission that the prosecution’s evidence regarding the raid (given by

IP Welagedera and WSI Gamage), is not full of details and mutually corroborative, I must

also observe the following: In an incident of this nature, where unexpected events have

occurred during a short period of time at rapid succession and some events have occurred

simultaneously, and the very same witnesses were subject to resistance and attempted

overpowering (and thus could not observe the incident passively), one cannot reasonably

expect them to provide a picture perfect narrative complete with all details of what

actually happened. Further, it is quite possible that IP Welagedera did not see the exact

manner in which WSI Gamage conducted herself, particularly as he would have been

concentrating on relieving himself from the grip of the 1st Accused and on preventing the

1st Accused from evading arrest and fleeing from the scene along with the polysack bag.

When ‘participant-witnesses’ as opposed to ‘passive-observer-witnesses’ give evidence

regarding an incident that occurred quite suddenly, it is not humanly possible for their

testimonies to mirror each other. Furthermore, their testimonies which had been in

response to the examination-in-chief conducted by the learned State Counsel, appear not

to have been complete with all the possible details of the event, particularly as the

examination of IP Welagedera seems to have been conducted in a somewhat sketchy

manner; so apparently, his examination had been far less than a comprehensive

examination-in-chief that may be reasonably expected of an experienced State Counsel.

It is necessary to also record that, notwithstanding lengthy cross-examination of both IP

Welagedera and WSI Gamage, the defence had not been able to establish that, (i) these

two witnesses had been belated in recording their detailed notes relating to the raid, (ii)

there exists inconsistencies of any particular significance between their oral testimonies

and the detailed notes, (iii) their testimonies suffer from inconsistencies per-se, (iv) the

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 34

evidence of the two main prosecution witnesses are incompatible with any other

independently proven material fact, (v) the prosecution’s version is either highly or

inherently improbable, (vi) during their testimonies they displayed a particular

demeanour or deportment which reflects that they were intentionally uttering falsehood,

or (vii) the prosecution witnesses entertained a cause or a motive to falsely implicate the

accused. Further, the cross-examination of these two witnesses did not give rise to an

inference that they had fabricated a case by foisting heroin on the 1st Accused. Further,

the defence was not able to elicit during cross-examination any admission favourable to

the position of the defence.

In State of Uttar Pradesh v M. K. Anthony, [AIR 1985 SC 48] Justice Desai, has held as

follows:

“While appreciating the evidence of a witness, the approach must be whether the evidence

of the witness read as a whole appears to have a ring of truth. Once that impression is

formed, it is undoubtedly necessary for the court to scrutinise the evidence more

particularly keeping in view of the deficiencies, draw-backs and infirmities pointed out in

evidence as a whole and evaluate them to find out whether it is against the general tenor of

the evidence given by the witness and whether the earlier evaluation of the evidence is

shaken as to render it unworthy of belief. Minor discrepancies on trivial matters not

touching the core of the case, hyper-technical approach by taking sentences torn out of

context here or there from the evidence, attaching importance to some technical error

committed by the investigating officer not going to the root of the matter would not

ordinarily permit rejection of the evidence as a whole. … Even honest and truthful

witnesses may differ in some details unrelated to the main incident because power of

observation, retention and reproduction differ with individuals. Cross-examination is an

unequal duel between a rustic and refined lawyer.”

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 35

In Mananage Susil Dharmapala v. Officer-in-Charge, Special Crimes Division, Colombo,

referring to the degree of proof the prosecution is obliged to fulfill, the Supreme Court

had the occasion to observe the following:

“In terms of section 3 of the Evidence Ordinance, a fact is said to be proved when, after

considering the matters before it, the Court either believes it to exist or considers its

existence so probable that a prudent man ought, under the circumstances of the particular

case, to act upon the supposition that it exists. Therefore, on an application of the principle

contained in section 3 of the Evidence Ordinance buttressed by the earlier mentioned

judicial precedents, I am of the opinion that, a criminal case can be considered to have been

proved by the prosecution beyond reasonable doubt, if in the objective mind of the Judge or

the jury, as the case may be, the prosecution has presented sufficient cogent evidence which

causes the Judge or the jury to believe that the accused had committed the offence he has

been charged with, or the judge or the jury considers that the accused having committed

the offence to be so probable that the judge or the jury ought, under the circumstances of

the case, act upon the supposition that the accused committed the offence. A case is ‘proven

beyond reasonable doubt’, when a state of mind develops in the judge or the jury as the case

may be, as to belief in the truthfulness of the assertion made by the prosecution, and the

absence of a logically sound reason to doubt that assertion.”

In view of the foregoing, I am convinced and therefore do not entertain a reasonable

doubt in my own mind, that the narrative which has been given by IP Welagedera and

WSI Gamage in their testimonies, reflect an accurate and reliable picture of the events

that had taken place on 16th August 2004 in Mannar near the Pillaiyar Kovil pertaining to

the 1st Accused - Appellant and the 2nd Accused. I am also of the view that the prosecution

has proven its case against the Appellant beyond reasonable doubt.

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 36

The law and its application as regards the impugned judgments of the High Court and

the Court of Appeal

During the course of the hearing, learned President’s Counsel for the Appellant and the

learned Additional Solicitor General for the Respondent addressed this Court on several

aspects pertaining to the impugned judgments of the High Court and the Court of

Appeal. Those submissions necessitate that a description be provided of the applicable

law regarding the scope, nature and degree of scrutiny required to be performed by this

Court in respect of those two judgments.

Testimony and evidence related functions of the trial judge

A key challenge launched by learned President’s Counsel for the Appellant regarding the

judgment of the High Court, was based on the assessment of credibility of prosecution

and defence witnesses by the learned High Court Judge. Learned counsel argued that,

the Judge of the High Court had not properly performed the function of assessment of

credibility, and had believed the version of the prosecution while not paying due

attention to the defence position and the evidence adduced on behalf of the defence. He

submitted that this had resulted in the Appellant not having received a fair trial in the

High Court. In this regard, learned Counsel for the Appellant in his post-argument

written submissions has critiqued the judgement of the High Court as amounting to a

“scanty judgment”.

In response, learned Additional Solicitor General submitted that the impugned judgment

of the Court of Appeal reflects that the appellate court had given due consideration to

whether the High Court Judge had correctly assessed the credibility of prosecution

witnesses, and that the Judge of the High Court had, due to valid reasons, accepted the

testimonies of prosecution witnesses and rejected the testimonies given by the defence

witnesses.

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 37

The core submission made in this regard by learned President’s Counsel for the Appellant

was that the learned Judge of the High Court had not in terms of the applicable law, duly

performed his functions as a trial judge. Thus, the following description of the role and

functions of a trial judge is provided:

Particularly in a criminal trial conducted before a judge sitting without a jury, testimony

and evidence related functions to be performed by the presiding judge, which I wish to

refer to as the primary functions of the trial judge to be performed after the recording

of evidence, are the following:

(i) Assessment and determination of ‘credibility’ of witnesses.

(ii) Determination of ‘testimonial trustworthiness’ of the testimonies given by

witnesses.

(iii) Analysis of the evidence.

(iv) Determination of the ‘probative value’ (weight) to be attached to evidence and

the ‘sufficiency’ of evidence to prove the charges.

(v) Determination of whether the prosecution has ‘proven the ingredients of the

offence(s)’ the accused stands charged.

(vi) If the defence has relied on a ‘general or special exception to criminal liability’,

whether the defence has proven such exception.

(vii) Determination of whether the prosecution has proven its case ‘beyond

reasonable doubt’, and contra wise, whether the defence has raised a

‘reasonable doubt’ regarding the case for the prosecution.

It is to be noted that the performance of these evidence related functions would require

application of certain legal principles and therefore a correct appreciation and application

of such legal principles would be necessary for the lawful performance of these functions.

A methodical and rational approach to discharging each of these functions is necessary.

However, it must be appreciated that performing each of these functions individually,

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 38

separately from each other (as if in watertight compartments), and incrementally

adopting a segmented or phased-out approach, (in the manner scientific experiments are

conducted), may not be practically feasible. That is mainly due to the inter-relationship

and interdependency of these functions and in view of the nature of the material to be

taken into consideration. The adjudication of every criminal trial, must necessarily be

founded upon inter-alia the performance of these critical functions. If a verdict of ‘guilt’

of an accused is arrived at without performing these functions in a lawful manner,

indeed, as rightly pointed out by the learned President’s Counsel for the Appellant, the

accused can rightfully claim that he was deprived of a fair trial. A judgment of a criminal

trial Court which does not reflect that these functions have been carried out by the learned

trial judge in a lawful and sufficient manner, cannot be relied upon to satisfy an appellate

Court that the accused had received a fair trial, and that he had been found ‘guilty’ in a

lawful manner. However, a determination of whether or not the accused has been

deprived of the constitutional right (in terms of Article 13(3) of the Constitution) to a fair

trial should be founded upon not only whether or not the trial judge has correctly

performed the above-mentioned functions, but also on a careful consideration of the

totality of testimonies given by witnesses and the evidence of the case. However, it is

important to note that a verdict arrived at without the proper performance of the afore-

stated testimony and evidence related functions would be unlawful and hence should be

vacated in appeal, only if such failure on the part of the trial judge had prejudiced the

substantial rights of the accused or occasioned a failure of justice.

In this regard, it is important to note that the nature and the extent to which these

testimony and evidence related functions are to be performed by the trial judge would

depend upon the nature of the issues placed in dispute by the parties. For example, it

would not be necessary to assess and determine credibility of a witness whose testimony

has not been impeached through cross-examination or adversely commented upon

during submissions of counsel. In view of the compelling need to save precious judicial

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 39

time and associated resources, what is either admitted, or not challenged or critiqued,

need not be judicially considered and determined.

Jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal

As regards the impugned judgment of the Court of Appeal, learned President’s Counsel

submitted that the Court of Appeal had failed to consider whether the prosecution has

proved its case beyond reasonable doubt. He asserted that the assessment of credibility of

prosecution witnesses was totally flawed and hence the learned Judges’ decision to

believe the two main prosecution witnesses was erroneous. He further submitted that the

version of the defence had not been carefully considered, and that was vital, as in his

opinion, the defence evidence at its minimum raised a reasonable doubt regarding the

case for the prosecution. The sum-total of those submissions was that the Court of Appeal

had not properly performed its appellate functions. Learned Additional Solicitor General

submitted that the Court of Appeal had performed its functions in terms of the law, and

had affirmed the conviction of the Appellant, only after careful scrutiny of the evidence

led at the trial by both the prosecution and the defence and upon a consideration of the

judgment of the High Court. Thus, in my view it is necessary to refer to the following

description of the jurisdiction and functions of the Court of Appeal:

Article 138(1) of the Constitution which confers appellate jurisdiction on the Court of

Appeal, provides as follows:

“The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise subject to the provisions of the Constitution

or of any law, an appellate jurisdiction for the correction of all errors in fact or in

law which shall be committed by the High Court, in the exercise of its appellate or

original jurisdiction or by any Court of First Instance, tribunal or other institution and

sole and exclusive cognizance, by way of appeal, revision and restitutio in integrum, of all

causes, suits, actions, prosecutions, matters and things of which such High Court, Court

of First Instance tribunal or other institution may have taken cognizance:

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 40

Provided that no judgment, decree or order of any court shall be reversed or varied

on account of any error, defect or irregularity, which has not prejudiced the

substantial rights of parties or occasioned a failure of justice.” (Emphasis added.)

It would thus be seen that while the Court of Appeal has been vested with wide appellate

jurisdiction in respect of a judgment or final order of the High Court, the exercise of that

jurisdiction should result in the vacation of the judgment or final order appealed against,

only if in the opinion of the Court of Appeal, the procedure adopted or the impugned

judgment or final order of the High Court contains an error, defect or irregularity, and

such error, defect or irregularity had caused prejudice to the substantive rights of the

parties or occasioned a failure of justice. As an infringement of the substantive rights of

parties would also result in a failure of justice, in the final analysis, what would give rise

to the Court of Appeal vacating, varying or otherwise interfering with the impugned

judgment or final order, is the Court of Appeal forming the view that in the totality of the

circumstances, the impugned judgment of the High Court had occasioned a failure or

miscarriage of justice.

In practice, what defines the scope of the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction of the Court

of Appeal, are the grounds of appeal urged on behalf of the Appellant during the

hearing. The scrutiny of the procedural aspects of the impugned proceedings and the

contents of the impugned judgment or final order, is founded upon the grounds of appeal

actually urged before the appellate court. The Court of Appeal need not go into and focus

on matters that have not been urged and argued by Counsel. That is of fundamental

importance.

In the present matter, the impugned judgment of the Court of Appeal contains the

‘grounds of appeal’ urged by learned counsel for the Appellant during the hearing of the

Appeal in the Court of Appeal. (It is noted that, in this matter, one and the same counsel

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 41

appeared for the Appellant and the Respondent before the Court of Appeal and the

Supreme Court.) The grounds of appeal urged before the Court of Appeal as contained

in the judgment of the Court of Appeal (reproduced verbatim), are as follows:

“1st ground of appeal:- The trial judge did not analyze the evidence led by the prosecution

with caution, resulting in a miscarriage of justice.

2nd and 3rd grounds of appeal:- The evidence of IP Welagedera with regard to the raid is

scanty and not credible.

4th ground of appeal:- The contradictions in the evidence and the probability or

improbability of the prosecution version have not been properly evaluated by the learned

judge.

5th ground of appeal:- In any case there was no evidence whatsoever against the 2nd accused-

appellant and therefore the conviction of the 2nd accused-appellant was wrong.”

Therefore, in the instant matter, the duty cast on the Court of Appeal, was to scrutinize

the impugned judgment in the backdrop of the afore-stated grounds of appeal. It is

evident from the impugned judgement of the Court of Appeal, that following a

consideration of the afore-stated grounds of appeal and the proceedings of the High

Court, it had answered the first three questions in the negative, and the fourth question

in the affirmative. That had resulted in the conviction of the 1st Accused being affirmed

and the conviction of the 2nd Accused being vacated and therefore he being acquitted.

From a generic perspective, in an appeal against a conviction, the primary task of the

appellate court is to scrutinize the proceedings, including the recorded testimonies of

witnesses and the impugned judgment of the High Court, and determine whether the

trial judge had performed the functions expected of a trial judge in terms of the law,

objectively, diligently and correctly; in other words, determine whether the trial judge

has performed his functions judicially. This does not require the appellate court to

assume the position of the trial judge, and re-adjudicate the case. For example, the duty

cast on an appellate court does not require re-assessment of the credibility of witnesses.

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 42

What is necessary is for the appellate court to carefully consider and determine whether

the functions the law requires the trial judge to perform, have been lawfully and correctly

performed. This scrutiny should be performed while recognizing that the trial judge is

vested by law with a degree of discretionary authority. That there could be a difference

between the objective view of the learned judges of the Court of Appeal and the learned

judge of the High Court, does not necessarily make the latter view unlawful or unsafe.

One judge needs to recognize and respect individual, independent and objective views

founded upon a judicial consideration of evidence and the applicable law, by another

judge.

In the instant matter, what would be necessary is for the Court of Appeal to have

considered whether the trial judge had assessed the credibility and testimonial

trustworthiness of witnesses having applied criteria recognized by law, and done so

correctly. However, during the hearing of the appeal, if the assessment and determination

of credibility of a particular witness has not been challenged on specific grounds, the

appellate court would not be required to perform the task of determining whether the

trial judge had lawfully assessed and determined credibility of that particular witness. It

is seen that the grounds on which the credibility of prosecution witnesses IP Welagedera

and WSI Gamage were challenged was on the footing that there was a contradiction inter-

se (inconsistency) between the evidence of the two witnesses, and that the prosecution’s

version of events was improbable. Therefore, the scrutiny of the assessment of credibility

of those two witnesses should be based on those two grounds, only.

In King v. Gunaratne and Another [14 Ceylon Law Recorder, 144], the objective of the

scrutiny of the trial proceedings and the impugned judgment by the appellate Court has

been captured by Chief Justice Macdonnell in the following manner:

“This is an appeal mainly on the facts from a Court which saw and heard the witnesses to a

Court which has not seen or heard them. …” Chief Justice Macdonnell has enumerated

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 43

three tests which a Court sitting in appeal should apply when determining questions

of fact. They are as follows:

(i) Was the verdict of the Judge unreasonable and against the weight of the

evidence?

(ii) Was there a misdirection either on the law or on the evidence?

(iii) Has the trial Court drawn wrong inferences from matters in evidence?

Indeed, it is the cursus curiae of appellate Courts of this country, that an appellate Court

will not lightly interfere with the assessment and determination of credibility of witnesses

and testimonial trustworthiness, arrived at by a trial judge. Chief Justice G.P.S. de Silva’s

views regarding this aspect in Alwis v. Piyasena Fernando, [(1993) 1 Sri L.R. 119] are of

particular relevance. His Lordship has held as follows:

“It is well established that findings of primary facts by a trial judge who hears and sees

witnesses are not to be lightly disturbed on appeal. The findings in this case are based

largely on credibility of witnesses. …”.

In Kumara de Silva and two others v Attorney-General, [(2010) 2 Sri L.R. 169] [CA

Minutes of 15.11.2007], Sarath de Abrew, J held as follows:

“Credibility is a question of fact, not of law. Appeal Court judges repeatedly stress the

importance of the trial Judge’s observations of the demeanour of witnesses in deciding

questions of fact. The acceptance or rejection of evidence of witnesses is therefore a question

of fact for the trial Judge, since he or she is in the best position to hear and observe witnesses.

In such a situation the Appellate courts will be slow to interfere with the findings of the

trial Judge unless such evidence could be shown to be totally inconsistent or perverse and

lacking credibility.”

In Ariyadasa v Attorney-General, [(2012) 1 Sri. L.R. 84], Sisira de Abrew, J in holding that

the witness whose credibility was challenged was in fact a credible witness, and having

done so based on the trial judge’s finding to that effect, has held as follows:

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 44

“Court of Appeal will not lightly disturb a finding of a trial Judge with regard to the

acceptance or rejection of a testimony of a witness, unless it is manifestly wrong, when the

trial judge has taken such a decision after observing the demeanour and the deportment of

a witness. This is because the trial Judge has the priceless advantage to observe the

demeanour and deportment of the witness which the Court of Appeal does not have.”

One key reason for the afore-stated approach is that the trial court has the invaluable

advantage of observing the demeanour and deportment of witnesses who testify at the

trial, and using such observations for the purpose of assessing and determining the

credibility of witnesses. Furthermore, the gradual and incremental unfolding of human

testimony and other evidence during the course of a trial, and the ability of the trial judge

to question witnesses and obtain clarifications, place the trial judge in an advantageous

position in appreciating the evidence and the respective positions of the prosecution and

the defence. These advantages are not available to an appellate Court, which is called

upon to determine the lawfulness of the finding of the trial Court, based on a

consideration of the verbatim transcript of the trial proceedings together with the

judgment of the trial judge, aided by submissions of counsel and the reasons for the

findings contained in the judgment. That is the legal basis for an appellate Court to be

hesitant to disturb the findings of a trial judge regarding the credibility of witnesses and

the trustworthiness of the testimonies given by witnesses. However, for an appellate

Court to be respectful of the trial judge’s assessment and determination of credibility and

testimonial trustworthiness of witnesses, the record of the trial proceedings and the

judgment should reflect that the trial judge had paid due attention to the demeanour and

deportment of the relevant witnesses, and formed a view regarding their credibility and

testimonial trustworthiness inter-alia based on such demeanour and deportment.

Furthermore, the judgment should reflect that the trial judge was acutely aware of the

others tests and the criteria available for the assessment of credibility and testimonial

trustworthiness, had applied those criteria in an appropriate manner to the extent that is

warranted, and had objectively and diligently arrived at findings thereon. A sweeping

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 45

averment by the trial judge that he believes the testimony given by a witness without

giving reasons therefor, would not enable proper judicial scrutiny of the judgment of the

trial judge. He must explain the process and the criteria by which credibility and

testimonial trustworthiness were assessed and determined, and give reasons for his

findings.

Furthermore, the judgment must reflect that the trial judge had developed a correct

appreciation of the case for the prosecution and the defence. A mere reproduction of the

testimonies given by witnesses in the form of a summation, and a sweeping averment

that the testimonies given by witnesses are believable and hence acceptable, would not

meet with the standard expected of a trial judge.

If the judgment of the trial court depicts that -

(i) the trial judge had not functioned independently, impartially and neutrally,

(ii) the trial judge had not judicially performed the functions of assessment and

determination of credibility of witnesses and testimonial trustworthiness of the

testimonies given by witnesses,

(iii) the trial judge had not appreciated the evidence correctly,

(iv) the evidence had not been correctly analyzed, weighed, the sufficiency of

evidence presented by the prosecution had not been considered and the probative

value of such evidence had not been determined,

(v) the trial judge had taken into consideration inadmissible or irrelevant material and

had been substantially influenced or prejudiced by such material,

(vi) the trial judge had not correctly appreciated and applied the applicable law,

(vii) the trial judge had not taken into consideration and determined whether the

constituent ingredients of the offence(s) have been proven by the prosecution,

(viii) the trial judge had not considered whether the prosecution has proven its case

beyond reasonable doubt, or conversely, whether the defence has raised a

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 46

reasonable doubt through either cross-examination of prosecution witnesses,

presentation of defence evidence or through submissions, or

(ix) the trial judge had arrived at a perverse finding (verdict),

and in view of the evidence and the applicable law, a substantial miscarriage of justice

has occurred to the accused – appellant due to one or more failures enumerated above,

or in the circumstances of the case including the totality of the evidence, the conviction

of the accused is wholly unreasonable, arbitrary or unreliable (unsafe), the finding of the

trial judge must be classified as being ‘unlawful’, and thus the verdict must be quashed

by the appellate court.

Therefore, if the appellate Court is to affirm the conviction of the accused – appellant, the

impugned judgment of the trial court should ex-facie reflect that the trial judge has

performed the earlier mentioned functions in the manner the law demands that he should

perform in the circumstances of the particular case, and the finding of ‘guilt’ should in

the opinion of the Court of Appeal not be unreasonable, arbitrary, perverse or unreliable

(unsafe).

Jurisdiction of the Supreme Court

Learned President’s Counsel for the Appellant, insisted that this Court scrutinizes the

evidence presented by the prosecution and the defence afresh (as if combing the evidence

with a fine tooth-comb), and hold that the prosecution had failed to prove its case beyond

a reasonable doubt. Somewhat hesitantly though, in deference to the detailed

submissions made by both counsel with regard to the testimonies given by prosecution

and defence witnesses, in the earlier part of this judgment, I have engaged in a detailed

analysis of the testimonies given by witnesses for the prosecution and the defence and

stated the conclusions that was reached thereon.

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 47

Nevertheless, it is necessary for me to provide the following description pertaining to the

jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and its duties and functions in the consideration of an

Appeal from a judgment of the Court of Appeal, in a criminal matter:

In terms of article 118 of the Constitution, the Supreme Court is the highest and final

superior Court of record, and shall, subject to the provisions of the Constitution, exercise

inter-alia final appellate jurisdiction. As regard its final appellate jurisdiction, in terms of

Article 127(1) of the Constitution, the Supreme Court has been conferred with the

jurisdiction to correct all errors in fact or in law which had been committed by the Court

of Appeal. In terms of Article 127(2) of the Constitution, in the exercise of that final

appellate jurisdiction, the Supreme Court may affirm, reverse or vary any order,

judgment, or sentence of the Court of Appeal, and may issue such directions to any Court

of First Instance or order a new trial or further hearing in any proceedings as the justice

of the case may require. In a criminal appeal to the Supreme Court, while answering the

questions of law in respect of which special leave to appeal or leave to appeal (as the case

may be) had been granted, the primary function of this Court is to determine whether in

the backdrop of the grounds of appeal urged before the Court of Appeal, the afore-stated

functions of the Court of Appeal which sat in appeal against the judgment of the High

Court, had been performed in a lawful and correct manner. Additionally, this Court has

the overarching duty to consider whether (a) the failure if any on the part of the Court of

Appeal performing its appellate function had occasioned a miscarriage of justice, and (b)

in any event, for cogent reasons to be enumerated, the finding of the trial court, should

be allowed to stand.

The following avenues would pave the way for the Supreme Court to exercise its

appellate jurisdiction:

(i) In terms of Article 128(1) of the Constitution, where the Court of Appeal either

ex-mero motu or at the instance of any aggrieved party to a matter or

proceedings, grants leave to appeal to the Supreme Court.

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 48

(ii) In terms of Article 128(2) of the Constitution, where the Supreme Court in its

discretion grants special leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, in instances where

the Court of Appeal has refused to grant leave to appeal to the Supreme Court

or where in the opinion of the Supreme Court, the case is fit for review by the

Supreme Court.

(iii) In terms of the proviso to Article 128(2) of the Constitution, where the Supreme

Court grants leave to appeal in a matter or proceedings as it is satisfied that the

question to be decided is of public or general importance.

It would be seen that the instant Appeal has come up through the second avenue

enumerated above, due to the reason that the Supreme Court in the exercise of its

discretion has deemed it fit to grant special leave to appeal to the Supreme Court on the

premise that in view of the three questions of law identified by this Court (referred to at

the outset of this judgment) this matter is fit for review by the Supreme Court. It must be

noted that the entitlement granted by the Constitution to prefer an appeal to the Supreme

Court, should necessarily be with leave first having been obtained (which is a pre-

condition to be satisfied), and exercised founded upon a substantial question of law

which arises out of the impugned judgment of the Court of Appeal. It is important to bear

in mind that raising a question of law should not be strategy based, with the view to

causing the Supreme Court to re-assess and re-determine fundamental testimony-related

issues such as credibility of witnesses and testimonial trustworthiness of evidence

contained in testimonies of witnesses.

In matters such as the instant appeal, the findings of facts by both the High Court and

the Court of Appeal are concurrent. That the Supreme Court should not interfere with

concurrent findings of fact arrived at by the trial Court and the Court of Appeal is not a

cast-iron rule. Nevertheless, it is necessary for this Court to express the view that, the

Supreme Court would only in ‘special circumstances’ (in the true sense of that term)

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 49

founded upon compelling reasons of law and facts, disturb such concurrent findings

of the two lower courts. As held by Justice Kulatunge in Rev. Mathew Peiris v. The

Attorney General [(1992) 2 Sri L.R. 372], where the final decision is reached (as is the case

here), on the basis of antecedent determinations of facts on several issues, a court of final

appeal (the Supreme Court) should be slow to interfere with the findings of the trial court.

This Court should not be called upon to perform the functions of the trial Court or that

of the Court of Appeal. There should be a substantial question of law, which requires to

be answered by the apex Court of this country. Thus, I would be inclined not to accept

the suggestion by learned President’s Counsel for the Appellant, that this Court interferes

with the findings of the learned trial judge on the assessment of credibility of witnesses

arrived at by him. Indeed, if the Appellant could establish that the learned trial judge had

grievously erred in the application of legal criteria in the assessment of credibility and

testimonial trustworthiness, and upon the attention of the Court of Appeal having been

drawn to such error, the Court of Appeal had overlooked that aspect of the case, then I

would not have hesitated to go to the extent of exercising jurisdiction which the Court of

Appeal ought to have exercised and scrutinized whether a failure of justice had been

caused regarding the assessment of credibility and testimonial trustworthiness of

witnesses. I must state that in the instant Appeal, for the reasons I have stated in the

earlier part of this judgement (relating to the analysis of testimonies given by witnesses

and their evidence) the Appellant has not satisfied that high threshold, which warrants

this Court to re-assess and determine afresh, credibility and testimonial trustworthiness

of witnesses.

Ideally, in an Appeal to the Supreme Court against a judgment of the Court of Appeal,

the appeal should be argued by counsel based on an agreed set of evidence-based facts

which emerged at the trial. This Court should be invited to determine a substantial

question of law arising out of the judgment of the Court of Appeal, which may either be

a pure question of law, or be a question of law which to some extent is founded upon or

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 50

mixed with facts that have emerged through evidence presented at the trial. Whether the

trial judge had performed his functions in accordance with the law and done so correctly,

is a matter to be argued and considered during the first appeal, and not before this Court.

The objective of this Court exercising the final appellate jurisdiction in respect of a

judgment of the Court of Appeal, is to determine whether the impugned judgment of the

Court of Appeal is in accordance with the law, and if the said judgment raises questions

of law, to answer them in accordance with the law. An Appeal to the Supreme Court

against a judgment of the Court of Appeal, unless unavoidable due to the nature of the

questions of law raised pertaining to the judgment of the Court of Appeal, should not be

used by the Appellant to critique the judgment of the High Court. In any event, the

judgment of the High Court should not be critiqued, founded upon grounds not urged

before the Court of Appeal. In colloquial terms, the Appeal to the Supreme Court should

not be an occasion to ‘take a bite at the cherry for a second time’.

However, as pointed out by Justice Soza in Attorney General v. D. Seneviratne, [(1982) 1

Sri L.R. 302], once special leave to appeal has been granted, the Supreme Court need not

limit the scope of its consideration of the impugned judgment and the corresponding

proceedings to the question of law in respect of which special leave to appeal has been

granted. It may, in the interests of justice, consider the entire matter and correct any errors

of fact or law that may have been committed by a subordinate court.

Justice Sharvananda in Sri Lanka Ports Authority v. Pieris [(1981) 1 Sri L.R. 101], had

expressed the following view as regards the scope of the final appellate jurisdiction of the

Supreme Court:

“Article 127 spells the appellate jurisdiction of this Court. The appellate jurisdiction

extends to the correction of all errors in fact and/or in law which shall be committed by the

Court of Appeal or any court of first instance. There is no provision inhibiting this Court

from exercising its appellate jurisdiction once that jurisdiction is invoked. On reading

Articles 127 and 128 together, it would appear that once leave to appeal is granted by the

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 51

Supreme Court or the Court of Appeal and this Court is seized of the appeal, the

jurisdiction of this Court to correct all errors in fact or in law which had been committed

by the Court of Appeal or court of first instance is not limited but is exhaustive. Leave to

appeal is the key which unlocks the door into the Supreme Court, and once a litigant has

passed through the door, he is free to invoke the appellate jurisdiction of this Court “for the

correction of all errors in fact and/or in law which had been committed by the Court of

Appeal or any court of first instance”. This Court, however, has the discretion to

impose reasonable limits to that freedom, such as refusing to entertain grounds of

appeal which were not taken in the court below and raised for the first time before

this Court. This Court in the exercise of its discretion will, however, look to the broad

principles of justice and will take judicial notice of a point which is patent on the face of the

proceedings and discourage mere technical objections.” [Emphasis added.]

In Bandaranaike v. Jagathsena and Others, [(1984) 2 Sri L.R. 397], Justice Colin-Thome,

referring to the wide final appellate jurisdiction vested in the Supreme Court, has

observed that, the wide power vested in the Supreme Court must be used with

circumspection. The Court must attach the greatest weight to the opinion of the judge

who saw the witnesses and heard their evidence. Consequently, the Court should not

disturb a judgment of fact, unless it is ‘unsound’.

In Bharwada Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai v. State of Gujarat, [1983 AIR SC 753], cited by

learned Additional Solicitor General, Justice Thakkar, referring to the testimonies given

by two young ladies who were children at the time of the incident and sexually abused

by the Appellant, has expressed the following view:

“… Their evidence has been considered to be worthy of acceptance. It is a pure finding of

fact recorded by the Sessions Court and affirmed by the High Court. Such a concurrent

finding of fact cannot be reopened in an appeal by special leave unless it is established: (1)

that the finding is based on no evidence, or (2) that the finding is perverse, it being such as

no reasonable person could have arrived at even if the evidence was taken at its face value

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 52

or (3) the finding is based and built on inadmissible evidence, which evidence, if excluded

from vision, would negate the prosecution case or substantially discredit or impair it, or

(4) some vital piece of evidence which would tilt the balance in favour of the convict has

been overlooked, disregarded, or wrongly discarded. … We do not consider it appropriate

or permissible to enter upon a re-appraisal or reappreciation of the evidence in the context

of the minor discrepancies painstakingly highlighted by learned counsel for the appellant.

Overmuch importance cannot be attached to minor discrepancies. …”

I find myself in agreement with the afore-stated views.

Questions of law

I will now deal with the questions of law in respect of which special leave to appeal had

been granted.

(i) Did the learned Judges of the Court of Appeal misdirect themselves in not

considering the defence version at all and affirming the conviction of the

Appellant?

This question of law is founded upon the assertion that an appellate court has a duty to

consider the version of the defence presented at the trial, and that in the instant appeal,

the Court of Appeal had failed to perform that duty. It is necessary to point out that one

function of the Court of Appeal is to consider the version of the defence (if any) presented

at the trial, and thereafter consider whether the High Court had considered that version

and arrived at lawful conclusions thereon. Such a consideration of the version of the

defence raised at the trial is necessary for the purpose of considering whether such

version (a) gives rise to a reasonable doubt regarding the case for the prosecution, or (b)

gives rise to a general or special exception to criminal responsibility. In the instant appeal,

the first of these two grounds is applicable. Therefore, it is necessary to point out that the

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 53

afore-stated question of law will be viewed by this Court from that slightly varied legal

footing.

The submission of the learned President’s Counsel for the Appellant was that the Court

of Appeal had not given due consideration to the evidence presented on behalf of the

defence. In response, learned Additional Solicitor General submitted that the judgment

of the Court of Appeal clearly reflects that it had given due consideration to the position

of the defence and the evidence presented on behalf of the accused and had been mindful

of that position throughout the scrutiny of the judgment of the High Court.

It is necessary to point out that the purported non-consideration by the learned High

Court Judge of the evidence presented by the defence, has not been a ground based upon

which the judgment of the High Court was challenged before the Court of Appeal. That

is seen when one considers the grounds of appeal presented to the Court of Appeal (as

contained in the judgment of the Court of Appeal and referred to previously in this

judgment). That position is strengthened when one considers the contents of the written

submissions tendered on behalf of the Appellant to the Court of Appeal. Thus, in my

opinion, the necessity did not arise for the Court of Appeal to have considered whether

the learned judge of the High Court had given due consideration to the evidence

presented by the Defence. A consideration of the impugned judgment of the Court of

Appeal reveals that the judgment contains and is limited, to the views of the Court of

Appeal regarding the grounds of appeal urged on behalf of the Appellant. As the learned

Counsel for the Appellant had not raised a ground of appeal alleging that there was a

failure on the part of the trial judge to have considered the evidence presented on behalf

of the defence, understandably the Court of Appeal has not considered that aspect.

However, a careful scrutiny of the judgement of the High Court reveals clearly that the

learned judge had in fact considered the defence version (both the defence evidence and

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 54

the suggestions made to prosecution witnesses during their cross-examination) and

decided to reject it. The judgment of the High Court reveals two more aspects. They are,

that the learned Judge of the High Court had for reasons stated, decided (i) not to believe

the evidence given by defence witness Sivabalan, and (ii) that the case for the defence

does not give rise to a reasonable doubt regarding the case for the prosecution.

Be that as it may, it is observed that this question of law seems to have been raised on

behalf of the Appellant on the footing that the position of the defence and the defence

evidence give rise to a reasonable doubt regarding the case for the prosecution, which

aspect is claimed by the Appellant as not having been considered by the learned trial

judge and by the Court of Appeal. However, a perusal of the judgment of the High Court

clearly reveals that the learned High Court Judge has considered the evidence of IP

Welagedera and WSI Gamage from the perspective of (a) the probability of the

prosecution’s version, (b) consistency between the version of events testified to by IP

Welagedera vs. WSI Gamage, (c) suggestions made to both prosecution witnesses, and

(d) the evidence presented on behalf of the accused (defence evidence). The learned trial

judge has concluded that the prosecution witnesses were credible and that their evidence

could be acted upon. In that backdrop, the Court of Appeal while referring to the

purported discrepancy between the testimonies of IP Welagedera and WSI Gamage, has

observed the following:

“In this regard the learned High Court Judge has vividly described how certain witnesses

may observe certain things the others may not. … A witness may not observe and

remember better than another the manner in which the incident took place, especially when

he was the person who was attempting to subdue and overpower a criminal in order to

apprehend him with the contraband, rather than a witness who observes the incident. The

person really involved may sometimes be oblivious to the blows he received and the injuries

suffered or how and the manner in which he received and suffered, his primary concern

being the arrest of the accused, come what may. … The learned Judge has also stated that

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 55

when things occurred in rapid succession it would not be possible for some witnesses to

observe as well as certain other witnesses, the sequence and the things that happened.”

The above-quoted extract of the impugned judgment of the Court of Appeal shows (a)

the extent to which the learned judge of the High Court had considered issues pertaining

to the credibility and testimonial trustworthiness of key prosecution witnesses, and (b)

the manner in which the learned judges of the Court of Appeal had addressed their

minds to whether the learned judge of the High Court had correctly assessed and

determined credibility and testimonial trustworthiness of key prosecution witnesses.

In view of the foregoing, I hold that, the impugned judgment of the Court of Appeal

cannot be impeached on the premise that the Court of Appeal had failed to specifically

consider the defence evidence. Thus, I conclude that the impugned judgment of the Court

of Appeal does not contain a misdirection, and that in any event, the non-consideration

of the defence evidence by the Court of Appeal has not occasioned a failure of justice.

(ii) Did the learned Judges of the Court of Appeal misdirect themselves when they

failed to consider that although credibility of a witness is primarily the

function of the trier of facts, when the said trier of facts has failed to analyze

the defence evidence and has deprived the accused of his constitutional

protection to a fair trial, a duty is cast on the Court of Appeal to ensure that

a miscarriage of justice does not occur?

This ground of appeal has been formulated on the premise that the learned judge of the

High Court had failed to analyze the defence evidence and has thereby deprived the

accused of his constitutional protection to a fair trial. However, a scrutiny of the judgment

of the High Court reveals that the learned judge of the High Court had after considering

the case for the prosecution, engaged in a detailed consideration of the evidence given by

the Appellant and defence witness Sivabalan. Consequent to the narration and

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 56

consideration of their evidence, the learned judge of the High Court has concluded that

he does not believe the defence evidence. That amounts to a rejection of the defence

evidence following a consideration of such evidence. Therefore, I hold that the premise

on which this question had been raised is faulty, and thus does not require further

consideration.

(iii) Did the learned Judges of the Court of Appeal misdirect themselves when they

failed to appreciate that the learned trial judge did not analyze the evidence

led by the prosecution with caution resulting in a miscarriage of justice?

Once again, this question of law is also founded on the assumption that the judge of the

High Court had failed to analyze the evidence led by the prosecution.

The Judgement of the High Court clearly shows that the learned judge of the High Court

had -

(a) appreciated the nature of the charges framed against the accused,

(b) recorded a summation of the evidence given by each witness for the prosecution and

provided a description of the prosecution’s narrative,

(c) considered the evidence given by IP Welagedera and WSI Gamage and thereby

assessed the credibility and testimonial trustworthiness of their testimonies,

(d) considered whether there exists any discrepancy between the testimonies of IP

Welagedera and WSI Gamage,

(e) considered whether IP Welagedera not having testified regarding certain aspects

which WSI Gamage had testified, affects their credibility,

(f) arrived at the finding that notwithstanding lengthy cross-examination, defence

counsel had not proved a single contradiction,

(g) considered whether the officers of the PNB had followed an unlawful procedure by

producing the suspects before the Magistrate of Anuradhapura instead of producing

them before the Magistrate of Mannar,

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 57

(h) considered whether the defence had suggested any reason for officers of the PNB to

have falsely implicated the accused,

(i) considered the defence evidence,

(j) arrived at the conclusion that due to a reason cited in the judgment, defence witness

Sivabalan had given false testimony,

(k) concluded that the prosecution version is true, and that the defence version cannot be

believed, and

(l) held that the prosecution has proved its case beyond reasonable doubt.

In the circumstances, I cannot agree with the submission made by learned President’s

Counsel and the premise contained in the afore-stated question of law, that there has been

a tangible ill-consideration of testimonies given by witnesses and an absence of analysis

of the evidence presented by the prosecution and the defence. In the circumstances, I

must record my strong disapproval of the classification given by learned President’s

Counsel for the Appellant to the judgment of the High Court, that it is a ‘scanty judgment’.

Even though the judgment of the High Court does not reflect a methodical and detailed

discharge of the testimony and evidence related functions expected of a trial judge, I am

of the view that there has been a judicious consideration of credibility of witnesses and

the evidence placed before Court by the prosecution and the defence. Particularly in view

of the totality of the evidence, I hold that there has not been a failure of justice or any

prejudice caused to the Appellant. In the circumstances, in my view, the Appellant has

not been denied of a fair trial. In any event, as the available evidence amply supports the

conviction of the Appellant, I hold that there has been no miscarriage of justice.

A perusal of the judgment of the Court of Appeal reveals the following features:

(i) A consideration of the charges framed against the accused by the Attorney-

General.

(ii) Grounds of appeal urged by counsel for the Appellants at the hearing.

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 58

(iii) Appreciation of the law pertaining to the role of the Court of Appeal regarding

finding of facts by the High Court.

(iv) A narrative of the evidence presented.

(v) A description of the main features of the case relating to assessment of

credibility of prosecution witnesses: that notwithstanding lengthy cross-

examination, there are no contradictions inter-se ; that in view of the attendant

circumstances, the absence of certain details in the testimony of IP Welagedera

in comparison with the testimony of WSI Gamage, does not affect the

credibility that may be attached to their testimonies ; that the Court concurs

with the finding of the trial judge in that regard, together with reasons thereof.

(vi) A finding that the defence had not suggested any motive on the part of

prosecution witnesses to falsely implicate the accused by foisting a large

quantity of heroin on the accused.

(vii) A conclusion that in the totality of the circumstances of the case, the findings

of the trial judge cannot be classified as being perverse or unreasonable. That

there is ample evidence presented by the prosecution to convict the 1st accused

– appellant.

(viii) A conclusion that the evidence presented by the prosecution falls short of

proving beyond reasonable doubt that the 2nd Accused – Appellant had the

requisite knowledge of the contents of the parcel that was in the possession of

the 1st Accused – Appellant, and hence that there is a reasonable doubt as to

the culpability of the 2nd Accused – Appellant with regard to the offences of

trafficking and possession of heroin.

In my view, the forgoing features of the impugned judgment of the Court of Appeal is

clearly in consonance with the proper and lawful exercise of the appellate jurisdiction of

the Court of Appeal (in a criminal matter). It is seen that, it had only been after a careful

and correct consideration of the testimonies of witnesses, evidence presented at the trial

SC APPEAL 208/2012 – JUDGMENT 59

and the judgment of the High Court, that the Court of Appeal has affirmed the conviction

of the Appellant.

In view of the foregoing analysis, the answers to the questions of law stated above and

the totality of the evidence, I hold that the Judgment of the Court of Appeal is lawful, and

the Appellant’s conviction having been affirmed by the Court of Appeal should not be

interfered with.

In the circumstances, I affirm the conviction of the Appellant and the sentence imposed

on him, and dismiss this Appeal.

Judge of the Supreme Court

B.P. Aluwihare, PC, J

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Janak De Silva, J

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court