1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

S.C. Appeal 125/2015 SC/HCCA/LA/ 24/2013 (LA) WP/HCCA/GAMP/44/2013 D.C. Attanagalla Case No. 1253/M

In the matter of an Application for Leave to Appeal against the Judgment dated 03.12.2014 delivered by the Provincial High Court of the Civil Appeals of the Western Province (Holden at Gampaha) in Case No. WP/HCCA/GPH/44/2013 (LA) Hatton National Bank PLC No. 479, T.B. Jaya Mawatha, Colombo 10. and previously at 481, T.B. Jayah Mawatha, Colombo 10. And having and maintaining a branch office at 22, Kandy Road, Nittambuwa (previously known as Hatton National Bank Ltd)

PLAINTIFF Vs. 1. Sakalasuriya Appuhamilage Upul Aruna

Shantha

Kukulnape, Pallewela.

2. Senanayake Amarasinghe Mohotti

Appuhamilage Sudath Denzil No. 64, Kirindiwita. Gampaha.

2

3. Subasinghe Dissanayake Appuhamilage

Upul Hemantha Subsasinshge, No. 74, Marapola, Veyangoda. DEFENDANTS

AND BETWEEN Hatton National Bank PLC No. 479, T.B. Jaya Mawatha, Colombo 10. and previously at 481, T.B. Jayah Mawatha, Colombo 10. And having and maintaining a branch office at 22, Kandy Road, Nittambuwa (previously known as Hatton National Bank Ltd) PLAINTIFF-APPELLANT Vs. 1. Sakalasuriya Appuhamilage Upul Aruna

Shantha

Kukulnape, Pallewela.

2. Senanayake Amarasinghe Mohotti

Appuhamilage Sudath Denzil No. 64, Kirindiwita. Gampaha.

3. Subasinghe Dissanayake Appuhamilage

Upul Hemantha Subsasinshge, No. 74, Marapola, Veyangoda. DEFENDANT-RESPONDENTS AND NOW BETWEEN

3

Senanayake Amarasinghe Mohotti Appuhamilage Sudath Denzil No. 64, Kirindiwita. Gampaha. 2ND DEFENDANT-RESPONDENT-APPELLANT

Hatton National Bank PLC No. 479, T.B. Jaya Mawatha, Colombo 10. and previously at 481, T.B. Jayah Mawatha, Colombo 10. And having and maintaining a branch office at 22, Kandy Road, Nittambuwa (previously known as Hatton National Bank Ltd) PLAINTIFF-APPELLANT-RESPONDENT Vs. 1. Sakalasuriya Appuhamilage Upul Aruna

Shantha

Kukulnape, Pallewela. 2. Subasinghe Dissanayake Appuhamilage

Upul Hemantha Subsasinshge, No. 74, Marapola, Veyangoda.

DEFENDANT-RESPONDENT-RESPONDENTS BEFORE: S.E. Wanasundera P.C., J.

Anil Gooneratne J.

Nalin Perera J.

4

COUNSEL: Ms. Sudarshani Cooray with Ms. Sithara Jayasundera For 2nd Defendant-Respondent-Appellant Viran Fernando for Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent ARGUED ON: 04.07.2017 DECIDED ON: 27.07.2017 ANIL GOONERATNE J. This was an action on a Finance Lease Agreement entered between

the Plaintiff-Petitioner-Respondent Bank and the 1st Defendant-Respondent.

The 2nd and 3rd Defendants were the guarantors to the above agreement and

action was filed in the District Court of Attanagalla. 1st and 3rd Defendant-

Respondents did not appear in court and the case was fixed ex-parte against

them. The 1st Defendant failed and neglected to pay the regular payment due to

the Bank and Plaintiff-Petitioner-Respondent Bank filed action to recover a sum

of Rs. 1,578,204/30 and interest thereupon at 36% p.a from 18.12.2008.

It is said that the evidence of the Plaintiff witness was led by the

Plaintiff Bank and said Finance Lease Agreement, annexed to the plaint marked

‘A’ was sought to be marked in court and the counsel for the 2nd Defendant-

Respondent objected for same being marked in evidence on the basis that the

5

said agreement has not been stamped. The learned District Judge by his order

of 3.10.2013 upheld the objection of the 2nd Defendant and refused to mark and

permit to produce the said lease agreement in evidence. On appeal by the

Plaintiff-Respondent to the relevant High Court, the Plaintiff succeeded and the

appeal was allowed. The 2nd Defendant-Appellant appealed to the Supreme

Court and leave was granted on 21.07.2015 on questions of law referred to in

paragraphs 7(a) to (d) of the petition filed of record. The said question read thus:

(a) Has their Lordships erred in failing to appreciate that upon the plain

reading of the words in Gazette Extraordinary Notification. No. 1465/20

Item No.15 in the schedule to the gazette, exempts all Hire Purchase

Agreements from stamp duty, except Agreements in relation to vehicles

used for travelling;

(b) Has their Lordships erred in failing to appreciate that term “Private” being

excluded from the latter Gazette Notification No. 1465/20 has been done

to include all hire purchase agreements within the purview of the

instruments required to be stamped;

(c) Has their Lordships of the Provincial High Court erred in failing to

appreciate that the Deputy Commissioner of the Department of Inland

Revenue has no authority to interpret a gazette issued by Minister of

Finance and state that the term “Motor Vehicles Used for Travelling” does

not include Motor Coaches and Lorries” and hence the said letters should

not be considered by a Court of Law.

(d) Has their Lordships erred in failing to appreciate that when there arises a

conflict in interpreting the gazette and the matter is before a Court of Law,

a public officer should not be allowed to interpret the law and this duty is

6

vested only with the Court when two conflicting opinions are derived from

the words of the legislature and hence this letter should not be

considered at all;

The law relating to stamp duty is found in the Stamp Duty Act as

Amended and the relevant Gazette Notification. The relevant Sections of the Act

in a gist are as folloows:

Section 3(1) of Act No. 12 of 2006 permits the Minister to determine the stamp

duty payable on “specified instruments”.

Section 4 of the same Act identifies “a lease or hire of any property”

as a specified instrument.

Section 5 of the Act also empowers the Minister to “by Order published in the

Gazette specify the instruments, which shall be exempt from the

payment of stamp duty.

Section 5 enacts that the Order published in the gazette specify the

instrument which are exempt from stamp duty. The subject matter of the suit is

a ‘motor coach’.

My attention was drawn by learned counsel for Plaintiff party, of

two gazettes. Vide Gazette Extraordinary No. 1439/2 dated 03.04.2006 and later

Gazette Extraordinary 1465/20 dated 05.10.2006. Item 15 of Gazette 1465/20

reads as an exemption:

7

“Any instrument relating to any finance lease executed in respect of any

property other than any such finance lease in respect of any motor

vehicles used for travelling;”

The Sinhala version reads as follows:

“.uka nsuka ioyd fhdod .kakd fudagra jdyk iusnkaofhka jk uq,H

l,a noq .sjsiqula yer hus foam,la iusnkaOfhka l%shd;aul lrk ,o uq,H

l,a noq .sjsiqula "

The earlier Gazette Extraordinary No. 1439/2 of 03.04.2006

reads thus:

“A finance lease executed in respect of any property (other than any such finance lease in respect of motor vehicles used for travelling);”

The Sinhala version reads thus:

hus foam,la iusnkaOfhka l%shd;aul lrk ,o uq,H l,a noq .sjsiqula

(mqoa.,Sl .uka nsuka ioyd fhdod .kakd fudagra jdyk iusnkaOfhka jk

uq,H l,a noq .sjsiqula yer)

The later gazette that was issued should prevail and the English

version of the above gazettes are identical. The Sinhala version of Gazette

1439/2 carries an important qualification not explicit in the English version.

However, the Sinhala language version of the Gazette Extraordinary No.

1439/2 dated 03.04.2006 was in the following terms.

8

The words ‘mqoa.,Sl’ has been omitted in Gazette – 1463/20 of

05.10.2006. Does the legislature intend to omit ‘mqoa.,Sl’? The later gazette also

introduced some changes. Gazette 1439/2 of 03.04.2006 refer to mqoa.,Sl .uka

nsuka. Thus an instrument which lease a motor vehicle that is used for private

travel would be subject to stamp duty.

The omission as stated above may be a deliberate intent of the

legislature (Gazette 1465/20). A careful comparison of the two gazette would

make one realise of the slight change. The above change as stated above is not

the only change. Earlier gazette refer to 20 items that are exempt and the later

gazette exempt only 6 items. Therefore the argument that it cannot be said that

the gazette issued for the purpose of charging stamp duty on leases of all type

of vehicles, may not stand. It is questionable.

N.S. Bindra refer to the case of Lord Herschell, Bank of England Vs.

Vagliano Brothers (1891) AC 107.

I think the proper course is in the first instance to examine the language of the statute

and to ask what is its natural meaning uninfluenced by any considerations derived

from the previous state of the law, and not to start with inquiring how the law

previously stood, and then, assuming that it was probably intended to leave it

unaltered, to see if the words of the enactment will bear an interpretation in

conformity with this view.

Learned counsel for Plaintiff party also emphasis on another aspect.

It was argued that the word ‘mqoa.,Sl’ may not make a substantial difference to

9

the order of the Minister. The simple reading of the gazette appears to state

that Finance Leases on vehicles used for travelling would be liable for stamp

duty. I would add that ‘liable’ would mean answerable, or exposed or subject or

likely. As such can one state stamp duty would not be chargeable for finance

leases on all vehicles but merely for those used for travelling. The simplest of

the definition for travelling would be conveyance. Vehicles are used for

travelling and not usually for any other purpose. There are no vehicles that are

not used for travelling, but may be connected to some other purpose. The

English words travelling does not exactly mean the word ‘.uka nsuka’. The term

.uka nsuka could be distinguished from m%jdykh .uka nuka connected to

personal activity. Gazette 1465/05.10.2006 should be interpreted to make

Motor Coach which is used for passenger transporting not liable to stamp duty.

It is however arguable and a question of interpretation.

In any event Section 33 of the Stamp Ordinance reads thus:

“33 (1) No instrument chargeable with stamp duty shall be received or admitted in

evidence by any person having by law or consent of parties authority to receive

evidence or registered or authenticated or acted upon by any person or by any officer

in a public office or corporation or bank or approved credit agency unless such

instrument is duly stamped.

Provided that any such instrument may-

(a) be admitted in evidence by any person having by law or consent of parties

authority to receive evidence; or

(b) if the stamp duty chargeable on such instrument is one thousand five hundred

rupees or less, be acted upon by the Registrar General.

10

Upon payment of the proper duty with which it is chargeable or the amount

required to make up the same and a penalty not exceeding three times the proper

duty.”

The Plaintiff party could not have had any notice of the objection

taken by 2nd Defendant as the pleadings filed of record does not refer to such an

objection. It is essential to give an opportunity to the concerned party to cure

such a defect and proceed with such suit. If there is a deficiency of stamping

party concerned should be permitted to supply the deficiency. It would amount

to an injustice if the concerned party is denied of such a right as the above

section contemplates of curing the defect.

In Wickremasinghe and others Vs. The Goodwill Marine Academy

(Pvt) Ltd. 2001 (2) SLR 284

“Under the proviso to S. 33(1) such an unstamped bond may be admitted in evidence

upon payment of the proper duty or the amount required to make up the same and

a penalty not exceeding three times the proper duty”.

Ceylease Financial Services Ltd. Vs. Sriyalatha 2006 (2) SLR 169

“stamp duty should be paid prior to the admission of the relevant instrument. In the

circumstances, where an instrument has to be admitted in evidence and if it is not

duly stamped, the deficiency has to be cured prior to the instrument being marked in

evidence”.

In determining either the general object of the legislature, or the

meaning of its language in any particular passage, it is obvious that the intention

which appears to be most in accord with convenience, reason, justice and legal

principles should in all cases of doubtful significance, be presumed to be true

11

one. Maxwell on Interpretation of Statute 12th Ed Pg. 199. On General Principles

of Interpretation Pg. 28.

If there is nothing to modify, alter or qualify the language which the statute contains,

it must be construed in the ordinary and natural meaning of the words and sentences.

“The safer and more correct course of dealing with a question of construction is to

take the words themselves and arrive if possible at their meaning without, in the first

instance, reference to cases”.

The duty of court is to expound the law as it stands and to leave the

remedy to others. Suttars Vs. Briggs (1922) AC 1 at 8.

The relevant gazette or the later one exempts all finance leased

executed in respect of any property. The finance leased executed for motor

vehicles used for travelling is not exempted. This seems to be the most ordinary

simple meaning that could be given to the relevant exemption.

A court is not entitled to read words into an Act of parliament

unless clear reasons for it is to be found within the four corners of the Act itself

Vickers Sons & Maxim Ltd. vs. Evans (1910) AC 444 at 445.

Interpretation of a statute is a matter for a Court of Law. A Deputy

Commissioner of the Department of Inland Revenue has given an interpretation

to the relevant gazette and this court is not in a position to accept such an

interpretation. The learned District Judge correctly disregarded it but not the

High Court. I observe that the High Court was in gross error to rely on such an

interpretation of the Deputy Commissioner. The relevant provision of the

12

gazette is very simple and could be given its ordinary meaning, and the words to

be understood as it is. I am unable to give any extended meaning.

The questions of law 7(a) to (d) are answered as follows:

(a) yes.

(b) Answered as ‘yes’ in favour of the 2nd Defendant-Respondent-Appellant.

(c) Yes.

(d) Yes.

Upon a consideration of all the facts and circumstances, I set aside

the Order of the High Court. Plaintiff-Respondent Bank is directed to correctly

stamp the instrument and produce it in the District Court. Case remitted to

District Court. The learned District Judge is directed to go ahead with the trial

after receiving the instrument which has to be duly stamped. This appeal is

partly allowed as aforesaid, with costs.

Appeal partly allowed. JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT S.E Wanasundera P.C., J. I agree. JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT Nalin Perera J.

I agree JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT