==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application under and in terms of Article 99(13)(a) of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

SC (Expulsion) No: 02/2023

Manusha Nanayakkara, Maligaspe Gedera, Panagamuwa, Wanchawala.

PETITIONER

Vs. 1. Samagi Jana Balawegaya, 815, E.W. Perera Mawatha, Kotte Road, Ethul Kotte. 2. Ranjith Madduma Bandara, General Secretary, Samagi Jana Balawegaya, 815, E.W. Perera Mawatha, Kotte Road, Ethul Kotte. 3. Sajith Premadasa, President, Samagi Jana Balawegaya, 815, E.W. Perera Mawatha, Kotte Road, Ethul Kotte. 4. K. A. Rohanadeera, Secretary General of Parliament, Parliamentary Complex, Sri Jayawardenapura, Kotte.

2

5. R. M. A. L. Rathnayake, Chairman, Election Commission, Elections Secretariat, Sarana Mawatha, Rajagiriya. 6. M.A.P.C. Perera, Member, Election Commission, Elections Secretariat, Sarana Mawatha, Rajagiriya. 7. A. Faaiz, Member, Election Commission, Elections Secretariat, Sarana Mawatha, Rajagiriya. 8. H.M.T.D. Herath, Secretary, Election Commission, Elections Secretariat, Sarana Mawatha, Rajagiriya. 9. Saman Sri Ratnayake, Commissioner General of Elections, Election Commission, Elections Secretariat, Sarana Mawatha, Rajagiriya. RESPONDENTS

3

Before: Vijith K. Malalgoda, PC, J Achala Wengappuli, J Arjuna Obeyesekere, J Counsel: Faiszer Musthapha, PC with Shaheeda Barrie and Mehran Careem for the Petitioner

M. A. Sumanthiran, PC with Viran Corea, PC, Ermiza Tegal and Divya Mascranghe for the 1st Respondent Dr. Jayampathy Wickramaratne, PC with Pulasthi Hewamanne and Sampath Wijewardena for the 2nd Respondent Hejaaz Hisbullah with Shifan Maharoof for the 3rd Respondent Sureka Ahmed Jayasinghe, Senior State Counsel for the 4th – 9th Respondents Argued on: 12th October 2023, 23rd October 2023, 14th November 2023, 17th November 2023, 12th December 2023, 14th December 2023 and 23rd January 2024 Written Tendered on behalf of the Petitioner on 2nd February 2024 Submissions:

Tendered on behalf of the 1st Respondent on 5th February 2024 Tendered on behalf of the 2nd Respondent on 5th February 2024 Tendered on behalf of the 3rd Respondent on 7th February 2024 Tendered on behalf of the 4th – 9th Respondents on 2nd February 2024 Decided on: 9th August 2024

4

Obeyesekere, J

The issue that arises for determination in this application is whether the expulsion of the

Petitioner from the Samagi Jana Balawegaya, a registered political party and the 1st

Respondent to this application, and on whose nomination paper the Petitioner was

elected to Parliament, is valid.

This application was taken up for hearing together with SC (Expulsion) No. 1/2023. While

the factual matters in both applications were almost identical, the legal arguments

presented by the learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioners in each application were

different except for the common complaint that the Petitioner was not afforded a fair

hearing prior to his expulsion from the 1st Respondent.

The Petitioner

The Petitioner states that he holds a diploma in Communication from the University of Sri

Jayawardenapura and is an undergraduate at the Open University. The Petitioner had

initially served as the News Manager and the News Director at two leading television

broadcasting companies. Having entered active politics, the Petitioner had been elected

as a member of the Southern Provincial Council in 2010 and as a Member of Parliament

in 2015, on both occasions as a member of the United National Party, also a registered

political party. At various times between 2015 and 2020, the Petitioner had served as a

Deputy Minister for Telecommunication, Digital Infrastructure and Employment.

The Petitioner states further that the 1st Respondent was formed in March 2020 and that

he is a founder member of the 1st Respondent as well as a member of its decision making

body known as the Working Committee. The Petitioner had contested the Galle District

at the Parliamentary elections held in August 2020 on the nomination paper of the 1st

Respondent and having secured 47,399 preferential votes, was elected to Parliament as

one of two members elected from the 1st Respondent. It is perhaps important to state

that the 1st Respondent is the single largest party in Opposition in Parliament at the

moment and that its leader, the 3rd Respondent is the Leader of the Opposition in

Parliament.

5

Political developments in May 2022

The Petitioner states that post Covid-19 and particularly from the early part of 2022, the

Country underwent a period of economic hardship hitherto unseen, with shortages in

fuel, gas and essential food items. The Petitioner claims that depletion of the foreign

currency reserves of the Country led to inflation reaching record numbers culminating

with street protests and civil unrest, and that the Country was heading towards a national

crisis. The Petitioner claims further that in this backdrop and in order to calm the waters,

the then Cabinet of Ministers resigned from office on 4th April 2022. The Petitioner states

however that the protests and civil unrest continued unabated and on 9th May 2022, the

then Prime Minister too resigned from office. As provided by Article 49(1) of the

Constitution, the Cabinet of Ministers stood dissolved with the said resignation.

The Petitioner states that the 3rd Respondent was thereafter invited to accept the post of

Prime Minister. This invitation and the situation prevailing in the Country at that time had

been discussed at the Working Committee meeting of the 1st Respondent held on 10th

May 2022. According to the minutes of the said meeting of the Working Committee [1R2]

which had been attended by the Petitioner, as borne out by the signature sheet of the list

of attendees at the meeting [1R3], the 3rd Respondent had informed the membership that

various groups had invited the 1st Respondent to form a Government and that the Chief

Buddhist Prelates had made a strong request for the 3rd Respondent to accept the post of

Prime Minister. After several members had expressed their views, a decision had been

taken that no member of the 1st Respondent shall accept office in a Government formed

by any person other than its leader the 3rd Respondent. The said decision has been

recorded in 1R2 in the following manner:

“wjidk jYfhka .re rdPs; fiakdr;ak ue;s;=ud jsiska fldkafoais j,g hg;aj w.%dud;H Oqrh Ndr.; hq;= nj;a" wm jsiska bosrsm;a lrkq ,nk fldkafoais j,g PkdOsm;sjrhd tlÛ fkdjqKfyd;a fyda fjk;a fya;=jla u; fjk;a w.%dud;Hjrhl= PkdOsm;sjrhd m;al<fyd;a fyda tjeks w.%dud;Hjrhl= hgf;a msysgqjk wdKavqjl iu.s Pk n,fjs.fha lsisoq uka;%sjrhl= fyda idudPslhl= lsisoq ;k;=rla Ndr fkd.; hq;= njg fhdaPkd lrk ,o w;r tls fhdaPkdj iNdj jsiska talu;slj wkqu; lrk ,os'”

6

On 12th May 2022, the Member of Parliament elected from the United National Party was

appointed by the then President as the new Prime Minister. With the Working Committee

of the 1st Respondent having already decided on its stance with regard to its members

joining a Government of which the 1st Respondent was not a party, the 1st Respondent

made a formal announcement by way of a press statement on 16th May 2022 [1R1]

conveying the following decision taken by the Parliamentary group of the 1st Respondent

on that date:

“ta wkqj j;auka wdKavqj jsiska wdra:slh f.dvke.Su Wfoid lrkq ,nk" rgg ys;e;s hym;a

lghq;= fjkqfjka' tys ;k;=re ,nd fkdf.k" mdra,sfuska;= l%shdj,sh ;=<ska iu.s Pkn,fjs.fha

mqraK iyh ,nd oSug uka;%s lKavdhus reiajSfusoS talu;sl ;Skaoq lrkq ,enSh'”

Having expressed the view that the 1st Respondent would extend its support to restore

the economy but that it will not join the Government, the 1st Respondent went on to state

in 1R1 that it would withdraw its support in the event an attempt is made to entice any

Members of Parliament elected from the 1st Respondent to join the Government. Thus,

the position of the Working Committee of the 1st Respondent reached with the

participation of the Petitioner could not have been any clearer.

However, that did not deter the Petitioner, although a member of the 1st Respondent

which was not a part of the then Government in Office, from joining the Government and

being appointed the Cabinet Minister for Labour and Foreign Employment on 20th May

2022. Pursuant to the resignation from office of the then President on 14th July 2022,

Parliament, acting in terms of Article 40(1) of the Constitution, had elected the then Prime

Minister as President on 20th July 2022. A new Prime Minister had thereafter been

appointed on 22nd July 2022, and on the same date, the Petitioner had been appointed as

Cabinet Minister of Labour and Foreign Employment, once again of a Government of

which the 1st Respondent was not a member. The Petitioner is currently functioning in

such post.

P2 and restrictions on members of the 1st Respondent

The Constitution of the 1st Respondent, produced by the Petitioner marked P2, contains

provisions that deal with the consequences that would flow where a member obtains

7

membership in other political parties while holding membership in the 1st Respondent,

and joining a Government of which the 1st Respondent is not a party. The relevant

provisions in P2 are set out below:

“3.3 idudPslfhl=g fjk;a foaYmd,k mlaIhl idudPsl;ajh oersh fkdyels jk w;r" tfia

fjk;a foaYmd,k mlaIhl idudPsl;ajh ,nd.;fyd;a iy$fyda orkafkakus" tkhskau tu idudPslhdf.a iu.s Pk n,fjs.h mlaIfha mlaI idudPsl;ajh wfydais fjs' 3'5 lsisoq idudPslfhl= lD;HdOsldrs uKav,fha mqraj wkque;shlska f;drj fjk;a

foaYmd,k mlaIhla fyda foaYmd,k ixjsOdkhla jsiska we;s lrkq ,nk mrsmd,khla ;+< ;k;+re Ndr .ekSula fkdl< hq;+h' 3'7 lsisoq idudPslfhl= lD;HdOsldrs uKav,fha mqraj wkque;shlska f;drj fjk;a foaYmd,k mlaIhl fyda fjk;a foaYmd,k mlaIhla jsiska md,kh lrkq ,nk wdKavqjlg fyda m<d;a iNdjlg fyda m<d;a md,k wdh;khlg fyda iyfhda.h oelajsu fyda iyfhda.h oelafjk m%ldY lsrSu fyda iyfhda.h oelafjk njg we.fjk m%ldY lsrsu fyda fkdl< hq;+h' 3'8 lsisoq idudPslfhl= lD;HdOsldrs uKav,fha mqraj wkque;shlska f;drj fjk;a foaYmd,k mlaIhl fyda fjk;a foaYmd,k mlaIhla jsiska msysgqjkq ,nk mdra,sfuska;+fjs fyda m<d;a iNdjl fyda m<d;a md,k wdh;khl fyda jsmlaIhlg iyfhda.h oelajsu fyda iyfhda.h oelafjk m%ldY lsrSu fyda iyfhda.h oelafjk njg we.fjk m%ldY lsrsu fyda fkdl,

hq;+h'”

Thus, it would appear that obtaining membership of another political party while being a

member of the 1st Respondent would result in the automatic cancellation of membership

in the 1st Respondent. Furthermore, no member of the 1st Respondent shall accept office,

join or assist a Government of which the 1st Respondent is not a member without the

prior approval of the Working Committee of the 1st Respondent. It is a violation of the

latter that (a) led to the suspension of the membership of the Petitioner in the 1st

Respondent in the first instance, (b) formed the basis of the charge sheet that was issued

to the Petitioner, and (c) culminated in the expulsion of the Petitioner from the 1st

Respondent.

Suspension of the membership of the Petitioner and calling for explanation

Paragraph 3.13 of P2 provides as follows:

8

“3'13 mlaIfha hus idudPslfhl= jskh lvlsrsula isoqlr we;s njg fmks hk wjia:djloso"

mlaIfha Wmrsu hym; iy wdrlaIdj ioyd jydu tu idudPslhdg tfrysj mshjr .; hq;+ njg mlaI kdhlhdg fmks hk wjia:djlos o" tu idudPslhdf.a mlaI idudPsl;ajh jydu w;aysgqjd ta iusnkaOfhka mlaI idudPslhdf.ka ksoyig lreKq jsuiSug mlaI kdhlhdg n,h we;s w;r" tu ;SrKh o" tu idudPslhd jsiska ksoyig lreKq olajd we;akus" tls lreKq oelajsu o" lD;HdOsldrs uKav, reiajsug bosrsm;a l< hq;+ w;r lD;HdOsldrs uKav,h jsiska tu mlaI idudPslhd iusnkaOfhka .; hq;+ bosrs mshjr .;

hq;+h'”

The above provision consists of two tiers of disciplinary control. The first is that the leader

of the 1st Respondent has been empowered to suspend on his own initiative the

membership of any member who has breached party discipline and to call for an

explanation from such member or request such member to show cause. The leader of the

1st Respondent is thereafter required to place such material before the Working

Committee of the 1st Respondent, thus bringing the first tier to an end. The second tier

commences upon such material being placed before the Working Committee and obliges

the Working Committee to decide on the future course of action with regard to such

member.

With it being clear that the Petitioner had acted contrary to Paragraphs 3.5, 3.7 and 3.8

of P2, the 3rd Respondent, acting in terms of the powers vested in him in terms of the

aforementioned Paragraph 3.13 of P2, suspended with immediate effect the membership

of the Petitioner in the 1st Respondent by his letter dated 20th May 2024 [P4(a)]. The

Petitioner has not challenged, either in this application or before any other forum, the

above suspension of his membership.

P4(a) reads as follows:

“iu.s Pk n,fjs.h mlaI idudPsl;ajh w;aysgq jSu iu.s Pk n,fjs.h mlaIh jsiska msysgqjkq fkd,nk wdKavqjl ;k;+re Ndr fkd.; hq;+ njg mlaIh jsiska ;SrKh lr ;snshos' rks,a jsl%uisxy w.%dud;Hjrhd jYfhka msysgqjk ,o wdKavqfjs lenskgs wud;H Oqrhla Tn jsiska mlaIfha lD;HdOsldrs uKav,fha mqraj wkque;shlska f;drj Ndrf.k we;' ta wkqj Tn jsiska mlaIfha jskh lv lsrSula isoqlr we;s nj fmks hk fyhska o" mlaIfha Wmrsu hym; iy wdrlaIdj ioyd Tng tfrysj jydu mshjr .; hq;+ nj ud yg fmks hk

9

fyhska o" mlaI jHjia:dj 3'13 j.ka;sh u.ska ud fj; mejrs we;s n,;, m%ldrj Tnf.a mlaI

idudPsl;ajh jydu w;aysgqjSu'” By the same letter P4(a), the 3rd Respondent had requested the Petitioner to show cause,

thus affording the Petitioner an opportunity of placing his side of the story and setting in

motion the process of affording the Petitioner a fair hearing prior to any decision relating

to his membership in the 1st Respondent being taken by the Working Committee. The

relevant paragraph in P4(a) reads as follows:

“iu.s Pk n,fjs.h jsiska msysgqjkq fkd,nk wdKavqjl ;k;=re Ndr fkd.; hq;= njg mlaIh jsiska ;srKh f.k ;snshos tu ;SrKhg tfrysj huska Tn jsiska rks,a jsl%uisxy uy;d w.%dud;Hjrhd f,i msysgqjkq ,enq wdKavqfjs lenskgs wud;H ;k;=rla ndr .ekSfuka mlaI jHjia:dfjs 3'5 iy$fyda 3'7 iy$fyda 3'11 j.ka;s W,a,x.kh lsrSfuka mlaIfha jskh lvlsrSu iusnkaOfhka Tng ksoyig lreKq oelajSug we;akus" tu lreKq fuu ,smsh ,o osk isg osk y;l ld,hla ;=<oS ud fj; ,sLs;j ,enSug i,iajk fuka mlaI jHjia:dfjs 3'13

j.ka;sh hgf;a ud fj; mejrS we;s n,;, m%ldrj fuhska Tng oekqus fous'”

While stating that he does not agree with the contents of P4(a), the Petitioner, by his

letter dated 26th May 2022 [1R8] sought an extension of 30 days to respond to P4(a). The

Petitioner claims that he submitted his explanation by letter dated 24th June 2022 [P5(b)]

wherein he explained the circumstances that led him to join the Government on 20th May

2022. While the receipt of P5(b) has been denied by the 1st Respondent, I must observe

that P5(b) does not bear the signature of the Petitioner nor has the Petitioner submitted

any proof to establish that P5(b) was in fact sent to either of the three Respondents.

Appointment of a Disciplinary Committee

Paragraph 3.13 of P2 requires the 3rd Respondent to place his decision to suspend, as well

as the response of the Petitioner, if any, before the Working Committee of the 1st

Respondent to enable the Working Committee to decide on the future course of action.

By letter dated 15th November 2022 [P4(b)], the 2nd Respondent informed the Petitioner

as follows:

“Tn jsiska iu.s Pk n,fjs.h mlaIfha jskh nrm;, f,i lvlsrSula isoqlr we;s njgo iy$fyda m%;sm;a;s W,a,x>Kh lr we;s njgo iy$fyda nrm;, jskh jsfrdaOs l%shdjla isoqfldg

10

we;s njgo iy$fyda lD;HdOsldrs uKav,h iEysug m;aj we;s nejska Tng jsreoaOj jskh mrlaIKhla wdrusN lsrSug lD;HdOsldrs uKav,h ;SrKh fldg we;' ta wkqj Tng jsreoaOj jskh mrslaIKhla isoqlr jskh mrslaIK jdra;djla bosrsm;a lrk f,ig mlaI jHjia:dfjs m%;smdok m%ldrj PkdOsm;s kS;s{ k,ska osidkdhl uy;d iNdm;s jYfhkao" PkdOsm;s kS;s{ oskd,a ms,smaia iy kS;s{ i|u,a rdPmlaI hk uy;ajreka idudPslhska o jk mrsos jskh uKav,hla lD;HdOsldrs uKav,h jsiska m;a lr we;' ta wkqj Tng jsreoaOj meje;afjk tls jskh mrslaIKh fuu jskh uKav,h jsiska mj;ajkq we;'” The Petitioner did not reply to P4(b).

Disciplinary proceedings

The Chairman of the Disciplinary Committee had accordingly informed the Petitioner by

letter dated 12th January 2023 [1R10a] that the disciplinary inquiry has been scheduled

for 24th January 2023 at the head office of the 1st Respondent, that the Petitioner is

entitled to be represented by an Attorney-at-Law and that his presence is mandatory. A

copy of the charge sheet signed by the Chairman of the Disciplinary Committee had been

annexed to 1R10a.

Even though 1R10a is said to have been served on the Petitioner in Parliament, the

Petitioner did not respond to 1R10a nor did he present himself before the Disciplinary

Committee on 24th January 2023. The Disciplinary Committee did not proceed with the

inquiry, although it was within their power to do so since 1R10a had been personally

delivered to the Petitioner. By letter dated 5th February 2023 [P4(c)], the Chairman of the

Disciplinary Committee had once again requested the presence of the Petitioner at a

hearing scheduled for 24th February 2023. It was also conveyed by P4(c) that the presence

of the Petitioner is mandatory and that any failure will result in the inquiry proceeding ex-

parte.

The Petitioner responded to P4(c) by letter dated 23rd February 2023 [P5(a)] in which he

stated that he is not in receipt of 1R10a and the charge sheet annexed thereto, and that

in any event, the inquiry be postponed as he has a previously scheduled meeting on that

date. The Disciplinary Committee had acceded to the said request of the Petitioner and

11

by letter dated 15th March 2023 [P4(d)] re-submitted the charge sheet [P4(e)] and

informed the Petitioner that, (a) the Committee has agreed to re-schedule the disciplinary

inquiry for either 4th April 2023 or 26th April 2023, and (b) the Petitioner may choose one

of the said two dates convenient to him and inform his decision to the Disciplinary

Committee by 27th March 2023. The Petitioner was informed further that if he fails to

respond, the inquiry would commence on 4th April 2023 and in the event he is not present

on that date, the inquiry would proceed in his absence.

The Petitioner claims that he responded to P4(d) by letter dated 27th March 2023 [P5(c)]

sent through an Attorney-at-Law. P5(c) is not on a letter head of an Attorney-at-Law nor

does it contain the name or the signature of the sender. P5(c) sought the withdrawal of

P4(d) on the basis that the Disciplinary Committee has no legal authority to conduct an

inquiry, even though P5(c) did not elaborate any further. Thus, even if one accepts that

P5(c) was sent by or on behalf of the Petitioner, it is clear that having submitted himself

to the jurisdiction of the Disciplinary Committee by P5(a), the Petitioner had a change of

mind and was not going to participate at the proceedings before the Disciplinary

Committee.

The events of 4th April 2023

Two important events took place on 4th April 2023.

The first important event that took place on 4th April 2023 is the filing of action by the

Petitioner in the District Court of Nugegoda [Case No. SPL/624/2023] against the General

Secretary of the 1st Respondent, the Chairman of the Disciplinary Committee and the

leader of the 1st Respondent, naming them as the 1st, 2nd and 3rd defendants, respectively.

Of the said defendants, the 1st and 3rd defendants are before this Court as the 2nd and 3rd

Respondents. A copy of the plaint has been tendered marked ‘P8’.

The Petitioner had sought a declaration that the charge sheet P4(e) is null and void and

inter alia a permanent injunction, interim injunction and an enjoining order preventing

the three defendants from taking any disciplinary action against the Petitioner based on

the charge sheet and P4(d). Although the Petitioner claims that he obtained an enjoining

12

order on the same date, the Petitioner has not tendered a copy of the order delivered by

the District Court. However, it is admitted that the Instructing Attorney-at-Law of the

Petitioner had not taken steps to have the said enjoining order served on the Disciplinary

Committee or to apprise the Disciplinary Committee of such order. Thus, when the

Disciplinary Committee commenced its sittings at 4pm on 4th April 2023, there was no

impediment to it proceeding with the inquiry against the Petitioner.

This brings me to the second important event that took place on 4th April 2023, that being,

notwithstanding P5(c), the proceedings of the Disciplinary Committee commenced as

scheduled at 4pm on 4th April 2023. The proceedings of that date have been marked as

‘1R20’. Having recorded the fact that the Petitioner has not indicated which of the two

days proposed in P4(d) are convenient to him and that the Petitioner is absent, the

Disciplinary Committee had decided to proceed with the inquiry in the absence of the

Petitioner. The Prosecuting Officer had led the evidence of the 2nd Respondent and

produced some of the above documents to establish that the Petitioner had violated the

provisions of P2 by accepting a ministerial portfolio in a Government of which the 1st

Respondent was not a member.

The decision of the Disciplinary Committee has been tendered with the Statement of

Objections marked ‘1R21’. I have examined 1R21 and it is clear that the Disciplinary

Committee has considered the evidence, both oral and documentary, and thereafter

found the Petitioner guilty of all charges for the reasons recorded therein. I must state

that the Petitioner does not impugn the findings of the Disciplinary Committee, and for

good reason.

Decision of the Working Committee and the expulsion of the Petitioner

The 3rd Respondent states that acting in terms of the powers vested in him by paragraph

13.3(xx) of P2, he summoned a meeting of the Working Committee for 18th July 2023. An

extract of the minutes of the said meeting was tendered with the Statement of Objections

of the 1st – 3rd Respondents [1R26], and the minutes themselves [X1] together with the

signature sheet of the attendees [X2] were tendered thereafter supported by an affidavit

of the 3rd Respondent. It is clear from the said minutes that the Chairman of the

13

Disciplinary Committee had presented 1R21 to the 3rd Respondent and that in the

absence of the 2nd Respondent, a summary of the report had been presented to the

Working Committee by the Deputy General Secretary of the 1st Respondent. Having

considered the said findings, the members of the Working Committee had unanimously

decided to expel the Petitioner from the 1st Respondent.

This decision of the Working Committee has been communicated to the Petitioner by

letter dated 18th July 2023 signed by the 3rd Respondent [P9].

Article 99(13)(a) of the Constitution and its proviso

The consequences that follow an expulsion of a Member of Parliament from the

membership of the political party or independent group from which he was elected have

been set out in Article 99(13)(a) of the Constitution.

Article 99(13)(a) reads as follows:

“Where a Member of Parliament ceases, by resignation, expulsion or otherwise, to

be a member of a recognized political party or independent group on whose

nomination paper (hereinafter referred to as the “relevant nomination paper”) his

name appeared at the time of his becoming such Member of Parliament, his seat

shall become vacant upon the expiration of a period of one month from the date of

his ceasing to be such member:

Provided that in the case of the expulsion of a Member of Parliament his seat shall

not become vacant if prior to the expiration of the said period of one month he

applies to the Supreme Court by petition in writing, and the Supreme Court upon

such application determines that such expulsion was invalid. Such petition shall be

inquired into by three Judges of the Supreme Court who shall make their

determination within two months of the filing of such petition. Where the Supreme

Court determines that the expulsion was valid the vacancy shall occur from the date

of such determination.” [emphasis added]

14

The Petitioner, aggrieved by P9, invoked the above jurisdiction of this Court by his petition

filed on 15th August 2023. While the principal relief sought is a declaration that the

decision to expel the Petitioner as communicated by P9 is invalid, the Petitioner has also

sought a declaration that the constitution and/or appointment of the Disciplinary

Committee, and the charge sheet issued by such Committee is in violation of the

Constitution of the 1st Respondent and is thereby of no force or avail in law.

The nature of the jurisdiction of this Court

Prior to considering the several arguments presented by the learned President’s Counsel

for the Petitioner, there are two matters that I must briefly discuss in order to place in

context the manner in which I must consider the several issues that have been raised in

this application.

The first is the nature of the jurisdiction of this Court when an application is made under

Article 99(13)(a) of the Constitution. In Gamini Dissanayake v M. C. M. Kaleel and Others

[(1993) 2 Sri LR 135; at page 198], Mark Fernando, J in the minority judgment stated as

follows:

“Our jurisdiction under Article 99(13)(a) is not a form of judicial review, or even of

appeal, but rather an original jurisdiction analogous to an action for a declaration,

though it is clearly not a re-hearing. Are we concerned only with the decision-

making process, or must we also look at the decision itself? Article 99(13)(a) requires

us to decide whether the expulsion was valid or invalid, some consideration of the

merits is obviously required….” [emphasis added]

In the majority judgment delivered by this Court in Tilak Karunaratne v Mrs. Sirimavo

Bandaranaike and Others [(1993) 2 Sri LR 90; at pages 101-102], Dheeraratne, J stated

that:

“The nature of the jurisdiction conferred on the Supreme Court in terms of the proviso

to Article 99(13)(a) is indeed unique in character; it calls for a determination that

expulsion of a Member of Parliament from a recognized political party on whose

nomination paper his name appeared at the time of his becoming such Member of

15

Parliament, was valid or invalid. If the expulsion is determined to be valid, the seat

of the Member of Parliament becomes vacant. It is this seriousness of the

consequence of expulsion which has prompted the framers of the Constitution to

invest that unique original jurisdiction in the highest court of the Island, so that a

Member of Parliament may be amply shielded from being expelled from his own

party unlawfully and/or capriciously. It is not disputed that this courts jurisdiction

includes, an investigation into the requisite competence of the expelling authority;

an investigation as to whether the expelling authority followed the procedure, if any,

which was mandatory in nature; an investigation as to whether there was breach of

principles of natural justice in the decision making process; and an investigation as

to whether in the event of grounds of expulsion being specified by way of charges at

a domestic inquiry, the member was expelled on some other grounds which were not

so specified….” [emphasis added]

Having thereafter considered the submission of Mr. H.L. De Silva, PC appearing for the

respondents in that application that although Court could interfere if the decision of the

expelling authority was unreasonable in the 'Wednesbury sense', but since the decision

to expel the petitioner was a political decision judges should not enter the political

thicket, Dheeraratne, J stated that “Our jurisdiction appears to be wider; it is an original

jurisdiction on which no limitations have been placed by Article 99(13)(a)” and referred

to the above passage of Mark Fernando, J in Dissanayake in support of his position. I must

state that the views expressed by Mark Fernando, J have been referred to in almost every

judgment delivered by this Court where the applicability of the proviso to Article 99(13)(a)

has been considered.

In Zainul Abdeen Nazeer Ahamed v The Sri Lanka Muslim Congress and Others [SC

Expulsion No. 01/2022; SC minutes of 6th October 2023] Padman Surasena, J considered

inter alia the above decisions and the decisions in Ameer Ali and Others v Sri Lanka

Muslim Congress and Others [(2006) 1 Sri LR 189], Sarath Amunugama and Others v Karu

Jayasuriya, Chairman UNP and Others [(2000) 1 Sri LR 172] and Perumpulli Hewage

Piyasena v Illankai Thamil Arsukachchi and Others [(2012) 1 Sri LR 215] and stated as

follows:

16

“Thus, this court in all the previous cases has consistently taken and maintained the

position that the nature of the jurisdiction this Court conferred on it by Article

99(13)(a) of the Constitution: is not a form of judicial review; is not even in the form

of an appeal; is rather an original jurisdiction analogous to an action for a

declaration; is not a re-hearing; is indeed unique in character and original in nature

vested in the highest Court of the island; is a very wide jurisdiction; is an original

jurisdiction on which no limitations have been placed by Article 99(13)(a); is sui

generis; is original and exclusive; is a jurisdiction to determine the validity or

otherwise of an expulsion in terms of the proviso to Article 99(13)(a) of the

Constitution; is neither injunctive nor discretionary; is indeed unique in character.

I agree with the above views consistently taken by this Court.” [emphasis added]

Standard of review

The second matter that I wish to address at the outset is the standard of review. In

Rambukwella v United National Party and Others [(2007) 2 Sri LR 329; at page 341], this

Court was confronted with the submission of the respondent that a political party is a

private organisation consisting of its members who come together on the basis of a

constitution of such Party and hence the expulsion of a member should be viewed from

the same perspective as that of a member from a private club without introducing the

high standard of review that apply in Public Law, and the opposing submission that in

view of the serious impact that an expulsion has on the rights of the member the standard

of review must be the same as under Public Law.

Chief Justice Sarath Silva, having considered the above submissions in the light of Section

7 of the Parliamentary Elections Act No.1 of 1981, the law relating to expulsion of a

Member of Parliament from his or her membership of the political party on whose ticket

such member was elected as it stood prior to the present Constitution of 1978 and the

evolution of Article 99, held as follows:

“In view of the change of the Electrical System effected by the Fourteenth

Amendment the review of the validity of a decision of expulsion has to be, in my

view, now considered not only from the perspective of a vacation of the seat of the

17

Member in Parliament but also from the perspective of the impact on the Electorate

from which he was declared on the basis of preferential votes cast in his favour. As

a result of the expulsion by the Party the voters preferred candidate is removed

from his seat in Parliament and replaced by a candidate who at the original

election failed to obtain adequate preferential votes to gain election to

Parliament. In short the winning candidate is replaced by a candidate who has lost,

as a result of the expulsion. Thus in consequence of the expulsion not only the

member loses his seat in Parliament but also there is a subversion of

the preference indicated by the electors in exercising their franchise. In view of

these far reaching consequences I am inclined to agree with the submission of Mr.

Wijesinghe, that the standard of review of a decision of expulsion should be

akin to that applicable to the review of the action of an authority empowered to

decide on the rights of persons in Public Law. Generally such review comes with the

rubric of Administrative Law.” [emphasis added]

I must state that the cumulative effect of the aforementioned views expressed by this

Court over the last thirty plus years, with which I am in agreement, is that the jurisdiction

conferred on this Court by the proviso to Article 99(13)(a) is indeed extremely wide and

that the level of scrutiny is equally high. Having said so, I must lay down three matters

that I wish to be guided by, in considering the several matters raised by the parties in this

application.

Jurisdiction is not discretionary

The first is that the power conferred by the proviso to Article 99(13)(a) is not discretionary

in nature and hence, I shall refrain from venturing into a consideration of any arguments

that may be taken when this Court is exercising a discretionary jurisdiction. As in this

application, an allegation was raised in Perumpulli Hewage Piyasena v Ilankai Tamil

Arasu Kadchi [supra] that the Petitioner has suppressed or misrepresented material facts.

Saleem Marsoof, PC, J having considered that issue, held as follows:

“It is, however, unnecessary to probe deep into the submissions and counter

submissions of learned Counsel on these contentious matters, as in my considered

18

opinion, the jurisdiction of this Court to determine the validity or otherwise of an

expulsion in terms of the proviso to Article 99(13)(a) of the Constitution is neither

injunctive nor discretionary, and does not necessitate any inquiry into the conduct of

the person invoking the said jurisdiction. Indeed, the mechanism provided by the said

article to an expelled Member of Parliament to effectively have the date of vacation

of his seat postponed for a further period not exceeding two months pending the

determination by this Court of its validity or invalidity, does not necessarily confer on

it a discretionary character as contended by the learned President's Counsel for the

3rd Respondent, as that is an automatic stay of vacation of seat mandated by the

Constitution, and is not dependent on the exercise of any discretion by Court. This

stay of vacation of seat is not granted by Court, but is conferred by the Constitution

itself.

The jurisdiction of this Court Conferred by Article 99(13)(a) of the Constitution is sui

generis, original and exclusive, and does not confer any discretion to this Court to

dismiss in limine an application filed there under merely on the ground of

suppression or misrepresentation of material facts, as in cases involving injunctive

relief or applications for prerogative writs.” [page 222]

“I am therefore of the opinion that even in a case where there is cogent evidence to

establish that an expelled Member of Parliament did not come to Court with clean

hands, if this Court finds that the purported expulsion is invalid, "his seat shall not

become vacant" and he will continue to hold office, and this Court does not have the

discretion to make a contrary determination on the sole ground of suppression

misrepresentation of material facts, or dismiss the application in limine. I am of the

opinion that it is therefore not necessary to make any findings in regard to the

question whether the Petitioner has suppressed or misrepresented any material facts

in his petition or in the course of the hearing, and accordingly, the preliminary

objection raised by the 3rd Respondent has to be overruled.” [pages 223-224]

Similarly, I am not inclined to uphold the submission of the learned President’s Counsel

for the 1st and 2nd Respondents and the learned Counsel for the 3rd Respondent that the

members of the Working Committee should have been named as respondents to this

19

application. While serving as a Judge of the Court of Appeal, I have considered this

identical submission in Porakara Mudiyanselage Aruna Samantha Kumara v T.A.C.N.

Thalangama and Others [CA (Writ) Application No. 238/2020; CA minutes of 21st May

2021] where an expulsion of a member of a local authority by the political party to which

such member belonged was challenged in a writ application filed in terms of Article 140

of the Constitution. With the jurisdiction vested in the Court of Appeal being discretionary

and with the petitioners in that case having named as respondents some of the members

of the working committee of the respondent political party and having sought permission

to add the other members though a ruling had not been made, I exercised my discretion

in favour of the petitioners and over ruled such objection inter alia for the following

reasons:

(a) The failure to name all members of the Working Committee as Respondents has not

prejudiced those who have been named/not named as Respondents; and

(b) The reasons for the expulsion can still be placed before this Court by the members

who have been added as Respondents.

I would go a step further in this application by stating that I am exercising a

Constitutionally vested jurisdiction which involves no discretion and that given what is

being challenged is the decision of a political party to expel from its membership a

Member of Parliament, the presence before this Court of the political party itself together

with its General Secretary and its Leader would suffice in the Respondents seeking to

justify the grounds for the expulsion.

Merits of the decision The second matter that I shall be guided by is that although the merits of the decision to

expel a member can be examined and has in fact been examined in several previous

applications and can be examined in future applications as well, given the width and

breadth of the jurisdiction of this Court, I must exercise caution in venturing into the arena

of considering the merits of the decision that led to an expulsion of a Member of

Parliament, especially in an application such as this where the violation is apparent and

arises as a matter of policy on the part of the 1st Respondent.

20

Mr. M. A. Sumanthiran, the learned President’s Counsel for the 1st Respondent submitted

that what has now happened is a tragi-comedy in that the Petitioner, having been elected

to Parliament on the nomination list of the 1st Respondent, violates the Constitution of

the 1st Respondent, crosses the aisle of Parliament, sits on the Government benches

having accepted ministerial office, votes with the Government and is now challenging his

expulsion from the Opposition ranks. He submitted further that the People do not elect a

Member of Parliament intending them to cross the aisle from side to side to satisfy their

personal whims and fancies and destroying the very fabric of an electoral system, and for

that reason, party discipline is extremely important for the effective functioning of a

political party and that primacy must be given to the political party over an elected

member.

Kulatunga, J in Jayatillake and Another v Kaleel and Others [(1994) 1 Sri LR 319; at page

400] held that, “In handling a crisis of the magnitude faced by the respondents and in

dealing with men of the petitioners' caliber, a political party must be allowed a discretion

to decide what sanctions are appropriate for violations of Party discipline; and if the

Party decides, bona fide, to expel any member guilty of repudiating the Party, as the

petitioners have done, this Court will not in the exercise of its constitutional jurisdiction

impose such member on the Party. If that is done, Parliamentary Government based on

the Political Party System will become unworkable.” [emphasis added]

In Tilak Karunaratne v Mrs. Sirimavo Bandaranaike and Others [supra; at page 111]

Dheeraratne, J stated further that:

“A political party is a voluntary association of individuals who have come together

with the avowed object of securing political power on agreed policies and a

leadership. Cohesion is a sine qua non of success and stability whether a political

party is in power or in the opposition. To foster party cohesion discipline among its

members becomes absolutely necessary. Party disintegration has to be arrested by

firm disciplinary measures that include expulsion which Article 99(13)(a) of our

Constitution itself recognizes. The members of a party are bound together by a

contract which is usually the party constitution, from which arises contractual

21

obligations of the membership. These obligations are either express or implied.”

[emphasis added]

A similar view has been expressed in Dissanayake [supra; at page 138], where Kulatunga,

J stated that, “Our Constitution confers primacy to the political party as against the

individual M.P. The party carries the mandate of the electors and in turn gives a

mandate to the M.P. The exercise of the rights of the petitioners qua MP's is subordinate

to the requirements of party discipline and their freedom to agitate matters in public is

constrained by reason of their obligations to the party which they have freely undertaken

to honour.” Ms. Sureka Ahmed Jayasinghe, the learned Senior State Counsel appearing

for the 4th – 9th Respondents submitted that this amorphous ‘mandate of the people’

argument should not be used to undermine party discipline which, as made evident by

such offices as party whips, is integral to our democratic form of government.

In this background, I am of the view that much deference as possible must be shown to

the decision of the political party when it says that one of its members have violated its

constitution and that it can no longer have that person as a member of that party. As

submitted by Mr. Hejaaz Hizbullah, the learned Counsel for the 3rd Respondent, to

demand that SJB continue to keep the Petitioner as a member of the party is like forcing a

cricket team to share the dressing room with a player from the other side. Unless in

exceptional circumstances such as where malice or bias on the part of the decision maker

is alleged and such allegations are supported by cogent evidence or where the expulsion

is unlawful or capricious or the reasons given for the expulsion are flimsy, farfetched or

imaginary, I am of the view that the merits of the decision that culminated in an expulsion

is a matter that is best left within the domain of the relevant political party. As Kulatunga,

J stated in Jayatilake and Another v Kaleel and Others [supra; at page 234], “a political

party must be allowed a discretion to decide what sanctions are appropriate for violations

of Party discipline.”

I must perhaps state that in this application, the necessity for this Court to examine the

merits does not arise for two reasons. The first is that the reason for the expulsion is very

clear and needs no further consideration. Party discipline is paramount and as submitted

by the learned Senior State Counsel, there has been an unambiguous violation of an

22

unambiguous rule by the Petitioner. The Petitioner was a founder member of the 1st

Respondent and ought to have been fully conversant with the provisions of its

constitution. Having been present at the Working Committee meeting on 10th May 2022,

the Petitioner was privy to the decision taken at such meeting that no member shall

accept any post in a Government of which the 1st Respondent is not a party.

Notwithstanding, he joins such a Government 12 days later. The second reason is that the

Petitioner himself has not sought to impugn the decision on its merits at any stage of the

process that commenced on 20th May 2022, except perhaps the explanation said to have

been offered by P5(b).

Compliance with procedure The third matter that I shall be guided by is that I must be satisfied that there has been

substantial compliance with the procedure laid down in the constitution of the 1st

Respondent, for the following reasons:

(a) The relationship between the Petitioner and the 1st Respondent is contractual and

the Petitioner is entitled to demand that the contractual provisions be followed and

adhered to;

(b) The standard of review is akin to that of an application where the principles of Public

Law would apply;

(c) The consequence that follow an expulsion have an impact not only on the Petitioner

but also on those who voted for him.

In Dissanayake [supra; page 234], Kulatunga, J observed that, “The right of a Member of

Parliament to relief under Article 99(13)(a) is a legal right and forms part of his

constitutional rights as a Member of Parliament.” A similar view was expressed in Safiul

Muthunabeen Mohamed Muszhaaraff v S. Suairdeen and Others [SC Expulsion No.

02/2022; SC minutes of 29th February, 2024] where Priyantha Jayawardena, PC, J held

that:

23

“Members of the Parliament exercise the sovereignty of the People. Further, they

represent the voters/people in the country in Parliament. However, if a Member of

Parliament is expelled from the party, he will lose his seat in Parliament. Hence it is

imperative to hold a proper disciplinary inquiry before a decision is taken to expel a

member from a political party. Furthermore, it is necessary to give a fair hearing to

the member at the disciplinary inquiry.”

Arguments of the Petitioner

Mr. Faiszer Musthapha, the learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioner presented the

following four principal arguments before us:

(1) The Petitioner has not been expelled by and/or from the 1st Respondent in that the

terminology that has been used in P9 is wrong;

(2) The impugned decision of the Working Committee of the 1st Respondent is violative

of the enjoining order issued by the District Court of Nugegoda in Case No.

SPL/624/2023;

(3) The procedure laid down in P2 has not been followed, in that the Disciplinary

Committee has not been appointed by the Working Committee;

(4) The Petitioner has not been afforded a hearing by the 1st Respondent and/or its

Working Committee and/or the Disciplinary Committee.

The Petitioner has not been expelled from the 1st Respondent

In terms of Article 99(13)(a), where a Member of Parliament ceases to be a member of a

recognised political party or independent group on whose nomination paper his name

appeared at the time of his becoming such Member of Parliament, by resignation,

expulsion or otherwise, his seat shall become vacant upon the expiration of a period of

one month from the date of his ceasing to be such member. Thus, the Constitutional

requirement is that the cessation of membership must occur either by resignation,

expulsion or otherwise, which means in any other manner. The Sinhala wording used is

24

“b,a,d wiajSfuka fyda my lsrSfuka fyda wka fya;=jla ksid fyda k;r jQ wjia:djl”. Having said

that, the jurisdiction of this Court which has been conferred by the proviso to such Article

is limited, for obvious reasons, to expulsion. Thus, any argument that a Member of

Parliament has ceased to be a member of a political party other than by expulsion would

mean that the proviso would not apply and such cessation cannot be challenged before

this Court.

Be that as it may, the first submission of the learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioner

was that:

(a) the impugned letter P9 is not a letter of expulsion in that the terminology used in P9

does not reflect the terminology used in P2, and for that reason, P9 is not in

accordance with the provisions of P2; and

(b) as the Petitioner has not been expelled, the disqualification in Article 99(13)(a) does

not apply to the Petitioner.

The learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioner thereafter drew our attention to

Paragraph 3.12 of P2 which reads as follows:

“lD;HdOsldrs uKav,h jsiska jskh lusgq m;al< hq;= w;r tu jskh lusgq jsiska ,ndfok

ksrafoaY ie,ls,a,g f.k hus idudPslfhl=f.a mlaI idudPsl;ajh w;aysgqjSug fyda hus idudPslfhl= mlaI idudPsl;ajfhka fkrmsug fyda iqoqiq fjk;a jskh l%shdudra. .eksug

lD;HdOsldrs uKav,h n,h we;af;ah'”

It was the position of the learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioner that in terms of

P2, the Working Committee, having considered the report of the Disciplinary Committee,

can arrive at three possible decisions, namely to suspend the member, expel the member

or take any other appropriate disciplinary action against such member.

According to the 1st – 3rd Respondents, the Working Committee, having considered the

report of the Disciplinary Committee had arrived at the following decision – vide 1R26:

“ta wkqj miq.sh jskh mrslaIK lusgqfjs jdra;dj i;H jdra;djla f,i iusu; lsrsug;a tls lusgqfjs jskh mrslaIK uKav,fha ;SrKh iy ksrafoaY i<ld n,d iu.s Pk n,fjs.h

25

jHjia:dj,sfha 3^12& jHjia:dfjs m%;smdok m%ldrj lghq;= lruska .re kd,l Pqvs yrska m%kdkaoq uy;dg iy .re u,s.iafma fldar<f.a k,Ska ukqI kdkhlaldr uy;d mlaI idudPsl;ajfhka fkrmd yerSug .re yraIK rdPlreKd ue;s;=uka jsiska fhdaPkd lrk ,o w;r tls fhdaPkdj uqPsnra ryqudka ue;s;=uka jsiska iA:sr lrk ,oS' tls fhdaPkdh wkqj iu.s Pk n,fjs.fha lD;HdOsldrs uKav,h 2023-07-18 jk osk iu.s Pk n,fjs.h jHjia:dj,sfha 3^12& jHjia:dfjs m%;smdok m%ldrj lghq;= lruska .re kd,l Pqvs yrska m%kdkaoq uy;d iy .re u,s.iafma fldar<f.a k,Ska ukqI kdkdhlaldr uy;d iu.s Pk n,fjs.fha mlaI idudPsl;ajfhka fkrmd yerSug iu.s Pk n,fjs.fha lD;HdOsldrs

uKav,hg talu;slj ;SrKh lrk ,oS'”

Thus, the unanimous decision of the Working Committee of the 1st Respondent was that

the Petitioner shall be expelled from the 1st Respondent. To that extent, the decision of

the Working Committee is clear and is in accordance with P2.

The last three paragraphs of the impugned letter P9 by which the above decision was

conveyed by the 3rd Respondent to the Petitioner reads as follows:

“jskh mrslaIK uKav,h tu oskfhaoS talmdraYjslj jskh mrslaIKh mj;ajd jskh mrslaIK jdra:dj ud fj; bosrsm;a lr we;' tlS jskh uKav,h mrSlaIK jdra:dj wkqj fpdaokd m;%fha ioyka fpdaokd 08 Tn jeroslre njg jskh mrslaIK uKav,h ;SrKh fldg we;' iu.s Pkn,fjs. mlaIfha kdhl f,i mlaI jHjia:dj m%ldrj ud yg mejrs we;s n,;, wkqj ud jsiska th jraI 2023'07'18 jk osk mlaIfha lD;HdOsldr uKav,h fj; bosrsm;a lrk ,oS' ta wkqj lD;HdOsldr uKav,h jsiska iu.s Pkn,fjs. mlaI jHjia:dfjs 3(10 3(11 3(12 iy 3(13 j.ka;s m%ldrj .kakd ,o talu;sl ;SrKh u; Tn fpdaokd m;%fha ioyka fpdaokd ish,a,gu jeroslre njg ikd: jS we;s nejska Tnf.a mlaI iudPsl;ajh wo osk isg ls%hd;aul

jk mrsos ;ykus lrk njg Tng fuhska oekqus fous'”

Furthermore, the above decision of the Working Committee has been conveyed by the

3rd Respondent to the Chairman, Election Commission [1R28a] and the Secretary General

of Parliament [1R28b]. In both letters:

(a) The caption reads as follows: “ukQI kdkdhlaldr hk mdra,sfuSka;= uka;Sjrhdf.a mlaI

idudPsl;ajh wfydais lsrSu iusnkaOfhks”;

26

(b) The final paragraph reads as follows: “ta wkqj tlS ukQI kdkdhlaldr hk mdra,sfuSka;=

uka;Sjrhd uka;S OQrfhka bj;a lsrSu iusnkaOfhka wjYH bosrs lS%hd udra. .kakd f,i

Un;=udf.ka b;d ldreKslj b,a,d isgsus”

The learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioner submitted that the terminology used

in P9 [;ykus lsrSu] as well as in 1R28a and 1R28b [wfydais lsrSu / bj;a lsrSu] are different

to that in P2 and for that reason, P9 is not a valid letter of expulsion. However, the word,

“fkrmkjd” has been defined in the “.=kfiak uyd isxy, Ynso fldaIh” to include the word,

“bj;a lrkjd”. I must state that even if there is any discrepancy in the terminology, what

is critical in terms of P2 is the decision of the Working Committee and not the use of the

specific terminology when the said decision is conveyed. The unanimous decision of the

Working Committee, as borne out by 1R26 was to expel the Petitioner. There is no doubt

about that.

Having said so, on the face of it, the terminology used in P9 is not the same terminology

used in P2. However, the word, ‘fkrmsu’ in Paragraph 3.12 means to expel a person and

the word, ‘;ykus’ in P9 means to ban someone, with the result that such person loses his

membership in the political party. Both words convey the same intention and effect, that

the Petitioner has ceased to be a member of the 1st Respondent. The decision of the

Working Committee and its conveyance by P9 are amply sufficient to trigger the

provisions of Article 99(13)(a) and its proviso. In these circumstances, I am satisfied that

the Petitioner has ceased to be a member of the 1st Respondent as a result of his expulsion

by its Working Committee. I therefore see no merit in the first argument of the learned

President’s Counsel for the Petitioner.

Violation of the enjoining order

The second argument of the learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioner was that the

impugned decision of the Working Committee of the 1st Respondent taken at its meeting

held on 18th July, 2023 contravenes the enjoining order issued by the District Court of

Nugegoda in Case No. SPL/624/2023.

I have already referred to the fact that having afforded the Petitioner two opportunities

of presenting his defence, the Disciplinary Committee issued an ultimatum to the

27

Petitioner by its letter dated 15th March 2023 marked P4(d) to present himself before the

said Committee and that the Petitioner was even afforded the courtesy of choosing the

date of the inquiry.

In his plaint filed on 4th April 2023, the Petitioner, in referring to the three Defendants,

had stated in paragraph 3 of the plaint [P8] that:

“by; kus ioyka l< 1 jk js;a;slre iu.s Pk n,fjs.fha idudPslfhl= jk w;r iu.s Pk n,fjs.fha f,alusjrhd o fjs' fojk js;a;slre iu.s Pk n,fjs.fha WoafoaYs; jskh lusgqfjs idudPslfhl= fjS' iu.s Pk n,fjs.fha iuia: idudPsl;ajh fjkqfjka ;=kajk js;a;slreg tfrysj fuu kvqj mjrkq ,nhs'”

Having indicated that the purpose of naming the 3rd defendant as a party to the action

was for him to represent the entire membership of the 1st Respondent political party, and

although by paragraph (a) of the prayer to the plaint, the Petitioner had prayed for

permission to name the 3rd defendant as representing the entire membership of the 1st

Respondent, the Petitioner has not produced any evidence to establish that he obtained

permission in this regard from the District Court.

The Petitioner had also sought inter alia a declaration that the charge sheet served on

him by the Disciplinary Committee is null and void, and a permanent injunction, interim

injunction and an enjoining order preventing the three defendants from taking any

disciplinary action against the Petitioner based on the charge sheet, and P4(d).

Paragraphs (I) and (J) by which the said enjoining orders had been sought are re-produced

below:

“(i) by; ls P4 e f,i i,l=Kq lr we;S fpdaokd m;%h u; lsisoq mshjrla .ekSfuka 1, 2, 3 js;a;slrejka iy Tjqkaf.a fiajlhka ksfhdPs;hka iy Tjqka hgf;a lghq;+ lrkakka j<lajd,k w;+re ;ykus ksfhda.h iusnkaofhka jk jsuiSu wjika fjk f;la n,mj;a jk jdrK ksfhda.hla ksl=;a lrK f,igo (j) by; ls f,i P4 d f,i i,l=Kq lr we;s 2023 – 03 – 15 oske;s ,smsh u; lsisoq mshjrla

.eksfuka 1, 2, 3 js;a;slrejka iy Tjqkaf.a fiajlhka ksfhdPs;hka iy Tjqka hgf;a lghq;+ lrkakka j<lajd,k w;+re ;ykus ksfhda.h iusnkaofhka jk jsuiSu wjika fjk f;la

n,mj;a jk jdrK ksfhda.hla ksl=;a lrK f,igo”

28

Thus, the gravamen of the Petitioners complaint was with the letter dated 15th March

2023 [P4(d)].

Although it is admitted that the District Court had issued the above enjoining order/s on

4th April 2023, the Petitioner has not tendered a copy of the proceedings of that date nor

the order delivered by the District Court by which the said enjoining order/s had been

granted. I have already stated that the said enjoining order was not served on the

Disciplinary Committee, and with there being no impediment, the Disciplinary Committee

proceeded with the inquiry that was scheduled for 4th April 2023 and concluded its

hearing the same day.

On 2nd May 2023, the defendants had filed a petition and affidavit in terms of Sections

664(3) and 666 of the Civil Procedure Code [1R24] seeking to vacate the said enjoining

order. Among the matters that the said defendants had brought to the notice of the

District Court as part of their obligation to make full disclosure of material facts was that

the Disciplinary Committee had proceeded with the inquiry on 4th April 2023, that the

Petitioner has been found guilty of all charges, that the recommendations of the

Disciplinary Committee have been submitted to the Working Committee in terms of

Paragraph 3.12 of P2 and the following matter:

“tnejska oekg fuu jdrK ksfhda.hg wod< jq jraI 2023-03-15 oske;s ,smsh iy jraI 2023-01-12 oske;s fpdaokd m;%h iusmqraKfhkau j,x.= ks;HdKql+, iy jHjia:dKql=, f,aLk jk nj;a tls f,aLk iusnkaO bosrs lghq;= lD;HdOsldrs uKav,h yuqfjs mj;sk nj;a tu lD;HdOsldrs uKav,h fyda tys idudPslhska fuu kvqfjs mdraYajlhka fkdjk nj;a tnejska Bg

jsreoaOj ;joqrg;a fuu jdrK ksfhda.h l%shd;aul l, fkdyels nj;a'”

The defendants had very clearly put the Petitioner on notice that much water has flowed

under the bridge since the letter dated 15th March 2023 and that the matter is now before

the Working Committee, thus changing the entire scope and ambit of the plaint filed in

the District Court.

Having heard the learned Counsel, the District Court by its Order delivered on 14th June

2023 [1R25] vacated the enjoining order previously issued against the 2nd and 3rd

29

defendants. The District Court however did not vacate the enjoining order issued against

the 1st defendant, that being the General Secretary of the 1st Respondent. Thus, while the

2nd Respondent in his capacity as General Secretary of the 1st Respondent could not have

played any role in the disciplinary proceedings relating to the Petitioner, there was no

impediment after the above variation on 14th June 2023 to either the 1st Respondent, the

3rd Respondent or the Working Committee of the 1st Respondent from proceeding with

disciplinary action against the Petitioner.

The learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioner submitted that even though the 3rd

Respondent was no longer enjoined from taking any further action against the Petitioner,

the 2nd Respondent and those acting under his authority were enjoined from convening a

Working Committee meeting for any discussion and/or ratification of the disciplinary

matters against the Petitioner and taking any further action against the Petitioner. It was

the position of the learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioner that even though the

2nd Respondent was not present at the meeting of the Working Committee held on 18th

July 2023, the meeting of the Working Committee had been convened by the 2nd

Respondent in violation of the enjoining order and for that reason, the decision arrived at

by the Working Committee on 18th July 2023 to expel the Petitioner is invalid.

Paragraph 3.13(xx) of P2 provides that, “mlaI kdhlhdf.a Wmfoia u; uy f,alusjrhd jsiska lD;HdOsldrs uKav,h wju jYfhka udihlg jrla leojsh hq;=h' mlaIfha kdhlhdg wjYH

wjia:djlos lD;HdOsldrs uKav,h leojsug n,h we;af;ah'”

Thus, while the entity tasked with taking decisions for the 1st Respondent is its Working

Committee, the power to call for a meeting of the Working Committee can be exercised

by its General Secretary at the request of the 3rd Respondent or directly by the 3rd

Respondent. In his affidavit to this Court, the 2nd Respondent has stated that, “I did not

participate in any manner whatsoever in the decision making process pertaining to the

same in view of the Order of the District Court”, a fact which is borne out by the minutes

of the meeting 1R26 and has been confirmed by the 3rd Respondent in his affidavit.

30

The fact that the meeting was called by the 3rd Respondent is borne out by 1R28a and

1R28b. This is further established by the following paragraph in P9 where the 3rd

Respondent has taken the responsibility of placing 1R21 before the Working Committee:

“jskh mrslaIK uKav,h tu oskfhaoS talmdraYjslj jskh mrslaIKh mj;ajd jskh mrslaIK jdra:dj ud fj; bosrsm;a lrk we;' tlS jskh uKav,h mrSlaIK jdra:dj wkqj fpdaokdm;%fha ioyka fpdaokd 08 Tn jeroslre njg jskh mrslaIK uKav,h ;SrKh fldg we;' iu.s Pkn,fjs. mlaIfha kdhl f,i mlaI jHjia:dj m%ldrj ud yg mejrs we;s n,;, wkqj ud jsiska th jraI 2023'07'18 jk osk mlaIfha lD;HdOsldr uKav,h fj; bosrsm;a lrk ,oS'”

In the absence of any material to contradict this position, I am satisfied that the 2nd

Respondent did not convene the meeting of the Working Committee held on 18th July

2023 nor has he taken any steps in contravention of the enjoining order issued against

him. In any event, the enjoining order against the 2nd Respondent was to prevent any

further steps being taken on P4(d) and P4(e) but as intimated by the defendants in that

case to the District Court, the Disciplinary Committee had already proceeded to hear the

matter and submitted its findings to the Working Committee. Thus, even though there

existed an enjoining order, it was limited in its practical application and events

subsequent to 4th April 2023 had made such order futile. In these circumstances, I see no

merit in the second argument of the learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioner.

Appointment of the Disciplinary Committee

This brings me to the third argument of the learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioner,

that being:

(a) P4(a) was not placed before a properly constituted meeting of the Working

Committee; and/or

(b) the Working Committee did not take a decision to appoint a Disciplinary Committee

to look into the breach of the provisions of P2 by the Petitioner as required by

Paragraph 3.12 of P2,

31

and for that reason, the recommendations of the Disciplinary Committee are illegal as it

has not been validly constituted.

As Dheeraratne, J stated in Tilak Karunaratne v Mrs. Sirimavo Bandaranaike and Others

[supra; at page 101], “It is not disputed that this court's jurisdiction includes, an

investigation into the requisite competence of the expelling authority; an investigation as

to whether the expelling authority followed the procedure, if any, which was mandatory

in nature.”

I must at this point advert to certain provisions of the constitution of the 1st Respondent

P2, as the said provisions clearly demonstrate that (a) within the 1st Respondent there is

no concentration of power in one person, (b) almost all decisions are taken by the

Working Committee after deliberation, and (c) such decisions are thereafter placed at the

annual Party Conference for review by the entire membership.

While Paragraph 13.3 (i) – (xxix) of P2 sets out the extensive powers and functions of the

Working Committee, Paragraph 13.3(i) provides as follows:

“mlaIfha mrsmd,k lghq;= isoq lsrSfus n,dOsldrh lD;HdOsldrs uKav,h jk w;r mlaIh fjkqfjka ;SrK .eKSfuS n,h lD;HdOsldrs uKav,h i;=fjs' tls ;SrK mlaI iusfus,kfha iudf,dapkhg hg;aj wjidkd;aul fjS' lD;HdOsldrs uKav,h jsiska mlaIfha Pd;sl jsOdhl lusgqj jsiska ;SrKh lrkq ,nk jevigyka ls%hd;aul l< hq;+ w;r mlaI jHjia:dj" ia:djr

ksfhda." rS;Ska" mlaIfha wdjdrOrau yd m%;sm;a;s l%shd;aul jk njg j. n,d .; hq;+h'”

Other than the limited power vested in the 3rd Respondent to suspend the membership

of a member of the 1st Respondent in terms of Paragraph 3.13 to which I have already

referred, disciplinary control of the members of the 1st Respondent is vested by P2

exclusively in its Working Committee. This is amply demonstrated by the following

provisions of P2:

(1) Paragraph 13.3(iii) – “ hus ixjsOdkhla w;aysgqjSfuka fyda wkqnoaO;djfhka neyer lsrSfuka

fyda mlaIfha hus idudPslfhl= fyda hus ixjsOdkhl ks<Odrsfhl= fyda idudPsl;ajfhka fyda Oqrfhka bj;a lsrsfuka fyda Tyqf.a Oqrh w;aysgqjSfuka fyda idudPsl;ajh w;aysgqjSfuka fyda fjk;a wdldrhlska fyda hus idudPslfhl=g fyda mlaIfha ixjsOdkhlg fyda ks,Odrsfhl=g

32

jsreoaOj jskhdkql=, mshjr .eksfus n,h lD;HdOsldrs uKav,h i;=fjs. tjeks lS=hdudra.hla

.kq ,enq jsg th mlaIfha B,. jdraIsl iusfuS,khg jdra;d l< hq;=hs.”

(2) Paragraph 3.13 requires the 3rd Respondent to place before the Working Committee

his decision to suspend the membership of a member and the response thereto, if

any, and which thereafter obligates the Working Committee to decide on the future

course of action that should be taken with regard to such member – “lD;HdOsldrs uKav, reiajsug bosrsm;a l< hq;+ w;r lD;HdOsldrs uKav,h jsiska tu mlaI idudPslhd

iusnkaOfhka .; hq;+ bosrs mshjr .; hq;+h'”

(3) Paragraph 3.12 – “lD;HdOsldrs uKav,h jsiska jskh lusgq m;al< hq;= w;r tu jskh

lusgq jsiska ,ndfok ksrafoaY ie,ls,a,g f.k hus idudPslfhl=ff.a mlaI idudPsl;ajh w;aysgqjSug fyda hus idudPslfhl= mlaI idudPsl;ajfhka fkrmsug fyda iqoqiq fjk;a jskh

l%shdudra. .eksug lD;HdOsldrs uKav,hg n,h we;af;ah'”

Concomitant with its power to take decisions on behalf of the 1st Respondent [Paragraph

13.3(i)] is the power conferred on the Working Committee to take disciplinary action

against members of the 1st Respondent [Paragraph 13.3(iii)], decide on the course of

action that must be taken once a member has been suspended by the 3rd Respondent

[Paragraph 3.13], and appoint a Disciplinary Committee [Paragraph 3.12] to consider such

matters.

The above provisions act as procedural safeguards to protect the rights of the members

of the 1st Respondent and ensure that no single person can take any arbitrary or capricious

decision that affects their rights as members. Thus, except the limited power conferred

on the 3rd Respondent to suspend the membership of a member, full disciplinary control

over a member is vested in and must be exercised by the Working Committee of the 1st

Respondent.

In paragraphs 42 – 49 of his petition, the Petitioner has stated that although a member of

the Working Committee, he was not given notice of the Working Committee meeting

pertaining to the appointment of a Disciplinary Committee and for that reason there was

no proper Working Committee meeting constituted, and hence decisions taken at such

meeting including the appointment of the Disciplinary Committee are invalid. This formed

33

the basis for the declaration sought by the Petitioner that the appointment of the

Disciplinary Committee has been made in violation of P2. The averments in the above

paragraphs of the petition have been denied in paragraph 15 of the Statement of

Objections of the 1st – 3rd Respondents. I must state that the argument that, since the

Petitioner did not receive notice of the establishment of the Disciplinary Committee the

appointment of the Disciplinary Committee is suspect, is not tenable, because the

Petitioner’s membership in the 1st Respondent and from its Working Committee stood

suspended with effect from 20th May 2022 and for that reason, the Petitioner was not

entitled to be noticed of any meeting of the 1st Respondent after that date.

In paragraph 12(e) of their Statement of Objections, the 1st – 3rd Respondents have stated

further that, “the Working Committee of the SJB decided to appoint a Disciplinary Inquiry

Committee to inquire into the allegations against the petitioner in terms of Article 3(12)

of the Constitution and the said decision was communicated to the Petitioner by letter

dated 15th November 2023 (sic) by the 2nd Respondent.” The date of such meeting has

however not been disclosed either in the Statement of Objections or in the said letter of

15th November 2022 [P4(b)]. Furthermore, the 1st – 3rd Respondents have not produced

the minutes of the said meeting and the signature sheet.

Responding to this position, the learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioner in the

course of his submissions stated that if such a decision had been taken, the 1st – 3rd

Respondents must corroborate same by producing the minutes of such meeting and that

the only inference that can be drawn by the failure to do so is that the Working Committee

did not appoint the Disciplinary Committee to look into the breach of the provisions of P2

by the Petitioner as required by Paragraph 3.12 of P2. Thus, it is a matter of evidence if

such a meeting was in fact held, as claimed by the 1st – 3rd Respondents.

It is in this background, and being mindful of Paragraph 13.3(xx) of P2 in terms of which

the power to summon a meeting of the Working Committee is vested with the 2nd and 3rd

Respondents, and that the burden of establishing that due process has been followed and

that the expulsion is valid is on the 1st Respondent, that I shall consider the

correspondence exchanged between the parties, most of which I have already referred

to.

34

The first document is P4(b) by which the 2nd Respondent informed the Petitioner that the

Working Committee has appointed a Disciplinary Committee to inquire into the matters

set out in P4(a). The Petitioner did not reply to P4(b). The second document is 1R10a, by

which the Chairman of the Disciplinary Committee informed the Petitioner that a

Disciplinary Committee has been appointed by the Working Committee. The Petitioner

did not reply 1R10a.

The third document is P4(c) by which the Chairman of the Disciplinary Committee

requested the Petitioner to present himself before the Disciplinary Committee. The

Petitioner for the first time responded to the Disciplinary Committee by his letter P5(a)

and took up the position that “I did not receive a charge sheet as stated by you or any

charge sheet. Therefore, I state that the purported disciplinary inquiry fixed for 24th

February 2023 is void ab initio and null and void as it violates the principles of natural

justice as I have not been informed of the charges against me.” The Petitioner did not

allege that the Disciplinary Committee has not been validly appointed by the Working

Committee but moved for another date as he had to attend a previously scheduled

meeting. Thus, the Petitioner submitted himself to the jurisdiction of the Disciplinary

Committee, and requested that due process be adhered to and that he be given a fair

hearing. The fifth document is P5(c), with no name or signature of the sender, wherein it

is stated that the Disciplinary Committee has no authority or legal basis to send P4(d)

without any further elaboration.

In its decision 1R21, the Disciplinary Committee has referred to it having been appointed

by the Working Committee. The Petitioner has not specifically raised this issue in his plaint

before the District Court. In paragraph 11(iv) of its petition filed before the District Court

of Nugegoda [1R24], the defendants have disclosed that P4(a) was informed to the

Working Committee and that the Disciplinary Committee was appointed by the Working

Committee. The proceedings of the District Court of 14th June 2023 do not disclose any

submissions on this matter. Most importantly, the minutes of the meeting of the Working

Committee held on 18th July 2023 [1R26], where the decision to expel the Petitioner from

the 1st Respondent was arrived at, disclose the fact that the Disciplinary Committee has

been appointed by the Working Committee, thus laying to rest any doubts on this matter.

35

The final document is P9 which discloses that the Disciplinary Committee has been

appointed by the Working Committee.

In the above circumstances, I am satisfied that the provisions of P2 have been complied

with and that the Working Committee has acted in terms of P2. In any event, I am of the

view that having kept silent from P4(b) onwards and having submitted to the jurisdiction

of the Disciplinary Committee by P5(a), the Petitioner is estopped from challenging the

legality of the appointment of the Disciplinary Committee in these proceedings.

Although not referred to by the Petitioner, I must, for the sake of completeness, state

that it is necessary to place before Court the minutes of the meeting where the decision

to expel has been taken once such decision is challenged. This was considered in Ameer

Ali and Others v Sri Lanka Muslim Congress and Others [supra; page 198] where it was

held that:

“Since the final decision to expel the Petitioners is said to have been made at this

meeting it was essential for the Respondents to have produced the minutes of the

meeting that indicate the persons who were present and the manner in which the

serious issues raised by the Petitioners were considered before a final decision was

made.” [emphasis added]

A similar view was expressed in Safiul Muthunabeen Mohamed Muszhaaraff v S.

Suairdeen and Others [supra], where this Court held that, “… Furthermore, the

respondents did not produce the minutes of the meeting which is alleged to have taken

the decision to expel the petitioner from the party. Thus, it is uncertain whether a meeting

to expel the petitioner had ever taken place.”

However, in the above two cases, the Court was referring to the minutes of the meeting

that took the decision to expel the member concerned whereas in this case, not only have

the minutes of the meeting that took the decision to expel the Petitioner been tendered

but those minutes refer to the fact that it is the Working Committee that appointed the

Disciplinary Committee, thus confirming that the requirement in Paragraph 3.12 of P2 has

been satisfied.

36

In the above circumstances, I am not in agreement with the third argument of the learned

President’s Counsel for the Petitioner.

A fair hearing and natural justice

I shall now consider the final argument of the learned President’s Counsel for the

Petitioner, that being the Petitioner has not been afforded a fair hearing by the 1st

Respondent and/or its Working Committee and/or the Disciplinary Committee

Although it was submitted by Mr. Sumanthiran, PC that crossing the aisle would by itself

justify expulsion, it has been accepted by our Courts time and again that a fair hearing

must be afforded to a member prior to a decision being taken to expel such person from

a political party or independent group. As Mark Fernando, J observed in Dissanayake

[supra; at page 182], “a decision made by an unbiased tribunal, after duly considering the

views of those likely to be affected by it, is not only more likely to be correct, but will be

more acceptable and of better quality. Fairness to the individual facilitates a better

decision by the tribunal. The duty to give a fair hearing is as much a canon of good

administration as of good legal or judicial procedure ...” [emphasis added]

It is important that individuals are provided with the opportunity to participate in the

decision making process prior to decisions affecting their rights are taken by public

authorities and/or authorities vested with statutory power. This would promote the

quality, accuracy and rationality of such process, and enhance the legitimacy thereof

while at the same time improving the quality of decisions made by public authorities. As

stated in De Smith’s Judicial Review [Eighth edition; page 342] “Procedural justice aims

to provide individuals with a fair opportunity to influence the outcome of a decision and

so ensure the decision’s integrity” and “assist in achieving a sense that justice has both

been done and seen to be done”.

That procedural fairness is not frozen at any moment of time and is a ‘constantly evolving

concept’ [per Lond Bingham in R v H [(2004) 2 A.C. 134] has been emphasised in De Smith

[supra; page 407] where the authors have stated as follows:

37

“The content of procedural fairness is infinitely flexible. It is not possible to lay down

rigid rules and everything depends on the subject matter. The requirement necessary

to achieve fairness range from mere consultation at the lower end, upwards through

an entitlement to make written representations, to make oral representations, to a

fully-fledged hearing with most of the characteristics of a judicial trial at the other

extreme. What is required in a particular case is incapable of definition in abstract

terms. As Lord Bridge has put it [vide Lloyd v McMahon [(1987) 1 A. C. 625 at 702]:

“the so-called rules of natural justice are not engraved on tablets of stone. To use

the phrase which better expresses the underlying concept, what the requirements

of fairness demand when anybody, domestic, administrative or judicial, has to

make a decision which will affect the rights of individuals depends on the

character of the decision-making body, the kind of decision it has to make and the

statutory or other framework in which it operates.”

In Jayatillake and Another v Kaleel and Others [supra; at page 394], this Court stated

that, “ … there are certain procedural safeguards which are recognised for ensuring fair

hearings e.g. the accused should be supplied with a fair statement of the charges

(Stevenson v United Road Transport Union), he should be informed of the exact nature of

the charge (Labouchere v Earl of Wharncliffe), he should be given an opportunity of

defending or palliating his conduct (Fisher v Keane). The opportunity should be fair,

adequate and sufficient. Thus the right to be heard will be illusory unless there is time and

opportunity for the case to be met - Paul Jackson 'Natural Justice' p. 63. An Oral hearing

is another valuable safeguard which ought to be provided unless it may be dispensed with

having regard to the subject-matter, the rights involved and the nature of the inquiry.”

It was held in Tissa Attanayake v United National Party and Others [(2015)] 1 Sri LR 319]

that:

“Admittedly, the opportunity of a fair hearing may be limited in the circumstances.

For instance, the time for responding to a charge sheet or making submissions may

be reduced. Yet, the person is entitled to be told what he is charged with and afforded

some opportunity of explaining himself. The Petitioner is a Member of Parliament

38

and expulsion could lead to lose his seat. The very gravity of the matter required that

at least a limited hearing ought to be given to the Petitioner.” [page 331]

“… the observance of natural justice depicted in the maxim Audi Alteram Partem

provides the foundation for the manner and form in which Administrative Law is

applied. Whether or not the other party has reasons or defences to submit is not the

issue. The basic issue is to provide the other party an opportunity to explain himself.”

[page 334]

Having considered the above cases and the requirement to follow principles of natural

justice, Surasena, J in Zainul Abdeen Nazeer Ahamed v The Sri Lanka Muslim Congress

and Others [supra] stated as follows:

“The main ground on which the Petitioner has sought to canvass his expulsion from

the party is the fact that the SLMC did not conduct a formal inquiry according to the

law. For the reasons I have already set out above, I have held that the SLMC had not

breached the Rules of Natural Justice in the instant case as it had granted ample

opportunities for the Petitioner in the instant case to tender his written explanation

as to why he had violated the party decision taken at the High Command meeting

held on 21st November 2021. I have also held that the absence of a formal inquiry

has not vitiated the decision of the SLMC to expel the Petitioner under the

circumstances of the instant case. Therefore, the Petitioner is not entitled to succeed

on this ground.”

While agreeing with the above view, Samayawardhena, J went on to state that, “In my

view, if he (the petitioner) did not show cause in response to P9, there is no necessity to

fix the matter for the formal inquiry. The Petitioner cannot now be heard to say that the

failure to hold a formal inquiry is a violation of the rules of natural justice. The rules of

natural justice are not written in stone; whether or not these rules have been violated

must be determined based on the unique facts and circumstances of each individual case.”

39

Has the Petitioner been afforded a fair hearing? That being the legal position, I shall first deal with the complaint that the Petitioner was

not afforded a fair hearing by the Working Committee and/or the Disciplinary Committee

prior to being expelled. This allegation is furthest from the truth. The mechanism provided

in P2 does not require a hearing to be afforded by the Working Committee itself but

instead provides for a hearing to be afforded by a Disciplinary Committee that is

appointed by the Working Committee. To that extent, the grievance of the Petitioner is

unfounded.

I have already referred to the correspondence between the 1st – 3rd Respondents on the

one hand and the Petitioner on the other, commencing with P4(a) and culminating in P9.

The Petitioner was invited by P4(a) at the first available opportunity to provide an

explanation and/or show cause relating to his suspension. Whether the Petitioner

submitted an explanation is in doubt. Having stayed its hand for a period of about five

months, the Petitioner was put on notice by P4(b) that a Disciplinary Committee has been

appointed to conduct a formal disciplinary inquiry. The Disciplinary Committee thereafter

invited the Petitioner by 1R10a to present himself for an inquiry on 24th January 2023 and

informed him that he is entitled to legal representation. A copy of the charge sheet

together with the list of witnesses and documents were served on the Petitioner together

with 1R10. Thus, the Petitioner was fully aware of the scope and ambit of the Disciplinary

Inquiry and of the material that was to be presented at the inquiry. Even though the

Petitioner did not respond to 1R10, the Disciplinary Committee on its own volition

postponed the inquiry to 24th February 2023 and informed him of such fact by P4(b). The

Petitioner responded to the Disciplinary Committee for the first time with P5(a) and

sought an adjournment, purportedly on the basis that he has to attend a previously

scheduled meeting at the Presidential Secretariat.

Be that as it may, the Disciplinary Committee accepted the excuse offered by the

Petitioner and afforded the Petitioner a further opportunity to participate at the formal

inquiry and even went to the extent of giving the Petitioner a choice of two dates to

choose from. It is then that the Petitioner challenged the authority of the Disciplinary

Committee by P5(c), for reasons which had not been disclosed. The Petitioner thereafter

40

clearly displayed his intention not to participate before the Disciplinary Committee by

filing action in the District Court of Nugegoda.

In these circumstances, it is clear to me that the Disciplinary Committee has acted with

patience and has afforded the Petitioner every possible opportunity of providing his side

of the story and of being heard by an independent disciplinary body. The Petitioner could

not have asked for more opportunities to present his case, and cannot blame others for

his failure to attend the inquiry. The findings of the Disciplinary Committee have

thereafter been placed before the Working Committee which had arrived at its decision

only after considering the said findings. I therefore see no merit in the argument of the

learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioner that the Petitioner was not afforded a fair

hearing prior to the Working Committee taking a decision on 18th July 2023.

Two other matters There are two other matters that were raised by the learned President’s Counsel for the

Petitioner that I must advert to.

The first is that the Working Committee did not meet as stated on 18th July 2023 and that

the minutes of the meeting marked 1R26 are fabricated. What gave rise to this allegation

was that 1R26 was only an extract of the minutes and the signature sheet of those who

were present at that meeting had not been annexed. Although prior permission was not

sought to tender further material, the learned President’s Counsel for the 1st Respondent

submitted together with an affidavit of the 3rd Respondent, a complete copy of the

minutes of the said meeting [X1] together with the signature sheet of the attendees [X2]

in order to demonstrate the legality of the decision arrived at the meeting of the Working

Committee on 18th July 2023. Although the learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioner

sought to argue that there were discrepancies between 1R26 and X1, having examined

both documents, I see no reason to doubt the authenticity of the minutes, and I therefore

accept the statement by the 3rd Respondent that X1 is a true copy of the minutes of the

meeting.

41

In the above circumstances, I am satisfied that the Working Committee (a) met on 18th

July 2023, (b) was apprised of the findings of the Disciplinary Committee, and (c) arrived

at the decision to expel the Petitioner only after having considered the said findings.

The second matter that I wish to advert to is the submission of the learned President’s

Counsel for the Petitioner that in terms of Paragraph 13.3(i) of P2, the decision of the

Working Committee is subject to the approval at the Party Conference. That is correct

and is the general rule. However, an exception is found at Paragraph 13.3(iii) which

provides that decisions of the Working Committee on disciplinary matters must only be

reported to the Party Conference. To insist that such decisions be approved at the Party

Conference or that such decisions be reviewed prior to such decisions taking effect would

make it impossible to implement decisions taken by the Working Committee relating to

disciplinary issues.

Conclusion

In the above circumstances, I am of the view that the expulsion of the Petitioner from the

1st Respondent is valid. This application is accordingly dismissed, without costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT Vijith K. Malalgoda, PC, J I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT Achala Wengappuli, J I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT