1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

S.C (FR) No. 880/2009

In the matter of an Application under Article 17 read with Article 126 of the Constitution

Chief Inspector C.V. Weerasena No. 8A, 87, Jayawadana Gama Battaramulla. PETITIONER Vs. 1. Officer-In-Charge/Personnel

2nd Floor New Secretariat Building Colombo 1.

2. Deputy Inspector General/Personnel

Range Police Headquarters, Colombo 1.

3. The Inspector General of Police

Police Headquarters, Colombo 1.

4. Secretary,

Ministry of Defence, Colombo 1.

5. Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12. RESPONDENTS

2

BEFORE: Priyantha Jayawardena P.C., J. Anil Gooneratne J. & Nalin Perera J. COUNSEL: J. C. Weliamuna P.C. with Pulasthi Hewamanne for the Petitioner Ms. Barrie S.S.C for the Respondents ARGUED ON: 14.11.2017 DECIDED ON: 08.12.2017 GOONERATNE J. It is the position of the Petitioner that he has 25 years’ service and

is a Chief Inspector of Police, in the Sri Lanka Police. Petitioner initially joined the

service as a Reserved Sub-Inspector of Police in 1991, in the Technical Service.

He was promoted as Inspector (Technical Service) on 01.09.1998, and as Chief

Inspector (Technical Service) on 01.08.2002. Respondents take up the position

that in the reserve service the Petitioner was not engaged in regular police

functions but was employed in the Motor Mechanical Division, or the Works

Unit. The Supreme Court on 25.03.2010 granted Leave to Proceed under Article

12(1) of the Constitution. The main relief sought is in terms of sub-paragraph (e)

of the prayer to the petition and it reads thus:

3

(e) Direct the 1st to the 4th Respondents to entertain the application for the

Petitioner for promotion to the rank of ASP and call for interviews

forthwith and/or promote the Petitioner to the rank of ASP on the same

date as those who would be promoted in terms of the document marked

P10 read with P12.

The Petitioner was later on absorbed into the permanent cadre of

the police force in or about 2006. (P1a & 3R6) It is urged that the petitioner was

harassed as stated in paragraph 6 of the petition (vide P3 (a) to P9). As such in

that backdrop the Petitioner complains that an application form to apply to the

rank Assistant Superintendent of Police was not given to him (2009). Application

was called by internal notice marked P10. Petitioner as pleaded was refused

promotion as an A.S.P in the year 2008 for the reason that he lacks seniority.

(Vide P15 (b)). The Petitioner argue that the failure to give the Petitioner an

application form to apply for the post of A.S.P and subsequent failure to

promote the Petitioner and promoting officers junior to him is a violation of the

Petitioner’s fundamental rights. Petitioner claims that he has a legitimate

expectations to be nominated and appointed as an Assistant Superintendent of

Police.

Respondents argue that the Petitioner whilst being in the reserve

service, was not engaged in regular police activities but employed as a Motor

Mechanic – Work Unit. By Cabinet decision of 01.02.2006 the Reserve Police

4

Force was absorbed into the Regular Force but such absorption did not extend

to officers of the Special categories, had been absorbed separately, on the

Cabinet Decision of 28.06.2006. The officers of the Special Category was initially

absorbed not to the regular force but specialised category of work. However the

Cabinet Decision of 06.07.2006, all officers in the Special Categories were given

the option of joining the regular cadre, subject to fulfilling the necessary

prerequisites. Such decision was communicated to all specialised categories.

However the Petitioner erroneously submitted his name for absorption though

not entitled to do so. Inadvertently, Petitioner was issued a letter of absorption

due to an administrative lapse but remained in the correct list in the computer

system. (name reflects in the system)

Thereafter Petitioner due to his own negligence failed to submit an

application. Thus the Petitioner was not entitled to apply for a post in the regular

force. The Petitioner was therefore, subsequently absorbed into the special

category in the regular force. As such he cannot complain that he was victimised

by the Police Department in the manner learned President’s Counsel submitted

to us.

I agree with the submissions of learned Senior State Counsel that

the Petitioner was not entitled to be promoted as A.S.P in the regular service

(subsequent to his failure to apply to be included in the regular service). No

5

doubt there was an administrative lapse. In Mohideen Vs. Jayatilleke – SC Appeal

118A/2009 S.C. Minute 01.04.2013. .... where legal boundaries have been

traversed the courts must exercise their powers after careful consideration of

the legality in fearlessly exercising a check and balance on arbitrary or capricious

exercise of their power within the parameters of the law. The above dicta could

be utilised not only by the Petitioner’s party but more particularly by the

Respondents in the context of the case in hand. In these circumstances I do not

think that the Petitioner could entertain a legitimate expectation. Even if he had

an ‘expectation’ he cannot in my view entertain a legitimate expectation.

In view of the facts submitted by either side, it is for the Petitioner

to obtain necessary clarification. If he thinks the other way about, whom should

the authorities blame?

The failure on the part of the Petitioner to protect his own rights

cannot give rise to an action in court. Administrative lapse cannot be used to

support a legitimate expectation. This court is not inclined to grant prayer (e) of

the prayer to the Petition. It is the National Police Commission that should look

into this matter,

This is a fit case to consider the decision in, Dalpat Abasaheb

Solunke Vs. B S Mahajan AIR 1990 SC 435.

It will thus appear that apart from the fact that the High Court has rolled the cases of the two

appointees in one, though their appointments are not assailable on the same grounds, the

6

Court has also found it necessary to sit in appeal over the decision of the Selection Committee

and to embark upon deciding the relative merits of the candidates. It is needless to emphasise

that it is not the function of the Court to hear appeals over the decisions of the Selection

Committees and to scrutinize the relative merits of the Candidates. Whether a candidate is

fit for a particular post or not has to be decided by the duly constituted Selection Committee

which has the expertise on the subject. The Court has no such expertise. The decision of the

Selection Committee can be interfered with only on limited grounds, such as illegality or

patent material irregularity in the Constitution of the Committee or its procedure vitiating the

selection, or proved mala fides affection the selection etc. It is not disputed that in the present

case the University had constituted the Committee in due compliance with the relevant

statutes. The Committee consisted of experts and it selected the candidates after going

through all the relevant material before it. In sitting in appeal over the selection so made and

in setting it aside on the ground of the so called comparative merits of the candidates as

assessed by the Court, the High Court went wrong and exceeded its jurisdiction.

The Police Department must decide as to what should be done. In

the case the court will not interfere. If the Petitioner has the requisite

qualifications and satisfied the criteria for selection the authorities concerned

could consider the case of the Petitioner. As such I proceed to dismiss this

application.

Application dismissed without costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Priyantha Jayawardena P.C. J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Nalin Perera J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

7