1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for Special Leave to

Appeal from the Judgment of the Court of Appeal

under Article 128 (2) of the Constitution.

The Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department

Colombo 12.

Plaintiff

SC (SPL) LA 145/2014 Vs,

CA LA 06/2009 HC-Colombo 1649/2004 1. Herath Mudiyanselage Sarath Wijewardene,

No. 35, Migunagama, Mahiyangana.

2. Algama Koralage Sumedha Perera,

No. 270C, 14B, Dickland Estate,

Hokandara Road, Talawatugoda.

Accused

And between Stanley Christoffel Asoka Obeysekere,

No.11/5, Rajakeeya Mawatha,

Colombo 07

Aggrieved Party -Appellant

Vs.

1. Herath Mudiyanselage Sarath Wijewardene,

No. 35, Migunagama, Mahiyangana.

2

2. Algama Koralage Sumedha Perera,

No. 270C, 14B, Dickland Estate,

Hokandara Road, Talawatugoda.

Accused-Respondents

The Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department

Colombo 12.

Respondent

And Now Between

1. Herath Mudiyanselage Sarath Wijewardene,

No. 35, Migunagama, Mahiyangana.

2. Algama Koralage Sumedha Perera,

No. 270C, 14B, Dickland Estate,

Hokandara Road, Talawatugoda.

Accused-Respondents-Petitioners

Vs, Stanley Christoffel Asoka Obeysekere,

No.11/5, Rajakeeya Mawatha,

Colombo 07

Aggrieved Party -Appellant-Respondent

The Attorney General Attorney General’s Department Colombo 12. Respondent- Respondent

3

Before: Justice Vijith K. Malalgoda, PC

Justice Murdu N. B. Fernando, PC

Justice P. Padman Surasena

Counsel: Faisz Musthapha, PC, for the Accused-Respondent-Petitioners

Romesh de. Silva, PC, for the Aggrieved Party-Appellant-Respondent

Thusith Mudalige, DSG, for the Hon. Attorney General

Argued on 27.01.2020

Order on 26.06.2020

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J

Heard the learned President’s Counsel for the Accused-Respondent-Petitioners in support of the

instant Special Leave to Appeal Application. The main argument of the learned President’s Counsel

was based on section 16 (2) of the Judicator Act, whether the Aggrieved Party-Appellant-Respondent

before this Court is in fact an Aggrieved Party within the meaning of the Judicator Act.

During his reply the learned President’s Counsel for the Aggrieved Party-Appellant-Respondent,

relied on the following passage from Weeramanthri on property at page 873;

“In Ceylon the property of a deceased person whether testate or intestate vests immediately

on the death in his heirs, subject to payment of just debts, to the extent of which the personal

representative as such has a claim upon the property.”

In support of his contention he further relied on the decisions in Silva Vs. Silva 10 NLR 242 and SC

Appeal 28/2013 decided on 14th January 2016

4 As observed by this court, the Court of Appeal when refusing the preliminary objection raised on

behalf of the Accused-Respondent-Petitioners had not considered the above position, which in our

opinion, is very relevant to the maintainability of the main appeal before the Court of Appeal.

Considering all the matters raised by both parties we are not inclined to grant Special Leave in this

matter.

Application for Special Leave is refused.

As agreed by parties the order of the Court of Appeal shall stand altered to read as only as overruling

the Preliminary Objection raised against the maintainability of the Leave to Appeal application on

the ground that the Petitioners in the application before the Court of Appeal has no locus standi.

Further Court of Appeal Order must not be taken to have granted Leave to Appeal to the said

Petitioners despite the refences to that effect.

Thus, the Court of Appeal is directed to hear the parties and decide the question whether it should

grant Leave to Appeal for the Aggrieved Party-Appellant-Respondent to proceed with the appeal.

This application is accordingly dismissed. No Costs

Judge of the Supreme Court

Justice Murdu N. B. Fernando, PC I agree,

Judge of the Supreme Court

Justice P. Padman Surasena I agree,

Judge of the Supreme Court