IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

1. Letchumy Suntharanathan,

New Kalmunai Road,

Kallady, Batticaloa.

2. Suntharanathan Premini,

New Kalmunai Road,

Kallady, Batticaloa.

Defendant-Respondent-Appellants

SC/APPEAL/194/2014

EP/HCCA/BC/26/2007

DC BATTICALOA 4535/L

Vs.

Sellathangam Logitharajah,

New Kalmunai Road,

Kallady, Batticaloa.

(Deceased)

Janaththany Logitharajah,

New Kalmunai Road,

Kallady, Batticaloa.

Substituted Plaintiff-Appellant-

Respondent

Before: Hon. Justice P. Padman Surasena

Hon. Justice Achala Wengappuli

Hon. Justice Mahinda Samayawardhena

2

SC/APPEAL/194/2014

Counsel: S. Mandaleswaran with S. Abinya for the Defendant-

Respondent-Appellants.

V. Puvitharan, P.C. with Joseph Beneraj Ragul for the

Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent.

Argued on: 02.12.2024

Written submissions:

By the Appellants and Respondent on 15.01.2024

Decided on: 19.02.2025

Samayawardhena, J.

The plaintiff filed this action against the 1st defendant in the District

Court of Batticaloa by plaint dated 10.10.1997, seeking a declaration of

title to, ejectment of the defendant from, the two portions of the land

described in schedules C and D to the plaint, and damages. The

defendant filed answer seeking dismissal of the plaintiffs action. Her

daughter was later added as the 2nd defendant. The position of the 1st

defendant was that she has prescribed to the land and on that basis she

gifted the land in suit to the 2nd defendant by a deed. After trial, the

District Judge, by judgment dated 29.10.2004, dismissed the plaintiffs

action and allowed the cross-claim of the defendant. The District Judge

held that the 2nd defendant is entitled to Lots 1 and 2 of Plan No. 29

marked X by prescriptive possession.

At the trial, during the cross-examination, the plaintiff admitted that she

became entitled only to a 1/5 share of the land by her title deed marked

P3, although the deed purported to convey the entire land to her. The

plaintiff admitted in evidence that this deed was executed without any

payment as a gesture of goodwill. On that basis, the District Judge

correctly answered issue No. 1 of the plaintiff, Is the plaintiff the owner

3

SC/APPEAL/194/2014

of the property described in schedule B to the plaint as set out in

paragraphs 2-5 of the plaint?, as Sole ownership was not proved.

The third issue of the plaintiff, Was the defendants husband

Kanapathipillai Suntharanathan in occupation of a divided south western

portion out of the land described in schedule B morefully described in

schedule C to the plaint with leave and licence of the original owner

Sinnathamby Thangarasa and Rasamanikabathy Seenithamby? was

correctly answered by the District Judge in the negative. Although the

plaintiff stated in paragraph 7 of the plaint that the 1st defendants

husband was there with the leave and licence of Sinnathamby

Thangarasa and Rasamanikabathy Seenithamby, no evidence

whatsoever acceptable to Court was led to establish that fact. The District

Judge correctly states in the judgment that even the plaintiff in his

evidence firmly and clearly did not take up such a position except to make

a passing remark in his evidence that the 1st defendants late husband

was there with the leave and licence of the plaintiffs predecessors. The

District Judge also states that the plaintiff even in his statement made to

the police marked P4 does not mention about leave and licence. None of

the witnesses of the plaintiff spoke about leave and licence. Neither

Sinnathamby Thangarasa nor Rasamanikabathy Seenithamby who are

the plaintiffs predecessors in title was called to give evidence that they

gave leave and licence to the defendants husband to possess the land.

During the cross-examination of the defendant, it was put to her that her

late husband possessed the land with the leave and licence of the

predecessors of the plaintiff but the defendant had completely rejected it.

The question of leave and licence has not been pursued further with any

seriousness.

According to the evidence of the defendant, after her marriage to her late

husband in 1978, she came into occupation of the house on the land. At

4

SC/APPEAL/194/2014

that time, her husband and his parents had been living in the house. All

three of them are now deceased. Admittedly, the husband had been

operating a cycle repair shop on the premises. Several witnesses were

called and several documents were marked to prove long possession.

Among them, the trade registration licences for the years 1981-1985 had

been marked in evidence as P4-P7. The voter registration list for 1986,

which included the name of the 1st defendant, was marked as P8. The

Gramaseva Officer of that area during the relevant time, Selliah

Arasaratnam, also gave evidence. He stated in his evidence that when he

served as the Gramaseva Officer of that area for around 20 years from

01.01.1980, the husband of the 1st defendant was operating a cycle

repairing shop on the land in suit, with the shop in the front and the

house at the rear side of the building. He has visited the house for several

official purposes which he had described in evidence.

All the witnesses had given evidence, and all the documents had been

marked before the District Judge who pronounced the well-considered

judgment. Unlike the appellate Court Judge, he was in a distinctly

advantageous position to observe the demeanour and deportment of the

witnesses in the witness box. As there was ample credible evidence that

the defendants and their predecessors had been living on the land in suit

(Lots 1 and 2 of Plan X, approximately 3 perches in extent) without paying

rent to anyone or acknowledging anyones rights for over ten years, the

District Judge held that the defendants had prescribed to the land in

suit.

Being dissatisfied with the judgment of the District Court, the plaintiff

appealed to the High Court of Civil Appeal of Batticaloa. The High Court

set aside the judgment of the District Court and directed the judgment to

be entered in favour of the plaintiff only in respect of paragraph B of the

5

SC/APPEAL/194/2014

plaint, i.e. only ejectment of the defendants from the land in suit. The

High Court did not make a finding on declaration of title.

The judgment of the High Court lacks any analysis of the evidence led at

the trial. At one point, it merely reiterates the well-established legal

principle that a co-owner may institute an action to have his undivided

share declared and to seek the ejectment of a trespasser. The District

Judge has not stated anything contrary to that principle in the judgment.

What the District Judge states is that the plaintiff is not the sole owner

of the land, which is correct. The High Court does not explain the

applicability of this principle to the facts of the case or make a

determination on that matter. As I stated previously, the High Court only

orders ejectment of the defendant without any finding on the soil rights.

Reiterating well-established legal principles and citing judicial precedent

in a judgment serves no purpose unless their relevance to the facts of the

case is properly articulated.

Thereafter the High Court states without any rational basis this Court is

of the view that Sundaranathan (defendants husband) has entered into

the land with leave and license. A person who has entered into possession

of land in one capacity is presumed to continue to possess it in the same

capacity and sets aside the judgment of the District Court on the premise

that the defendant did not prove prescriptive title. As the District Judge

correctly states after analysing the evidence, the plaintiff did not prove

that the 1st defendants husband came into possession of the land with

the leave and licence of anybody. If this is not proved by the plaintiff, on

the facts and circumstances of the case, the defendants claim for

prescriptive title is bound to succeed.

The two questions of law on which leave to appeal was granted and the

answers thereto are as follows:

6

SC/APPEAL/194/2014

Q. Did the High Court err in law in granting ejectment without the

declaration of title?

A. In the circumstances of this case, yes.

Q. Did the High Court err in law in holding that the 1st defendants

husband is a licensee of the plaintiffs predecessor in title?

A. Yes.

I set aside the judgment of the High Court and restore the judgment of

the District Court. The appeal is allowed with costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

P. Padman Surasena, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Achala Wengappuli, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court