==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 16

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCTRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal under and in

terms of Section 5C of the High Court of

the Provinces (Special Provisions)

(Amendment) Act No. 54 of 2006 to be

read with Article 128 of the Constitution

of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

SC Appeal No: Ven. Madakumbure Sudassana Thero,

73/2025 Sri Bodhirajaramaya,

Madakumbura,

SC HCCA LA: Karandeniya.

375/2021 PLAINTIFF

SP/HCCA/GA No: Vs.

58/2017(F)

1. Ven. Kosgoda Mahinda Thero,

DC Balapitiya Case No: Siriwijaya Bodhirajaramaya,

3085/L Bogahapitiya,

Ahungalla.

2. Ven. Galpothukande Devinda Thero,

Sri Pathirajaramaya,

Pathiraja Pedesa,

Uragasmanhandiya.

DEFENDANTS

AND

Page 2 of 16

Ven. Madakumbure Sudassana Thero,

Sri Bodhirajaramaya,

Madakumbura,

Karandeniya.

PLAINTIFF-APPELLANT

Vs.

1. Ven. Kosgoda Mahinda Thero,

Siriwijaya Bodhirajaramaya,

Bogahapitiya,

Ahungalla.

2. Ven. Galpothukande Devinda Thero,

Sri Pathirajaramaya,

Pathiraja Pedesa,

Uragasmanhandiya.

DEFENDANT-RESPONDENTS

AND NOW BETWEEN

2. Ven. Galpothukande Devinda Thero,

Sri Pathirajaramaya,

Pathiraja Pedesa,

Uragasmanhandiya.

2nd DEFENDANT-RESPONDENT-

APPELLANT

Vs.

Page 3 of 16

Ven. Madakumbure Sudassana Thero,

Sri Bodhirajaramaya,

Madakumbura,

Karandeniya.

PLAINTIFF-APPELLANT-

RESPONDENT

Ven. Kosgoda Mahinda Thero,

(Deceased)

Siriwijaya Bodhirajaramaya,

Bogahapitiya,

Ahungalla.

1st DEFENDANT-RESPONDENT-

RESPONDENT

Before : Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

: Arjuna Obeyesekere, J.

: Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

Counsel : Kuvera De Zoysa, P.C. with Ms. Harshala Yapa

instructed by M. J. S. Fonseka for the 2nd

Defendant- Respondent-Appellant.

: Dr. Wijayadasa Rajapakshe P.C. with Suraj

Walgama and Rasika Dissanayake instructed by

Jayamuditha Jayasooriya for the Plaintiff-

Appellant-Respondent.

Argument on : 26-11-2025

Written Submissions : 19-12-2025 and 14-10-2025 (By the 2nd

Defendant-Respondent-Appellant)

Page 4 of 16

: 18-12-2025 (By the Plaintiff-Appellant-

Respondent)

Decided on : 07-05-2026

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

The 2nd defendant-respondent-appellant (hereinafter referred to as the 2nd

defendant) preferred this appeal on being aggrieved of the judgment dated 02-

11-2021 pronounced by the Provincial High Court of the Southern Province

holden in Galle while exercising its civil appellate jurisdiction.

The plaintiff of this action before the District Court and the two defendants

named therein are Buddhist priests. The dispute between the parties before

the District Court has been in relation to the Viharadhipathiship of the

Buddhist Temple morefully described in the plaint.

There is no dispute as to the fact that the 1st defendant priest mentioned in

the plaint has passed away during the pendency of the action and there was

no necessity to effect a substitution in that regard.

When this matter was supported for Leave to Appeal on 07-05-2025, this

Court granted leave on the following specific questions of law.

1. Is the founding Viharadhipathi entitled in law to nominate the plaintiff-

appellant-respondent as the next Viharadhipathi although the plaintiff-

appellant-respondent is not a pupil of the founding Viharadhipathi?

2. Has the Civil Appellate High Court erred in law by failing to appreciate

that in the event the pupillary line fails, the temple vests in the

Mahasanga of the fraternity to which the temple is affiliated?

It needs to be noted that when this matter was supported for leave, the learned

President’s Counsel who represented the 2nd defendant submitted that he is

no longer seeking a judgment in his favour for a deceleration of

Viharadhipathiship of the temple in issue.

Hence, this appeal will be considered under the said context and the

questions of law allowed by this Court, having in mind that the 2nd defendant

Page 5 of 16

is only praying for the dismissal of the action instituted by the plaintiff-

appellant-respondent (hereinafter referred to as the plaintiff) before the

District Court.

Accordingly, it is my view that considering the counter claim by the 2nd

defendant for a declaration in his favour would no longer be necessary to

consider in this appeal.

The Pleadings-

The plaintiff instituted this action before the District Court of Balapitiya

praying for a judgment to the effect that he should be declared the controlling

Viharadhipathi of Sri Pathirajarama Temple morefully described in the second

paragraph of his plaint dated 25-09-2005 for the reasons set out in his

pleadings. In addition to the above relief, the plaintiff sought the ejectment of

the 1st and the 2nd defendants named in the plaint and anyone claiming under

them from the said temple and the temple land, for damages, and other reliefs

deemed fit by the Court.

The position taken up by the 1st and 2nd defendants of the action who filed

separate but similar answers had been that, for the matters stated in their

averments it should be the 1st defendant who should be declared the

Viharadhipathi, and if the judgment is against the 1st defendant, it is the 2nd

defendant who should be declared the Viharadhipathi being the senior most

student of Sumanaransi Thero who became the Viharadhipathi of the temple

after the demise of the founder Viharadhipathi of the temple namely,

Madakumbure Sri Suseema Thero.

The Trial-

The case has proceeded to trial with three admissions. The 1st to 26th issue

has been raised by the plaintiff, while the 27th to 31st issue was by the

defendants.

The learned District Judge of Balapitiya pronouncing his judgment dated 25-

07-2017 has crystallized the factual matters where there are no variance or

Page 6 of 16

dispute between the parties although there had been no initial admissions in

the case.

Having considered the relevant disputed facts and the circumstances, the

relevant law in that regard, and the claim between the parties in relation to

the Viharadhipathiship of the relevant temple, it has been the determination

of the learned District Judge that the document marked P-08 under which

the plaintiff priest has claimed Viharadhipathiship can be considered as a

document written by the founder Viharadhipathi of the temple namely,

Madakumbure Suseema Thero.

Having considered the contention that after the demise of the said founder

Viharadhipathi it should be the plaintiff who became the Viharadhipathi, it

was his view that Madakumbure Suseema Thero had as his pupil

Sumanaransi Thero at the time of writing the document marked P-08, and

although the Viharadhipathi of a temple can appoint a junior pupil over a

senior pupil as the succeeding Viharadhipathi, the founder Viharadhipathi

cannot appoint a priest who is not a pupil of his own without the consent of

the pupils of the said Viharadhipathi.

It was on that basis the learned District Judge has decided to dismiss the

plaint. Having considered the counter claim by the defendants, it has been

the determination of the learned District Judge that the evidence adduced

before the Court, when considered on a balance of probability, has established

that it should be the 2nd defendant priest who is entitled to be declared as

Viharadhipathi of the questioned temple.

The Appeal before the High Court-

However, when the judgment of the learned District Judge was challenged

before the Provincial High Court of the Southern Province holden in Galle, the

learned Judges of the High Court, pronouncing their judgment on 02-11-2021

has taken a totally contrasting view to that of the learned District Judge.

It has been determined that the document marked P-08 should prevail over

the claim of the 2nd defendant, that he should be declared the Viharadhipathi

as a pupil of Sumanaransi Thero who was the succeeding Viharadhipathi of

Page 7 of 16

the founder Viharadhipathi of the temple namely, Suseema Thero. The High

Court has determined that as admitted by all parties the earlier mentioned

Sumanaransi Thero has abandoned the subjected temple and disrobed, and

hence, 1st and 2nd defendants are not entitled in law to make any claim to the

Viharadhipathiship or Chief incumbency to the said temple on the basis that

the 2nd defendant is a pupil of the earlier mentioned Sumanaransi Thero.

It has been determined that when Sumanaransi Thero abandoned the temple

and disrobed, the founder Viharadhipathi namely, Madakumbure Suseema

Thero has nominated the plaintiff who is a pupil of his brother priest

Madakumbure Sudassi Thero as the Viharadhipathi by the letter marked P-

08, and therefore the learned District Judge was wrong in deciding that the

plaintiff is not the rightful Viharadhipathi of the said temple (at page 13, 1st

paragraph of the High Court judgment-page 855 of the Appeal Brief).

The said determination read as follows;

“As already explained aforesaid when Ven. Sumanaransi Thero has

abandoned the subjected temple. Hence, the 1st and 2nd defendant are

not entitled in law to make any claim as Viharadhipathi or chief

incumbent to the subjected temple on the basis that the 2nd defendant is

a pupil of Ven. Sumanaransi Thero. Since the 1st defendant made his

claim through the 2nd defendant, 1st defendant is also not entitled to be

nominated as Viharadhipathi of the subjected temple. In such

circumstances when only pupil of Ven. Makumbure Susima Thero has

abandoned the temple as the founder and the chief incumbent of the

subjected temple Ven. Makumbure Susima the rightly nominated Plaintiff

who is the pupil of the brother priest namely Madakumbure Sudassi

Thero as Viharadhipathi of the subjected temple by letter marked P-08.

Accordingly, we are of the view that the learned Additional District Judge

has failed to decide that the plaintiff priest is the Viharadhipathi of the

subjected temple.

When evidence show that the Ven. Pathirajapedese Sumanaransi Thero

had abandoned the temple and his conduct in such a nature that

Page 8 of 16

conducive to an abandonment, obtaining his sanction to nominate some

other suitable priest by the founder of the subjected temple to the post of

Viharadhipathiship is erred in law, since once Ven. Sumanaransi has

abandoned the subjected temple, he loses all his entitlement to take any

decisions regarding the subjected temple, he loses all his entitlement to

take any decisions regarding the subjected temple. Hence, we are of the

view that the decision of the learned District Judge that the sanction of

Ven. Sumanaransi should have been obtained when the plaintiff had

been nominated by P-08 as Viharadhipathi of the subjected temple is

erred in law.”

It needs to be noted that as correctly determined by the learned District Judge

and also agreed by the Civil Appellate High Court several crucial facts in

relation to the dispute between the parties were not disputed facts during the

trial.

I find it relevant to highlight the following undisputed facts which are relevant

for the determination of this appeal which in my view would provide clarity to

this judgment.

a. The fact that Madakumbure Suseema Thero was the founder of the

temple in question and the founder Viharadhipathi of the same.

b. The aforesaid Madakumbure Suseema Thero had only one pupil

namely, Pathirajapedese Sumanaransi Thero.

c. After the demise of the founder Viharadhipathi, the said

Sumanaransi Thero was appointed as the Viharadhipathi and it is

he who had overall control of the questioned temple until he

abandoned the temple and disrobed.

d. The mentioned Madakumbure Suseema Thero had a brother priest

namely, Madakumbure Sudassi Thero, and the plaintiff is a pupil of

the said Sudassi Thero.

e. The fact that Ven. Suseema Thero passed away on 11-04-1989.

f. The fact that Viharadhipathiship of the disputed temple should be

determined based on the sisyanusisya paramparawa rule which

means “pupillary succession” or “succession from pupil to pupil”.

Page 9 of 16

Although the letter marked P-08 was a contested document, I find that the

learned District Judge as well as the learned Judges of the High Court has

correctly determined that the letter P-08 was a document authored by the

Madakumbure Suseema Thero.

However, it needs to be noted that the High Court has erred in determining

that the said letter was a letter written by the founder Viharadhipathi of the

temple after his pupil Sumanaransi Thero disrobed or abandoned the sasana.

As I have earlier stated in this judgement, in fact there had been no dispute

during the trial that Ven. Suseema Thero has passed away on 11-04-1989.

The evidence clearly establishes the fact that his pupil namely, Sumanaransi

Thero had been the Viharadhikari at the time of passing away of Suseema

Thero, and eight months after his passing away, the said Sumanaransi Thero

has been appointed as the Viharadhipathi of the temple.

The letter marked P-08 is a letter dated 29-05-1988. Therefore, it is clear that

the learned Judges of the High Court were misdirected in determining that

the said letter was written after Sumanaransi Thero abandoned the temple

and disrobed, where in fact the letter has been written while Sumanaransi

Thero has been the Viharadhikari of the temple as the only pupil of Suseema

Thero.

Consideration of the Grounds of Appeal-

Having considered the judgment of the learned District Judge and the

appellate judgment of the learned Judges of the Civil Appellate High Court, I

find that both Courts have considered the judgment pronounced in the case

of Gunananda Unnanse Vs. Dewarakkita Unnanse 26 NLR 257 in the

respective determinations.

The learned President’s Counsel who represented the plaintiff as well as the

2nd defendant also relied on the same judgment which overruled Siriniwasa

Vs. Sarananda (1921) 22 NLR 318 to advance their arguments at the hearing

of this appeal.

Page 10 of 16

In the said judgment Bertram C.J., while considering several authorities on

the question of succession to incumbency under sisya paramparawa rule laid

down the following,

“Where a Vihare with lands attached is vested in a priest as the “Original

Proprietor” he may take any of the following courses -

1. If he has pupils (say five pupils) he may make an absolute gift

to one of them. In that case the Vihare with its lands devolves

absolutely on that pupil. This pupil may make a similar

donation to a pupil of his own. When this goes on

uninterruptedly this is called sisya paramparawa.

2. The “original proprietor” may make bequest common to all his

five pupils. In that case all five succeed to the benefits of the

Vihare, but one is elected to the superiority, and this office

passes in succession to all of the five to whom the bequest has

been made. The last survivor may therefore make a gift in favor

of any other person.

3. The “original proprietor”, instead of making a gift to a particular

pupil, and thus starting a line of pupillary succession, or making

a common bequest to all his pupils, may, if he likes, transfer his

rights to any other person passing over his pupils.

4. The “original proprietor” may, if he likes, do none of these

things. He may elect to die intestate, without making any

disposition of the temple and its lands. In that case (and here

comes the important words): “the priests who happen to be

assembled at his death become entitled in common.” The

opinion adds these words: “things which belong equally to two

priests devolve wholly to the survivor.”

It was the submission of the learned President’s Counsel who represented the

2nd defendant that although Rev. Madakumbure Suseema was the founder

Viharadhipathi of the questioned temple, it cannot be considered that the said

priest was the original proprietor of the temple. This argument appears to be

in order to counter the determination in Gunananda Unnanse Vs.

Page 11 of 16

Dewarakkita Unnanse (supra) where it was held that, “the original proprietor

has a right to transfer his rights to any other person passing over his pupils

but no one else”. It was his position that admittedly Rev. Madakumbure

Suseema was a pupil of Galpoththawala Suwineetha Thero of Sri

Bodhirajaramaya, and the mentioned Valmeegoda Sudassi Thero was also a

pupil of the earlier mentioned Suwineetha Thero. It was submitted that the

evidence led in this case show that Madakumbure Suseema Thero established

the temple in question with the help of his tutor namely, Suwineetha Thero,

and his brother priest Rev. Valmeegoda Sudassi Thero and hence, it should

be Galpoththawala Suwineetha Thero, being the tutor of Madakumbure

Suseema Thero, that should be considered as the original proprietor of the

temple, though Suseema Thero was the founder Viharadhipathi of the temple.

Accordingly, it was his position that Madakumbure Suseema Thero had no

right to appoint the plaintiff who is a pupil of his brother scholar Rev. Sudassi

over the head of his own pupil Rev. Sumanaransi. It was his position that

after the demise of the founder Viharadhipathi, his only pupil Rev.

Sumanaransi was appointed as the Viharadhipathi of the questioned temple,

and after he abandoned the temple and disrobed, the pupillary succession

should end and the temple reverts to the fraternity or chapter to which the

said temple belongs, and it is the Mahanayake of the said chapter who has

the right to appoint the Viharadhipathi of the said temple. It was his argument

that therefore, the document marked P-08 has no validity and the plaintiff

cannot succeed in this action.

The learned President’s Counsel who represented the plaintiff relied on the

judgment in Gunananda Unnanse Vs. Dewarakkita Unnanse (supra) where

it was submitted that “the original proprietor” mentioned in the judgment

when considering the facts in relation to the matter under appeal should be

Madakumbure Suseema Thero. It was submitted that it was he who has

established the temple and the founder Viharadhipathi of the same.

Maintaining the position that the original proprietor can bypass his pupil and

transfer his rights to any other person, it was his position that the plaintiff

Page 12 of 16

can claim the rights to the temple and the land based on the proven document

P-08 where the original proprietor has passed his rights to the plaintiff.

The learned President’s Counsel submitted the judgment in Duwegama

Indrajothi Sthavira and Others Vs. Paragastota Rewatha Sthavira (1988)

2 SLR 283 where Dheeraratne J., reconsidered the above issue and held

that, “The original proprietor of a temple has a right to appoint any monk

passing over his pupils as Viharadhipathi upon the demise of the original

proprietor”.

Submitting as to the 2nd question of law raised, it was his position that the

2nd defendant cannot be considered as a pupil of Pathirajapedese

Sumanaransi Thero since his higher ordination certificate marked P-14 has

been made after Sumanaransi Thero disrobed and left sasana, and

accordingly, pupillary succession has not started. It was his submission that

the appellate judgment of the High Court of the Civil Appeal should therefore

stand without disturbance, since it has been established that founder

Viharadhipathi of the temple has transferred his rights to the plaintiff passing

over his pupil.

Having considered the relevant facts and circumstances under which this

appeal should be decided, and also the arguments placed before this Court

by the learned President’s Counsel in respect of their stance, I find that this

is a matter where admitted and established facts should play a pivotal role in

deciding the questions of law under which this appeal was considered. As I

have considered before, there cannot be any doubt that Madakumbure

Suseema Thero has written the letter marked P-08 transferring his rights to

the temple in question to the plaintiff, which is a letter dated 29-05-1988. As

I have considered earlier, the learned Judges of the High Court has got it

totally wrong when it was determined that the said transfer was made only

after the only pupil of Madakumbure Suseema, namely, Rev. Sumanaransi

disrobed. However, the document marked P-10 which was a statement given

to Karandeniya Police Station by earlier mentioned Sumanaransi Thero while

being a layman on 14-12-2006, clearly established that the said Sumanaransi

Thero has disrobed somewhere in the year 2002.

Page 13 of 16

It is an admitted fact that after the demise of Suseema Thero, Rev.

Sumanaransi became the Viharadhipathi of the temple. Although the plaintiff

has claimed that after the demise of Rev. Suseema, Sumanaransi Thero was

appointed to look after the affairs of the questioned temple under the guidance

and supervision of him, I find no basis to agree with such a position as the

evidence taken as a whole does not support such a contention. I find that

even at the time of Suseema Thero, it was his pupil Sumanaransi Thero who

has been functioning as the Viharadhikari of the temple, and the said Rev.

Sumanaransi has been duly appointed as the Viharadhipathi of the said

temple 8 months after Rev. Suseema’s demise.

It is abundantly clear that although the plaintiff may have had the document

marked P-08 under which he could have claimed the Viharadhipathiship of

the temple over the pupil of Suseema Thero, he has not claimed the

Viharadhipathiship as such, which is the reason why the relevant authority

who is vested with the right of nominating the Viharadhipathi of the temple

has decided to appoint Rev. Sumanaransi as the succeeding Viharadhipathi

of Rev. Suseema. If Rev. Sumanaransi was only appointed under the guidance

and supervision of the plaintiff as claimed by him, in my view, there should

be some documentation to substantiate such a position, where there had been

none produced at the trial. In my view, the plaintiff should have claimed the

Viharadhipathiship of the temple based on the document marked P-08 when

the question of Viharadhipathiship arose for a determination after the demise

of the founder Viharadhipathi of the temple. The plaintiff has filed this action

before the District Court in the year 2005, several years after the appointment

of Rev Sumanaransi as the Viharadhipathi of the temple, and also several

years after Rev. Sumanaransi disrobed and abandoned the temple. It is clear

from the evidence that it was the 1st and 2nd defendants who had been residing

in the temple at the time Rev. Sumanaransi disrobed.

It is my considered view that the plaintiff has by his own conduct failed to

claim the Viharadhipathiship at the proper time he should have claimed it,

and now estopped from claiming the same on the strength of the document

marked P-08.

Page 14 of 16

At this juncture, I would like to quote from the judgment of the Dheeraratne

J, in Duwegama Indrajothi Sthavira and Others Vs. Paragastota Rewatha

Sthavira (supra) at page 292 where it was observed,

“I am of the view that any interpretation of the Buddhist Eccleciastical

Law by Court, should be conducive to ensure stability, and continuity of

the numerous Buddhist places of worship in the country. Perhaps I can

find traces of the same view expressed in the words of Jayewardene A.J

in the very case of Gunananda Unnanse Vs. Dewarakkita Unnanse

(supra).”

Having considered and determined the 1st question of law under which leave

to appeal was granted, I will now focus my attention to the 2nd question of law

to consider a situation where the pupillary line ends.

In the appeal under consideration since the 2nd defendant has now abandoned

his claim to the Viharadhipathiship as a pupil of Sumanaransi Thero, the

question that needs determination is whether succession based on

sisyanusisya paramparawa has come to an end, and if so, who is entitled to

appoint an incumbent to the questioned temple. There is no dispute that Rev.

Sumanaransi who was appointed as the Viharadhipathi of the temple has

disrobed and had abandoned the temple thereafter. Since there is no claim

under sisyanusisya paramparawa, the only conclusion that can be reached is

the line of pupillary succession has become extinct.

In the case of U. Dhammaloka Thero Vs. P. Saranapala Thero 57 NLR 518

it was held,

“Upon the extinction of the line of pupillary succession to a Buddhist

temple governed by the rule of succession known as sisyanusisya

paramparawa, the temple vests in the Sangha and the right of appointing

a new Viharadhipathi vests in the Mahanayake of the fraternity which

has jurisdiction over it. The fact that a stranger has functioned as

Viharadhipathi for a long period does not entitle him to defeat the

Mahanayake’s right of appointment, which is a right that cannot be lost

by prescription.”

Page 15 of 16

In the case Dammaratna Unnanse Vs. Sumangala Unnanse (1910) 14 NLR

400 it was held,

“If succession to a vihare in “sisyanusisya paramparawa” fails, the

Chapter of the college to which it belongs have the right to appoint,

although in the case of small viharas the Maha Nayaka may act alone in

the faith of future support from the Chapter, and even in districts the local

Nayaka Unnanses have been known to appoint.”

Even though it is not relevant for the purpose of this appeal, even in a

situation where an incumbent Viharadhipathi dies without leaving a pupil,

the rule of succession is the same.

In the case of Attadassi Unnanse Vs. Indajothi Unnanse (1956) 59 NLR 79

it was observed that,

“When the incumbent of a Vihare to which the rule of Sisyanusisya

Paramparawa dies without leaving a pupil, the line of pupillary

succession becomes extinct, and the right of appointing his successor is

vested in the Sangha. It cannot be contended that the chain of pupillary

succession includes not only the descending line but also, when the

descending line becomes extinct, the ascending line.”

The above line of authority clearly demonstrates that in the instant case, since

the pupillary line of succession has become extinct with the disrobing of Rev.

Sumanaransi, it is the chapter of the college to which the vihare belongs have

the right to appoint a Viharadhipathi or Viharadhikari as the case may be.

For the reasons as considered above, I answer the questions of law under

which this appeal was considered in the following manner,

1. If the founding Viharadhipathi is also the original proprietor of the

temple, he can transfer his rights to any other person passing over

his pupils. However, the plaintiff is not entitled to claim the

Viharadhipathiship based on the document marked P-08 for the

reasons considered in this judgment as he is estopped from claiming

any benefit out of the document marked P-08.

Page 16 of 16

2. As considered in this judgment, the pupillary line of succession has

come to an end, therefore, the right of appointing a Viharadhipathi

vests in the Sangha.

Accordingly, I find that the judgment dated 02-01-2021 pronounced by the

Provincial High Court of the Southern Province holden in Galle cannot be

allowed to stand.

Hence, the said judgment is hereby set aside. For the reasons considered in

this judgment, I affirm the dismissal of the plaintiff’s action by the learned

District Judge of Balapitiya.

Having considered the relevant facts and the circumstances, I order no costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court