==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

CASE NO: SC/FR/06/2023

1. Marapitiya Arachchilge

Manjula Somawardana,

No. 143/A,

Mailawalana, Kirindiwela.

2. Hewa Pawulage Chandi Dilum Munidasa,

No. 7, Kumara Keerthi Mawatha,

Walpola, Matara.

3. Amarasingha Arachchilage

Mahesh Pradeepa Sampath,

No. 20/7/2, Darshana Mawatha,

Hokandara South, Hokandara.

4. Wijesinghe Arachchige Haral

Prasley Perera,

No. 387/5, Goda Uda Road,

Ihala Bomiriya, Kaduwela.

5. Sitisekara Mudiyanselage

Premarathna Sitisekara,

No. 199, Obawatta,

Heiyanthuduwa.

6. Wijahaluwalage Amarajeewa,

Mailamada, Kumbukwewa.

7. Kadinappulige Ganga Chandi Kularathne,

No. 71/2, Katuwalamulla, Ganemulla,

8. Pilapitiye Gedara Darshana Wimalarathne,

No. 101/14, Tikiriraja Mawatha,

Bandarawatta.

2

SC/FR/6/2023

9. Malawara Arachchige Nishanthi,

No. 116/09, D.S. Senanayake Mawatha,

Battuwatta, Ragama.

10. Athukoralage Don Ajith Pushpakumara,

No. 352/6, Suwa Mawatha,

Walgama, Athurugiriya.

11. Demal Giriya Gamage Jayanthu Lalin Trinti

Bandara, No. 123/A/4, Kothalawala,

Kaduwela.

12. Illandari Deva Dishan Priyadarshana

Permarathna, No. 352/A,

4th Mile Post, Karandeniya.

13. Herath Mudiyanselage Premarathna Banda,

Thalagolla, Kanulwela, Bibila.

14. Rajapaksha Mudiyanselage

Chaminda Perera,

No. 76, Kospelavinna, Rathnapura.

15. Adikari Mudiyanselage

Abayawikrama Bandara,

Dewala Road, Baduluwela,

Dambagalla, Monaragala.

16. Siyambalape Kankanmalage

Don Nishantha,

No. 57/2, Palabotekanda,

Pahala Kosgama, Kosgama.

Petitioners

Vs.

1. Neel Bandara Hapuhinne

1A. K.D.N. Ranjith Asoka

1B. W.V.P. Priyankara Yasarathna

1C. S. Aloka Bandara

3

SC/FR/6/2023

Secretary,

Ministry of Public Adminstration,

Home Affairs, Provincial Council and

Local Government,

Independence Square,

Colombo 7.

2. S. Aloka Bandara,

2A. N.U.M. Mendis,

Director-General of Combined Services,

Ministry of Public Administration,

Home Affairs, Provincial Councils and Local

Government, Independence Square,

Colombo 7.

3. G.K.D. Liyanage,

3A. K.P.G. Pushpakumara,

Government Printer,

Department of Government Printing,

No. 118, Dr. Danister De Silva Mawatha,

Colombo 8.

4. The Secretary of the Public

Service Commission,

Office of the Public Service

Commission, No. 1200/9,

Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

5. Hon. Justice Jagath Balapatabendi,

5A. Sanatha J. Ediriweera,

Chairman,

Public Service Commission

6. Indrani Sugathadasa,

6A. S.M. Mohamed,

4

SC/FR/6/2023

Member,

Public Service Commission

7. T.R.C. Ruberu,

7A. N. H. M. Chithrananda,

Member,

Public Service Commission

8. Ahamod Lebbe Mohamed Saleem,

8A. Prof. N. Selvakkumaran,

Member,

Public Service Commission

9. Leelasena Liyanagama,

9A. M.B.R. Pushpakumara,

Member,

Public Service Commission,

10. Dian Gomes,

10A. Dr. A.D.N. de Zoysa,

Member,

Public Service Commission.

11. Dilith Jayaweera,

11A. Mrs. R. Nadarajapillai,

Member,

Public Service Commission.

12. W.H. Piyadasa,

12A. Mr. C. Pallegama,

Member,

Public Service Commission.

13. Suntharam Arumainayaham,

13A. Mr. G.S.A. de Silva PC,

Member,

Public Service Commission,

5th to 13th A Respondents at,

5

SC/FR/6/2023

Office of the Public Service Commission,

No. 1200/9,

Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

14. The Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondents

Before: Hon. Justice Mahinda Samayawardhena

Hon. Justice Menaka Wijesundera

Hon. Justice M. Sampath K.B. Wijeratne

Counsel: Lasantha Garusinghe with Ms. Navoda Wanniarachchi for

the Petitioners.

Sabrina Ahamed, S.S.C., for the Hon. Attorney General.

Written submissions:

By the Petitioner on 11.07.2025.

By the Respondents on 29.01.2025.

Argued on: 11.09.2025

Decided on: 17.12.2025

Introduction

Sixteen petitioners, who are officers in the Combined Services attached to

the Department of Government Printing, filed this fundamental rights

application on 10.01.2023, naming the Secretary and the Director General

of Combined Services of the Ministry of Public Administration, the

Government Printer, and the Public Service Commission as respondents.

They alleged the violation of their fundamental rights guaranteed under

Articles 12(1) and 14(1)(g) of the Constitution by:

6

SC/FR/6/2023

(a) Combined Services Circular No. 2/2022 dated 01.08.2022 marked

P1, issued by the Director General of Combined Services under

delegated authority of the Public Service Commission;

(b) The list of Annual Transfers for the Combined Services for the year

2023 dated 16.11.2022 marked P18, insofar as it relates to the

petitioners; and

(c) The Appeal Decision of the Public Service Commission dated

23.12.2022 marked P20, affirming the said transfers.

This Court granted leave to proceed on the alleged violation of Article 12(1)

and issued an interim order preventing the respondents from giving effect

to the impugned transfers.

Objections, counter-objections, and pre-argument written submissions

were filed, and the matter was fixed for argument. At the hearing, learned

Senior State Counsel for the respondents moved that the preliminary

objection on the ground of time bar be decided prior to the consideration of

the merits. Both parties were heard on the preliminary objection, and this

order pertains to that objection.

Time bar objection

Article 126(2) of the Constitution mandates that a person alleging the

infringement or imminent infringement of a fundamental right by executive

or administrative action shall invoke the jurisdiction of this Court within

one month of the alleged infringement. The time limit prescribed therein is

mandatory. The said Article provides as follows:

Where any person alleges that any such fundamental right or language

right relating to such person has been infringed or is about to be

infringed by executive or administrative action, he may himself or by

an attorney-at-law on his behalf, within one month thereof, in

7

SC/FR/6/2023

accordance with such rules of court as may be in force, apply to the

Supreme Court by way of petition in writing addressed to such Court

praying for relief or redress in respect of such infringement. Such

application may be proceeded with only with leave to proceed first had

and obtained from the Supreme Court, which leave may be granted or

refused, as the case may be, by not less than two judges.

However, the rigidity of this time limit has been relaxed in limited

circumstances by:

(a) judicial precedent; and

(b) statutory provisions

I will address these two aspects separately in due course.

Proper stage for raising a time bar objection

Learned Counsel for the petitioners contends that, as the time-bar objection

was not taken up in the objections but only in the pre-argument written

submissions, this Court should not entertain it.

In terms of section 39 of the Judicature Act No. 2 of 1978, where a court of

first instance has plenary jurisdiction to adjudicate a matter but its

jurisdiction has been invoked in an incorrect manner, any objection to

jurisdiction shall be taken at the earliest possible opportunity. Such an

objection cannot be raised subsequently. This section has no application to

the superior courts.

Nevertheless, it is the cursus curiae of this Court that a time-bar objection

in a fundamental rights application shall be raised before the case is taken

up for argument, that is, in the objections or in the pre-argument written

submissions, and not for the first time at the hearing or in post-argument

written submissions.

8

SC/FR/6/2023

This position was examined in Romesh Cooray v. Jayalath, Sub-Inspector of

Police and Others [2008] 2 Sri LR 43. In that case, counsel for the 6th

respondent raised the time-bar objection for the first time at the argument.

Bandaranayake J. (as she then was), having considered the nature of

fundamental rights applications together with the procedure prescribed by

the Supreme Court Rules of 1990 in respect of such applications, observed

at page 51 as follows:

Accordingly on a consideration of the aforementioned Rules, it is

evident that a preliminary objection should be raised at the time the

objections are filed and/or should be referred to in the written

submissions that has to be tendered in terms of the Rules. The objective

of this procedure is quite easy to comprehend. The whole purpose of

objections and written submissions is to place their case by both

parties before Court prior to the hearing and when the petitioner’s

objections are taken along with the objections and/or written

submissions filed by the respondents prior to the hearing, it would not

come as a surprise either to the affected parties or to Court and the

applications could be heard without prejudice to any one’s rights.

Therefore, as correctly pointed out by the learned President’s Counsel

for the petitioner, the earliest opportunity the 6th respondent had of

raising the aforementioned preliminary objection was at the time of

filing his objections and written submissions in terms of the Supreme

Court Rules, 1990, as the objections and/or the written submissions

should have contained any statement of fact and/or issue of law that

the 6th respondent intended to raise at the hearing.

Admittedly, the 6th respondent had not raised the preliminary objection

on the ground of the application being filed out of time either in his

objections or in the written submissions. In the circumstances, it is

9

SC/FR/6/2023

apparent that there is no merit in the objection raised by the 6th

respondent.

In Randeniya v. Chairman, Public Service Commission and Others [2020] 2

Sri LR 88, the time-bar objection was likewise raised only at the argument.

Jayasuriya C.J., whilst emphasising that a party seeking shelter under

section 13(1) of the Human Rights Commission Act to circumvent the time

bar objection is obliged to place material before the Court to show that an

inquiry into his complaint is pending before the Human Rights Commission,

further held at 102-103:

I observe that this Court on 14.05.2013 had granted leave to proceed

in this matter. There is no material indicating that the Court considered

the ‘time bar’ when granting leave to proceed. At the argument stage

Court heard submissions of both parties on merits even though the

learned Deputy Solicitor General raised an objection on the basis of

time bar. Therefore, I proceeded to consider all such submissions and

to make the determination on merits, following the practice adopted in

Ananda Dharmadasa et al v. Ariyaratne Hewage et al [2008] 2 SLR

19, even though this application could have been dismissed in limine

on the basis of time bar.

In the present case, the respondents have raised the time-bar objection

before the matter was taken up for argument, namely in their pre-argument

written submissions. This accords with the procedural expectations

articulated in Romesh Cooray v. Jayalath and subsequent authorities,

which emphasise that such objections shall be raised at the earliest

opportunity, that is, at the time of support for leave to proceed or when

filing objections, and at the latest in the pre-argument written submissions.

The petitioners have had full opportunity to respond. Accordingly, the

objection has been raised in a timely and proper manner, and the

petitioners’ contention to the contrary is without merit.

10

SC/FR/6/2023

Judicial precedent

The relaxation of the one-month rule through judicial precedent is founded

predominantly on the maxim lex non cogit ad impossibilia, which means

that the law does not compel a person to do what is impossible.

If a person has been held incommunicado for more than one month

following the alleged infringement of his fundamental rights, he should not

be denied the opportunity to be heard on the ground that he failed to invoke

the jurisdiction of this Court within one month of the infringement. In such

circumstances, the one-month period will begin to run only from the date

on which he first regains the ability to communicate with the outside world

and take steps to vindicate his rights.

Similarly, where the infringement occurs as a result of an act not

immediately known to the petitioner, the one-month period will commence

only from the date on which he first becomes aware of the violation.

Sharvananda C.J., in Mutuweeran v. The State (5 Skantha’s Law Reports

126 at 130), observed as follows:

Because the remedy under Article 126 is thus guaranteed by the

Constitution, a duty is imposed upon the Supreme Court to protect

fundamental rights and ensure their vindication. Hence Article 126(2)

should be given a generous and purposive construction. The one month

prescribed by Article 126(2) for making an application for relief by a

person for infraction of his fundamental right applies to the case of the

applicant having free access to his lawyer and to the Supreme Court.

In that case, the petitioner had been detained from the date of his arrest on

28.07.1986 until the filing of the petition on 03.10.1986. At page 129,

Sharvananda C.J. articulated the guiding criterion for determining

compliance with the one-month time limit in the following terms:

11

SC/FR/6/2023

In my view, Article 126(2) postulates a person whose freedom of

movement is not fettered by being kept in custody or detention, who

has free access to the Supreme Court to apply for relief under Article

126 of the Constitution.

In Edirisuriya v. Navaratnam [1985] 1 Sri LR 100 at 105-106, Ranasinghe

J. (as he then was), with the concurrence of Sharvananda C.J., citing

Vadivel Mahenthiran v. Attorney-General (SC Application No. 68/1980, SC

Minutes of 05.08.1980) and Hewakuruppu v. G.A. de Silva, Tea

Commissioner (SC Application No. 118/84, SC Minutes of 10.11.1984), held

that although the one-month time limit stipulated in Article 126(2) is

mandatory, the Court may, in a fit and proper case, entertain an application

made outside that period if an adequate excuse for the delay is established.

His Lordship further held that where the petitioner has been held

incommunicado, the maxim lex non cogit ad impossibilia applies, for the law

does not expect a person to do the impossible. This dictum has been cited

with approval in several later decisions, including Ranaweera v. Sub-

Inspector Wilson Siriwardena [2008] 1 Sri LR 260 at 271.

In Gamaethige v. Siriwardena [1988] 1 Sri LR 384 at 401, Mark Fernando

J. acknowledged that this Court has not merely a discretion but, in

appropriate circumstances, a duty to entertain a fundamental rights

application filed out of time, where the unique facts and circumstances of

the case so warrant.

The time limit of one month prescribed by Article 126(2) has thus been

consistently treated as mandatory; where however by the very act

complained of as being an infringement of a petitioner’s fundamental

right, or by an independent act of the respondents concerned, he is

denied such facilities and freedom (including access to legal advice) as

would be necessary to involve the jurisdiction of this court, this Court

has discretion, possibly even a duty, to entertain an application made

12

SC/FR/6/2023

within one month after the petitioner ceased to be subject to such

restraint. The question whether there is a similar discretion where the

petitioner’s failure to apply in time is on account of the act of a third

party, or some natural or man-made disaster, would have to be

considered in an appropriate case when it arises.

At page 402, Mark Fernando J. recapitulated the law as follows:

Three principles are thus discernible in regard to the operation of the

time limit prescribed by Article 126(2). Time begins to run when the

infringement takes place; if knowledge on the part of the petitioner is

required (e.g. of other instances by comparison with which the

treatment meted out to him becomes discriminatory), time begins to run

only when both infringement and knowledge exist (Siriwardena v.

Rodrigo [1986] 1 Sri LR 384, 387). The pursuit of other remedies,

judicial or administrative, does not prevent or interrupt the operation of

the time limit. While the time limit is mandatory, in exceptional cases,

on the application of the principle lex non cogit ad impossibilia, if there

is no lapse, fault or delay on the part of the petitioner, this Court has a

discretion to entertain an application made out of time.

In Siriwardena v. Brigadier Rodrigo [1986] 1 Sri LR 384 at 387, Ranasinghe

J. (as he then was) held:

The period of one month specified in Sub-Article (2) of Article 126 of the

Constitution would ordinarily begin to run from the very date the

executive or administrative act, which is said to constitute the

infringement, or the imminent infringement as the case may be, of the

Fundamental Right relied on, was in fact committed. Where, however,

a petitioner establishes that he became aware of such infringement, or

the imminent infringement, not on the very day the act complained of

was so committed, but only subsequently on a later date, then, in such

13

SC/FR/6/2023

a case, the said period of one month will be computed only from the

date on which such petitioner did in fact become aware of such

infringement and was in a position to take effective steps to come

before this Court.

In Dayaratne and others v. National Savings Bank and others [2002] 3 Sri

LR 116, the objection based on the time bar, namely that the interviews and

decisions relating to promotions had taken place more than one month

before the application was filed, was rejected. The Court held that time

began to run against the petitioners only when the names of the promotees

were announced. This demonstrates that the petitioner’s awareness of the

impugned act is central to the computation of the one-month time bar.

In Sriyani De Soyza and others v. Chairman of the Public Service Commission

(SC/FR/206/2008, SC Minutes of 09.12.2016), Prasanna Jayawardena J.

articulated the approach consistently adopted by this Court in applying

Article 126(2) in the following manner:

However, this Court has consistently recognized the fact that, the duty

entrusted to this Court by the Constitution to give relief to and protect

a person whose Fundamental Rights have been infringed by executive

or administrative action, requires Article 126(2) of the Constitution to

be interpreted and applied in a manner which takes into account the

reality of the facts and circumstances which found the application. This

Court has recognized that it would fail to fulfill its guardianship if the

time limit of one month is applied by rote and the Court remains blind

to facts and circumstances which have denied a Petitioner of an

opportunity to invoke the jurisdiction of Court earlier.

These authorities demonstrate that, while the one-month time limit

stipulated in Article 126(2) is mandatory, its application must be tempered

by a realistic appreciation of the facts and circumstances of each case. The

14

SC/FR/6/2023

constitutional duty of this Court to protect and vindicate fundamental

rights cannot be fulfilled by a mechanical or rigid application of the time

bar. Accordingly, where a petitioner clearly establishes that he was

prevented, whether by impossibility, lack of awareness, or other

circumstances beyond his control, but without any lapse, fault, delay, want

of due diligence, or similar omission on his part, from invoking the

jurisdiction of this Court earlier, the one-month period should be computed

from the point at which he was first placed in a position to meaningfully

seek relief.

The instant application of the petitioners, and the time-bar objection raised

by the learned Senior State Counsel, do not fall within the ambit of the

foregoing discussion. The petitioners rely on section 13(1) of the Human

Rights Commission of Sri Lanka Act to meet the time bar objection.

Statutory provisions

The petitioners allege that their fundamental right guaranteed under Article

12(1) was violated by Combined Services Circular No. 2/2022 dated

01.08.2022 marked P1, whereby the Department of Government Printing

was designated as a popular station to the detriment of the petitioners; and

by the Transfer Orders issued for the year 2023 dated 16.11.2022 marked

P18, which were made pursuant to the said circular.

This application was filed on 10.01.2023, well beyond one month from

either the date of the impugned Circular or the date of the impugned

Transfer Orders. The petitioners are therefore clearly out of time under

Article 126(2).

The petitioners cannot rely on the Appeal Decision of the Public Service

Commission dated 23.12.2022 marked P20, which affirmed the said

transfers. The pendency or pursuit of such appeals or the pursuit of

remedies before any other forum does not suspend, interrupt, or extend the

15

SC/FR/6/2023

one-month period prescribed by Article 126(2) for invoking the jurisdiction

of this Court. In Gamaethige v. Siriwardena [1988] 1 Sri LR 384 at 402,

Mark Fernando J. stated that “The pursuit of other remedies, judicial or

administrative, does not prevent or interrupt the operation of the time limit.”

However, section 13(1) of the Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka Act

No. 21 of 1996 creates a statutory exception to the one-month rule. It

provides as follows:

Where a complaint is made by an aggrieved party in terms of section

14 to the Commission, within one month of the alleged infringement or

imminent infringement of a fundamental right by executive or

administrative action, the period within which the inquiry into such

complaint is pending before the Commission, shall not be taken into

account in computing the period of one month within which an

application may be made to the Supreme Court by such person in terms

of Article 126(2) of the Constitution.

According to this provision, two conditions must be satisfied:

(a) The complaint shall be made to the Human Rights Commission

“within one month of the alleged infringement or imminent infringement

of a fundamental right by executive or administrative action”; and

(b) The period during which “the inquiry into such complaint is pending

before the Commission” shall be excluded when computing the one-

month period within which the petitioner is required to invoke the

jurisdiction of this Court under Article 126(2).

The petitioners have tendered, together with the petition, the document

marked P17 dated 14.09.2022 issued by the Human Rights Commission of

Sri Lanka, which states that “ශ්‍රී ලංකා මානව හිමිකම් කකාමිෂන් සභාව කවත ඔබ විසින්

22/08 — දින ක ාමුකර ඇති පැමිණිල්ල, ඉහතකී අංක ටකේ ලි ාපදිංචි කර ඇති බවේ ඒ

16

SC/FR/6/2023

පිළිබඳව කකාමිෂන් සභාකේ අවධාන ක ාමු කවමින් පවතින බවේ කමයින් දැනුම් කදමු.” This

document suggests that the petitioners made an undated complaint to the

Commission, probably within one month of the issuance of the impugned

Circular P1. However, the petitioners have not produced any further

material to establish that the inquiry into that complaint was pending

before the Commission at any point of time thereafter.

Complaints may be made to the Human Rights Commission for a variety of

purposes, and one such purpose, as observed by Aluwihare J. in Kithsiri v.

Faiszer Musthapa (SC/FR/362/2017, SC Minutes of 10.01.2018), may be

to circumvent the time limit imposed by Article 126(2) of the Constitution.

There is, however, no compulsion or mandatory obligation on the Human

Rights Commission to conduct an inquiry merely because a complaint has

been lodged. Section 14 of the Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka Act

clearly provides that the Commission may, and not shall, investigate an

allegation of infringement or imminent infringement of a fundamental right.

Section 14 reads as follows:

The Commission may, on its own motion or on a complaint made to it by

an aggrieved person or group of persons or a person acting on behalf of

an aggrieved person or a group of persons, investigate an allegation of the

infringement or imminent infringement of a fundamental right of such

person or group of persons caused-

(a) by executive or administrative action; or

(b) as a result of an act which constitutes an offence under the

Prevention of Terrorism Act, No. 48 of 1979, committed by any

person.

As this Court has emphasised in a long line of decisions, the mere lodging

of a complaint before the Human Rights Commission is insufficient to avert

the operation of the time bar under Article 126(2). The petitioner shall also

17

SC/FR/6/2023

establish that the Commission had commenced or was conducting an

inquiry into such complaint during the relevant period. I respectfully concur

with that view.

Although Murdu Fernando J. (as she then was) in Ranasinghe v. Ceylon

Petroleum Storage Terminals Ltd [2019] 3 Sri LR 184 initially took the view

that a complaint made to the Human Rights Commission within one month

of the alleged violation was sufficient to attract the benefit of section 13(1),

and that proof of the inquiry being pending before the Commission was

unnecessary, on the basis that an aggrieved party has no control over the

Commission’s internal processes, Her Ladyship appears to have

subsequently reconsidered and departed from that position, as Her

Ladyship has since agreed with the reasoning of Janak De Silva J. in

Thilangani Kandambi v. State Timber Corporation (SC/FR/452/2019, SC

Minutes of 14.12.2022), where His Lordship clarified the correct legal

position as follows:

(a) The initial view was that mere production of a complaint made to

the Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka within one month of the

alleged infringement is sufficient to get the benefit of the provisions in

section 13(1) of the Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka Act No. 21

of 1996 [Romesh Coorey v. Jayalath (2008) 2 Sri.L.R. 43, Alles v. Road

Passenger Services Authority of the Western Province, (S.C.F.R.

448/2009, S.C.M. 22.02.2013)].

(b) However, the correct position is that a petitioner must show evidence

that the Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka has conducted an

inquiry regarding the complaint or that an inquiry is pending. Simply

lodging a complaint is inadequate. [Subasinghe v. Inspector General of

Police, SC (Spl) 16/1999, S.C.M. 11.09.2000; Kariyawasam v.

Southern Provincial Road Development Authority and 8 Others, (2007)

2 Sri.L.R. 33; Ranaweera and Others v. Sub-Inspector Wilson

18

SC/FR/6/2023

Siriwardene and Others (2008) 1 Sri.L.R. 260; K.H.G. Kithsiri v Faizer

Musthapha, (S.C.F.R. 362/2017, S.C.M. 10.01.2018); Wanasinghe v.

Kamal Paliskara and Others, (S.C.F.R. 216/2014, S.C.M. 23.06.2021)].

Hence, the reliance placed on the judgment of Murdu Fernando J. in

Ranasinghe v. Ceylon Petroleum Storage Terminals Ltd to contend that the

mere acknowledgment of a complaint made to the Human Rights

Commission is sufficient to take an application outside the one-month time

limit, can no longer be regarded as good law.

In Alagaratnam Manorajan v. Governor, Northern Province

(SC/FR/261/2013, SC Minutes of 11.09.2014), Wanasundera J.

emphasised that Article 126(2) contains a constitutional time bar intended

to ensure urgency, finality, and prompt invocation of the Supreme Court’s

fundamental rights jurisdiction. Her Ladyship further observed that section

13 of the Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka Act must not be

interpreted in a manner that overrides or suspends the one-month

limitation in Article 126(2), but rather as a narrow exception that operates

consistently with the purpose of the constitutional provision.

If a bare complaint to the Human Rights Commission were permitted to stop

the running of time indefinitely, it would defeat the constitutional

requirement of promptness and undermine the finality envisaged by Article

126(2).

Conclusion

For the foregoing reasons, I uphold the preliminary objection and dismiss

the application.

Judge of the Supreme Court

19

SC/FR/6/2023

Menaka Wijesundera, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

M. Sampath K.B. Wijeratne, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court