[SC Appeal 210/2017] - Page 1 of 6

1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA.

In the matter of an appeal in terms of Article 128

of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

Officer In Charge

Police Station,

Bibile.

COMPLAINANT

-Vs-

1. Sanjaya Samantha Bandara Nanayakkara

Kawdella,

Bibile.

2. Alawatthage Chularathne Anura De Silva

Batticaloa Road,

Ambagolla Junction,

Bibile.

ACCUSED

AND THEN BETWEEN

1. Sanjaya Samantha Bandara Nanayakkara

Kawdella,

Bibile.

1ST ACCUSED-APPELLANT

2. Alawatthage Chularathne Anura De Silva

Batticaloa Road,

Ambagolla Junction,

Bibile.

2ND ACCUSED-APPELLANT

-Vs-

SC APPEAL No. 210/2017

S.C. Special Leave to Appeal No.

7/15

High Court Monaragala Appeal No.

14/2013 and 15/2013

Magistrate Court Bibile Case No.

14007

[SC Appeal 210/2017] - Page 2 of 6

2

1. Officer In Charge

Police Station,

Bibile.

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

2. Hon. Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

Alawatthage Chularathne Anura De Silva

Batticaloa Road,

Ambagolla Junction,

Bibile.

2ND ACCUSED-APPELLANT-APPELLANT

-Vs-

1. Officer In Charge

Police Station,

Bibile.

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT

2. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. PADMAN SURASENA, J.

A. H. M. D. NAWAZ, J. &

K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J.

COUNSEL : Asoka Fernando for the 2nd Accused-Appellant-Appellant

instructed by Ms. A.R.R. Siriwardena.

Azard Navavi SDSG for the Complainant-Respondent-Respondent

and the Respondent-Respondent.

[SC Appeal 210/2017] - Page 3 of 6

3

ARGUED &

DECIDED ON : 13-12-2023.

P. PADMAN SURASENA, J.

Court heard the submissions of the learned Counsel for the 2nd Accused-Appellant-Appellant,

the submissions of the learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General who appeared for both the

Complainant-Respondent-Respondent and the Respondent-Respondent, and then concluded

the argument of this case.

The 2nd Accused-Appellant-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Accused-Appellant) stood

charged along with another (1st Accused) before the Magistrates Court of Bibile under three

counts. The 1st count is for an offence punishable under Section 344 read with Section 32 of

the Penal Code; the 2nd count is for an offence punishable under Section 186 read with Section

32 of the Penal Code; the 3rd count is for an offence punishable under Section 314 read with

Section 32 of the Penal Code. As the learned Magistrate had decided not to proceed with the

2nd count, the trial had proceeded only on the 1st and 3rd counts. After the trial, the learned

Magistrate had convicted both Accused on the 1st count in the Charge Sheet, which is for using

criminal force against Police Constable 1759 Nissanka of Bibile Police in order to prevent or

deter the said Police Constable from discharging his duty as a public servant, an offence

punishable under Section 344 read with Section 32 of the Penal Code. The learned Magistrate

has acquitted both Accused from the 3rd count which is under Section 314 of the Penal Code.

Being aggrieved by the said conviction, both the Accused had then appealed to the Provincial

High Court. The Provincial High Court, by its judgement dated 26-11-2014, had affirmed the

conviction and the sentence imposed on both Accused, and affirmed the judgement dated 17-

06-2013 pronounced by the learned Magistrate of Bibile.

Being aggrieved by the judgement of the Provincial High Court, the 2nd Accused has filed the

instant appeal. Although, the 2nd Accused in the Special Leave to Appeal Petition filed before

this Court had sought for Special Leave to Appeal in respect of several questions of law covering

the factual matrices of the case, we note that this Court by its order dated 31-10-2017, had

granted Special Leave to Appeal only on the following question of law.

Whether the Hon. High Court Judge erred in law for his inability to consider that,

the learned Magistrate disregarded the failure of the prosecution to prove Count 1

[SC Appeal 210/2017] - Page 4 of 6

4

of the charges framed against the accused for its inability to establish that the

Virtual Complainant engaged in his official duties at the time of the incident?

Therefore, it would suffice for us to consider the above question of law in this appeal.

The facts of the case show clearly that the 2nd Accused had assaulted/used criminal force on

the Police Constable Nissanka who had just come out of the Police Station and walked towards

the Bus Stand in Bibile Town.

The main contention of the learned Counsel for the 2nd Accused is that the said Police Constable

was not on duty when he was subjected to the relevant assault. It was his argument that due

to that fact, it was wrong for the Magistrates Court as well as the Provincial High Court to have

convicted the Accused-Appellant-Appellant. Section 344 of the Penal Code under which the 2nd

Accused stands convicted is as follows:

whoever assault or uses a criminal force to any person, being a public servant

in the execution of his duty, as such public servant, or with intent to prevent or

deter that person from discharging his duty as such public servant, or in

consequence of anything done or attempted to be done by such person in the

lawful discharge of his duty as such public servant, shall be punished with

imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or

with fine, or with both.

Therefore, the primary question is whether the Police Constable Nissanka could be considered

to have been discharging his duty at the time he was assaulted just outside the Police Station.

First and foremost, it could be pertinent to refer to Section 56 of the Police Ordinance which is

as follows:

Every police officer shall for all purposes in this Ordinance contained be considered to

be always on duty, and shall have the powers of a police officer in every part of Sri

Lanka.

It shall be his duty-

(a) To use his best endeavours and ability to prevent all crimes, offences and

public nuisances;

(b) To preserve the peace;

(c) To apprehend disorderly and suspicious characters;

(d) To detect and bring offenders to justice;

[SC Appeal 210/2017] - Page 5 of 6

5

(e) To collect and communicate intelligence affecting the public peace;

(f) Promptly to obey and execute all orders and warrants lawfully issued and

directed to him by any competent authority.

The literal and plain meaning of the above section is clear enough for us to hold that every

Police Officer must be considered to be always on duty. Be that as it may, even on the

consideration of the facts of this case, we can see clearly that the Police Constable Nissanka

was on standby duty in the Police Station on the relevant date. This is obvious because the

incident relevant to this case had occurred on the day immediately after the date of the

Presidential Election 2010. Furthermore, it is not disputed that the Police Constable Nissanka

had come out of the Police Station with permission obtained from his superiors.

On the other hand, the relevant date of offence being the day immediately after the Presidential

Election 2010, we cannot turn a blind eye to the fact that the law had prohibited any gathering

on the streets on such days. It is also not disputed that the group of persons to which the 2nd

Accused had belonged at the time of committing this offence was celebrating the election victory

in the town with cheering etc. It was at that moment that the Police Constable Nissanka

observing that those persons were committing an offence and observing that there was a

likelihood of a breach of peace in the area, had taken a prompt action to warn that group of

persons with a view of dispersing them. It was at that time that the 2nd Accused had resisted

the duty of the said Police Constable and used criminal force on him. We observe that it was

under such circumstances that the 2nd Accused now takes up the position that the Police

Constable Nissanka was not on duty at that moment. We are unable to agree with that

submission.

Learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General cited the case of Albert V. Lavin.1 In that case, Lavin,

a Police Constable at the relevant time, off duty and in plain clothes, was at the head of a queue

of a bus stop. He had intervened when another person had attempted to jump the queue at

that bus stop. The Magistrate had concluded that there were reasonable grounds for Lavin to

believe that there existed a likelihood of a breach of peace which was imminent at the time,

which had warranted his intervention. The House of Lords had unanimously agreed with that

conclusion.

1 1981 (3) ALL ER 878

[SC Appeal 210/2017] - Page 6 of 6

6

Thus, in addition to the presence of the afore-stated statutory provision in our country namely,

Section 56 of the Police Ordinance, Lavins case also supports the sustainability of the

judgements of both the Magistrates Court as well as the Provincial High Court.

For the foregoing reasons, we proceed to answer the question of law in respect of which this

Court has granted Special Leave to Appeal, in the negative. We observe that the learned

Magistrate had considered evidence in relation to all the ingredients of the offence and had

come to the correct conclusion. We also observe that the whole trial had been conducted before

the Magistrate who pronounced the judgement. Therefore, the learned Magistrate who

pronounced the judgement had ample opportunity to evaluate the evidence of the Witnesses

taking into consideration, the demeanour and deportment of those Witnesses. Perusal of the

judgement of the learned High Court Judge also reveals that the learned High Court Judge had

also considered all necessary aspects of the case before he decided to dismiss the appeal. Thus,

in those circumstances we have no basis to interfere with the findings of the Trial Judge as well

as the conclusions reached by the learned High Court Judge.

For the above reasons, we decide to affirm the judgement dated 17-06-2013 and also the

judgement dated 26-11-2014 of the learned High Court Judge and affirm the conviction and

the sentence imposed on the 2nd Accused. Hence this Appeal should stand dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

A.H.M.D. NAWAZ, J.

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO J.

I agree,

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Mks