1 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of section 5 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 10 of 1996 reads with Article 154P (3) of the Constitution of the Republic of Sri Lanka

Commercial Bank of Ceylon Limited alias Seemasahitha Lanka Vanija Bankuwa of No. 21, Bristol Street, Colombo 01 and having branch office and/or place of business at No. 343, Galle Road, Colombo 06.

Plaintiff

SC/CHC /19/2007 HC (Western Province) Civil Vs Case No. 100/98 (1)

1. Samarathilaka Wijesingha Ekanayaka 2. Indra Iranganie Wijesingha Ekanayaka 3. Sujeewa Wijesingha Ekanayaka

Carrying on business under the name style and firm of “Sahana Printers” at Dummaladeniya, Wennappuwa.

Defendants

And Commercial Bank of Ceylon Limited alias Seemasahitha Lanka Vanija Bankuwa of No. 21, Bristol Street, Colombo 01 and having branch office and/or place of business at No. 343, Galle Road, Colombo 06.

Plaintiff-Appellant

2 Vs

1. Samarathilaka Wijesingha Ekanayaka

(Now deceased) 1A. Indra Iranganie Wijesingha Ekanayaka

1st Substituted Defendant-Respondent 2. Indra Iranganie Wijesingha Ekanayaka

2nd Defendant-Respondent

3. Sujeewa Wijesingha Ekanayaka

Carrying on business under the name style and firm of “Sahana Printers” at Dummaladeniya, Wennappuwa.

3rd Defendant-Respondent

Before: Justice Vijith K. Malalgoda PC

Justice L.T.B. Dehideniya

Justice S. Thurairaja PC

Counsel: S. A. Parathalingam, PC with Varuna Senadhira for the Plaintiff-Appellant

Lasitha Kanuwanaarachchi with Bhagya De Silva for the

Substituted Defendant-Respondent

Argued on: 22.03.2019

Decided on: 28.11.2019

3 Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J

The Plaintiff-Appellant (here in after referred to as “the Appellant Bank”) has instituted an action

before the Commercial High Court of the Western Province against the 1st to 3rd Respondents-

Respondents (here in after referred to as the 1st to 3rd Respondents) for the recovery of

a) a sum of Rs. 1,545,986/35 a further sum of Rs. 475,231/96 by way of unpaid interest and a

sum of Rs. 9,504/63 by way of Turn Over Tax on such interest and a sum of Rs. 21,385/43

by way of Defence Levy on such interest from 01. 08. 1995 to 12.02.1997 aggregating to

sum of Rs 2,052,108/37 and further interest on the said sum of Rs. 1,545,986/35 at 20%

per annum from 13.02.1997 until full and final settlement and Turn Over Tax on such

interest at 2% and Defence Levy on such interest at 4.5% and

b) a sum of Rs. 1,800,000/- with legal interest from the date of the Plaint and thereafter with

further legal interest on the decreed amount till payment in full

granted to the Respondents by the Appellant Bank as a loan facility.

During the trial before the Commercial High Court three admissions and 35 issues were raised by

the parties.

The Plaintiff summoned one Keerthi Ediriweera an executive from the Plaintiff bank and closed

the case marking P-1 to P-9. On behalf of the Defendants, the 1st Defendant S.W. Ekanayake

testified before the High Court and summoned one Senarathne, Inspector of Police as the witness

for the defence and closed the case marking V-1 to V-19.

At the conclusion of the said trial, the Commercial High Court of the Western Province by its

judgment dated 07th February 2007 dismissed the said action. Being aggrieved by the said

judgment, the Appellant Bank has filed the instant appeal before this court.

As revealed before this court, the 1st-3rd Respondents, who were carrying on a business under the

name and style of “Sahana Printers”, was a regular customer of the Appellant Bank in its branch at

No. 343, Galle Road, Colombo. 06 and had maintained a current account bearing No. 6049 which

was later changed to No. 6017320 with the said branch of the Appellant Bank.

4 As admitted by both parties, the Appellant Bank had granted an overdraft facility to the said

account and according to the Appellant Bank, by 17th March 1994 the aforementioned current

account was overdrawn in a sum of Rs. 3,472,592/50.

The Appellant Bank had taken up the position before the Commercial High Court that the Bank has

granted a loan in a sum of Rs. 3,500,000/- that was duly credited to the aforesaid current account

of the Respondents in order to settle the said overdrawn facility. It was further submitted that the

Appellant Bank had rescheduled the said loan into two parts; such as an interest free loan of Rs.

1,800,000/- and an interest bearing loan of Rs. 1,700,000/-. Both the said loans were utilized to

recover the overdrawn balance in the current account of the Respondents. But, as stated by the

Appellant Bank, the Respondents have failed and neglected to repay the due amounts.

At this point, it is pertinent to observe that according to the evidence of witness Ediriweera, the

overdraft facility that has been granted to the Respondents was based on an oral request made by

them. The witness of the Appellant Bank whilst giving evidence before the Commercial High Court

stated that the Respondents had been granted overdraft facilities in the absence of any funds in

the said account to honour the cheques drawn by them.

The 1st Respondent, in his evidence, has admitted that the Appellant Bank has granted an

overdraft facility to the Respondents. This has been accepted by both parties but it was the

position taken by the 1st Respondent whilst giving evidence before the trial court that, they have

settled such amount. However, the settlement of the overdraft balance is not the question before

us. The foremost question is whether the bank has granted another loan to recover the overdrawn

balance.

During the trial, it was submitted on behalf of the Appellant Bank that there were some

discussions regarding a settlement of the overdrawn balance of Rs. 3,472,592.92/- and then the

bank has granted the said loan valued Rs. 3,500,000/- to the Respondents. Even though the Bank

has taken up the position that it is the established usual banking procedure when an overdrawn

balance in a current account remains outstanding such overdrawn balance could be recovered by

granting a loan to such customer, the Appellant Bank had failed to establish the granting of a loan,

with documentary proof. It means that there is no request letter of the Respondents, no valid

certificate regarding the granting of this loan and no signed documents. Without providing any

such signed documents, it is doubtful as to how the Appellant Bank, being a responsible

5 institution, had granted a loan to their customers. Although, it was stated that the loan facility was

granted based on the oral request of the Respondents, the Bank had failed to bring acceptable

evidence to prove their case.

In the case of the Hatton National Bank Limited v Helenluc Garments Ltd and Others (1999) 2 SLR

365, Wijetunga J has stated that ‘Overdrafts are loans by the banker to the customer…….’ In such a

situation, a question arises as to whether a fresh loan could be granted to settle the given loan.

On the perusal of the Judgment of the High Court, I observe that the learned Judge has correctly

identified that there was no evidence to substantiate the said loan. Further, the learned Judge had

observed that the procedure followed by the Appellant Bank to recover the overdraft balance was

an unusual as well as surprising process.

Moreover, it is important to focus that the bank has granted a high amount of a loan for the

Respondent to settle their overdrawn balance. But, there is no guarantee bond, mortgaged bond,

valid loan agreement, and the bank has failed to take sureties privileges such as beneficium ordinis

sue excussionis and beneficum divisionis.

The importance of such requisites were discussed in several cases before Appellate Courts. In the

case of Brunswick Exports Ltd vs. HNB Ltd (1999) 1 SLR 219 it is stated that “ the Mortgage had

been executed to secure the repayment of a commercial loan given by a commercial bank to a

company for the purpose of its business.” Further, in the Hemas Marketing (pvt) Ltd Vs.

Chandrasiri and Others (1994) 2 SLR 181, the Court of Appeal observed that “a guarantee is an

accessory contract by which the promisor undertakes to be answerable to the promisee for the

debt, default or miscarriage of another person whose primary liability to the promise must exist or

be contemplated……” Therefore, as a reputed Commercial Bank, the Appellant Bank should have a

greater responsibility more than this when they are granting loan facilities to their customers.

On the other hand, the Counsel for Respondents has submitted that the Respondents have never

asked for such a loan valued 3.5 Million or otherwise. Further, the counsel submitted that the

Respondents have settled the said overdraft of Rs. 3,472.92/=. Furthermore, the Respondents’

position is, during this time, one Lalith Peiris, who was the Manager of the Appellant Bank, had

fraudulently prepared documents and misappropriated monies belonging both, to customers of

6 the Bank as well as the Appellant Bank. The learned High Court Judge has correctly analyzed the

above position based on V-19 a document produced by the defence as follows;

“ú;a;sfhka meñKs,sldr nexl=jg iy tys l<uKdlrefjl= jYfhka isá ,,s;a mSrsiag

úreoaOj t,a, lrk ,o fuu fpdaokdj we;a; jYfhkau b;d nrm;,h' fuu fpdaokdj

Tmamq lsrSu i|yd ú;a;sh meñKs,sldr nexl=fõ ks,Odrshl= jk “,,s;a mSrsia” hk

l<uKdlref.a wkqm%dma;sl ks,Odrshd úiska jrla fmd,Sishg lrk ,o meñKs,a,la

Wmfhda.S lr .;af;ah' tu meñKs,af,a iy;sl msgm;la ú;a;sfhka idCIs i|yd le|jk

,o wmrdO mrSCIK fomd¾;=fïka;=fõ idCIslre jk fmd,sia mrSCIl hdmd

uqoshkafia,df.a fiakdr;ak ud¾.fhka bosrsm;alrk ,oS' fuu ;Skaÿfõ iïmQ¾K;ajh

Wfoid —ú-19˜ f,aLKfhka iuyr fldgia kej; Wmqgd oelaùu fhda.H nj uf.a woyi

neúka tlS f,aLKfha iuyr fldgia my; Wmqgd olajñ'

—ud fldu¾I,a nexl=fõ m%Odk ld¾hd,fha YdLdkh wxYfha m%Odk

l<uKdlre f,i fiajh lrkjd' udf.a rdcldrs iajNdjh jkqfha fld<U

YdLd u.ska ksl=;alrk Kh iy whsrd wëCIKh lsrSuhs' tla tla wxYh

u.ska ksl=;a lrk tjeks Kh myiqlï iïnkaOj udisl jd¾;djla

m%Odk ld¾hd,hg tùu flfrkjd' je,a,j;a; YdLdfõ l<uKdlre

f,i tÉ' wd¾' wdrsh;s,l uy;d 1994'03'21 fjks osk jev ndr.;a miqj

.kqfokq iïnkaOj fidhd ne,SfïoS iel iys; Kh myiqlï ,ndoS ;snQ nj

wm fj; jd¾;d l<d' tu úia;r wkqj iyldr idudkH wêldrS msgfoKsh

uy;df.a m%Odk;ajfhka tu úia;r mrSCId l<d' tu mrSCIKfhka

wkdjrKh lrf.k ;snqKd tu nexl= YdLdfõ ysgmq l<uKdlre t,a'tia'

mSrsia uy;d nexl= m%;sm;a;s j,g mgyeksj úYd, m%uKfha iel iys; Kh

myiqlï ;=kla imhd oS tajd f.ùï meyeryer nexl=jg w,dNù ;sîula

.ek' fï .ek fidhd n,d f.k hoaoS lreKdrÉÑ fca' mS' keue;s whg

ksl=;alr ;snQ re' oi,CI y;hs oYu 06 l Kh whsrd myiqlï nexl=jg

f.ùfuka tu .kqfokqj wjika l< fyhska oekg w,dNhla ke;' my;

i|yka úia;r whsrd foll mSrsia uy;d úiska jxpksl f,i ksl=;a lr

7

we;' ^1& l,q;r .d,q mdr ksõ mrK.u ì,av¾ia hk ,smskfha ,CIdka

iud.ug re' 7700000$- hs' ^2& ÿïu,foKsh fjkakmamqj iyk ms%kag¾ia

wdh;hg re' 3500000$- hs' tl;=j 11200000$- hs' by; lS ,CIdka

iud.u yjq,alrejka 05 fofkl=f.ka hqla;h' tÉ'B' ;sfiard" tka' jhs'

mrK.u" jhs' tï' tï' pQ,j;S" mSrsia tu whhs' tu iud.ug

26'09'91 isg 26'08'94 olajd fldgia jYfhka tlS Kh whsrdj f.jd

;snqkd' wdrïNfha .sKqï wxl 6170 hgf;a;a miqj lïmshqg¾ l,dg miqj

wxl 6018386 hgf;a;a f.ùï lr ;snqkd' wxl 251250 fpla fmdf;a

fplam;a 15 la u.skao wxl 8003800 fpla fmdf;ys fpla m;a 08 la u.skao"

wxl î 818-383200 fpla fmdf;a fpla m;a folla u.skao f.ùï lr ;sfí'

;jo tu Kh whsrd f.jQ nj i|yka lr ;snqfka Kh ,nd.kakd iud.u

,CI 72 l ;ekm;=jla nexl=fõ ;ekam;a l< njg jHdc úia;rhla

bosßm;a lsÍfuks' tjeks ;ekam;=jla fkd;snQ nj wm mÍlaIKfha fy<s ù

;snqKd' by; lS fpla fmd;a 03 g ksl=;a l< fplam;a 25 g wu;rj fjk;a

fplam;a rdYshla ksl=;a lr we;s njg fmkS .shd'''''' tu fplam;a j,

úia;r nexl= m%ldYfha we;=<;a fõ' ;jo fuu 1994 ud¾;= 17 osk ,laI

3500000$- l Khla u.ska fuu whsrdj ner lr whsrdj f.ùula f,i

fmkajd we;' tfia lr we;af;a nexl=j fkdu`. heùughs' tfy;a tu uqo,

oekg Kh f,i iq/l=ï fkdue;sj fï olajd w,dNhlaj mj;S'”

by; ù'19 f,aLKfha wvx.= ish`t lreKq fuu kvqfõ md¾Yjlrejka w;r meK ke.S

we;s wdrjqf,a úksYaph i`oyd wrgqjgu ls`od nisk iq`t lreKq wvx.= f,aLKhls' tlS

f,aLKh wmlaImd;S f,i úYaf,aIKh lr n,k úg ffk;sl jYfhka u;= jkakd jQ m%Odk

m%;sM,hla kï" meñKs,s mlaIh ish j.lsj hq;= ks,Odßfhl= ud¾.fhka fuu kvqjg

wod< m%Yakh we;s jQ jljdkqfõu ord we;s ia:djrh meyeos,s jkafkah' ù'19 u.ska

meñKs,a, ord we;s ia:djrh wkqj fuu kvqjg wod< ú;a;slrejkag odkh lrk ,o nj

lshk ñ,shk 3'5 l uqo,la we;a; jYfhkau ú;a;slrejka yg f.jd fkdue;' tu uqo,

ù'19 lsis jHdl+,;djhlska f;drj meyeos<s lrk whqre meñKs,sldr nexl= YdLdfõ l,la

8

l<ukdldr fiajfha kshqla;j isá ,,s;a mSßia hk wh úiska ish mßyrKhg ,nd f.k

we;s nj meyeos,sh' tlS isoaêuh lreK ;j ÿrg;a Tmamq lsÍfï wjYH;djh ú;a;sh u;

megùu wjYH jkafka ke;'”

In the case of the Sri Lanka Ports Authority and Another vs. Jugolinija –Boal East (1981) 1 SLR 18,

Samrakoon CJ held that “If no objection is taken, when at the close of a case, documents are read

in evidence, they are evidence for all purposes of the law. This is the cursus curiae of the original

civil courts”. Therefore, the ‘V-19’ can be accepted as evidence to this fraud done by the Appellant

Bank official.

I am further mindful of the decision in Alwis vs. Piyasena Fernando (1993) 1 SLR 119 where G.S.P.

de. Silva CJ had observed that, “the findings of primary facts by a Trial Judge who hears and sees

the witnesses are not to be lightly disturbed on appeal.”

This court is also of the view that the Appellant Bank by having preferred this appeal cannot seek

benefits as there was a fraud done by the bank official Lalith Peiris and in the said circumstances

the Appellant Bank has failed to establish the issues before the High Court.

Hence, I affirm the judgment of the High Court of Western Province Civil (holden in Colombo) and

dismiss the instant appeal.

Appeal Dismissed with cost.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Justice L.T.B. Dehideniya

I agree,

Judge of the Supreme Court

Justice S. Thurairaja PC

I agree,

Judge of the Supreme Court