IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

1. Weerappuli Gamage Gamini

Ranaweera,

No. 415/18,

High-Level Road,

Delkanda,

Nugegoda.

Plaintiff

SC APPEAL NO: SC/APPEAL/56/2020

HCCA GALLE NO: SP/HCCA/GA/22/2013(F)

DC GALLE NO: 14617/L

Vs.

1. Matharage Davith Singho,

Aluth Ihala,

Mapalagama.

Defendant

AND BETWEEN

1. Matharage Davith Singho,

(Deceased)

Aluth Ihala,

Mapalagama.

Defendant-Appellant

2

1A. Matharage Dharmasiri,

1B. Matharage Mahinda,

1C. Matharage Premawathi,

1D. Matharage

Shiriyawathie,

All of Dehigodawatta,

Aluth Ihala,

Mapalagama.

1E. Matharage Ariyawathie

of Bambarawana,

Mattaka.

1F. Matarage Seetha of

Gorakagashuduwa,

Mapalagama.

1G. Matarage Renuka of

Akuresse Gedara,

Etahawilwatta,

Mapalagama

Substituted Defendants-

Appellants

Vs.

1. Weerappuli Gamage Gamini

Ranaweera,

No. 415/18,

High-Level Road,

Delkanda,

Nugegoda.

Plaintiff- Respondent

3

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Weerappuli Gamage Gamini

Ranaweera,

No. 415/18,

High-Level Road,

Delkanda,

Nugegoda.

Plaintiff-Respondent- Appellant

Vs.

1A. Matharage Dharmasiri,

1B. Matharage Mahinda,

1C. Matharage Premawathi,

1D. Matharage Shiriyawathie,

All of Dehigodawatta,

Aluth Ihala,

Mapalagama.

1E. Matharage Ariyawathie

of Bambarawana,

Mattaka.

1F. Matarage Seetha of

Gorakagashuduwa,

Mapalagama.

1G. Matarage Renuka of

Akuresse Gedara,

Etahawilwatta,

Mapalagama.

Substituted Defendants-

Appellants-Respondents

4

Before: Murdu N.B. Fernando, P.C., J.

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Hilary Livera for the Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant.

Vishwa de Livera Tennakoon for the 1A Substituted

Defendant-Appellant-Respondent.

Written submissions:

by the Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant on

29.07.2020

Argued on : 10.01.2022

Decided on: 20.05.2022

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The plaintiff filed this action in the District Court seeking a

declaration of title to and ejectment of the defendant from the land

in suit. The defendant filed answer seeking dismissal of the

action. At the trial, the defendant raised an issue claiming

prescriptive title to the land. After the conclusion of the trial, the

District Court entered judgment for the plaintiff. On appeal, the

High Court of Civil Appeal set aside the judgment of the District

Court on the basis that the plaintiff failed to establish legal title

to the land. The High Court arrived at this conclusion by making

a comparison between the original title deed of the plaintiff (deed

No. 1986) marked P6 and a photocopy of the same deed marked

V1. This Court granted leave to appeal to the plaintiff on the

following two questions of law:

5

(a) Did the learned Judges of the High Court err in law in

concluding that the deed bearing No. 1986 does not fulfil

the due requirements of section 2 of the Prevention of

Frauds Ordinance?

(b) Did the learned Judges of the High Court misdirect

themselves in evaluating the evidence and concluding that

the attesting witnesses have not given evidence when the

record bears out that one attesting witness had in fact given

evidence?

The short question to be decided in this appeal is whether deed

No. 1986 has been properly executed in terms of section 2 of the

Prevention of Frauds Ordinance, No. 7 of 1840, as amended. The

said section insofar as relevant to the present purposes reads as

follows:

No sale, purchase, transfer, assignment, or mortgage of land

or other immovable property…shall be of force or avail in law

unless the same shall be in writing and signed by the party

making the same, or by some person lawfully authorized by

him or her in the presence of a licensed notary public and

two or more witnesses present at the same time, and unless

the execution of such writing, deed, or instrument be duly

attested by such notary and witnesses.

To prove due execution of a deed, this section requires proof of

four matters:

(a) the deed was signed by the executant

(b) it was signed in the presence of a licensed notary public and

two or more witnesses

6

(c) the notary public and the witnesses were present at the

same time

(d) the execution of the deed was duly attested by the notary

and the witnesses

It may be relevant to note that under section 2 of the Prevention

of Frauds Ordinance, the document shall be signed by the

executant in the presence of the notary and the two witnesses

present at the same time. However, the section does not expressly

state that the document shall also be signed by the two witnesses

and the notary in the presence of the executant at the same time.

Execution and attestation are two different things: the former by

the maker/executant and the latter by the notary and the

witnesses.

Attestation is two-fold: due attestation by the notary and the

witnesses as stated in section 2 of the Prevention of Frauds

Ordinance, and formal attestation by the notary as stated in

section 31 of the Notaries Ordinance, No. 1 of 1907, as amended.

In the execution of deeds, the requirements under section 2 of the

Prevention of Frauds Ordinance are mandatory, and non-

compliance renders a deed invalid. Conversely, non-compliance

with the Rules made for notaries set out in section 31 of the

Notaries Ordinance does not invalidate a deed as expressly

provided for in section 33 of the Notaries Ordinance, which reads

as follows:

No instrument shall be deemed to be invalid by reason only

of the failure of any notary to observe any provision of any

rule set out in section 31 in respect of any matter of form:

7

Provided that nothing hereinbefore contained shall be

deemed to give validity to any instrument which may be

invalid by reason of non-compliance with the provisions of

any other written law.

(Weeraratne v. Ranmenike (1919) 21 NLR 286, Asliya Umma v.

Thingal Mohamed [1999] 2 Sri LR 152, Wijeyaratne v. Somawathie

[2002] 1 Sri LR 93, Pingamage v. Pingamage [2005] 2 Sri LR 370)

What constitutes the attestation and the form of attestation are

set out in sections 31(20) and 31(21) of the Notaries Ordinance;

this is the formal attestation appended by the notary at the end

of the deed. This is different from attesting a deed by the notary

and witnesses as contemplated in section 2 of the Prevention of

Frauds Ordinance. If the formal attestation of a deed is defective,

the notary can be prosecuted under the Notaries Ordinance, but

the deed’s validity is unaffected.

In Thiyagarasa v. Arunodayam [1987] 2 Sri LR 184, the deed on

its face had the date 14th January 1973 as the date of execution.

According to the plaintiff, the actual date of execution was 7th

October 1972. The District Court held that the deed was not

properly executed. On appeal, G.P.S. De Silva J. (later C.J.) held

at 188-189:

Once it is established that the requirements of section 2 of

the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance relating to the execution

of the deed have been complied with, the mere fact that the

notary has inserted a false or wrong date of its execution

does not render the deed void. The lapse on the part of the

notary does not touch the validity of the deed but may render

the notary liable to be prosecuted for contravention of the

provisions of the Notaries Ordinance. This seems reasonable

8

and just for the parties to the transaction have no control over

the acts of the notary who is a professional man. I am

therefore of the opinion that P3 is valid and effective to

transfer the legal title to the property and is not bad for want

of due execution.

The Court quoted with approval the following statement of law

found in The Conveyancer and Property Lawyer (1948) Vol. 1 Part

1 by E.R.S.R. Coomaraswamy at page 94:

The formal attestation by the notary is not part of the deed

but it is the duty of the notary to append it.

What is compulsory is compliance with the provisions of section

2 of the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance; non-compliance with the

other provisions of the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance or the

Notaries Ordinance does not ipso facto make the deed invalid.

It was held in Weeraratne v. Ranmenike (1919) 21 NLR 286 that

the requirement under section 16 (now section 15) of the

Prevention of Frauds Ordinance that a deed shall be executed in

duplicate was only a duty imposed on the notary and was not

intended to invalidate the deed in the event of non-compliance.

De Sampayo J. held at 287-288:

It is clear to my mind that this clause merely imposed a duty

on the notary, and was not intended to invalidate deeds

where the notary might have failed to observe the direction

therein contained. It is well settled that a notary’s failure to

observe his duties with regard to formalities which are not

essential to due execution, so far as the parties are

concerned, does not vitiate a deed. For instance, the absence

of the attestation clause does not render a deed invalid. D.C.

9

Kandy, 19,866 (Austin’s Rep. 113); D.C. Negombo, 574

(Grenier (1874), p.39). Similarly, I think the failure on the part

of the notary to have a deed executed in duplicate does not

affect its operation as a deed. The case D.C. Kandy, 22.401

(Austin’s Rep. 139) is an authority on this point. I therefore

think that the decision of the Commissioner in this case is

erroneous.

Let me now turn to the word “attest” as contemplated in section

2 of the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance. Following the ordinary

dictionary meaning of “attest” which is “to bear witness to”, a

person who sees the document signed by the executant is a

witness to it; if he subscribes as a witness, he becomes an

attesting witness. Black’s Law Dictionary (11th edition) defines

“attesting witness” as “someone who vouches for the authenticity

of another’s signature by signing an instrument that the other has

signed.”

A word of caution: although section 2 of the Prevention of Frauds

Ordinance does not require the witnesses and the notary to attest

the deed before the executant, this section requires the execution

of the deed to be “duly attested” by the notary and the two

witnesses.

The word “duly” here is not without significance. How is a deed

considered to be duly attested? In this context, section 2 of the

Prevention of Frauds Ordinance needs to be read with section

31(12) of the Notaries Ordinance which runs as follows:

[The notary] shall not authenticate or attest any deed or

instrument unless the person executing the same and the

witnesses shall have signed the same in his presence and in

10

the presence of one another, and unless he shall have signed

the same in the presence of the executant and of the attesting

witnesses.

Although compliance with the Rules contained in section 31 is not

mandatory as explained above, it was held in Emalia Fernando v.

Caroline Fernando (1958) 59 NLR 341 that an instrument which

is required by section 2 of the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance to

be notarially attested must be signed by the notary and the

witnesses at the same time as the maker and in his presence.

This conclusion was reached giving due regard to the expression

“duly attested” found in section 2 of the Prevention of Frauds

Ordinance. I am in complete agreement with this interpretation,

for otherwise the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance which was

enacted to prevent fraud can be misused to cover fraud on the

basis that section 2 of the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance does

not require the notary and witnesses to sign the deed before the

executant in the presence of one another. At page 344 Basnayake

C.J. held:

Learned counsel for the appellant contended that the

requirement of the Notaries Ordinance in regard to the

attestation of documents is not relevant to a consideration of

the true meaning of the section. I am unable to agree that the

provisions of the Notaries Ordinance are irrelevant to a

consideration of the meaning of section 2 of the Prevention of

Frauds Ordinance. I think in giving effect to the word “duly”

we should take into account provisions of law which regulate

the execution of documents required to be notarially attested.

Section 30(12) of the Notaries Ordinance provides that a

notary “shall not authenticate or attest any deed or

11

instrument unless the person executing the same and the

witnesses shall have signed the same in his presence and in

the presence of one another, and unless he shall have signed

the same in the presence of the executant and of the attesting

witnesses.” Section 30(20) requires the notary to state in his

attestation that the deed was signed by the party making it

and the witnesses in his presence and in the presence of one

another. The view I have expressed above is in accord with

the decision of this Court in the case of Punchi Baba v.

Ekanayake (4 S.C. C. 119), in which this Court expressed the

view that section 2 of the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance

required that the notary and the witnesses should sign in the

presence of the maker and at the same time and that a deed

not so signed was not valid.

P6 is the original title deed of the plaintiff and V1 is the photocopy

of that deed tendered by the plaintiff with the plaint in support of

an application for an interim injunction. The contention of the

defendant, which was accepted by the High Court, is that: V1 did

not contain the signature of the second attesting witness; the

signature of the second attesting witness appearing in P6 had

been placed after the execution of the deed; therefore the

plaintiff’s title deed had not been duly executed.

It is significant to note that the defendant did not raise an issue

on due execution of the deed either at the beginning of the trial or

during the course of the trial. When the original deed P6 was

marked through the plaintiff, the defendant moved that it be

marked subject to proof. When the plaintiff closed his case

reading in evidence the marked documents including P6, the

defendant did not maintain that it had not been proved, thereby

12

indirectly conceding that the objection was no longer a live

objection.

How can a deed be proved?

Section 68 of the Evidence Ordinance reads as follows:

If a document is required by law to be attested, it shall not

be used as evidence until one attesting witness at least has

been called for the purpose of proving its execution, if there

be an attesting witness alive, and subject to the process of

the court and capable of giving evidence.

The plaintiff called as witnesses the notary and the first attesting

witness to the deed, and they confirmed that the donor, the donee,

the first attesting witness, the second attesting witness and the

notary were all present at the same time and signed the deed in

that order. When they were confronted with V1, they stated that

they saw V1 for the first time in the witness box. The following

finding of the High Court is not correct:

When there is a dispute or challenging a document with

regard to the due execution, the notary alone is not sufficient

to give evidence. At least one attesting witness should give

evidence. In this case attesting witnesses have not given

evidence and no explanation is given for it.

Although the High Court came to the finding that no attesting

witness was called to give evidence on the execution of P6 and no

explanation was provided for such failure, in fact, two attesting

witnesses were called to prove P6: one was the notary and the

other was the first attesting witness.

13

There is no dispute that Anoma Ranaweera, the wife of the donee

who signed as the first witness to the deed and whose evidence

has been overlooked by the High Court, is an attesting witness.

The decision of the High Court would have been different if the

Court had drawn its attention to the evidence of this attesting

witness.

The notary is as much an attesting witness as the two witnesses

themselves within the meaning of section 68 of the Evidence

Ordinance. (Wijegoonetileke v. Wijegoonetileke [1956] 60 NLR 560,

The Solicitor General v. Ahamadulebbe Ava Umma (1968) 71 NLR

512 at 515-516, Thiyagarasa v. Arunodayam [1987] 2 Sri LR 184,

Wijewardena v. Ellawala [1991] 2 Sri LR 14 at 35)

In Marian v. Jesuthasan (1956) 59 NLR 348 it was held:

Where a deed executed before a notary is sought to be

proved, the notary can be regarded as an attesting witness

within the meaning of section 68 of the Evidence Ordinance

provided only that he knew the executant personally and can

testify to the fact that the signature on the deed is the

signature of the executant.

In Marian’s case, the execution of the deed by the executant was

in issue but only the notary who did not personally know the

executant gave evidence to prove the deed. It is in that context the

Court held that the notary was not an attesting witness. This

should not be understood to mean that a notary can never be an

attesting witness unless he knows the executant personally. For

instance, in the case at hand, whether or not the notary knew the

executant is beside the point as the deed is challenged on the sole

ground that the second attesting witness did not sign the deed.

14

Even if the notary did not know the executant personally, he can

still be an attesting witness but proof of execution of the deed is

incomplete on his evidence alone. If the notary does not know the

executant, he must know the witnesses and the witnesses must

know the executant. In that eventuality, at least one of the two

attesting witnesses needs to be called to prove due execution.

Sections 31(9) and 31(10) of the Notaries Ordinance are relevant

in this regard.

31(9) He shall not authenticate or attest any deed or

instrument unless the person executing the same be known

to him or to at least two of the attesting witnesses thereto;

and in the latter case, he shall satisfy himself, before

accepting them as witnesses, that they are persons of good

repute and that they are well acquainted with the executant

and know his proper name, occupation, and residence, and

the witnesses shall sign a declaration at the foot of the deed

or instrument that they are well acquainted with the

executant and know his proper name, occupation, and

residence.

31(10) He shall not authenticate or attest any deed or

instrument in any case in which both the person executing

the same and the attesting witnesses thereto are unknown

to him.

To sum up, the notary is a competent witness to prove attestation,

and if he knows the executant, he is a competent witness to prove

attestation and execution, both of which are the sine qua non of

proving due execution. This was lucidly explained by T.S.

15

Fernando J. in The Solicitor General v. Ahamadulebbe Ava Umma

(1968) 71 NLR 512 at 516:

The object of calling the witness is to prove the execution of

the document. Proof of the execution of the documents

mentioned in section 2 of No. 7 of 1840 means proof of the

identity of the person who signed as maker and proof that

the document was signed in the presence of a notary and

two or more witnesses present at the same time who attested

the execution. If the notary knew the person signing as

maker, he is competent equally with either of the attesting

witnesses to prove all that the law requires in section 68 – if

he did not know that person then he is not capable of proving

the identity as pointed out in Ramen Chetty v. Assen Naina

(1909) 1 Curr. L.R. 257, and in such a case it would be

necessary to call one of the other attesting witnesses for

proving the identity of the person. It seems to me that it is for

this reason that it is required in section 69 that there must

be proof not only that “the attestation of one attesting

witness at least is in his handwriting” but also “that the

signature of the person executing the document is in the

handwriting of that person.” If the notary knew the person

making the instrument, he is quite competent to prove both

facts – if he did not know the person then there should be

other evidence.

In the instant case the notary stated in his evidence that he knew

the executant and the other witnesses personally as the donee

was his classmate, the donor is the donee’s aunt, the first witness

is the donee’s wife, and the second witness is his (the notary’s)

clerk. The question in this case is not whether the executant

16

signed the deed but whether the second witness was present

(together with the others) at the time of the deed being signed by

the executant and duly attested.

This in my view has been proved by marking the original deed as

P6 and calling the notary and the first witness to the deed as

witnesses in the plaintiff’s case. The High Court, without

considering the aforementioned evidence, relied on a photocopy

of the deed (which had been tendered by the plaintiff with the

plaint for another purpose) to reject the original deed. The High

Court at page 8 of the impugned judgment states “even though it

is a true copy, it has the Land Registry seal and the inference the

court can draw is that the document marked P6 has been sent to

the Land Registry without the signature of one attesting witness.”

The standard of proof of due execution of a deed is on a balance

of probabilities. It is in my view unjust on the part of the appellate

Court to hold against the plaintiff on “inferences” when there was

no issue raised in the District Court on the due execution of the

deed, when P6 was not objected to at the closure of the plaintiff’s

case as a deed which had not been proved, when the deed was

proved by calling two attesting witnesses, and when the defendant

or the District Court did not insist that the plaintiff produce the

duplicate and/or protocol of the deed to further verify the matter.

The case of Baronchy Appu v. Poidohamy (1901) 2 Brown’s Reports

221 relied upon by the High Court to say that in addition to the

notary another witness should have been called has no

applicability to the facts of the instant case. The headnote of this

case reads as follows:

17

[W]hen it is alleged that a person signed a blank sheet of

paper which was subsequently filled up in the form of a deed

and impeached as fraudulent by such person, the execution

of such document ought to be proved, not by calling the

notary who attested it, but by calling at least one of the

witnesses thereto.

The statement of law enunciated in the above case is correct on

the unique facts of that case where the deed was challenged on

the basis that the notary obtained the signatures on blank papers.

The challenge in the instant case is different and, in any event, in

the instant case, the notary and another attesting witness have

given evidence on due execution.

The ratio decidendi in a decision must be understood in light of

the unique facts and circumstances of that particular case.

Unless the two situations are similar, judicial precedents need not

be mechanically applied merely because the subject area is the

same.

Moreover, the course of action adopted by the High Court is

against the basic principles of proof of documents as envisaged in

the Evidence Ordinance. Documents must be proved by primary

evidence except in the limited instances where secondary

evidence is permitted: sections 64 and 65 of the Evidence

Ordinance, section 162 of the Civil Procedure Code. It is not

possible to defeat primary evidence by secondary evidence (other

than in exceptional situations), although vice versa is possible.

For the aforesaid reasons, I answer the two questions of law in

the affirmative. The judgment of the High Court of Civil Appeal is

18

set aside and the judgment of the District Court is restored. The

appeal is allowed with costs both here and in the Court below.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Murdu N.B. Fernando, P.C., J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court