P a g e 1 | 22

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Lanka Milk Foods (CWE) Limited,

Welisara,

Ragama.

Plaintiff

SC Appeal No. SC/CHC/16/2007

CHC Case No. HC (Civil) 157/2001 (1)

Vs,

Seylan Bank Limited,

No. 33, Sri Baron Jayatilaka Mawatha,

Colombo 01.

Presently at:

Ceylinco-Seylan Towers,

No. 90, Galle Road,

Colombo 03.

Defendant

-And Now-

Seylan Bank Limited,

No. 33, Sri Baron Jayatilaka Mawatha,

Colombo 01.

P a g e 2 | 22

Presently at:

Ceylinco-Seylan Towers,

No. 90, Galle Road,

Colombo 03.

Defendant-Appellant

Vs,

Lanka Milk Foods (CWE) Limited,

Welisara,

Ragama.

Plaintiff-Respondent

Before: Justice S. Thurairaja, PC

Justice A.L. Shiran Gooneratne

Justice Mahinda Samayawardhena

Counsel: Dr. Romesh de Silva, PC with Shanaka Coorey instructed by De

Livera Associates for the Defendant-Appellant.

Nihal Fernando, PC with Harshula Seneviratne instructed by

Hemanthi Bulatwatte for the Plaintiff-Respondent.

Argued on: 25/11/2024

Decided on: 19/03/2025

P a g e 3 | 22

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

[1] By Plaint dated 26/11/1992, the Plaintiff-Respondent (hereinafter sometimes

referred to as the Plaintiff) filed this action CHC No. HC (Civil) 157/01 (1) against

the Defendant-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Defendant Bank) for the

recovery of money due on Performance Bond/Guarantee No. 001/LG/90/253 dated

15/10/1990 [marked P6], and Performance Bond/Guarantee No. 001/LG/91/027

dated 07/02/1991 [marked P9], as the first and second causes of action, against the

Defendant Bank, in a sum of US$ 72,730.23 and US$ 56,733.25 respectively,

together with legal interest until the date of payment in full.

[2] The Plaintiff also prayed that, in the event of any inability to recover the decreed

sum of US dollars, the sum to be recovered in Sri Lankan Rupees may be equivalent

to the sum of US dollars and interest thereon at the date of payment.

[3] In paragraph 5 of the Plaint, the Plaintiff stated, that in or about July 1991, the

business of The Bank of Credit and Commerce International (overseas) Limited

(hereinafter referred to as the BCCI) was suspended by the Central Bank of Sri

Lanka and the Defendant Bank upon being appointed and/or upon being given the

power to do so by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, managed and/or administered

and/or carried on the business of BCCI in Sri Lanka.

[4] In paragraph 6 of the plaint, the Plaintiff stated, that acting under the Gazette

Extraordinary No. 694/17 dated 28/12/1991, the President under Section 5 of the

Public Security Ordinance, and under the Gazette Extraordinary No. 695/11 dated

01/01/1992, by the powers vested in it by Emergency (Banking Special Provisions)

Regulations No. 2 of 1991, the Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka,

vested the business of the said BCCI in Sri Lanka in the Defendant Bank with effect

from 1st January 1992.

[5] In Paragraph 8 of the Plaint, the Plaintiff stated, that the Defendant has acted and/or

taken the benefit of the said Order made by the President marked P1, and the said

Regulations marked P4 and is therefore estopped from denying same.

P a g e 4 | 22

[6] In paragraph 09 of the Plaint, the Plaintiff, for a first cause of action on Performance

Bond/Guarantee No. 001/LG/90/253 dated 15/10/1990, for the recovery of a sum of

US$ 72,730.30 together with legal interest, [marked P6], stated that the Plaintiff

entered into a contract with Won Ji Industrial Company Limited of Seoul, South

Korea, (hereinafter referred to as the Contractor), for the purchase by the Plaintiff

of 150 metric tons of Triple Laminate Foil to be supplied by the Contractor.

[7] A Condition of the said Contract marked P5, was that the Contractor shall furnish a

Performance Bond for US$ 72,730,23 [United States dollars, Seventy-two thousand

seven-hundred and thirty and cents twenty-three only] (10% of the total value of the

contracted amount) for the due and punctual performance and fulfilment of the

contract above referred to and the contractor has requested to furnish the requisite

Performance Bond and whereas, Bank of Credit & Commerce International

(overseas) Limited has agreed to do so.

[8] In paragraph 11 of the plaint, the Plaintiff stated, that BCCI, at the request of the

Contractor, issued Performance Bond or Guarantee No. 0001/LG/90/253 dated

15/10/1990, (P6) for US$ 72,730.23 in favor of the Plaintiff.

[9] In paragraph 20 of the Plaint, the Plaintiff, for a second cause of action on

Performance Bond/Guarantee No. 001/LG/91/027 dated 07/02/1991 [marked P9],

for the recovery of a sum of US$ 56,733.25, together with legal interest, stated that

the Plaintiff entered into a Contract with the said Contractor, for the purchase by the

Plaintiff of 105 metric tons of Triple Laminate Foil to be supplied by the Contractor.

[10] As in the 1st cause of action, a Condition of the said Contract marked P8, was that

the Contractor shall furnish a Performance Bond for US$ 56,733.25 [United States

dollars Fifty-six thousand seven hundred and thirty-three and cents twenty-five

only], (10% of the total value of the contracted amount) for the due and punctual

performance and fulfilment of the Contract above referred to and the Contractor has

requested to furnish the requisite Performance Bond and whereas Bank of Credit &

Commerce International (overseas) Limited has agreed to do so.

P a g e 5 | 22

[11] In paragraphs 21 and 22 of the Plaint, the Plaintiff stated, that BCCI, at the request

of the Contractor, issued Performance Bond or Guarantee No. 0001/LG/91/027

dated 07/02/1991 (marked P9) for US$ 56,733.25 in favor of the Plaintiff.

[12] The operative parts of P6 and P9, referred to above is as follows:

In P6:

Whereas Won Ji Industrial Co. Ltd 550-1, Garibong Dong, Guro Ku. The 3rd

Export-Industrial Zones, Seoul, Korea (hereinafter referred to as the Contractor)

have entered into a tender for the supply of 150 MT Triple Laminate Foil

Lakspray Vita Milk and Vita Spray pack to be shipped on or before

31.05.1991 with the Lanka Milk Foods (CWE) Ltd. Welisara, Ragama (hereinafter

referred to as the Obligee)

---

If the Contractor shall fail in the due and punctual performance and fulfillment of

the contract above referred to and upon the said Obligee requesting to the said Bank

of Credit & Commerce International (overseas) Ltd. Colombo a statement signed

by a duly authorized signatory of the said Obligee that the said contractor has failed

in the contractual obligations then and in that case to make payment to the said

Obligee sum of US$ 72,730.23 (United States dollars seventy-two thousand seven

hundred and thirty and cents twenty-three only) ---"

In P9:

Whereas Won Ji Industrial Co. Ltd 550-1, Garibong Dong, Guro Ku. The Third

Export-Industrial Zone, Seoul, Korea (hereinafter referred to as the Contractor)

have entered into a tender for the supply of 105 Metric Tonnes Triple Laminate Foil

Lakspray Vita Milk Pack to be shipped on or before August 31 1991 with the

Lanka Milk Foods (CWE) Ltd. Welisara, Ragama (hereinafter referred to as the

Obligee)

---

P a g e 6 | 22

If the Contractor shall fail in the due and punctual performance and fulfillment of

the tender above referred to, and upon the said obligee requesting to the said Bank

of Credit & Commerce International (overseas) Ltd. Colombo a statement signed

by a duly authorized signatory of the said Obligee that the said contractor has failed

in the contractual obligations then and in that case to make payment to the said

Obligee sum of US$ 56,733.25 (United States dollars fifty-six thousand seven

hundred and thirty-three and cents twenty-five only) ---"

[13] Paragraph 3 of the Performance Bonds marked P6 and P9 contained agreements and

declarations, inter alia, which state that,

In case of impossibility to perform in accordance with the obligations as

stipulated in the said paragraph, then in such instance the said Bonds shall

cease and the liability shall thereupon be extinguished.

This bond will remain in force from October 15, 1990 to December 31,

1991,

All claims under this Bond are payable in Colombo and must be made on

or before 31st December 1991. (P6)

This bond will remain in force from January 31, 1991 to January 1992,

both days inclusive.

All claims under this Bond are payable in Colombo and must be made on

or before January 31, 1992. (P9).

[14] In paragraphs 13, 15 and paragraphs 24, 26 of the Plaint, for a first and second cause

of action, respectively, the Plaintiff stated that, since the Contractor failed in the said

contractual obligations, the Plaintiff by writing dated 18/12/1991, marked P7,

addressed to the Defendant, demanded payment of the monies due under the

aforesaid Performance Bonds, P6 and P9 from the Industrial Bank of Korea relying

on the said Performance Bonds and the Counter Guarantee issued by the Industrial

Bank of Korea to BCCI, in the same terms as the guarantors undertaking to the

beneficiary.

P a g e 7 | 22

[15] Claiming, in Paragraphs 19 and 30 of the Plaint, that the Defendant has made default

in the payment of the aforesaid sums to the Plaintiff, though obliged to do so on

demand, the Plaintiff has filed this action as aforesaid, for the recovery of the said

sums together with legal interest.

[16] The Defendant filed Answer dated 02/07/1993 and stated inter alia, that the Plaint

does not disclose a cause of action, alleged that the action is prescribed in law,

denied any liability on the alleged transaction set out in the Plaint, and prayed for

the dismissal of the Plaint.

[17] Having considered the pleadings, the evidence led in Court and the written

submissions tendered by the respective parties, the learned Commercial High Court

Judge, by Judgment dated 20/02/2007, held in favour of the Plaintiff and awarded

the reliefs prayed for in the Plaint.

[18] Being aggrieved by the said Judgment of the Commercial High Court the Defendant-

Appellant filed a Petition dated 29/03/2007 in this Court, whereby, inter alia, has

sought the said Judgement dated 20/02/2007 delivered by the Commercial High

Court be set aside.

[19] When this matter was taken up for hearing before this Court the learned Presidents

Counsel for the Defendant-Appellant raised the following legal positions, which in

his submission, would deprive the Plaintiff-Respondent to have and maintain this

action;

a. in terms of the Regulations made by the President under section 5 of the

Public Security Ordinance, can the Monetary Board of the Central Bank of

Sri Lanka, acting under and in terms of the Emergency (Banking Special

Provisions), Regulations No. 2 of 1991 (P4), vest the business of BCCI in Sri

Lanka, in the Defendant Bank,

b. the relevant Bonds P6 and P9 are not On Demand guarantee bonds but

Conditional Bonds,

P a g e 8 | 22

c. plaintiff has not taken steps against Wong Ji Industrial (the contractor) for its

failure in the due and punctual performance and fulfilment of the contract,

d. no proper claim/call on P6 and P9 related to the supply of Triple Laminated

Foil,

e. the Plaintiffs claim is excessive and thus unlawful.

[20] The legal position in paragraph (a) above, was raised for the first time in these

proceedings by the learned Presidents Counsel for the Defendant Bank, as a

preliminary objection to the maintainability of this action. The Court having decided

that the said question makes out a pure question of law, permitted the respective

Counsel to address the Court on the said question of law.

Legal Validity of the Emergency (Banking Special Provisions) Regulations No.

2 of 1991.

[21] Section 2(1) of the Public Security Ordinance reads thus:

Where, in view of the existence or imminence of a state of public emergency, the

President is of opinion that it is expedient so to do in the interests of public security

and the preservation of public order or for the maintenance of supplies and services

essential to the life of the community, ----"

[22] This provision grants the President broad discretion in determining whether the

implementation of a regulation is necessary. The expressions in the interest of and

Public Order within the confines of emergency regulations have been given a wide

connotation by this Court in the case of Yasapala v. Ranil Wickramasinghe and

Others 1. In this case, the Court held that a regulation may not have been directly

designed to maintain public order, yet it may have been enacted in the interest of

public order. The Court was also of the view that Public Order was an expression

of wide connotation and signifies the state of tranquility that prevails among

members of a political society.

1 S.C. Application 103 of 1980, S.C. Minutes of 8 .12 .80 .

P a g e 9 | 22

[23] The Court also emphasized that the existence of such a state of emergency is not a

justiciable matter that the courts be called upon to determine by applying an

objective test. This principle was consistently upheld and more fully emphasized in

Weerasinghe v. Samarasinghe2, Bank of Ceylon v. Bogala Graphite3, Janatha

Finance and Investments Ltd. v. Liyanage and others4.

[24] As established in the case of Yasapala, the President's belief in the necessity or

expediency of an emergency regulation is deemed conclusive of its validity, as he is

not bound as a matter of law to disclose the reasons for the proclamation. This

principle aligns with the reasoning in Carltona Ltd. v Commissioners of Works5

(cited by Sharvananda J. in Yasapala v Wickramasinghe6), where it was held:

All that the Court can do is to see that the power which it is claimed to exercise is

one which falls within the four corners of the power given by the legislature and to

see that those powers are exercised in good faith. Apart from that, the Courts have

no power at all to inquire into the reasonableness, the policy, the sense, or any other

aspect of the transaction.

[25] This validation was reiterated in R v. Comptroller General of Patents, ex. P. Bayer

Products Ltd7, where it was held that if a regulation is good on its face, the necessity,

or the expediency of making such regulation could not be canvassed in the courts.

However, it is pertinent to note that the finality clause under Section 8 of the Public

Security Ordinance does not exempt emergency regulations from judicial review.

This was stated in Siriwardena and others v. Liyanage and others8,

[26] In Edirisuriya v. Navaratnam and Others9 the Court was of the view that when the

exercise of such power is challenged, it is open to the Court to examine whether the

impugned power has been exercised as required by law in the circumstances under

2 [1966] 68 NLR 361 3 77 NLR 385 4 [1983] 2 SLR 111 5 [1943] 2 All ER 560, 564. 6 Supra (n1) 7 [1941] 2 K.B. 306. 8 [1983] 2 SLR 164 9 [1985] 1SLR 100, 112

P a g e 10 | 22

which alone such powers could have been exercised. Once the existence of the

facts and circumstances upon which a reasonable man could have so acted is

established to the satisfaction of the Court, the Judicial intrusion should then

come to a halt (emphasis is mine)

[27] The Gazette notification dated 28th December 1991 explains the background in

which the control of BCCI bank was vested in the Defendant Bank and justifies the

implementation of emergency financial regulations.

[28] Regulation 2 states, Where upon a report . the Monetary Board of the Central

Bank of Sri Lanka is satisfied that any licensed commercial bank incorporated

outside Sri Lanka is unable to carry on business in Sri Lanka, or is unable to meet

the demands of its depositors and other persons who have had transactions with such

Licensed Commercial Bank (hereinafter referred to as the Defaulting Bank), and

that its continuance in business is likely to involve serious economic loss to and to

adversely affect the Monetary and bank system of the national economy, the

board may notwithstanding the provisions of any other law to the contrary, by the

Order published in the Gazette vest, the business, of such defaulting bank in another

licensed commercial bank (hereinafter referred to as the Acquiring Bank) which

consents to such vesting. (emphasis is mine)

[29] Therefore, with the justification provided in the said Gazette notification and the

failure on the part of the Petitioners to substantiate any claim of mala fides or where

the law is stretched beyond its legal confines, I am of the view that the impugned

regulation remains valid within the framework of the Public Security Ordinance.

Acquiescence to the Gazette by the Defendant Bank

[30] The Gazette notification dated 28th December 1991 reads thus:

3 (1) No order under regulation 2 shall be made by the Board unless-

a) ----

P a g e 11 | 22

b) the proposed acquiring bank agrees in writing to comply with all such

terms and conditions as may be specified by the Board relating to the

manner in which the existing assets of the defaulting Bank are to be used

and the existing liabilities of the defaulting bank are to be met.

(2) Upon making of an order under regulation 2-

(a) the acquiring bank shall comply with such terms and conditions as may be

specified by the Board under paragraph (1) of this regulation and such

other direction as the Board may lawfully give.

[31] In terms of the above provisions, the Defendant Bank, by its conduct has

unequivocally acquiesced to the vesting order and was in control of the financial

affairs of BCCI, including its contractual obligations. Assuming authority in the

banking business of BCCI, it benefited from the transfer of assets while also

becoming responsible for its liabilities. The Defendant Bank did not challenge the

validity of the vesting order at the time of its execution. It is observed that the

objection to the validity of the vesting order is taken up for the first time when sued

for default of its contractual obligations.

[32] Moreover, the principle of estoppel by conduct prevents a party from accepting the

benefits of a legal order while simultaneously repudiating its obligations. I find that

the Defendant Bank is estopped from denying its liabilities and shall be bound by

its obligations arising out of the vesting order. By accepting the vesting order and

acting upon it, the Defendant Bank is precluded from denying its liabilities arising

from the said performance bonds.

Valid Authorization of Signatories

[33] In the proceedings before the Commercial High Court, the Plaintiff's position was

that a demand had been made on the Performance Bonds (marked P6 and P9)

through a document dated 18/12/1991 (marked P7). The demand stated that the

Contractor had "failed in the due performance of their contract for the supply of 105

P a g e 12 | 22

M/T and 150 M/T of Triple Laminate Foil to Lanka Milk Foods (CWE) Ltd." The

demand was signed by authorised signatories, i.e. the Directors authorised by a

Board resolution (marked P17) and the Finance Manager.

[34] In proceedings before the trial court, the position of the Defendant Bank was that

the signatures placed in the demand marked P7, were not by authorised signatories

and therefore had no legal validity in terms of the law. However, a Board resolution

passed by the Plaintiff Company with the authorised signatures was tendered in

evidence marked P17. It is noted that the Defendant Bank at no stage of the trial,

contested the validity of the said Resolution marked P17.

[35] The said Resolution (P17), has authorised and mandated persons named therein, to

act on instructions regarding any accounts or transactions of the Plaintiff Company.

It provided that one of the two signatories should be the Acting Finance Manager

and only in his absence any two of the other persons named are authorised to sign

on behalf of the Plaintiff Company. It is in evidence that when P7 demand/call was

made, the Defendant Bank never took up the position that the signatures placed were

not by authorised signatories.

[36] Having considered the objections raised by the Defendant Bank and the facts and

circumstances referred to above, the learned Judge of the Commercial High Court

concluded that the objection raised by the Defendant regarding the purported

requirement of the demand having to be signed by an authorised signatory in my

opinion, merits no consideration. I too see no reason to depart from that stand.

Quantifying damages

[37] During cross-examination, it was suggested to the Plaintiffs witness that "a claim

on a Performance Bond, regardless of its value, is limited to the actual damages

suffered." The Defendant's position was that the beneficiary had failed to quantify

the damages incurred due to the Contractors actions before lodging the claim. It

was also the position of the Defendant, that if there were defects in the goods

P a g e 13 | 22

supplied, the beneficiary should have availed himself to institute an action against

the Contractor or referred the matter to Arbitration.

[38] Responding to the above, the Plaintiffs position was that due to the deficiency in

delamination, the loss caused to the Plaintiff was around 17% of the contract value

and that this action was filed to sue the banker on the Performance Bond and not on

the contract entered with the Contractor.

The quantification of damages shall be discussed in detail in the latter part of this

judgement.

Are the Performance Bonds On Demand guarantee Bonds or Conditional

Bonds

[39] The learned Presidents Counsel for the Defendant Bank argued that if a

Performance Bond is to be construed as an on demand Bond, it requires extremely

clear wording, and Performance Bonds P6 and P9 do not qualify as such. The Courts

attention was drawn to the term:

That the contractor has failed in the contractual obligations then and in that case

to make payment to the oblige sum of

It was submitted that the phrase then and in that case makes the payment

conditional, requiring the Plaintiff to first obtain an adjudication that Wong Ji

Industrial (the contractor) is in breach of contract prior to seeking relief from the

Defendant under the contested Bonds.

[40] Regarding P6 and P9, the learned Presidents Counsel for the Defendant Bank

further submitted that no proper claim or call was made. He argued that P6 and P9

require the Plaintiff to make an independent claim through a statement that the

Contractor is in breach. It was emphasized that the precise terms of the Bond must

be strictly followed when making a claim or call under it.

In my view, this position raises two key questions.

P a g e 14 | 22

does the term and in that case to make payment to the said Oblige sum of

----, make the underlying relationship between the Contractor and the

Beneficiary conditional, thereby necessitating the institution of an action for

breach of contract against the Contractor to prove the underlying liability

before seeking relief from the Defendant Bank based on the Performance

Bond?

has the qualifying event been sufficiently identified?

[41] The Bonds in question marked P6 and P9, are termed as Performance Bonds.

Whatever the terms used, Performance Bond, Demand Bond, Performance

Guarantee and Demand Guarantee can be used interchangeably and are

recognized in law as such. The said interchangeability was appreciated in Edward

Owen Engineering Ltd. v. Barclays Bank International Ltd10, where Lord Denning

MR began his judgment by stating:

This case concerns a new business transaction called a performance guarantee or

a performance bond.

[42] A Performance Bond generally takes the form of a demand guarantee, where liability

is triggered by a demand in the form of a statement that the applicant is in breach of

its obligations under the underlying relationship.

[43] As discussed earlier in this judgment, upon the beneficiary's assertion that the

Contractor has failed in the due and punctual performance and fulfilment of the

contract, the Defendant is obliged to make payment to the Obligee. On its proper

construction, the Performance Bonds are payable on demand. As in P6 and P9, when

the breach of contract by the Contractor and the payment obligation by the Obligee

is expressed in plain terms, the banker must and should pay on first demand.

[44] Where an instrument contains an undertaking to pay on demand (with or without

the words first and/or written); and does not contain clauses excluding or limiting

the defences available to a surety; it will almost always be construed as a demand

10 [1978] QB 159, 164

P a g e 15 | 22

guarantee. (Howe Richardson Scale Co. Ltd. v. Polimex-Cekop and National

Westminster Bank Ltd. 11).

[45] In determining whether a guarantee is payable upon demand or requires proof of

underlying liability factors such as the inclusion of a principal debtor clause may be

used to interpret the instrument. Clauses that restrict or exclude defences available

to the guarantor, or the use of phrases like on demand, can aid interpretation but

are not decisive on their own.

[46] As explained in Pagets Law of Banking12, when interpreting guarantees, it is

important to recognize that a demand guarantee will inevitably reference:

the contractual performance it secures; and

the conditions under which a demand can be made, namely the principals

default.

A simple promise to pay on demand, without any reference to the principals

obligations, would leave room for fraudulent claims. This is because the principal

would have no basis to argue that the demand relates to an obligation not covered

by the guarantee. In other words, the guarantee must still be tied to the underlying

contract to provide clarity and protection against unjustified claims.

[47] As held in Siporex Trade SA V Banque Indosuez13 The whole commercial purpose

of a performance bond is to provide a security which is to be readily, promptly, and

assuredly realisable when the prescribed event occurs; a purpose reflected in the

provision here that it should be payable on first demand.

[48] In the present case, the beneficiary, when making the demand for payment, claimed

that the Contractor had failed in the due performance of the contract. In my view,

the words the contractor has failed in the due and punctual performance and the

fulfilment of the contract on its true construction create no ambiguity to assert a

11 [1978]1 Lloyds Rep 161 12 John Odgers QC (ed), Pagets Law of Banking (15th edn, Butterworths Law 2018) ch 35, [35.8]. 13 [1986] 2 Lloyds Rep 146, 158

P a g e 16 | 22

claim to require the payment on demand specified in the guarantee, without any

objection, contestation, or defense.

[49] It is also observed that the Defendant Bank never complained about the qualifying

event for the recovery of the money due to the Beneficiary on non-compliance by

the Contractor of the terms and conditions of the Performance Bonds or any

discrepancy that would justify withholding or rejecting the demand.

[50] In Esal Commodities Ltd. And Reltor Ltd. V Oriental Credit Ltd and Wells Fargo

Bank NA14 the words we undertake to pay the said amount on your written demand

in the event that the supplier fails to execute the contract in perfect performance

were construed not to require the beneficiary to prove a failure to perform.

Autonomous nature of a demand guarantee

[51] As pointed out earlier, the Defendant Bank submitted that the Plaintiff should limit

itself to the actual loss and damages suffered as a result of the breach of contract

therein, underlining the importance of the contractual relationship between the

parties. When the Defendant asserts that the Plaintiff has not taken steps against the

Contractor prior to seeking relief from the Defendant, it is in fact, questioning the

autonomous nature of a demand guarantee.

[52] The difference between a traditional guarantee (suretyship) and a demand guarantee

lies in the nature of the liability. In a traditional guarantee, the suretys liability is

secondary and dependent upon the principal debtors default. The creditor must

prove such default to enforce the suretys liability.

[53] In contrast, a demand guarantee creates a primary obligation for the issuer (the

Defendant Bank in this case), which is triggered solely by a demand from the

beneficiary, regardless of disputes between the beneficiary and the principal debtor.

The demand guarantee operates autonomously from the underlying contract,

meaning the guarantor is detached from disputes or claims arising from that contract.

14 [1985] 2 Lloyds Rep 546

P a g e 17 | 22

[54] The principle of autonomy is reflected in Article 5(a) of the International Chamber

of Commerce (ICC) Uniform Rules for Demand Guarantees (URDG), which states:

A guarantee is by its nature independent of the underlying relationship and the

application, and the guarantor is in no way concerned with or bound by such

relationship. A reference in the guarantee to the underlying relationship for the

purpose of identifying it does not change the independent nature of the guarantee.

The undertaking of a guarantor to pay under the guarantee is not subject to claims

or defenses arising from any relationship other than a relationship between the

guarantor and the beneficiary.

Pagets Law of banking15, referring to a number of decided UK case laws observes

that;

It is hoped that the revised URDG are to be incorporated into more demand

guarantee contracts worldwide.

[55] A Guarantor can challenge the validity of an instrument by asserting fraudulent

conduct or misrepresentation by the beneficiary. In such instance the Guarantor

may decline payment when a sufficient case of fraud is made out, entitling the

Guarantor to refuse to honor the guarantee. However, in this case, no such

allegation of fraud was pleaded or led in evidence by the Defendant Bank.

[56] However, if a Beneficiary claims more than they are entitled to under a demand

guarantee, there is an implied obligation for them to repay the excess amount to the

principal. This duty applies even if the principal has already reimbursed the bank.

The repayment obligation arises once the overpayment amount is determined, either

by agreement or a court ruling, and must be dealt with in a separate suit.

[57] Regarding the legal position on bank guarantees, the Plaintiff, in their written

submissions to the Commercial High Court and this Court, cited several decided

cases from the UK and Sri Lanka.

15 Supra [n12] ch 35, [35.2].

P a g e 18 | 22

In Edward Owen Engineering Ltd. v. Barclays Bank International Ltd16.

It was held that All this leads to the conclusion that the performance guarantee

stands on a similar footing to a letter of credit. A bank which gives a performance

guarantee must honor that guarantee according to its terms. It is not concerned in

the least with the relations between the supplier and the customer; nor with the

question whether the supplier has performed his contractual obligation or not; nor

with the question whether the supplier is in default or not. The banker must pay

according to its guarantee, on demand, if so stipulated, without proof or conditions.

The only exception is when there is a clear fraud of which the bank has notice

[58] In the words of Kerr J. in R. D. Harbottle (Mercantile) Ltd. v. National Westminster

Bank17, cited with approval by Lord Denning MR. in the above-mentioned

judgement, the machinery and commitments of banks are on a different level.

They must be allowed to be honored free from interference from courts. Otherwise,

trust in international commerce could be irreparably damaged.

[59] In Hydrabad Industries ltd. v Idac Trading (Pvt) Ltd and two others18 it was held

that

A confirmed letter of credit constitutes a bargain between the banker and the

vendor of goods, which imposes on the banker an absolute obligation to pay

irrespective of any dispute which there may be between the parties on the question

whether the goods are up to contract or not. An elaborate commercial system has

been built up on the footing that bankers confirmed credits are of that character,

and it would be wrong for the court to interfere with that established practice. The

system of financing these operations would break down completely if a dispute

between the vendor and the purchaser were to have the effect of freezing the sum

in respect of which the letter of credit was opened. The courts jurisdiction to grant

injunctions is wide, but this is not a case in which, in the exercise of the courts

discretion, it ought to grant an injunction.

16 [1978] 1 All ER 976 17 [1977] All ER 862, 870 18 [1995] 2 SLR 304

P a g e 19 | 22

[60] The Appellate Courts in Sri Lanka, in various instances, have propounded Bonds

and irrevocable letters of credit as the life blood of international trade. In many

instances, the trial court judges have been put on notice to be mindful not to

intervene and/or disturb the bankers obligation to pay and that it should be left free

to honor its contractual obligation.

In Telecommunication Consultants India Ltd. v. Pan Asia Bank Ltd19., TCIL, an

Indian company, entered into a contract with Nipuna Teleconstructions (Pvt) Ltd.

and obtained an Advance Payment Guarantee from Pan Asia Bank to secure the

contract. When Nipuna failed to perform its contractual obligations, TCIL demanded

payment under the guarantee. However, the bank delayed payment and allowed

Nipuna to obtain an ex-parte injunction from the District Court, blocking payment

for over two and a half years. Once the injunction lapsed, the bank still refused to

honor the guarantee, pleading fraud on the part of the TCIL. The Supreme Court

ruled in favor of TCIL, and held that banks must honor guarantees on demand,

regardless of disputes between contracting parties, and that the only valid exception

is proven fraud, which the bank failed to establish in this case.

Similarly, in Hemas Marketing (Pvt) Ltd. v. Chandrasiri and Others20, held that

A guarantee is an accessory contract by which the promisor undertakes to be

answerable to the promisee for the debt, default, or miscarriage of another person

whose primary liability to the promisee must exist or be contemplated. Bank

Guarantees were established as a universally acceptable means of payment

equivalent to cash in trade and commerce, on the basis that the promise of the

issuing bank to pay was wholly independent of the contract between the buyer and

seller and the issuing bank would honour its obligations to pay regardless of the

merits or demerits of the dispute between the buyer and the seller.

Indica Traders (Pvt) Ltd. v. Seoul Lanka Construction (Pvt) Ltd. and Others21

reaffirmed that courts should not interfere with a banks obligation to honor

19 SC CHC 36/2006 decided on 24.11.2017 20 [1994] 2 SLR 181 21 [1994] 3 SLR 387

P a g e 20 | 22

guarantees unless fraud is clearly established. The dispute in this case, arose from a

construction contract where Indica Traders alleged that Seoul Lanka Construction

wrongfully terminated the contract and sought to prevent the enforcement of an

Advance Payment Guarantee and a Performance Bond. The Court held that bank

guarantees are independent financial instruments, distinct from the underlying

contractual disputes. In this case, the plaintiffs fraud allegations were

uncorroborated and appeared to be an afterthought to justify the injunction. The

court held that a contract violation or an overpayment does not constitute fraud

unless it is so severe that it undermines the entire transaction.

[61] In the facts and circumstances of this case it is observed that;

I. the payment under the performance Bond/Guarantee was restrained by the

Defendant Bank with no challenge to the validity of the Bond/Guarantee

itself.

II. there was no condition precedent precluding or limiting the right to draw on

the instrument that would restrain the beneficiary.

III. no knowledge of fraud to the notice of the Defendant Bank.

IV. although not incorporated into P6 and P9, the persuasive value of Article 2

of the ICC Uniform Rules for Demand Guarantee 1991 [revised in 2007 and

2010], calls for due compliance to recognise the autonomy of the

Performance Guarantee from the underlying contractual relationship.

[62] In these circumstances, the question to be asked is why the Defendant Bank,

prevented the beneficiary from drawing on the instrument in terms of the underlying

contract when there was no substantial challenge to its validity. The Defendant Bank

has failed to answer this question to the satisfaction of this Court. Therefore, the

irresistible conclusion that this Court can come to is that by preventing the drawing

on the said Performance Bonds, the Defendant Bank has defaulted in the discharge

of its contractual obligations towards the beneficiary,

P a g e 21 | 22

[63] International commerce attaches great significance to Bank

Guarantees/Performance Bonds as pioneering financial instruments that bring

greater stability and accountability to principals [exporters and importers alike]

involved in international trade. Therefore, when an action is filed challenging the

validity of such instrument, the courts should not interfere lightly with its due

performance. Even in the first instance, where an ex-parte order is sought to restrain

payment when the beneficiary has on the face of it made a fraudulent demand, he

must normally be given the opportunity to answer the allegation (Bolivinter Oil SA

v. Chase Manhattan Bank22).

[64] When fraud is affecting the validity of an instrument, the courts are compelled to act

with caution not to permit deception or fraud by a party, which can cause irreparable

reputational loss and/or damage to a guarantor. At the same time, unless the fraud

exception applies, the courts should refrain from interfering or restraining a

legitimate call/demand on a Guarantee.

[65] In the words of banker, M.C.V. Rajanathan,

in exceptional circumstance, such as fraud, the Courts do intervene with an

injunction or restraining order, --- any claim made by the beneficiary should be

expeditiously settled and there should be no hesitation on the part of the bank in

honoring the claim.---, whenever a claim is made on a Bank Guarantee within the

expiry date, it is the obligation of the Banker to pay immediately on demand. All

Banks generally issue unconditional guarantees, hence there is no excuse

whatsoever for banker i.e., the guarantor to delay or refuse settlement. In other

words, Bankers should understand their lips are sealed when a claim is made

within the expiry.23 (emphasis is mine)

[66] For all the above reasons I am of the view that the Plaintiff has asserted its position

taken in the Plaint dated 26/11/1992, in the evidence led before Court, to establish

22 [1984] 1 Lloyd's Rep 251, 257 23 Rajanathan M C V, Lending Against Collateral (Sarasavi Publishers) 231233.

P a g e 22 | 22

that the Plaintiff should be granted the reliefs as prayed for in the Plaint, in terms of

prayers (a) (b) (c) and (d) as affirmed by the impugned Judgment dated 20/02/2007.

[67] In all the above circumstances, I answer all questions of law in favour of the Plaintiff

and uphold and affirm the Judgement dated 20/02/2007 of the Commercial High

Court. Accordingly, this Appeal is dismissed with costs fixed at Rs. 400,000/-

Judge of the Supreme Court

S. Thurairaja, PC, J.

I agree

Judge of the Supreme Court

Mahinda Samayawardhena J.

I agree

Judge of the Supreme Court