IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Wedikkarayalage Nirosha Sanjeewani,

Adurapotha, Kegalle.

Plaintiff

SC APPEAL NO: SC/APPEAL/180/2011

SC LA NO: SC/HCCA/LA/309/2011

HCCA KEGALLE NO: SP/HCCA/KEG/717/2010(F)

DC KEGALLE NO: 5955/L

Vs.

Hewavitharanage Podimenike,

“Saman Nivasa”,

No. 40, Hitinawatte,

Colombo Road, Kegalle.

Defendant

AND BETWEEN

Wedikkarayalage Nirosha Sanjeewani,

Adurapotha, Kegalle.

Plaintiff-Appellant

Vs.

Hewavitharanage Podimenike,

“Saman Nivasa”,

No. 40, Hitinawatte,

2

SC/APPEAL/180/2011

Colombo Road, Kegalle.

Defendant-Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

Hewavitharanage Podimenike,

“Saman Nivasa”,

No. 40, Hitinawatte,

Colombo Road, Kegalle.

Defendant-Respondent-Appellant

Vs.

Wedikkarayalage Nirosha Sanjeewani,

Adurapotha, Kegalle.

Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent

Before: S. Thurairaja, J.

Kumuduni Wickremasinghe, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Dr. Sunil Coorey with Sudarshani Coorey for the

Defendant-Respondent-Appellant.

Ishan Alawathurage for the Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent.

Argued on: 27.10.2022

Written submissions:

by the Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent on 16.02.2012

by the Defendant-Respondent-Appellant on 16.12.2011

Decided on: 21.11.2022

3

SC/APPEAL/180/2011

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The plaintiff filed this action against the defendant in the District Court

of Kegalle seeking a declaration of title to the land described in the second

schedule to the plaint, ejectment of the defendant therefrom, and

damages. The plaintiff claimed title to the land on the deed of transfer

marked P1 read with the deed of rectification marked P2 executed in

favour of her by the defendant. The defendant filed answer seeking

dismissal of the plaintiff’s action and made a claim in reconvention on

the basis that, although the deed appears to be an outright transfer, it

was in fact security for a loan obtained from the plaintiff’s husband and

therefore the plaintiff is holding the property subject to a constructive

trust created in favour of the defendant, as the defendant never intended

to transfer the beneficial interest in the property to the plaintiff.

The trial commenced on 16.09.1999 with the raising of 23 issues and

ended after nearly a decade on 24.06.2009. Both parties called several

witnesses and marked several documents. After trial, the learned District

Judge by a comprehensive judgment dated 15.03.2010 held with the

defendant.

Being dissatisfied with the judgment, the plaintiff appealed to the High

Court of Civil Appeal of Kegalle. The High Court set aside the judgment

of the District Court and ordered a retrial. This appeal is against the

judgment of the High Court. This Court granted leave to appeal on the

following questions of law formulated by counsel for the plaintiff:

(a) Did the High Court err in holding that the failure on the part of the

learned District Judge to state in his judgment the section of Chapter

IX of the Trusts Ordinance under which he had held that the Plaintiff-

Appellant was holding the property concerned on a constructive trust

4

SC/APPEAL/180/2011

on behalf of the Defendant-Respondent is fatal and affects the very

root of the impugned judgment?

(b) Did the High Court err in failing to realize and appreciate that it was

under section 83 of the Trusts Ordinance that the learned District

Judge has held that the property in suit was subject to a constructive

trust, although the learned District Judge did not state so anywhere

in his judgment?

(b) Was the failure to mention section 83 in the judgment of the District

Judge only a technicality and in no way fatal and did such failure

not in any manner affect the legality or validity of the judgment?

(c) Did the High Court fail to act on the principle of law that where a

judge had the power to act as he has done, his failure to invoke the

correct provision of law in so doing, and/or his invoking the wrong

provision of law, does not in any way affect the validity or legality

of what he has done?

(d) Did the High Court err by relying on a quotation from the judgment

of His Lordship Chief Justice Basnayake in the decision of

Wijewardena v. Lenora 60 NLR 457 because the said quotation had

no relevance to the decision to be given by the High Court in this

appeal?

(e) Did the High Court err in holding that, “this court is of the view that

learned counsel appearing on both sides missed the salient point of

argument involved in the case”, in view of the fact that the point on

which the High Court based its decision is totally untenable and bad

in law?

(f) Did the High Court err by violating the Defendant-Respondent’s right

to be heard by the High Court in deciding this appeal when the High

Court decided this appeal on a point that had not been raised by

either party and on which the Defendant-Respondent had no

opportunity of being heard before the High Court?

5

SC/APPEAL/180/2011

The learned High Court Judge quite categorically accepts that “The

learned District Judge while pronouncing the impugned judgment had

stated the reasons that prompted him to hold that the plaintiff-appellant is

holding the property concerned on behalf of the defendant-respondent on

a constructive trust.” He does not state that those reasons are faulty or

unacceptable. He accepts them. Then he states that both counsel “missed

the salient point of argument involved in this case” which “is fatal and

affects the very root of the impugned judgment”. What is this most

important point?

The learned High Court Judge says “a party who is claiming a constructive

trust to be in existence has to bring his case within any of the provisions

of section 83 to 96 of the Trusts Ordinance…that the learned District Judge

had erred himself in law when he failed to mention under which section of

chapter IX of Trusts Ordinance that the plaintiff-appellant was holding the

property concerned on a constructive trust on behalf of the defendant-

respondent”. This is a point that has not been raised by either party

before the High Court. It is this point that the learned High Court Judge

says “is fatal and affects the very root of the impugned judgment”. On this

basis alone, the judgment of the District Court was set aside and a retrial

ordered.

Chapter IX of the Trusts Ordinance (sections 82-98) deals with categories

of constructive trusts. But there was no issue at the trial in the District

Court or in the High Court on appeal regarding the number of the section

of the Trusts Ordinance that is applicable in this case. In the District

Court, the plaintiff claimed title to the land on deed P1 read with P2 and

the defendant stated that the plaintiff is holding the land relevant to this

deed on a constructive trust in favour of her, because she never intended

to transfer the beneficial interest in the land to the plaintiff. These

positions were expressly stated in the pleadings and in the issues. The

6

SC/APPEAL/180/2011

plaintiff knew the defendant’s position from the time the answer was filed.

At the argument before this Court, in answering a specific question posed

by the Court, learned counsel for the plaintiff candidly admitted that on

the facts and circumstances of this case there is no doubt that the

applicable section is section 83 of the Trusts Ordinance, but regrettably

did not accept that the judgment of the High Court was wrong. In my

view, the judgment of the High Court is manifestly wrong and must be

set aside.

The High Court Judge has cited Bernedette Valangenberg v.

Happuarachchige Anthony [1990] 1 Sri LR 190 in support of his

proposition. But nowhere in that judgment does it state that unless the

relevant section of the Trusts Ordinance is mentioned in the judgment, a

case filed on a constructive trust must fail. The other case cited by the

High Court Judge, namely, Wijewardene v. Lenora (1958) 60 NLR 457,

has no application at all in resolving this issue.

Although section 149 of the Civil Procedure Code permits the District

Judge to amend the issues or frame additional issues at any time before

passing the decree, the Judge shall use his discretion with caution,

particularly when he unilaterally decides to raise an issue unknown to

both parties in the course of writing the judgment.

Although a new issue taken in isolation may appear to be a pure question

of law, the Judge needs to analyse the evidence and interpret the law to

answer that question. Hammed v. Cassim [1996] 2 Sri LR 30 provides a

classic example. In that case, during the course of writing the judgment,

the District Judge raised the following issue: “Can the plaintiff have and

maintain the action in view of provisions of section 22(7) of the Rent Act?”

The District Judge held with the plaintiff on the issue of reasonable

requirement, on the basis of which the case was filed against the

defendant for ejectment; but in view of his answer in the negative to this

7

SC/APPEAL/180/2011

new issue, he dismissed the plaintiff's action. On appeal, although

Ranaraja J. referring to section 149 of the Civil Procedure Code stated “In

the present appeal, the relevant issue is a question of law on which it was

not absolutely necessary for the Judge to hear either party before

answering it. Thus I am of the view there was no prejudice caused to either

party on that score”, after analysing the evidence of the case and

interpreting section 22(7) of the Rent Act he came to the conclusion that

“The learned District Judge was therefore in error in holding that the

plaintiff was debarred by section 22(7) from instituting the action against

the defendant”. Had the District Judge afforded the parties an

opportunity to make submissions on that legal issue before the

pronouncement of the judgment, the learned District Judge also should

have come to the same conclusion. This does not mean that a Judge

cannot raise an issue and answer it during the course of writing the

judgment without hearing the parties; he can, but he must exercise his

discretion with restraint and circumspection. The case must be decided

by the Judge as it was presented before him by the rival parties, keeping

in mind that the system of justice we practice is adversarial, not

inquisitorial. Even if it is inquisitorial, the Judge cannot decide a matter

without giving a hearing to both parties. The rule of audi alteram partem

is applicable to all decision-making authorities including Judges.

Let us assume that citing the section in the judgment is a legal

requirement. What prejudice did failure to do so cause to either party?

For all intents and purposes, the trial proceeded on the basis that the

defendant asserts a constructive trust against the title deed of the

plaintiff in terms of section 83 of the Trust Ordinance. The District Judge

accepted the defendant’s position. The matter shall end there. Whilst

setting out the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal, the proviso to Article

138 of the Constitution states, “no judgement, decree or order of any court

shall be reversed or varied on account of any error, defect or irregularity,

8

SC/APPEAL/180/2011

which has not prejudiced the substantial rights of the parties or occasioned

a failure of justice.”

Is it necessary to cite the section in the judgement and does failure to do

so vitiate the judgment? When invoking the jurisdiction of a Court it is

salutary to mention the specific section under which it is invoked. But if

a party fails do so or cites a wrong section in this process, the application

need not be dismissed if the Court has jurisdiction to deal with the

matter, unless it has caused prejudice to the opposite party to meet the

plaintiff’s case. The same will apply to any other decision including

judicial pronouncements: citing the wrong section or failure to cite the

relevant section by the Judge in the order or judgment will not ipso facto

vitiate the decision.

Bindra on the Interpretation of Statutes (1975) 6th Ed. at page 153 states:

It is a well-settled principle of interpretation that as long as an

authority has power to do a thing, it does not matter if it purports to

do it by reference to a wrong provision of law.

Solicitor-General v. Perera (1914) 17 NLR 413 was a criminal case filed

under the Excise Ordinance where the license to sell liquor was cancelled

for failure to make some payment due. The Government Agent cancelled

the license under section 26(1)(a) of the Ordinance when the correct

section was section 26(1)(b). When the conviction for selling liquor

without a license was contested in appeal on this basis, Pereira J. rejected

it stating at page 416 “the fact that sub-section (a) of section 26 was cited

did not render the cancellation of the license any less effectual. The

Government Agent was not bound to cite any section at all.”

In Peiris v. The Commissioner of Inland Revenue (1963) 65 NLR 457 it was

held that a certificate issued to the Magistrate in recovery proceedings

under section 80(1) of the Income Tax Ordinance was not invalidated by

9

SC/APPEAL/180/2011

the mistake of the Assistant Commissioner of Inland Revenue where he

had purported to act under section 64(2)(b) although the correct

procedure would have been under section 65. Sansoni J. (later C.J.)

stated at 458: “It is well-settled that an exercise of a power will be referable

to a jurisdiction which confers validity upon it and not to a jurisdiction

under which it will be nugatory. This principle has been applied even to

cases where a Statute which confers no power has been quoted as

authority for a particular act, and there was in force another Statute which

conferred that power.” This was quoted with approval by Soza J. in

Leechman & Co. Ltd. v. Rangalla Consolidated Ltd [1981] 2 Sri LR 373 at

379-380 and Kumaranatunga v. Samarasinghe [1983] 2 Sri LR 63 at 73-

74. Vide also Jayawardane v. Ran Aweera [2004] 3 Sri LR 37 at 41.

I answer all the questions of law upon which leave was granted in the

affirmative and set aside the judgment of the High Court and restore the

judgment of the District Court. The defendant is entitled to costs in all

three Courts.

Judge of the Supreme Court

S. Thurairaja, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Kumuduni Wickremasinghe, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court