1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

SC Appeal No. 15/2012 SC (HCCA) LA No. 456/2011 HCCA Sabaragamuwa (Ratnapura) Appeal No. 77/2009 D.C. Pelmadulla Case No. 20/L Rev. Bengamuwe Dhammadinna Thero Purana Rajamaha Viharaya Pelmadulla. PLAINTIFF Vs.

1. Pallage Karunaratna Perera

No. 79, Ratnapura Road, Pelmadulla. 2. D. P. Kariyawasam

No. 79, Ratnapura Road, Pelmadulla.

DEFENDANTS AND BETWEEN 1. Pallage Karunaratna Perera

No. 79, Ratnapura Road, Pelmadulla. 1st DEFENDANT-APPELLANT Vs.

2

Rev. Bengamuwe Dhammadinna Thero Purana Rajamaha Viharaya Pelmadulla. PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT

2. D. P. Kariyawasa No. 79, Ratnapura Road, Pelmadulla.

2nd DEFENDANT-RRSPONDENT AND NOW BETWEEN Rev. Bengamuwe Dhammadinna Thero Purana Rajamaha Viharaya Pelmadulla. PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT-APPELLANT

1. Pallage Karunaratna Perera No. 79, Ratnapura Road, Pelmadulla.

1st DEFENDANT-APPELLANT-RESPONDENT 2. D. P. Kariyawasa No. 79, Ratnapura Road, Pelmadulla.

2nd DEFENDANT-RRSPONDENT-RESPONDENT BEFORE: S.E. Wanasundera P.C., J. Anil Gooneratne J. & Prasanna S. Jayawardena P.C., J

3

COUNSEL: B.O.P. Jayawardena with Oshada Rodrigo and Nirosha Wickramasinghe for the Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant Z.A. Ameen Hussain instructed by Hussain Ahamed For the 1st Defendant-Appellant-Respondent ARGUED ON: 26.01.2017 WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS TENDERED ON: 05.03.2012 (by Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant) 28.03.2012 (by 1st Defendant-Appellant-Respondent) DECIDED ON: 14.03.2017 GOONERATNE J. This was an action filed by the Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant

against the 1st Defendant-Appellant-Respondent and the 2nd Defendant-

Respondent-Respondent for a declaration of title to the property described in

the schedule to the Plaint, ejectment of the Defendants and for a declaration

that the Defendant occupy the land described in the schedule under Leave and

Licence of Plaintiff. It is the case of the Plaintiff that the 1st Defendant entered

the disputed premises with the Leave and Licence of the predecessor of the

Appellant, namely Rev. Mudduwe Pagnasekera Thero with a promise that he

would not alienate possession of the property to a third party and vacant

possession would be handed over on request. However at a subsequent stage

4

1st Defendant denied the Appellant’s (Plaintiff’s) title illegally and leased the

property to the 2nd Defendant-Respondent on lease Bond No. 19489 of

16.10.2002. 2nd Defendant did not file answer and trial proceeded ex-parte

against him. However learned District Judge held with the Plaintiff by Judgment

of 07.05.2009 and granted relief prayed for in the plaint. The 1st Defendant

aggrieved by the said Judgment, appealed to the Civil Appellate High Court, and

that court allowed the appeal on 04.10.2011 and set aside the Judgment of the

District Court.

Supreme Court on 24.01.2012 granted Leave to Appeal on the

following questions of law which revolve on law of fideicommissum.

(i) Have the learned High Court Judges erred in law in concluding that the

conditions imposed in the deed bearing No. 1341 (P2) do not create a

fideicommissum.

(ii) Have the learned High Court Judges erred in law in not considering the

provisions of the abolition of fideicommissum Act No.20 of 1972.

At the trial before the District Court the corpus was admitted and

execution of lease Bond referred to above No. 19489 of 16.10.2002, was also

admitted. Parties proceeded to trial on 16 issues. Plaintiff-Respondent-

Appellant had adduced documentary evidence in support of his case of title and

possession of the corpus. Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant leading in evidence

produced documents P1 to P12 and closed the case of the Plaintiff. The

5

Defendant did not lead any evidence. I also find that on perusal of the

proceedings several documents produced by the Plaintiff party, had not been

objected to by the Defendant. Learned District Judge has answered all issues

raised by the Plaintiff, in favour of the Plaintiff.

In the submissions of learned counsel for Plaintiff-Respondent-

Appellant he takes up the position that the documentary evidence led on behalf

of the Appellant was neither challenged nor rebutted by the 1st Defendant-

Appellant-Respondent. At the trial Appellant produced deed P1 No. 4143 dated

27.10.2000 in respect of his title. By deed P1 the Appellant acquires title to the

property from his teacher Rev. Mudduwe Pagnasekera Thero. The said Rev.

Pagnasekera Thero acquired title from his teacher Haldanduwana

Dhammarakkhitha Thero by deed of gift No. 1341 of 25.03.1964 produced as P2

at the trial. The subject matter of this case is depicted as P3 in the survey plan

No. 5759 dated 14.09.2005. Appellant also had produced documents marked

P4, P5, P7 & P8 to establish his predecessor’s title and possession, to the

property in dispute. A document marked P6 was produced and led at the trial.

This document was produced by the Appellant to establish the fact that the 1st

Defendant-Appellant-Respondent entered the property in dispute as a tenant

under Appellant’s predecessor who was the Viharadhipathi of the relevant time.

6

Document P6 like the other documents were never challenged at the trial. It is

also alleged by the Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant that the 1st Defendant-

Respondent in violation of lease document P6, wrongfully executed deed of

lease No. 19489 of 16.10.2002 (P9) and alienated possession of the premises to

the 2nd Defendant-Respondent.

Learned counsel for the 1st Defendant-Appellant-Respondent’s

position was that under and in terms of the deed of gift no. 1341 and marked

and produced as P2, (High Court brief refer to it as P8) the title of the donor Rev.

Dhammarakkitha Thero did not pass to the donee Rev. Mudduwe Pagnasekera

Thero but with his demise (donor) title vested with the temple. He further

argued that in view of the conditions imposed in the said deed, Rev. Mudduwe

Pagnasekera Thero could not have conveyed title of the corpus to the Plaintiff

by the deed No. 4143. I also note the portion dealing with this argument as

contained in the written submissions of the 1st Defendant-Appellant-

Respondent. It was submitted that the case is a case of declaration of title and

the Appellant has failed to discharge that burden. In the chain of title pleaded

by the Appellant in deed P2 (No. 1341) given by the donor Dhammarakkhitha

Thero title did not pass to the donee Rev. Pagnasekera Thero. It is repeated that

with the demise of Rev. Dhammarakkhitha Thero title vested in temple

(Pelmadulla Purana Vihara Rajaman Viharaya), in view of the conditions

7

appearing in the said deed. As such Rev. Mudduwe Pagnasekera Thero could not

have conveyed title by deed No. 4143 (P1) to Plaintiff.

In any event the important question of law revolve on the point,

whether deed P2 No. 1341 create a fideicommissum, and the effect of the

abolition of fideicommissum Act No. 20 of 1972. My attention has been drawn

to the case of Pablina Vs. Karunaratne 50 NLR 169 at pg. 170. Held for creation

of ‘fideicommissum’ the language used must clearly show.

(1) That the gift is not absolute to the donee.

(2) Who are the person to be benefited.

(3) When are they to benefit.

In another well-known text, ‘Laws of Ceylon – Walter Perera deals with

fideicommissum. I find variety of views and several expression of this topic are

considered. I note the following:

The writer states no satisfactory test appears to be available to be

applied to the question whether any particular words in a particular document

have the effect of creating a fideicommissum and the best course perhaps, is to

give summaries of the different decision which the Supreme Court has

pronounced.

8

At pgs. 436/437

A provision in a will that the property “shall forever remain unsold and undivided, and

the profits thereof be divided among the heirs collectively” was held to amount to a fidei

commissum, the word “heirs” not necessarily meaning the children of the testator. Similarly,

provision that the survivor should possess the common estate as he or she pleases, and that

after the death of both, whatever is left should be divided among the children, constitutes a

fideicommissum as to the residue. The survivor can alienate or encumber the property, but

he or she should not needlessly spend, give away, or squander the estate in prejudice of the

heirs on whom it is entailed. Under the Roman-Dutch Law it must not, in any case, be

diminished by more than three-fourths.

A gift of land to A comprising a provision that the land “shall be possessed and enjoyed

only by A, her children and their children in perpetuity, but shall not be sold, mortgaged, or

gifted to anyone,” was held to create a valid fideicommissum. ......

No set form of words is necessary for creating a valid fideicommissum. Prohibition of

alienation out of the family coupled with a clear indication of the person to whom the

property, in the event of alienation, is to go over, constitutes a good fideicommissum without

formal words. So also in the case of Vansanden v. Mack, it was held by Bonser C.J that no

special words were necessary to create a fideicommissum, but effect was to be given to the

intention of the testator, if it could be collected from any expressions in the instrument that

he intended to create a fideicommissum. In the same case Browne A.J. was of opinion that

the expression “my children and their descendants” different in nowise from “my children

and my descendants”; and it was also held by the court that whatever had been the intention

of the testator as to the creation of a fideicommissum, where the will had been construed by

the parties as if the testator had impressed a fideicommissum on the property, and such

construction had formed the basis of family arrangements for a long period, it should not be

disturbed. .......

9

The following words in a will – “I hereby direct that and his posterity (paramparawe)

should possess the following lands, & c. Except such possession, there lands or any part

thereof shall not be sold, mortgaged, or made over in any other manner or seized for his debt”

were held to create a fideicommissum. The word paramparawe was interpreted to mean

lineal descendants of the testator. It was further held in this case that in construing a will the

intention of the testator was of paramount importance, and where the intention to name a

fidei commissary was expressed, or might be gathered by necessary implication from the

language of the will, a fideicommissum was constituted. No particular form of words was

necessary to create it, and in cases of doubt the inclination of the court was not to put any

burden upon the inheritance.

Principles of Ceylon Law - Hon. H.W. Tambiah Q.C

Pg. 320.

The view taken is that in the case of a fideicommissum by deed there is a contract. The

persons to whom the obligation is due are the creditors during the pendency of the condition,

a principle which is contrary to the rule obtaining in the case of legacies. This concept is based

on the principle that a person who makes a stipulation subject to a condition, transmits the

expectation under the contract to his heirs if he dies before the fulfilment of the condition

(Voet 36.1.67; Magregor 1.4.5; Mohamed Bhai v. Silva (1911) 14 N.L.R 193; Thiagarajah v.

Thiagarajah (1921) 22 N.L.R 433; Balkis v. Perera (1927) 29 N.L.R 284; Ariyasathumma v.

Retnasingham (1946) 47 N.L.R 180.

The learned District Judge has arrived at his conclusion based on

deed P1 and P2. That P1 is a deed of transfer, and deed P2 is a deed of gift. The

question of a fideicommissum was not an issue before the original court. There

is no doubt that the 1st Defendant was a lessee of the Plaintiff. As such the law

would not permit the 1st Defendant to contest Plaintiff’s title. Material made

available suggest that the 1st Defendant in violation of lease document P6

10

wrongfully/illegally executed deed of lease P9 and alienated possession of the

premises to the 2nd Defendant. Learned District Judge has carefully considered

the above position. I do not think the Judgment of the learned District Judge

could be faulted in any respect as the Judgment had been delivered based on

the issues raised before the original court.

The learned High Court Judge considered the position of a

fideicommissum and reject the position of the Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant

and state deed P2 does not create a fideicommissum as P2 does not pass title

on the demise of Dhammarakkhitha Thero and the subject property becomes

sanghika property. On this aspect the authorities referred to above express the

view that no satisfactory test could be utilised to decide on the fideicommissum

but one has to gather such intention from the words used in the deed.

Therefore the views expressed by the learned High Court Judge

cannot be considered as a test to be applied and adhered to determine whether

deed P2 created a fideicommissum. P2 no doubt suggest that the gift is not

absolute to the donee, and the donee would benefit by deed P2 during his life

time. P2 deed executed in the year 1964, contains a prohibition on the donee to

mortgage or provide P2 as security or any alienation. There are some important

features in a fideicommissum, which suggest continuation of possession from

one to another on the demise of the donee.

11

I am in agreement with the submissions of the learned counsel for

Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant that deed P2 create a fideicommissum but with

the enactment of, abolition of fideicommissum and Entails Act No.20 of 1972

the fideicommissum becomes ineffective and the donee in deed P2 becomes the

absolute owner of the property without any encumbrances. By the said

Enactment the fideicommissum or any restraint or alienation, limit or

curtailment got wiped out and the donee would get title and no other named in

the deed would acquire title (Section 2 and 4 of the Act No. 20 of 1972).

Upon a consideration of all the facts and circumstances discussed

above, I set aside the Judgment of the High Court and affirm the Judgment of

the learned District Judge. I answer the two questions of law on which leave was

granted as ‘Yes’. In the creation of a fideicommissum it is not necessary to use

special language or an adoption of a particular form. What is required is the

manifestation of an intention to create it, and the presence of a condition or

happening of an event for fideicommissum to take effect. There should be a

clear indication as to who will benefit. Deed P2 fulfil all above, requirements.

The words used in deed P2 is clear. There is nothing wrong in

expressing the view that the property in dispute should be considered as

12

pudgalika property. As such I set aside the Judgment of the High Court and allow

this appeal with costs.

Appeal allowed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

S.E. Wanasundera P.C., J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Prasanna S. Jayawardena P.C., J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT