==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application under and in terms of Article 99(13)(a) of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

SC (Expulsion) No: 01/2023

Harin Fernando, No. 276/4, Negombo Road, Wattala.

PETITIONER

Vs. 1. Samagi Jana Balawegaya, 815, E.W. Perera Mawatha, Kotte Road, Ethul Kotte. 2. Ranjith Madduma Bandara, General Secretary, Samagi Jana Balawegaya, 815, E.W. Perera Mawatha, Kotte Road, Ethul Kotte. 3. Sajith Premadasa, President, Samagi Jana Balawegaya, 815, E.W. Perera Mawatha, Kotte Road, Ethul Kotte. 4. K. A. Rohanadeera, Secretary General of Parliament, Parliamentary Complex, Sri Jayawardenapura, Kotte.

2

5. R. M. A. L. Rathnayake, Chairman, Election Commission, Elections Secretariat, Sarana Mawatha, Rajagiriya. 6. M.A.P.C. Perera, Member, Election Commission, Elections Secretariat, Sarana Mawatha, Rajagiriya. 7. A. Faaiz, Member, Election Commission, Elections Secretariat, Sarana Mawatha, Rajagiriya. 8. H.M.T.D. Herath, Secretary, Election Commission, Elections Secretariat, Sarana Mawatha, Rajagiriya. 9. Saman Sri Ratnayake, Commissioner General of Elections, Election Commission, Elections Secretariat, Sarana Mawatha, Rajagiriya. RESPONDENTS

3

Before: Vijith K. Malalgoda, PC, J Achala Wengappuli, J Arjuna Obeyesekere, J Counsel: Dr. Romesh De Silva, PC with Ronald Perera, PC, M. Maharoof, Chandimal Mendis and Niran Anketell for the Petitioner

M. A. Sumanthiran, PC with Viran Corea, PC, Ermiza Tegal and Divya Mascranghe for the 1st and 3rd Respondents Dr. Jayampathy Wickramaratne, PC with Pulasthi Hewamanne and Sampath Wijewardena for the 2nd Respondent Sureka Ahmed Jayasinghe, Senior State Counsel for the 4th – 9th Respondents Argued on: 12th October 2023, 23rd October 2023, 14th November 2023, 17th November 2023, 12th December 2023, 14th December 2023 and 23rd January 2024 Written Tendered on behalf of the Petitioner on 2nd February 2024 Submissions:

Tendered on behalf of the 1st and 3rd Respondents on 5th February 2024 Tendered on behalf of the 2nd Respondent on 5th February 2024 Tendered on behalf of the 4th – 9th Respondents on 2nd February 2024 Decided on: 9th August 2024 Obeyesekere, J

The Petitioner is a Member of Parliament having been nominated by the Samagi Jana

Balawegaya, a registered political party and the 1st Respondent to this application in terms

of Article 99A of the Constitution. The issue that arises for determination in this

application is whether the expulsion of the Petitioner from the 1st Respondent is valid.

4

This application was taken up for hearing together with SC (Expulsion) No. 2/2023. While

the factual matters in both applications were almost identical, the legal arguments

presented by the learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioners in each application were

different except for the common complaint that each of the Petitioners were not afforded

a fair hearing prior to their expulsion from the 1st Respondent.

The Petitioner

The Petitioner states that he holds a Business Degree from Deak University, Australia and

a Master’s Degree in Business Administration from the University of West Scotland. The

Petitioner had been elected to the Uva Provincial Council, first as a member in 2010 and

later as the Chief Minister in 2014, and as a Member of Parliament in 2010 and 2015, on

all occasions as a member of the United National Party, also a registered political party.

At various times between 2015 and 2020, the Petitioner had served as a Cabinet Minister

for Telecommunication, Digital Infrastructure, Foreign Employment and Sports.

The Petitioner states further that the 1st Respondent was formed in March 2020 and that

he is a founder member of the 1st Respondent as well as a member of its decision making

body known as the Working Committee. Pursuant to the Parliamentary Elections held in

August 2020, the Petitioner having been nominated by the 1st Respondent to Parliament

on its National List, was declared elected as a Member of Parliament. It is perhaps

important to state that the 1st Respondent is the single largest party in Opposition in

Parliament at the moment and that its leader, the 3rd Respondent is the Leader of the

Opposition in Parliament.

Political developments in May 2022

The Petitioner states that post Covid-19 and particularly from the early part of 2022, the

Country underwent a period of economic hardship hitherto unseen, with shortages in

fuel, gas and essential food items. The Petitioner claims that depletion of the foreign

currency reserves of the Country led to inflation reaching record numbers culminating

with street protests and civil unrest, and that the Country was heading towards a national

crisis. The Petitioner claims further that in this backdrop and in order to calm the waters,

5

the then Cabinet of Ministers resigned from office on 4th April 2022. The Petitioner states

however that the protests and civil unrest continued unabated and on 9th May 2022, the

then Prime Minister too resigned from office. As provided by Article 49(1) of the

Constitution, the Cabinet of Ministers stood dissolved with the said resignation.

The Petitioner states that the 3rd Respondent was thereafter invited to accept the post of

Prime Minister. This invitation and the situation prevailing in the Country at that time had

been discussed at the Working Committee meeting of the 1st Respondent held on 10th

May 2022. According to the minutes of the said meeting of the Working Committee [1R2]

which had been attended by the Petitioner, as borne out by the signature sheet of the list

of attendees at the meeting [1R3], the 3rd Respondent had informed the membership that

various groups had invited the 1st Respondent to form a Government and that the Chief

Buddhist Prelates had made a strong request for the 3rd Respondent to accept the post of

Prime Minister. After several members had expressed their views, a decision had been

taken that no member of the 1st Respondent shall accept office in a Government formed

by any person other than its leader the 3rd Respondent. The said decision has been

recorded in 1R2 in the following manner:

“wjidk jYfhka .re rdPs; fiakdr;ak ue;s;=ud jsiska fldkafoais j,g hg;aj w.%dud;H Oqrh Ndr.; hq;= nj;a" wm jsiska bosrsm;a lrkq ,nk fldkafoais j,g PkdOsm;sjrhd tlÛ fkdjqKfyd;a fyda fjk;a fya;=jla u; fjk;a w.%dud;Hjrhl= PkdOsm;sjrhd m;al<fyd;a fyda tjeks w.%dud;Hjrhl= hgf;a msysgqjk wdKavqjl iu.s Pk n,fjs.fha lsisoq uka;%sjrhl= fyda idudPslhl= lsisoq ;k;=rla Ndr fkdf.; hq;= njg fhdaPkd lrk ,o w;r tls fhdaPkdj iNdj jsiska talu;slj wkqu; lrk ,os'”

On 12th May 2022,the Member of Parliament elected from the United National Party was

appointed by the then President as the new Prime Minister. With the Working Committee

of the 1st Respondent having already decided on its stance with regard to its members

joining a Government of which the 1st Respondent was not a party, the 1st Respondent

made a formal announcement by way of a press statement on 16th May 2022 [1R1]

conveying the following decision taken by the Parliamentary group of the 1st Respondent

on that date:

6

“ta wkqj j;auka wdKavqj jsiska wdra:slh f.dvke.Su Wfoid lrkq ,nk" rgg ys;e;s hym;a

lghq;= fjkqfjka' tys ;k;=re ,nd fkdf.k" mdra,sfuska;= l%shdj,sh ;=<ska iu.s Pkn,fjs.fha

mqraK iyh ,nd oSug uka;%s lKavdhus reiajSfusoS talu;sl ;Skaoq lrkq ,enSh'”

Having expressed the view that the 1st Respondent would extend its support to restore

the economy but that it will not join the Government, the 1st Respondent went on to state

in 1R1 that it would withdraw its support in the event an attempt is made to entice any

Members of Parliament elected from the 1st Respondent to join the Government. Thus,

the position of the Working Committee of the 1st Respondent reached with the

participation of the Petitioner could not have been any clearer.

However, that did not deter the Petitioner, although a member of the 1st Respondent

which was not a part of the then Government in Office, from joining the Government and

being appointed the Cabinet Minister for Tourism and Lands on 20th May 2022. Pursuant

to the resignation from office of the then President on 14th July 2022, Parliament, acting

in terms of Article 40(1) of the Constitution, had elected the then Prime Minister as

President on 20th July 2022. A new Prime Minister had thereafter been appointed on 22nd

July 2022, and on the same date, the Petitioner had been appointed as Cabinet Minister

of Tourism and Lands, once again of a Government of which the 1st Respondent was not

a member. The Petitioner is currently functioning as the Cabinet Minister of Tourism,

Lands, Sports and Youth Affairs.

P2 and restrictions on members of the 1st Respondent

The Constitution of the 1st Respondent, produced by the Petitioner marked P2, contains

provisions that deal with the consequences that would flow where a member obtains

membership in other political parties while holding membership in the 1st Respondent,

and joining a Government of which the 1st Respondent is not a party. The relevant

provisions in P2 are set out below:

“3.3 idudPslfhl=g fjk;a foaYmd,k mlaIhl idudPsl;ajh oersh fkdyels jk w;r" tfia

fjk;a foaYmd,k mlaIhl idudPsl;ajh ,nd.;fyd;a iy$fyda orkafkakus" tkhskau tu idudPslhdf.a iu.s Pk n,fjs.h mlaIfha mlaI idudPsl;ajh wfydais fjs'

7

3'5 lsisoq idudPslfhl= lD;HdOsldrs uKav,fha mqraj wkque;shlska f;drj fjk;a

foaYmd,k mlaIhla fyda foaYmd,k ixjsOdkhla jsiska we;s lrkq ,nk mrsmd,khla ;+< ;k;+re Ndr .ekSula fkdl< hq;+h' 3'7 lsisoq idudPslfhl= lD;HdOsldrs uKav,fha mqraj wkque;shlska f;drj fjk;a foaYmd,k mlaIhl fyda fjk;a foaYmd,k mlaIhla jsiska md,kh lrkq ,nk wdKavqjlg fyda m<d;a iNdjlg fyda m<d;a md,k wdh;khlg fyda iyfhda.h oelajsu fyda iyfhda.h oelafjk m%ldY lsrSu fyda iyfhda.h oelafjk njg we.fjk m%ldY lsrsu fyda fkdl< hq;+h' 3'8 lsisoq idudPslfhl= lD;HdOsldrs uKav,fha mqraj wkque;shlska f;drj fjk;a foaYmd,k mlaIhl fyda fjk;a foaYmd,k mlaIhla jsiska msysgqjkq ,nk mdra,sfuska;+fjs fyda m<d;a iNdjl fyda m<d;a md,k wdh;khl fyda jsmlaIhlg iyfhda.h oelajsu fyda iyfhda.h oelafjk m%ldY lsrSu fyda iyfhda.h oelafjk njg we.fjk m%ldY lsrsu fyda fkdl,

hq;+h'”

Thus, it would appear that obtaining membership of another political party while being a

member of the 1st Respondent would result in the automatic cancellation of membership

in the 1st Respondent. Furthermore, no member of the 1st Respondent shall accept office,

join or assist a Government of which the 1st Respondent is not a member without the

prior approval of the Working Committee of the 1st Respondent. It is a violation of the

latter that (a) led to the suspension of the membership of the Petitioner in the 1st

Respondent in the first instance, (b) formed the basis of the charge sheet that was issued

to the Petitioner, and (c) culminated in the expulsion of the Petitioner from the 1st

Respondent.

Suspension of the membership of the Petitioner and calling for explanation

Paragraph 3.13 of P2 provides as follows:

“3'13 mlaIfha hus idudPslfhl= jskh lvlsrsula isoqlr we;s njg fmks hk wjia:djloso"

mlaIfha Wmrsu hym; iy wdrlaIdj ioyd jydu tu idudPslhdg tfrysj mshjr .; hq;+ njg mlaI kdhlhdg fmks hk wjia:djlos o" tu idudPslhdf.a mlaI idudPsl;ajh jydu w;aysgqjd ta iusnkaOfhka mlaI idudPslhdf.ka ksoyig lreKq jsuiSug mlaI kdhlhdg n,h we;s w;r" tu ;SrKh o" tu idudPslhd jsiska ksoyig lreKq olajd we;akus" tls lreKq oelajsu o" lD;HdOsldrs uKav, reiajsug bosrsm;a l< hq;+ w;r lD;HdOsldrs uKav,h jsiska tu mlaI idudPslhd iusnkaOfhka .; hq;+ bosrs mshjr .;

hq;+h'”

8

The above provision consists of two tiers of disciplinary control. The first is that the leader

of the 1st Respondent has been empowered to suspend on his own initiative the

membership of any member who has breached party discipline and to call for an

explanation from such member or request such member to show cause. The leader of the

1st Respondent is thereafter required to place such material before the Working

Committee of the 1st Respondent, thus bringing the first tier to an end. The second tier

commences upon such material being placed before the Working Committee and obliges

the Working Committee to decide on the future course of action with regard to such

member.

With it being clear that the Petitioner had acted contrary to Paragraphs 3.5, 3.7 and 3.8

of P2, the 3rd Respondent, acting in terms of the powers vested in him in terms of the

aforementioned Paragraph 3.13 of P2, suspended with immediate effect the membership

of the Petitioner in the 1st Respondent by his letter dated 20th May 2024 [P4(a)]. The

Petitioner has not challenged, either in this application or before any other forum, the

above suspension of his membership.

P4(a) reads as follows:

“iu.s Pk n,fjs.h mlaI idudPsl;ajh w;aysgq jSu iu.s Pk n,fjs.h mlaIh jsiska msysgqjkq fkd,nk wdKavqjl ;k;+re Ndr fkd.; hq;+ njg mlaIh jsiska ;SrKh lr ;snshos' rks,a jsl%uisxy w.%dud;Hjrhd jYfhka msysgqjk ,o wdKavqfjs lenskgs wud;H Oqrhla Tn jsiska mlaIfha lD;HdOsldrs uKav,fha mqraj wkque;shlska f;drj Ndrf.k we;' ta wkqj Tn jsiska mlaIfha jskh lv lsrSula isoqlr we;s nj fmks hk fyhska o" mlaIfha Wmrsu hym; iy wdrlaIdj ioyd Tng tfrysj jydu mshjr .; hq;+ nj ud yg fmks hk fyhska o" mlaI jHjia:dj 3'13 j.ka;sh u.ska ud fj; mejrs we;s n,;, m%ldrj Tnf.a mlaI

idudPsl;ajh jydu w;aysgqjSu'” By the same letter P4(a), the 3rd Respondent had requested the Petitioner to show cause,

thus affording the Petitioner an opportunity of placing his side of the story and setting in

motion the process of affording the Petitioner a fair hearing prior to any decision relating

to his membership in the 1st Respondent being taken by the Working Committee. The

relevant paragraph in P4(a) reads as follows:

9

“iu.s Pk n,fjs.h jsiska msysgqjkq fkd,nk wdKavqjl ;k;=re Ndr fkd.; hq;= njg mlaIh jsiska ;srKh f.k ;snshos tu ;SrKhg tfrysj huska Tn jsiska rks,a jsl%uisxy uy;d w.%dud;Hjrhd f,i msysgqjkq ,enq wdKavqfjs lenskgs wud;H ;k;=rla ndr .ekSfuka mlaI jHjia:dfjs 3'5 iy$fyda 3'7 iy$fyda 3'11 j.ka;s W,a,x.kh lsrSfuka mlaIfha jskh lvlsrSu iusnkaOfhka Tng ksoyig lreKq oelajSug we;akus" tu lreKq fuu ,smsh ,o osk isg osk y;l ld,hla ;=<oS ud fj; ,sLs;j ,enSug i,iajk fuka mlaI jHjia:dfjs 3'13

j.ka;sh hgf;a ud fj; mejrS we;s n,;, m%ldrj fuhska Tng oekqus fous'”

While stating that he does not agree with the contents of P4(a), the Petitioner, by his

letter dated 26th May 2022 [1R8] sought an extension of 30 days to respond to P4(a). The

Petitioner claims that he submitted his explanation by letter dated 22nd June 2022 [P5(b)]

wherein he explained the circumstances that led him to join the Government on 20th May

2022. While the receipt of P5(b) has been denied by the 1st Respondent, I must observe

that P5(b) does not bear the signature of the Petitioner nor has the Petitioner submitted

any proof to establish that P5(b) was in fact sent to either of the three Respondents.

Appointment of a Disciplinary Committee

Paragraph 3.13 of P2 requires the 3rd Respondent to place his decision to suspend, as well

as the response of the Petitioner, if any, before the Working Committee of the 1st

Respondent to enable the Working Committee to decide on the future course of action.

By letter dated 15th November 2022 [1R9], the 2nd Respondent informed the Petitioner as

follows:

“Tn jsiska iu.s Pk n,fjs.h mlaIfha jskh nrm;, f,i lvlsrSula isoqlr we;s njgo iy$fyda m%;sm;a;s W,a,x>Kh lr we;s njgo iy$fyda nrm;, jskh jsfrdaOs l%shdjla isoqfldg we;s njgo iy$fyda lD;HdOsldrs uKav,h iEysug m;aj we;s nejska Tng jsreoaOj jskh mrlaIKhla wdrusN lsrSug lD;HdOsldrs uKav,h ;SrKh fldg we;' ta wkqj Tng jsreosOj jskh mrslaIKhla isoqlr jskh mrslaIK jdra;djla bosrsm;a lrk f,ig mlaI jHjia:dfjs m%;smdok m%ldrj PkdOsm;s kS;s{ k,ska osidkdhl uy;d iNdm;s jYfhkao" PkdOsm;s kS;s{ oskd,a ms,smaia iy kS;s{ i|u,a rdPmlaI hk uy;ajreka idudPslhska o jk mrsos jskh uKav,hla lD;HdOsldrs uKav,h jsiska m;a lr we;' ta wkqj Tng jsreoaOj meje;afjk tls jskh mrslaIKh fuu jskh uKav,h jsiska mj;ajkq we;'” The Petitioner did not reply to 1R9.

10

Disciplinary proceedings

The Chairman of the Disciplinary Committee had accordingly informed the Petitioner by

letter dated 12th January 2023 [1R10a] that the disciplinary inquiry has been scheduled

for 24th January 2023 at the head office of the 1st Respondent, that the Petitioner is

entitled to be represented by an Attorney-at-Law and that his presence is mandatory. A

copy of the charge sheet signed by the Chairman of the Disciplinary Committee had been

annexed to 1R10a.

Even though 1R10a is said to have been served on the Petitioner in Parliament, the

Petitioner did not respond to 1R10a nor did he present himself before the Disciplinary

Committee on 24th January 2023. The Disciplinary Committee did not proceed with the

inquiry, although it was within their power to do so since 1R10a had been personally

delivered to the Petitioner. By letter dated 5th February 2023 [P4(b)], the Chairman of the

Disciplinary Committee had once again requested the presence of the Petitioner at a

hearing scheduled for 24th February 2023. It was also conveyed by P4(b) that the presence

of the Petitioner is mandatory and that any failure will result in the inquiry proceeding ex-

parte.

The Petitioner responded to P4(b) by letter dated 23rd February 2023 [P5(a)] in which he

stated that he is not in receipt of 1R10a and the charge sheet annexed thereto, and that

in any event, the inquiry be postponed as he has a previously scheduled meeting on that

date. The Disciplinary Committee had acceded to the said request of the Petitioner and

by letter dated 15th March 2023 [P4(c)] re-submitted the charge sheet [P4(d)] and

informed the Petitioner that, (a) the Committee has agreed to re-schedule the disciplinary

inquiry for either 4th April 2023 or 26th April 2023, and (b) the Petitioner may choose one

of the said two dates convenient to him and inform his decision to the Disciplinary

Committee by 27th March 2023. The Petitioner was informed further that if he fails to

respond, the inquiry would commence on 4th April 2023 and in the event he is not present

on that date, the inquiry would proceed in his absence.

The Petitioner claims that he responded to P4(c) by letter dated 27th March 2023 [P5(c)]

sent through an Attorney-at-Law. P5(c) is not on a letter head of an Attorney-at-Law nor

11

does it contain the name or the signature of the sender. P5(c) sought the withdrawal of

P4(c) on the basis that the Disciplinary Committee has no legal authority to conduct an

inquiry, even though P5(c) did not elaborate any further. Thus, even if one accepts that

P5(c) was sent by or on behalf of the Petitioner, it is clear that having submitted himself

to the jurisdiction of the Disciplinary Committee by P5(a), the Petitioner had a change of

mind and was not going to participate at the proceedings before the Disciplinary

Committee.

The events of 4th April 2023

Two important events took place on 4th April 2023.

The first important event that took place on 4th April 2023 is the filing of action by the

Petitioner in the District Court of Nugegoda [Case No. SPL/625/2023] against the General

Secretary of the 1st Respondent, the Chairman of the Disciplinary Committee and the

leader of the 1st Respondent, naming them as the 1st, 2nd and 3rd defendants, respectively.

Of the said defendants, the 1st and 3rd defendants are before this Court as the 2nd and 3rd

Respondents. A copy of the plaint has been tendered marked ‘P8’.

The Petitioner had sought a declaration that the charge sheet P4(d) is null and void and

inter alia a permanent injunction, interim injunction and an enjoining order preventing

the three defendants from taking any disciplinary action against the Petitioner based on

the charge sheet and P4(c). Although the Petitioner claims that he obtained an enjoining

order on the same date, the Petitioner has not tendered a copy of the order delivered by

the District Court. However, it is admitted that the Instructing Attorney-at-Law of the

Petitioner had not taken steps to have the said enjoining order served on the Disciplinary

Committee or to apprise the Disciplinary Committee of such order. Thus, when the

Disciplinary Committee commenced its sittings at 4pm on 4th April 2023, there was no

impediment to it proceeding with the inquiry against the Petitioner.

This brings me to the second important event that took place on 4th April 2023, that being,

notwithstanding P5(c), to the fact that proceedings of the Disciplinary Committee

commenced as scheduled at 4pm on 4th April 2023. The proceedings of that date have

12

been marked as ‘1R20’. Having recorded the fact that the Petitioner has not indicated

which of the two days proposed in P4(c) are convenient to him and that the Petitioner is

absent, the Disciplinary Committee had decided to proceed with the inquiry in the

absence of the Petitioner. The Prosecuting Officer had led the evidence of the 2nd

Respondent and produced some of the above documents to establish that the Petitioner

had violated the provisions of P2 by accepting a ministerial portfolio in a Government of

which the 1st Respondent was not a member.

The decision of the Disciplinary Committee has been tendered with the Statement of

Objections marked ‘1R21’. I have examined 1R21 and it is clear that the Disciplinary

Committee has considered the evidence, both oral and documentary, and thereafter

found the Petitioner guilty of all charges for the reasons recorded therein. I must state

that the Petitioner does not impugn the findings of the Disciplinary Committee, and for

good reason.

Decision of the Working Committee and the expulsion of the Petitioner

The 3rd Respondent states that acting in terms of the powers vested in him by paragraph

13.3(xx) of P2, he summoned a meeting of the Working Committee for 18th July 2023. An

extract of the minutes of the said meeting was tendered with the Statement of Objections

of the 1st – 3rd Respondents [1R26], and the minutes themselves [X1] together with the

signature sheet of the attendees [X2] were tendered thereafter supported by an affidavit

of the 3rd Respondent. It is clear from the said minutes that the Chairman of the

Disciplinary Committee had presented 1R21 to the 3rd Respondent and that in the

absence of the 2nd Respondent, a summary of the report had been presented to the

Working Committee by the Deputy General Secretary of the 1st Respondent. Having

considered the said findings, the members of the Working Committee had unanimously

decided to expel the Petitioner from the 1st Respondent.

This decision of the Working Committee has been communicated to the Petitioner by

letter dated 18th July 2023 signed by the 3rd Respondent [P9].

13

Article 99(13)(a) of the Constitution and its proviso

The consequences that follow an expulsion of a Member of Parliament from the

membership of the political party or independent group from which he was elected have

been set out in Article 99(13)(a) of the Constitution.

Article 99(13)(a) reads as follows:

“Where a Member of Parliament ceases, by resignation, expulsion or otherwise, to

be a member of a recognized political party or independent group on whose

nomination paper (hereinafter referred to as the “relevant nomination paper”) his

name appeared at the time of his becoming such Member of Parliament, his seat

shall become vacant upon the expiration of a period of one month from the date of

his ceasing to be such member:

Provided that in the case of the expulsion of a Member of Parliament his seat shall

not become vacant if prior to the expiration of the said period of one month he

applies to the Supreme Court by petition in writing, and the Supreme Court upon

such application determines that such expulsion was invalid. Such petition shall be

inquired into by three Judges of the Supreme Court who shall make their

determination within two months of the filing of such petition. Where the Supreme

Court determines that the expulsion was valid the vacancy shall occur from the date

of such determination.” [emphasis added]

The Petitioner, aggrieved by P9, invoked the above jurisdiction of this Court by his petition

filed on 15th August 2023. The principal relief sought is a declaration that the decision to

expel the Petitioner as communicated by P9 is invalid.

The nature of the jurisdiction of this Court

Prior to considering the two principal arguments presented by Dr. Romesh De Silva, the

learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioner, there are two matters that I must briefly

discuss in order to place in context the manner in which I must consider the several issues

that have been raised in this application.

14

The first is the nature of the jurisdiction of this Court when an application is made under

Article 99(13)(a) of the Constitution. In Gamini Dissanayake v M. C. M. Kaleel and Others

[(1993) 2 Sri LR 135; at page 198], Mark Fernando, J in the minority judgment stated as

follows:

“Our jurisdiction under Article 99(13)(a) is not a form of judicial review, or even of

appeal, but rather an original jurisdiction analogous to an action for a declaration,

though it is clearly not a re-hearing. Are we concerned only with the decision-

making process, or must we also look at the decision itself? Article 99(13)(a) requires

us to decide whether the expulsion was valid or invalid, some consideration of the

merits is obviously required….” [emphasis added]

In the majority judgment delivered by this Court in Tilak Karunaratne v Mrs. Sirimavo

Bandaranaike and Others [(1993) 2 Sri LR 90; at pages 101-102], Dheeraratne J stated

that:

“The nature of the jurisdiction conferred on the Supreme Court in terms of the proviso

to Article 99(13)(a) is indeed unique in character; it calls for a determination that

expulsion of a Member of Parliament from a recognized political party on whose

nomination paper his name appeared at the time of his becoming such Member of

Parliament, was valid or invalid. If the expulsion is determined to be valid, the seat

of the Member of Parliament becomes vacant. It is this seriousness of the

consequence of expulsion which has prompted the framers of the Constitution to

invest that unique original jurisdiction in the highest court of the Island, so that a

Member of Parliament may be amply shielded from being expelled from his own

party unlawfully and/or capriciously. It is not disputed that this courts jurisdiction

includes, an investigation into the requisite competence of the expelling authority;

an investigation as to whether the expelling authority followed the procedure, if any,

which was mandatory in nature; an investigation as to whether there was breach of

principles of natural justice in the decision making process; and an investigation as

to whether in the event of grounds of expulsion being specified by way of charges at

15

a domestic inquiry, the member was expelled on some other grounds which were not

so specified ...” [emphasis added]

Having thereafter considered the submission of Mr. H.L. De Silva, PC appearing for the

respondents in that application that even though Court could interfere if the decision of

the expelling authority was unreasonable in the 'Wednesbury sense', but since the

decision to expel the petitioner was a political decision judges should not enter the

political thicket, Dheeraratne, J stated that “Our jurisdiction appears to be wider; it is an

original jurisdiction on which no limitations have been placed by Article 99(13)(a)” and

referred to the above passage of Mark Fernando, J in Dissanayake in support of his

position. I must state that the views expressed by Mark Fernando, J have been referred

to in almost every judgment delivered by this Court where the applicability of the proviso

to Article 99(13)(a) has been considered.

In Zainul Abdeen Nazeer Ahamed v The Sri Lanka Muslim Congress and Others [SC

Expulsion No. 01/2022; SC minutes of 6th October 2023] Padman Surasena, J considered

inter alia the above decisions and the decisions in Ameer Ali and Others v Sri Lanka

Muslim Congress and Others [(2006) 1 Sri LR 189], Sarath Amunugama and Others v Karu

Jayasuriya Chairman UNP and Others [(2000) 1 Sri LR 172] and Perumpulli Hewage

Piyasena v Illankai Thamil Arsukachchi and Others [(2012) 1 Sri LR 215] and stated as

follows:

“Thus, this court in all the previous cases has consistently taken and maintained the

position that the nature of the jurisdiction this Court conferred on it by Article

99(13)(a) of the Constitution: is not a form of judicial review; is not even in the form

of an appeal; is rather an original jurisdiction analogous to an action for a

declaration; is not a re-hearing; is indeed unique in character and original in nature

vested in the highest Court of the island; is a very wide jurisdiction; is an original

jurisdiction on which no limitations have been placed by Article 99(13)(a); is sui

generis; is original and exclusive; is a jurisdiction to determine the validity or

otherwise of an expulsion in terms of the proviso to Article 99(13)(a) of the

Constitution; is neither injunctive nor discretionary; is indeed unique in character.

I agree with the above views consistently taken by this Court.” [emphasis added]

16

Standard of review

The second matter that I wish to address at the outset is the standard of review. In

Rambukwella v United National Party and Others [(2007) 2 Sri LR 329; at page 341], this

Court was confronted with the submission of the respondent that a political party is a

private organisation consisting of its members who come together on the basis of a

constitution of such Party and hence the expulsion of a member should be viewed from

the same perspective as that of a member from a private club without introducing the

high standard of review that apply in Public Law, and the opposing submission that in

view of the serious impact that an expulsion has on the rights of the member the standard

of review must be the same as under Public Law.

Chief Justice Sarath Silva, having considered the above submissions in the light of Section

7 of the Parliamentary Elections Act No.1 of 1981, the law relating to expulsion of a

Member of Parliament from his or her membership of the political party on whose ticket

such member was elected as it stood prior to the present Constitution of 1978 and the

evolution of Article 99, held as follows:

“In view of the change of the Electrical System effected by the Fourteenth

Amendment the review of the validity of a decision of expulsion has to be, in my

view, now considered not only from the perspective of a vacation of the seat of the

Member in Parliament but also from the perspective of the impact on the Electorate

from which he was declared on the basis of preferential votes cast in his favour. As

a result of the expulsion by the Party the voters preferred candidate is removed

from his seat in Parliament and replaced by a candidate who at the original

election failed to obtain adequate preferential votes to gain election to

Parliament. In short the winning candidate is replaced by a candidate who has lost,

as a result of the expulsion. Thus in consequence of the expulsion not only the

member loses his seat in Parliament but also there is a subversion of

the preference indicated by the electors in exercising their franchise. In view of

these far reaching consequences I am inclined to agree with the submission of Mr.

Wijesinghe, that the standard of review of a decision of expulsion should be

akin to that applicable to the review of the action of an authority empowered to

17

decide on the rights of persons in Public Law. Generally such review comes with the

rubric of Administrative Law.” [emphasis added]

I must state that the cumulative effect of the aforementioned views expressed by this

Court over the last thirty plus years, with which I am in agreement, is that the jurisdiction

conferred on this Court by the proviso to Article 99(13)(a) is indeed extremely wide and

that the level of scrutiny is equally high. Having said so, I must lay down three matters

that I wish to be guided by, in considering the several matters raised by the parties in this

application.

Jurisdiction is not discretionary

The first is that the power conferred by the proviso to Article 99(13)(a) is not discretionary

in nature and hence, I shall refrain from venturing into a consideration of any arguments

that may be taken when this Court is exercising a discretionary jurisdiction. As in this

application, an allegation was raised in Perumpulli Hewage Piyasena v Ilankai Tamil

Arasu Kadchi [supra] that the Petitioner has suppressed or misrepresented material facts.

Saleem Marsoof, PC, J having considered that issue, held as follows:

“It is, however, unnecessary to probe deep into the submissions and counter

submissions of learned Counsel on these contentious matters, as in my considered

opinion, the jurisdiction of this Court to determine the validity or otherwise of an

expulsion in terms of the proviso to Article 99(13)(a) of the Constitution is neither

injunctive nor discretionary, and does not necessitate any inquiry into the conduct of

the person invoking the said jurisdiction. Indeed, the mechanism provided by the said

article to an expelled Member of Parliament to effectively have the date of vacation

of his seat postponed for a further period not exceeding two months pending the

determination by this Court of its validity or invalidity, does not necessarily confer on

it a discretionary character as contended by the learned President's Counsel for the

3rd Respondent, as that is an automatic stay of vacation of seat mandated by the

Constitution, and is not dependent on the exercise of any discretion by Court. This

stay of vacation of seat is not granted by Court, but is conferred by the Constitution

itself.

18

The jurisdiction of this Court Conferred by Article 99(13)(a) of the Constitution is sui

generis, original and exclusive, and does not confer any discretion to this Court to

dismiss in limine an application filed there under merely on the ground of

suppression or misrepresentation of material facts, as in cases involving injunctive

relief or applications for prerogative writs.” [page 222]

“I am therefore of the opinion that even in a case where there is cogent evidence to

establish that an expelled Member of Parliament did not come to Court with clean

hands, if this Court finds that the purported expulsion is invalid, "his seat shall not

become vacant" and he will continue to hold office, and this Court does not have the

discretion to make a contrary determination on the sole ground of suppression

misrepresentation of material facts, or dismiss the application in limine. I am of the

opinion that it is therefore not necessary to make any findings in regard to the

question whether the Petitioner has suppressed or misrepresented any material facts

in his petition or in the course of the hearing, and accordingly, the preliminary

objection raised by the 3rd Respondent has to be overruled.” [pages 223-224]

Similarly, I am not inclined to uphold the submission of the learned President’s Counsel

for the 1st and 2nd Respondents and the learned Counsel for the 3rd Respondent that the

members of the Working Committee should have been named as respondents to this

application. While serving as a Judge of the Court of Appeal, I have considered this

identical submission in Porakara Mudiyanselage Aruna Samantha Kumara v T.A.C.N.

Thalangama and Others [CA (Writ) Application No. 238/2020; CA minutes of 21st May

2021] where an expulsion of a member of a local authority by the political party to which

such member belonged was challenged in a writ application filed in terms of Article 140

of the Constitution. With the jurisdiction vested in the Court of Appeal being discretionary

and with the petitioners in that case having named as respondents some of the members

of the working committee of the respondent political party and having sought permission

to add the other members though a ruling had not been made, I exercised my discretion

in favour of the petitioners and over ruled such objection inter alia for the following

reasons:

19

(a) the failure to name all members of the Working Committee as Respondents has not

prejudiced those who have been named/not named as Respondents; and

(b) the reasons for the expulsion can still be placed before this Court by the members

who have been added as Respondents.

I would go a step further in this application by stating that I am exercising a

Constitutionally vested jurisdiction which involves no discretion and that given what is

being challenged is the decision of a political party to expel from its membership a

Member of Parliament, the presence before this Court of the political party itself together

with its General Secretary and its Leader would suffice in the Respondents seeking to

justify the grounds for the expulsion.

Merits of the decision The second matter that I shall be guided by is that although the merits of the decision to

expel a member can be examined and has in fact been examined in several previous

applications and can be examined in future applications as well, given the width and

breadth of the jurisdiction of this Court, I must exercise caution in venturing into the arena

of considering the merits of the decision that led to an expulsion of a Member of

Parliament, especially in an application such as this where the violation is apparent and

arises as a matter of policy on the part of the 1st Respondent.

Mr. M. A. Sumanthiran, the learned President’s Counsel for the 1st and 3rd Respondents

submitted that what has now happened is a tragi-comedy in that the Petitioner, having

been elected to Parliament on the nomination list of the 1st Respondent, violates the

Constitution of the 1st Respondent, crosses the aisle of Parliament, sits on the

Government benches having accepted ministerial office, votes with the Government and

is now challenging his expulsion from the Opposition ranks. He submitted further that the

People do not elect a Member of Parliament intending them to cross the aisle from side

to side to satisfy their personal whims and fancies and destroying the very fabric of an

electoral system, and for that reason, party discipline is extremely important for the

effective functioning of a political party and that primacy must be given to the political

party over an elected member.

20

Kulatunga, J in Jayatillake and Another v Kaleel and Others [(1994) 1 Sri LR 319; at page

400] held that, “In handling a crisis of the magnitude faced by the respondents and in

dealing with men of the petitioners' caliber, a political party must be allowed a discretion

to decide what sanctions are appropriate for violations of Party discipline; and if the

Party decides, bona fide, to expel any member guilty of repudiating the Party, as the

petitioners have done, this Court will not in the exercise of its constitutional jurisdiction

impose such member on the Party. If that is done, Parliamentary Government based on

the Political Party System will become unworkable.” [emphasis added]

In Tilak Karunaratne v Mrs. Sirimavo Bandaranaike and Others [supra; at page 111]

Dheeraratne, J stated further that:

“A political party is a voluntary association of individuals who have come together

with the avowed object of securing political power on agreed policies and a

leadership. Cohesion is a sine qua non of success and stability whether a political

party is in power or in the opposition. To foster party cohesion discipline among its

members becomes absolutely necessary. Party disintegration has to be arrested by

firm disciplinary measures that include expulsion which Article 99(13)(a) of our

Constitution itself recognizes. The members of a party are bound together by a

contract which is usually the party constitution, from which arises contractual

obligations of the membership. These obligations are either express or implied.”

[emphasis added]

A similar view has been expressed in Dissanayake [supra; at page 138], where Kulatunga,

J stated that, “Our Constitution confers primacy to the political party as against the

individual M.P. The party carries the mandate of the electors and in turn gives a

mandate to the M.P. The exercise of the rights of the petitioners qua MP's is subordinate

to the requirements of party discipline and their freedom to agitate matters in public is

constrained by reason of their obligations to the party which they have freely undertaken

to honour.” Ms. Sureka Ahmed Jayasinghe, the learned Senior State Counsel appearing

for the 4th – 9th Respondents submitted that this amorphous ‘mandate of the people’

argument should not be used to undermine party discipline which, as made evident by

such offices as party whips, is integral to our democratic form of government.

21

In this background, I am of the view that much deference as possible must be shown to

the decision of the political party when it says that one of its members have violated its

constitution and that it can no longer have that person as a member of that party. As

submitted by Mr. Hejaaz Hizbullah, the learned Counsel for the 3rd Respondent in SC

(Expulsion) No. 2/2023, to demand that SJB continue to keep the Petitioner as a member

of the party is like forcing a cricket team to share the dressing room with a player from

the other side. Unless in exceptional circumstances such as where malice or bias on the

part of the decision maker is alleged and such allegations are supported by cogent

evidence or where the expulsion is unlawful or capricious or the reasons given for the

expulsion are flimsy, farfetched or imaginary, I am of the view that the merits of the

decision that culminated in an expulsion is a matter that is best left within the domain of

the relevant political party. As Kulatunga, J stated in Jayatilake and Others v Kaleel [supra;

at page 234], “a political party must be allowed a discretion to decide what sanctions are

appropriate for violations of Party discipline.”

I must perhaps state that in this application, the necessity for this Court to examine the

merits does not arise for two reasons. The first is that the reason for the expulsion is very

clear and needs no further consideration. Party discipline is paramount and as submitted

by the learned Senior State Counsel, there has been an unambiguous violation of an

unambiguous rule by the Petitioner. The Petitioner was a founder member of the 1st

Respondent and ought to have been fully conversant with the provisions of its

constitution. Having been present at the Working Committee meeting on 10th May 2022

he was privy to the decision taken at such meeting that no member shall accept any post

in a Government of which the 1st Respondent is not a party. Notwithstanding, he joins

such a Government 12 days later. The second reason is that the Petitioner himself has not

sought to impugn the decision on its merits at any stage of the process that commenced

on 20th May 2022, except perhaps the explanation said to have been offered by P5(b).

Compliance with procedure The third matter that I shall be guided by is that I must be satisfied that there has been

substantial compliance with the procedure laid down in the constitution of the 1st

Respondent, for the following reasons:

22

(a) The relationship between the Petitioner and the 1st Respondent is contractual and

the Petitioner is entitled to demand that the contractual provisions be followed and

adhered to;

(b) The standard of review is akin to that of an application where the principles of Public

Law would apply;

(c) The consequence that follow an expulsion have an impact not only on the Petitioner

but also on those who voted for him.

In Dissanayake [supra; page 234], Kulatunga, J observed that, “The right of a Member of

Parliament to relief under Article 99(13)(a) is a legal right and forms part of his

constitutional rights as a Member of Parliament.” A similar view was expressed in Safiul

Muthunabeen Mohamed Muszhaaraff v S. Suairdeen and Others [SC Expulsion No.

02/2022; SC minutes of 29th February, 2024] where Priyantha Jayawardena, PC, J held

that:

“Members of the Parliament exercise the sovereignty of the People. Further, they

represent the voters/people in the country in Parliament. However, if a Member of

Parliament is expelled from the party, he will lose his seat in Parliament. Hence it is

imperative to hold a proper disciplinary inquiry before a decision is taken to expel a

member from a political party. Furthermore, it is necessary to give a fair hearing to

the member at the disciplinary inquiry.”

First past the post system

In order to place in context the first principal argument raised by the learned President’s

Counsel for the Petitioner, it is necessary to understand the evolution of the process by

which persons were elected to Parliament in Sri Lanka. The Westminster model of

Government, recommended by the Soulbury Commission in 1944 and adopted in the

Ceylon (Constitution) Order in Council of 1946, provided that the legislature was to be

bicameral consisting of the House of Representatives and the Senate. The House of

Representatives consisted of 101 Members, 95 elected by the People and 6 appointed,

23

and the Senate consisted of 30 Members, of whom 15 were elected by the House of

Representatives and 15 nominated by the Governor General. While the Senate came to

be perceived as archaic and was abolished in 1971, there was a gradual increase over the

years in the number of Members of Parliament. The framework remained the same under

the 1972 Constitution, and by 1977, the number of Members of Parliament had reached

168 representing 160 electorates or constituencies.

Until the Parliamentary Election held in July 1977, any person desirous of being elected

to Parliament could contest a particular electorate or constituency either as a nominee of

a political party or as an independent candidate, with the name and symbol of the

candidate clearly specified on the ballot paper. The voter would essentially vote for the

individual concerned, although, as the results of the Parliamentary Elections held in 1970

and 1977 demonstrate, a particular party was preferred irrespective of the candidate put

forward by such party resulting in such party obtaining a vast majority of the seats. Under

this system, the person who secured the highest number of votes would be the winner

and for this reason, this system was commonly referred to as the ‘first past the post

system’.

The learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioner pointed out that under the first past

the post system which is similar to the system that prevailed in England, once elected, it

was open to any Member of Parliament to cross the floor and sit on the opposition

benches or government benches, as the case may be, without such member losing his

Parliamentary seat and that even though such Member may subsequently be sacked by

the political party from which he or she may have been elected, such action will not

disentitle such Member from continuing to be a Member of Parliament. The position

remains the same in England to date, with Members allowed to change their party

affiliation at any time. This is often referred to as "crossing the floor", because the

Member of Parliament will usually change from sitting on the government benches to the

opposition benches or vice versa. In fact, two private members’ bills introduced in 2011

and 2020 in the British Parliament to force a by-election if a Member of Parliament

changed political parties did not even make it to the second reading.

24

Towards proportional representation

The 1978 Constitution saw a radical departure from the above first past the post system.

In their Report, under the heading of ‘Proportional Representation’, the Select Committee

of the National State Assembly appointed to consider the revision of the Constitution has

stated as follows [page 141 at page 143]:

“The present system of Parliamentary elections has been the subject of considerable

criticism in that representation in the Legislature is not fairly representative of

political opinion in the electorates. Thus in 1970 the Sri Lanka Freedom Party with

36.9% of the total vote was able to secure 60.3% of the total number of seats in the

Legislature, while the United National Party with 37.9% of the total vote was only

able to secure 11.3% of the total number of seats. The converse occurred in 1977,

when the United National Party with 50.9% of the total vote secured 83.3% of the

seats, whereas the Sri Lanka Freedom Party with 29.7% of the total vote secured only

4.8% of the seats. Apart from its unfairness, this situation is not conducive to political

stability.

The deficiencies of this system have been recognized in many countries, particularly

in Europe, and varying systems of proportional representation have been adopted in

order to achieve more exact representation of the major political parties in the

Legislature.

The Draft Constitution marks a major change in the system of Parliamentary

elections in this country by adopting a system of proportional representation, the

details of which are to be found in Articles 135 to 139.

Special mention ought however to be made of the following features:

(a) A Delimitation Commission will divide the country into several electoral

districts. [Article 136] These electoral districts will remain unchanged

thereafter, avoiding the inconvenience and complexities of periodical changes

in electoral boundaries. Further, electoral districts shall be the administrative

25

districts (or combinations of administrative districts), thereby facilitating

proper planning, administration and development;

(b) …

(c) The total number of seats has been frozen at 196, consisting of 36 seats (each

of the 9 provinces being entitled to four seats independent of population) and

160 seats, which will be divided among the several electoral districts according

to the number of registered electors in each electoral district. As population

increases, the qualifying number of electors per seat will automatically

increase, for this qualifying number is an arithmetical ratio (namely, the total

number of registered electors divided by 160) and is not dependent upon the

decision of any Delimitation Commission or other person or body. Further, since

the system attempts to obtain fairer representation of the political opinions of

the voters, the entitlement of seats is based on the number of registered

electors in each electoral district and not upon the number of inhabitants or

even citizens. This system will automatically provide for changes in

representation necessitated by increases or shifts of population;

(d) Voting will be for recognised political parties and groups of independent

candidates (who have submitted lists of candidates) and not for individuals.

This will have the added advantage of tending to reduce the intensity of the

rivalries between candidates of different political parties. In the case of the

death or resignation of a member, the vacancy will be filled, not by means of a

by-election, but from among the other candidates on the list of the party or

group to which such member belonged; …” [emphasis added]

Thus, what was being proposed was for the Country to be divided into constituencies

based on districts with each district being a single constituency and for a group of

candidates to be presented for the entire district as opposed to having 160 constituencies

contested by individual members. More significantly, the vote was to be cast to a political

party as opposed to an individual, and the number of the Members of Parliament that

were to be elected from each political party contesting a particular District was to be

26

determined on the number of votes that each party had obtained, thus eliminating a

landslide victory that would normally have followed an election held on the first past the

post system where the winner takes all.

Increase in the number of Members

Article 61(1) of the Draft Constitution [Annexure II to the aforementioned Report]

provided that, “There shall be a Parliament which shall consist of the Members elected by

the electors of the several electoral districts constituted in accordance with the provisions

of the Constitution”. Although the number of Members had not been specified, once

enacted, Article 62(1) of the 1978 Constitution provided that, “There shall be a Parliament

which shall consist of 196 members elected by the electors of the several electoral districts

constituted in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution”.

The above recommendations of the Select Committee found themselves into Chapter XIV

of the 1978 Constitution titled, ‘The Franchise and Elections’ as Article 98, of which the

following paragraphs are relevant and hence are re-produced below:

“(1) The several electoral districts shall together be entitled to return one hundred

and ninety six members.

(2) The apportionment of the number of members that each electoral district shall

be entitled to return shall, in the case of thirty-six members, be determined in

accordance with the provisions of paragraph (4) of Article 96.

(3) The apportionment of the number of members that each electoral district shall

be entitled to return out of the balance number of one hundred and sixty

members shall be determined in accordance with the succeeding provisions of

this Article.”

Thus, 160 of the 196 members were to be elected on district basis, with Article 99(1)

specifying that, “At any election of Members of Parliament, the total number of members

which an electoral district is entitled to return shall be the number specified by the

27

Commissioner of Elections in the Order published in accordance with the provisions of

paragraph (8) of Article 98”.

In respect of the balance 36 members, Article 96(4) provided that, “The electoral districts

of each Province shall together be entitled to return four members (independently of the

number of members which they are entitled to return by reference to the number of

electors whose names appear in the registers of electors of such electoral districts), and

the Delimitation Commission shall apportion such entitlement equitably among such

electoral districts.”

Thus, the total number of candidates that were to be returned for each electoral district,

both in terms of Article 98(2) and Article 98(3) was to be determined by the Delimitation

Commission and the names of those eligible to be nominated under Article 98(2) and

Article 98(3) were required to be submitted in one nomination paper.

Choosing of Members – position in 1978

An electorate or constituency having been defined in terms of an electoral district, Article

99(2), as it stood in 1978, provided that, “Any recognised political party or any group of

persons contesting as independent candidates (hereinafter referred to as an “independent

group”) may for the purpose of any election of Members of Parliament for any electoral

district, submit one nomination paper setting out the names, in order of priority, of such

number of candidates as is equivalent to the number of members to be elected for that

electoral district, increased by one-third ”

Having submitted the names of the candidates for an electoral district on a single

nomination paper in respect of those entitled to be appointed both under Article 98(2)

and Article 98(3), which nomination paper I shall refer to as the “District List”, Article

99(4) provided that, “The recognised political party or independent group which polls the

highest number of votes in any electoral district shall be entitled to have the candidate

whose name appears first in the nomination paper of that recognised political party or

independent group declared elected.” Article 99(7) provided further that where a political

party or independent group has secured sufficient votes to return more than one

28

candidate, additional candidate/s too shall be decided “in the order in which their names

appear in the nomination paper.”

The position therefore was that although the names of the candidates on the nomination

paper were known to the voter, it is the political party that decided in advance who its

preferred candidates would be. A Parliamentary Election was not held under the above

provisions, and its application was limited to the statute book.

14th Amendment to the Constitution

With a Parliamentary Election due, several significant amendments were made in 1988 to

the Constitution by the 14th Amendment to the Constitution. Of them, I shall refer to

three.

The first was to Article 62(1), which, pursuant to the amendment, provided that, “There

shall be a Parliament which shall consist of two hundred and twenty-five Members elected

in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution.” Article 98(1) remained and thus,

the total number of members that could be returned from all electoral districts remained

at 196.

The second significant amendment was the introduction of Article 99A, which provided

for the election of the balance 29 Members of Parliament, to be apportioned among the

political parties and independent groups that contested the Parliamentary Election, on

the basis of the total number of votes polled by such party or group at the said Election.

The 29 persons who are declared elected as Members of Parliament in terms of Article

99A are commonly referred to as “National List Members of Parliament”, and the list on

which their names appear is commonly referred to as the “National List”.

The third significant amendment brought about by the 14th Amendment was the

complete repeal and replacement of Article 99. While the text of Article 99(1) remained

the same, Article 99(2) introduced the concept of preferential votes or in other words, of

the voter being entitled to vote for his or her preferred political party or independent

group, and thereafter a further entitlement to vote for three of his or her preferred

candidates out of those whose names appeared in the nomination paper of the political

29

party or independent group for which he or she had already voted. Thus, the voter had a

direct bearing over the persons who would be elected as Members of Parliament,

increasing their franchise.

Provisions in this regard are set out in Article 99(2), (3), (5) and (8), re-produced below:

Article 99(2) – “Every elector at an election of Members of Parliament shall, in addition to

his vote, be entitled to indicate his preferences for not more than three candidates

nominated by the same recognized political party or Independent group.”

Article 99(3) – “Any recognized political party or any group of persons contesting as

independent candidates (hereinafter referred to as an “independent group”) may for the

purpose of any election of Members of Parliament for any electoral district, submit one

nomination paper setting out the names of such number of candidates as is equivalent to

the number of members to be elected for that electoral district, increased by three.”

Article 99(5) – “The recognized political party or independent group which polls the

highest number of votes in any electoral district shall be entitled to have the candidate

nominated by it, who has secured the highest number of preferences, declared elected.”

Article 99(8) – “The number of votes polled by each recognized political party and

independent group (other than those parties or groups disqualified under paragraph (6)

of this Article) beginning with the party or group which polled the highest number of votes

shall then be divided by the resulting number and the returning officer shall declare

elected from each such party or group, in accordance with the preferences secured by each

of the candidates nominated by such party or group (the candidate securing the highest

number of preferences being declared elected first, the candidate securing the next

highest number of preferences being declared elected next and so on) such number of

candidates (excluding the candidate declared elected under paragraph (5) of this Article)

as is equivalent to the whole number resulting from the division by the resulting number

of the votes polled by such party or group. The remainder of the votes, if any, after such

division, shall be dealt with if necessary, under paragraph (9) of this Article.”

30

Accordingly, the political party that obtained the highest number of votes would initially

be allocated one seat [the bonus seat] and the valid votes would thereafter be divided by

the balance number of seats, thus determining the number of seats that should be

apportioned among each political party based on the total number of votes obtained by

such political party.

Procedure for appointment of National List Members of Parliament

The procedure that should be followed in determining the 29 ‘National List Members of

Parliament’ is set out in Article 99A, which reads as follows:

“After the one hundred and ninety six members referred to in Article 98 have been

declared elected at a General Election of Members of Parliament, the Commissioner

of Elections shall forthwith apportion the balance twenty nine seats among the

recognized political parties and independent groups contesting such General Election

in the same proportion as the proportion which the number of votes polled by each

such party or group at such General Election bears to the total number of votes polled

at such General Election and for the purposes of such apportionment, the provisions

of paragraph (4), (5), (6) and (7) of Article 98 shall, mutatis mutandis, apply.

Every recognized political party or independent group contesting a General Election

shall submit to the Commissioner of Elections within the nomination period

specified for such election a list of persons qualified to be elected as Members of

Parliament, from which it may nominate persons to fill the seats, if any, which such

party or group will be entitled to, on such apportionment. The Commissioner of

Elections shall cause every list submitted to him under this Article to be published

forthwith in the Gazette and in one Sinhala, Tamil and English newspaper upon the

expiry of the nomination period.

Where a recognized political party or independent group is entitled to a seat under

the apportionment referred to above, the Commissioner of Elections shall by a

notice, require the Secretary of such recognized political party or group leader of

such independent group to nominate within one week of such notice, persons

31

qualified to be elected as Members of Parliament (being persons whose names are

included in the list submitted to the Commissioner of Elections under this Article or

in any nomination paper submitted in respect of any electoral district by such party

or group at that election) to fill such seats and shall declare elected as Members of

Parliament, the persons so nominated.

For the purposes of this Article the number of votes polled at a General Election shall

be deemed to be the number of votes actually counted and shall not include any

votes rejected as void.”

The 15th Amendment to the Constitution saw the addition of a further paragraph to Article

99A in terms of which:

“The Commissioner of Elections shall before issuing the aforesaid notice determine

whether the number of members belonging to any community, ethnic or otherwise,

elected to Parliament under Article 98 is commensurate with its national population

ratio and request the Secretary of such recognised political party or group leader of

such independent group in so nominating persons to be elected as Members of

Parliament to ensure as far as practicable, that the representation of all communities

is commensurate with its national population ratio.”

Article 99A together with Section 64(5) of the Parliamentary Elections Act No. 1 of 1981,

as amended, are the only provisions that relate to National List Members of Parliament.

Arguments of the Petitioner

That being the manner in which persons are chosen and subsequently nominated by a

political party as National List Members of Parliament, and the Petitioner having been

nominated by the 1st Respondent as one of its National List Members of Parliament, the

learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioner presented two principal arguments before

us in support of his position that the expulsion of the Petitioner is invalid.

The first was that a person appointed to Parliament from the National List, is not subject

to the provisions of Article 99(13)(a), and thus does not lose his seat in Parliament in terms

32

of Article 99(13)(a), even if such person ceases to be a member of the political party that

nominated him to Parliament.

The second argument was that the principles of natural justice had not been adhered to

prior to the expulsion of the Petitioner and that the Petitioner has been denied a fair

hearing.

Interpretation of the Constitution

As the first argument requires me to consider the meaning that should be given to the

words, ‘nomination paper’ in Article 99(13)(a), I shall at this stage briefly refer to the rules

that I must be guided by in considering the said argument.

In N.S. Bindra – Interpretation of Statutes [13th edition, 2023], it has been stated as

follows:

“In so far as the constitution is the source of validity for all statutory law; and it has

distinct procedures both for its promulgation and amendment; the interpretation of

the Constitution has not been seen akin to ordinary statutory interpretation. This

distinction is well captured in the following exposition of the Rajastan High Court

[State of Rajasthan v Shamlal [AIR 1960 Raj 256, pp 265-66] where the Court whilst

expounding upon the meaning of Article 295 of the Constitution stated “Accustomed

as we are in our day-to-day administration of justice to the interpretation of

numerous statutes, we are apt to lose sight of the fact that the Constitution is unlike

most of the statutes that we come across, has to be judged from somewhat different

standards. The Constitution is the very framework of the body politics; its life and

soul; it is the fountain-head of all its authority, the main spring of all its strength and

power. The executive, the legislature, and the judiciary are all its creation, and derive

their sustenance from it. It is unlike other statutes, which can be at any time altered,

modified or repealed. [Page 641-642]

“Both statutes and the Constitution in a way emanate from the same source, that is,

the People, but there is difference in the mode of their enactment. While the

Constitution is the direct mandate of the people themselves, the statute is an

33

expression of the will of the legislature only, though the legislature is also the

representative of the people. A Constitution is but a higher form of statutory law.

The Constitution viewed as a continuously operative charter of government, is not to

be interpreted as demanding the impossible or the impracticable. A Constitution is

the mechanism under which laws are to be made, and not merely an Act which

declares what the law is to be. It is also well-settled that a Constitution must not be

construed in a narrow or pedantic sense and the construction which is most

beneficial to the widest possible amplitude of its power must be adopted”. [Page

642]

Alles, J in A.W.A.K Peiris and Another v K. D. D. Perera [71 NLR 481], stated that:

“… it seems to me that in the task of constitutional interpretation, special

considerations have to be applied. The Constitution is not an ordinary enactment of

the legislature; in the words of Chief Justice Marshall in M’Culloch v. The State of

Maryland [5 U S. Reports 4 Law Ed. 597 at 602], “we must never forget that it is a

constitution we are expounding…” [page 488]

“Having regard to these general principles it will now be useful to consider the special

considerations that have to be adopted in dealing with the task of constitutional

interpretation.

Firstly in dealing with an enactment the constitutional validity of which is in issue,

there is a presumption in favour of validity and the Court will not rule an enactment

to be ultra vires unless the invalidity is clear beyond doubt.” [page 489]

“Secondly, the Court must have regard to its special character as organic law and

note that constitutional provisions are usually contained in terms of a general

nature. Most constitutions deal with the framework of government. They do not

contain provisions which are found in statutes passed in the normal exercise of

legislative powers. Therefore when the question arises whether a term in the

Constitution should be used in a narrow sense or given a broader interpretation,

the Court should be inclined to use it in the latter sense unless there is something

34

in the context or the rest of the Constitution which militates against such view.”

[emphasis added; page 490]

“Thirdly, being organic law, cast in broad and general terms, it has always to be

borne in mind that the framers of the Constitution intended to apply it to varying

conditions brought about by later developments. This does not mean that the

meaning of the legal expression changes but having regard to its generic form it is

capable of being adapted to new situations. The rule of generic interpretation is

one that is commonly used not only to ordinary enactments but also to constitutional

documents.” [emphasis added; page 491]

“Finally the Courts should give due effect to the declared intention of the legislature

in seeking to interpret a document such as the Constitution. In the words of the

present Chief Justice in Ranasinghe v. The Bribery Commissioners [(1962) 64 N.L.R.

449 at 450], “in examining an enactment with reference to any alleged

Constitutional invalidity, a Court must strive to reach a conclusion which will render

the will of the Legislature effective, or as effective as possible.” [Page 492]

In Vidanage v Pujith Jayasundara and Others [SC (FR) Application No. 163/2019; SC

minutes of 26th September 2022], seven Judges of this Court held that:

“It bears repeating that constitutional interpretation is different from statutory or

common law interpretation because of the general and open-ended nature of the

language used in Constitutions. Furthermore, the text of Constitutions is of an

ancient origin and it concerns topics that are central to a country’s basic political

structures and values. These factors have helped develop a distinct set of

constitutional interpretative techniques that require their judicious use in judicial

interpretation. This distinction between constitutional interpretation and statutory

interpretation was further highlighted by Chief Justice Dickson of the Canadian

Supreme Court in [Hunter v Southam Inc., 1984 SCC OnLine Can SC 36; (1984) 2 SCR

145] in the following words:

35

“The task of expounding a constitution is crucially different from that of

construing a statute. A statute defines present rights and obligations. It is easily

enacted and as easily repealed. A constitution, by contrast, is drafted with an eye

to the future. Its function is to provide a continuing framework for the legitimate

exercise of governmental power and, when joined by a Bill or a Charter of rights,

for the unremitting protection of individual rights and liberties. Once enacted, its

provisions cannot easily be repealed or amended. It must, therefore, be capable

of growth and development over time to meet new social, political and historical

realties often unimagined by its framers. The judiciary is the guardian of the

Constitution and must, in interpreting its provisions, bear these considerations in

mind.”

Having referred to the sui generis character of constitutional interpretation, this Court

cited with approval the following passage of Dhavan J in Moinuddin and Others v State

of Uttar Pradesh [AIR 1960 All 484]:

“Firstly, if two constructions are possible the Court must adopt the one which will

ensure smooth and harmonious working of the Constitution and eschew the other

which will lead to absurdity or gives rise to practical inconvenience or make well-

established provisions of existing law nugatory. Secondly, constitutional provisions

are not to be interpreted and applied, by narrow technicalities but as embodying

the working principles for practical government. Thirdly, the provisions of a

constitution are not to be regarded as mathematical formulae and that their

significance not formal but vital. Hence practical considerations rather than formal

logic must govern the interpretation of those parts of a constitution which are

obscure. Fourthly, in choice between two alternative constructions, the one which

avoids a result unjust or injurious to the nation should be preferred. Fifthly, before

making its choice between two alternative meanings, the court must read the

constitution as a whole, take into considerations its different parts and try to

harmonise them. Sixthly, above all courts should proceed on the assumption that no

conflict or repugnancy between different parts was intended by the framers of the

constitution.” [emphasis added]

36

The first argument of the Petitioner

Thus, bearing in mind that in interpreting the provisions of the Constitution, the judicial

approach should be dynamic rather than static, pragmatic and not pedantic, and elastic

rather than rigid, I shall now proceed to consider the first argument of the learned

President’s Counsel for the Petitioner, strenuously presented before us, that a National

List Member of Parliament is not subject to Article 99(13)(a) on the following grounds:

(a) Article 99(13)(a) is limited in application to those Members of Parliament whose

names are contained in a “nomination paper” and since the names of National List

Members of Parliament are not contained in a “nomination paper”, Article 99(13)(a)

has no application to National List Members of Parliament;

(b) In any event, the intention behind the election of National List Members of

Parliament was to ensure that persons of eminence should be elected and as such,

it was not intended to tie them down to party affiliations.

Nomination Period, Nomination Paper and the List

Referring to Article 99(3), the learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioner correctly

submitted that the names of those who are contesting under the District List are

contained in a nomination paper that is filed by the relevant political party or

independent group. He conceded that in terms of Article 99(13)(a), “Where a Member of

Parliament ceases, by resignation, expulsion or otherwise, to be a member of a recognized

political party or independent group on whose nomination paper (hereinafter referred to

as the “relevant nomination paper”) his name appeared at the time of his becoming such

Member of Parliament, his seat shall become vacant upon the expiration of a period of

one month from the date of his ceasing to be such member:”

It was submitted further that the names of those who are eligible to be elected in terms

of Article 99A are not contained in a nomination paper but rather on a list, which list,

according to Dr. De Silva, PC is not a nomination paper as contemplated by the

Constitution and the Parliamentary Elections Act. It is also correct that the nomenclature

used to refer to the District List and the National List in several Articles is different.

37

Referring to the use of the words ‘nomination paper’ in Article 99(13)(a), Dr. De Silva, PC

submitted further that the aforementioned consequence specified in Article 99(13)(a) is

limited to those Members of Parliament whose names appear on a ‘nomination paper’

and that a person elected and/or appointed to Parliament from the list as set out in Article

99A is not subject to Article 99(13)(a) for the reason that their names are not on a

‘nomination paper’. With there being no other provision relating to the expulsion of a

Member of Parliament in the Constitution, it was his position that a National List Member

of Parliament declared elected under Article 99A is not subject to the provisions of Article

99(13)(a), and that even though the political party that nominated such Member to

Parliament may have expelled such Member, he or she shall continue to be a Member of

Parliament.

In terms of Section 10(1)(a) of the Parliamentary Elections Act, in every Proclamation

dissolving Parliament or in any Order requiring the holding of an election, the President

shall specify, “the period (hereinafter referred to as the "nomination period") during

which nomination papers shall be received by the returning officer during normal office

hours at his office;”. Section 10(2)(a) provides further that, “The nomination period shall

commence on the tenth day after the date of publication in the Gazette of the

Proclamation or Order referred to in subsection (1) and expire at twelve noon on the

seventeenth day after the date of publication of such Proclamation or Order …”.

Section 15(1) of the Parliamentary Elections Act provides that, “Any recognized political

party or any group of persons contesting as independent candidates (hereinafter referred

to as an "independent group") may, for the purpose of an election of Members of

Parliament for any electoral district, submit one nomination paper setting out the names,

of such number of candidates as is equivalent to the number of Members to be elected for

that electoral district, increased by three. Such nomination paper shall be substantially in

Form A set out in the First Schedule to this Act.” I have already referred to the requirement

to have one nomination paper in the light of Article 98(2) and (3).

Thus, the law provides that there be a nomination period during which the nomination

paper for each electoral district must be filed.

38

I must at this stage refer to Clause 8 of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution

Bill relating to the balance 29 Members of Parliament, which reads as follows:

“After the one hundred and ninety six members referred to in Article 98 have been

declared elected at a General Election of Members of Parliament, the Commissioner

shall apportion the balance twenty nine seats among the recognized political parties

and independent groups contesting such General Election in the same proportion as

the proportion which the number of votes polled by each such party or group at such

General Election bears to the total number of votes polled at such General Election

and for the purposes of such apportionment, the provisions of paragraph (4), (5), (6)

and (7) of Article 98 shall, mutatis mutandis, apply.

Every recognized political party or independent group contesting a General Election

shall submit to the Commissioner within the nomination period specified for such

election a list of persons qualified to be elected as Members of Parliament, from

which it may nominate persons to fill the seats, if any, which such party or group will

be entitled to, on such apportionment.”

The above Bill had been referred to this Court by HE the President in terms of Article

122(1)(b) of the Constitution for a special determination as to whether the Bill or any of

its provisions are inconsistent with the Constitution. The following passage from the

Determination of this Court in the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution Bill

[Decisions of the Supreme Court on Parliamentary Bills (1988) Vol. IV, 9 at pages 12-13] is

relevant to the discussion of the issue before me:

“While no objection was raised in regard to the election of 196 members, it was

submitted that the balance 29 seats were to be apportioned by the Commissioner of

Elections among the recognized political parties and independent groups contesting

the general election and ultimately nominated by the secretaries of the said two

groups from the lists referred to under this clause or the nomination papers

submitted under Clause 7(3). In short, the contention was that apportionment by the

Commissioner and the nomination by the Secretary of the recognized political party

39

or group leader runs counter to the principle of elections by the electors enshrined in

Article 3 read with Articles 4(a) and 4(e) of the Constitution, in that it is an erosion of

the franchise, which is an inalienable aspect of the sovereignty of the people.

However, learned Solicitor General emphasized that the apportionment is based on

“… the same proportion as the proportion which the number of votes polled by each

such party or group at such General Election bears with the total number of votes

polled at such General Election…” [Article 99 (A)].

Learned Solicitor General urged that these were the operative words in Article 99 (A)

and that they show that the apportionment is related to the exercise of franchise by

the electors at the General Election. He accordingly urged that there is no erosion of

the elective principle.

We have considered the respective submissions made in regard to this matter and

our determination is that Clauses 3 and 8 of the Bill are not inconsistent with the

provisions of Article 3 read with Article 4(a) and 4(e) of the Constitution and therefore

do not require the approval of the People at a Referendum.

Mr. Samarasekera PC brought to our notice that certain matters in Clause 8 of the

Bill need clarification. While the Bill provides, “the Commissioner of Elections shall

cause the lists submitted to him under this Article to be published in the Gazette”

there is no reference to the time of the publication of the Gazette, as to when this is

to be published in the Gazette and that electors may not have adequate notice of the

names on the list at the time of the poll.

Learned Solicitor General agreed that this publication could be done in the same

manner and at the same time as in the case of nomination for the Electoral Districts

as provided for in the Parliamentary Elections Act No. 1 of 1981.” [emphasis added]

The above passage gives context to two matters. The first is that the words, “The

Commissioner of Elections shall cause every list submitted to him under this Article to be

published forthwith in the Gazette and in one Sinhala, Tamil and English newspaper upon

the expiry of the nomination period” was added at the end of the second paragraph of

40

Article 99A at the Committee Stage of Parliament, thus ensuring that the National List is

published in the Gazette during the nomination period and affording the voter the

opportunity of knowing the names of those nominated by the party on the National List

prior to exercising his or her franchise.

The second matter that the above Determination gives context to is that even though

those persons on the National List are not directly elected by the voter, those on the

National List become eligible to enter Parliament only as a result of the exercise by a voter

of his or her franchise in favour of the political party or independent group on whose list

such persons’ name appeared. In the Determination of this Court on the Provincial

Councils Election (Special Provisions) Bill [Decisions of the Supreme Court on

Parliamentary Bills (1991-2003) Vol. VII, 135 at page 141] it was observed that, “the

franchise is not restricted to merely voting at elections; it includes standing for elections,

and, indeed, the entire election process from nomination to poll.”

Thus, it is clear that the National List of all political parties contesting a Parliamentary

Election containing the names of those who are eligible to be elected in terms of Article

99A are also submitted during the nomination period, and are forthwith published in the

Gazette. While it is correct to state that the nomenclature used to refer to the two lists

are different, it is clear that the object that is sought to be achieved by both lists are one

and the same, that being to nominate during the nomination period candidates or

persons who are eligible to be elected to Parliament from a particular political party or

independent group and thereby place before the electorate the names of the nominated

candidates or persons to enable the electorate to exercise their franchise. Thus, the

District List as well as the National List must stand on an equal footing.

The above object is clearly reflected in the Determination of this Court in the Fourteenth

Amendment to the Constitution Bill [supra] and is borne out by:

(a) The third paragraph of Article 99A in terms of which, “the Commissioner of Elections

shall by a notice, require the secretary of such recognized political party or group

leader of such independent group to nominate within one week of such notice,

persons qualified to be elected as Members of Parliament (being persons whose

41

names are included in the list submitted to the Commissioner of Elections under this

Article or in any nomination paper submitted in respect of any electoral district by

such party or group at that election) to”; and

(b) The second paragraph of Article 99A which provides that the party or group “may

nominate persons to fill the seats, if any, which such party or group will be entitled

to, on such apportionment”.

The fact that the Petitioner has been nominated by the 1st Respondent has been admitted

by the Petitioner in paragraph 5 of his affidavit where he states that, “I later joined Samagi

Jana Balawegaya, the 1st Respondent party and was nominated on the National List at

the Parliamentary Elections in 2020”, and in paragraph 7 of his affidavit where the

Petitioner states that, “I am a Member of Parliament nominated from the National List in

recognition of the colossal effort and contribution to the Party at the said elections.”

Given the legislative history referred by me at the outset, it is clear that there has been a

distinct shift from the direct election of an individual prior to 1978 to the party-based

election of persons whose names are disclosed, after 1978. Prior to the 14th Amendment,

there existed only one nomination paper for an electoral district from which all members

were to be elected to that District. With the introduction of the 14th Amendment, a

greater degree of discretion has been bestowed on a party in selecting the National List

Members of Parliament. Thus, the legislative history demonstrates a shift towards a closer

relationship between the elector and a political party, rather than a move towards

individuals. In this context, the legislative history militates against giving Members of

Parliament, who are elected without any preference being cast for them by electors,

greater independence vis-à-vis their political party, than those who are elected from a

political party through the preference votes of electors.

Different categories of Members

Not only is the granting of greater independence from their parties to National List

Members of Parliament inconsistent with the legislative history, but such interpretation

would create a situation where different categories of Members of Parliament would be

42

created. As submitted by Dr. Jayampathy Wickremaratne, the learned President’s Counsel

for the 2nd Respondent, this would lead to an absurdity.

Assuming the argument of the learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioner is correct,

Article 99(13)(a) can become applicable in five different ways to create five distinct

categories of Parliamentarians.

The first category are those Members of Parliament whose names appear on the District

List. When such Members of Parliament are expelled from the relevant political party on

whose nomination paper their names appeared, Article 99(13)(a) would be triggered.

The second category are those Members of Parliament who were nominated as National

List Members of Parliament, with their names having appeared on the National List

submitted in terms of Article 99A. According to the Petitioner, these Members of

Parliament, of whom the Petitioner is one, shall be immune from the provisions of Article

99(13)(a).

The third category of Members of Parliament are those who were nominated as National

List Members of Parliament, but with their names having appeared on the District List, or

in other words, unsuccessful candidates. According to the Petitioner’s argument, these

Members are not immune from the provisions of Article 99(13)(a) for the reason that

their names appeared on a ‘nomination paper’.

In terms of Article 99(13)(b), “Where the seat of a Member of Parliament becomes vacant

as provided in Article 66 (other than paragraph (g) of that Article) or by virtue of the

preceding provisions of this paragraph the candidate from the relevant recognised

political party or independent group who has secured the next highest number of

preferences shall be declared elected to fill such vacancy.” Thus, once a vacancy arises in

the District List, the person who has obtained the next highest number of preferential

votes shall fill such vacancy and such person shall be declared elected. The manner of

filling vacancies arising in terms of Article 99(13)(b) is further elaborated in Section 64(1),

(3) and (4) of the Parliamentary Elections Act. Accordingly, where all the candidates

whose names appear in the nomination paper submitted by a recognized political party

43

in respect of an electoral district have been exhausted by election or otherwise or where

none of the candidates whose names remain on such a nomination paper have secured

any preferences, and thereafter a vacancy occurs, the Secretary of the said political party

shall nominate a member of such party to fill the vacancy.

Thus, the fourth category of Members are those whose names did not appear on the

District List submitted during the nomination period but have been nominated to fill a

vacancy that has arisen on the District List upon the exhaustion of the names in the

nomination paper. If the argument advanced on behalf of the Petitioner is accepted, the

provisions of Article 99(13)(a) shall not apply to this category, as well, as their names did

not appear in a nomination paper.

The fifth category are those Members who are nominated in terms of Section 64(5) to fill

a vacancy that arises upon the resignation, expulsion or otherwise of a Member of

Parliament nominated in terms of Article 99A. These vacancies could be filled by a person

whose name is on the District List, the National List or by a complete outsider. On the

Petitioner’s argument, only if the replacement is made from the District List would Article

99(13)(a) apply. Other replacements will be immune from the provisions of Article

99(13)(a).

The absurdity of the argument of the Petitioner is clearly evident when it comes to the

aforementioned, (a) third category, since a further distinction is being drawn between

National List Members of Parliament, depending as to from which list they entered

Parliament, (b) fourth category which seeks to draw a distinction between those who are

elected to fill a vacancy on the District List, and (c) fifth category which too seeks to draw

a distinction when filling a vacancy in terms of Section 64(5).

It certainly could not have been the intention of Parliament when it introduced Article

99A to have isolated those who are nominated to Parliament from the National List from

the applicability of Article 99(13)(a) and to create these different categories of Members

of Parliament. Whether a person is elected as a Member of Parliament on the District List

as part of the 196 members or on the National List as part of the 29 members, their

election is a reflection of the franchise of the People. Thus, conceptually, once elected,

44

there cannot be any difference between the Members of Parliament, and all Members of

Parliament shall be entitled to the same privileges as much as they shall also be subject

to the same disqualifications.

I must emphasise that whatever the category a Member of Parliament may belong to at

the time of his election, once elected to Parliament, all Members of Parliament are equal

and are subject to the equal protection of the law. Although stated in the context of

recruitment to the Public Service, the following passage from the judgment of Chief

Justice Parinda Ranasinghe in Ramuppillai v Festus Perera, Minister of Public

Administration, Provincial Councils and Home Affairs and Others [(1991) 1 Sri LR 11 at

page 26] captures the essence of the equality that must be maintained among all

Members of Parliament:

“A consideration of the facts and circumstances of the two decisions of this Court,

referred to above, and the principles laid down in the Indian cases, referred to

therein, and also in the case of State of Kerala vs. Thomas (AIR 1976 SC 490, 507) it

is clear: that the State is free to decide upon the sources from which either

admissions to educational institutions or recruitments to the Public Service are to be

made: that for such purpose the State could take into consideration the over-all

needs and matters of national interest and policy: that once such selections are made

those taken in from such sources are integrated into one common class: that

thereafter such appointees are "clubbed" together into a common stream of service

and cannot thereafter be treated differently for purposes of promotion by referring

to the consideration that they were recruited from different sources: that their

genetic blemishes disappear once they are integrated into a common class and

cannot be revived so as to make equals unequal once again: that there should be

no further classification amongst them …” [emphasis added]

Persons of eminence

The learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioner submitted that in any event, the

intention behind Article 99A was to enable persons of eminence and repute, who may

not want to contest an election, to be represented in Parliament and that such persons,

45

once declared elected, were expected to express their views and contribute to Parliament

in the manner they saw fit without being constrained by the parochial considerations of

party politics. He submitted further that Article 99A was an attempt at mimicking the lofty

nature of contributions expected from an upper chamber in a bicameral system.

I have already stated that whether it be through the District List or the National List, the

entry of every person to Parliament as a Member is a reflection of the franchise of the

People, which franchise has been expressed in favour of the political party first and

thereafter to the candidate, and for that reason, discipline within the party is important.

Thus, eminence and repute does not and should not isolate a member from the provisions

of Article 99(13)(a).

Having said that, I must refer to the third paragraph of Article 99A, in terms of which, once

the Commissioner of Elections calls upon the secretary of a political party to nominate

persons qualified to be elected as Members of Parliament, those “persons whose names

are included in the list submitted to the Commissioner of Elections under this Article or in

any nomination paper submitted in respect of any electoral district by such party at that

election” are eligible to be nominated. Thus, the nomination from the National List is not

limited to the category of eminent persons referred to by the learned President’s Counsel

for the Petitioner but even extends to those persons whose names appeared on the

District List although they were unsuccessful at the election.

There is one final matter that I must advert to. The learned President’s Counsel for the

Petitioner submitted that even though Article 99(13)(b) specifically refers to the seat of a

Member of Parliament becoming vacant by virtue of Article 99(13)(a), Section 64(5) of the

Parliamentary Elections Act does not refer to Article 99(13)(a), and therefore the

legislature has not contemplated those Members nominated through the National List

losing their seat as a result of an expulsion. While in filling a vacancy under Section 64(5),

the Secretary is not limited to nominating a person whose name did not appear on the

National List submitted under Article 99A, I must state that, whether specifically stated

or otherwise, with all Members being equally placed, the provisions of Article 66 as well

as Article 99(13)(a) must apply with equal force to all Members of Parliament.

46

In the aforesaid circumstances, I am of the following view:

(a) What matters is not the nomenclature attached to the document by which the party

nominates its candidates or persons eligible to be elected on the District List and the

National List, respectively;

(b) The phrase “nomination paper” employed in Article 99(13)(a) cannot be viewed as

a defined term of art, but rather a functional description alluding the nomination of

a person by a political party. This interpretation appears to me to be the only

sensible construction that could be arrived at;

(c) The determining factor shall be the object sought to be achieved by each of the lists;

(d) Eminence and repute do not give any Member of Parliament the right to act in

breach of party discipline; and

(e) Once elected, all Members of Parliament shall be subject to the provisions of Article

99(13)(a).

The above view accords with the principles of Constitutional interpretation referred to by

me earlier in that the term, “nomination paper” is used in a broader sense rather than a

narrow sense [A.W.A.K Peiris and Another v K. D. D. Perera]; it ensures smooth and

harmonious working of the Constitution and eschews absurdity and practical

inconvenience [Moinuddin and Others v State of Uttar Pradesh]; and, it avoids

interpretation with recourse to narrow technicalities and favours practical considerations

rather than formal logic [Moinuddin and Others v State of Uttar Pradesh].

I am therefore not in agreement with the first submission of the learned President’s

Counsel for the Petitioner.

47

A fair hearing and natural justice

This brings me to the second argument of the learned President’s Counsel for the

Petitioner, that being the Petitioner has not been afforded a fair hearing by the 1st

Respondent and/or its Working Committee and/or the Disciplinary Committee.

I must at this point state that Paragraph 13.3(i) of the constitution P2 clearly demonstrate

that within the 1st Respondent almost all decisions are taken by its Working Committee.

Other than the limited power vested in the 3rd Respondent to suspend the membership

of a member of the 1st Respondent in terms of Paragraph 3.13 to which I have already

referred, disciplinary control of the members of the 1st Respondent is vested by P2

exclusively in its Working Committee with the Working Committee having the power to

appoint a Disciplinary Committee to consider disciplinary issues against its members.

Concomitant with its power to take decisions on behalf of the 1st Respondent [Paragraph

13.3(i)] is the power conferred on the Working Committee to take disciplinary action

against members of the 1st Respondent [Paragraph 13.3(iii)], decide on the course of

action that must be taken once a member has been suspended by the 3rd Respondent

[Paragraph 3.13], and appoint a Disciplinary Committee [Paragraph 3.12] to consider such

matters.

The above provisions act as procedural safeguards to protect the rights of the members

of the 1st Respondent and ensure that no single person can take any arbitrary or capricious

decision that affects their rights as members. Thus, except the limited power conferred

on the 3rd Respondent to suspend the membership of a member, full disciplinary control

over a member is vested in and must be exercised by the Working Committee of the 1st

Respondent.

Although it was submitted by Mr. Sumanthiran, PC that crossing the aisle would by itself

justify expulsion, it has been accepted by our Courts time and again that a fair hearing

must be afforded to a member prior to a decision being taken to expel such person from

a political party or independent group. As Mark Fernando, J observed in Dissanayake

[supra; at page 182], “a decision made by an unbiased tribunal, after duly considering the

views of those likely to be affected by it, is not only more likely to be correct, but will be

48

more acceptable and of better quality. Fairness to the individual facilitates a better

decision by the tribunal. The duty to give a fair hearing is as much a canon of good

administration as of good legal or judicial procedure ...”. [emphasis added]

It is important that individuals are provided with the opportunity to participate in the

decision making process prior to decisions affecting their rights being taken by public

authorities and/or authorities vested with statutory power. This would promote the

quality, accuracy and rationality of such process, and enhance the legitimacy thereof

while at the same time improving the quality of decisions made by public authorities. As

stated in De Smith’s Judicial Review [Eighth edition, 2018] “Procedural justice aims to

provide individuals with a fair opportunity to influence the outcome of a decision and so

ensure the decision’s integrity” [page 341] and “assist in achieving a sense that justice has

both been done and seen to be done” [page 342].

That procedural fairness is not frozen at any moment of time and is a ‘constantly evolving

concept’ [per Lond Bingham in Regina v H and Others [(2004) 2 A.C. 134] has been

emphasised in De Smith’s Judicial Review [supra; page 407] where the authors have

stated as follows:

“The content of procedural fairness is infinitely flexible. It is not possible to lay down

rigid rules and everything depends on the subject matter. The requirement necessary

to achieve fairness range from mere consultation at the lower end, upwards through

an entitlement to make written representations, to make oral representations, to a

fully-fledged hearing with most of the characteristics of a judicial trial at the other

extreme. What is required in a particular case is incapable of definition in abstract

terms. As Lord Bridge has put it [vide Lloyd v McMohan [(1987) A. C. 625 at 702]]:

“the so-called rules of natural justice are not engraved on tablets of stone. To use

the phrase which better expresses the underlying concept, what the requirements

of fairness demand when anybody, domestic, administrative or judicial, has to

make a decision which will affect the rights of individuals depends on the

character of the decision-making body, the kind of decision it has to make and the

statutory or other framework in which it operates.”

49

As Dheeraratne, J stated in Tilak Karunaratne v Mrs. Sirimavo Bandaranaike and Others

[supra; at page 101], “It is not disputed that this court's jurisdiction includes, an

investigation into the requisite competence of the expelling authority; an investigation as

to whether the expelling authority followed the procedure, if any, which was mandatory

in nature.”

In Jayatillake and Another v Kaleel and Others [supra; at page 394], this Court stated

that, “……..there are certain procedural safeguards which are recognised for ensuring fair

hearings e.g. the accused should be supplied with a fair statement of the charges

(Stevenson v United Road Transport Union), he should be informed of the exact nature of

the charge (Labouchere v Earl of Wharncliffe), he should be given an opportunity of

defending or palliating his conduct (Fisher v Keane). The opportunity should be fair,

adequate and sufficient. Thus the right to be heard will be illusory unless there is time and

opportunity for the case to be met - Paul Jackson 'Natural Justice' p. 63. An Oral hearing

is another valuable safeguard which ought to be provided unless it may be dispensed with

having regard to the subject-matter, the rights involved and the nature of the inquiry.

It was held in Tissa Attanayake v United National Party and Others [(2015)] 1 Sri LR 319]

that:

“Admittedly, the opportunity of a fair hearing may be limited in the circumstances.

For instance, the time for responding to a charge sheet or making submissions may

be reduced. Yet, the person is entitled to be told what he is charged with and afforded

some opportunity of explaining himself. The Petitioner is a Member of Parliament

and expulsion could lead to lose his seat. The very gravity of the matter required that

at least a limited hearing ought to be given to the Petitioner.” [page 331]

“… the observance of natural justice depicted in the maxim Audi Alteram Partem

provides the foundation for the manner and form in which Administrative Law is

applied. Whether or not the other party has reasons or defences to submit is not the

issue. The basic issue is to provide the other party an opportunity to explain himself.”

[page 334]

50

Having considered the above cases and the requirement to follow principles of natural

justice, Surasena, J in Zainul Abdeen Nazeer Ahamed v The Sri Lanka Muslim Congress

and Others [supra] stated as follows:

“The main ground on which the Petitioner has sought to canvass his expulsion from

the party is the fact that the SLMC did not conduct a formal inquiry according to the

law. For the reasons I have already set out above, I have held that the SLMC had not

breached the Rules of Natural Justice in the instant case as it had granted ample

opportunities for the Petitioner in the instant case to tender his written explanation

as to why he had violated the party decision taken at the High Command meeting

held on 21st November 2021. I have also held that the absence of a formal inquiry

has not vitiated the decision of the SLMC to expel the Petitioner under the

circumstances of the instant case. Therefore, the Petitioner is not entitled to succeed

on this ground.”

While agreeing with the above view, Samayawardhena, J went on to state that, “In my

view, if he (the petitioner) did not show cause in response to P9, there is no necessity to

fix the matter for the formal inquiry. The Petitioner cannot now be heard to say that the

failure to hold a formal inquiry is a violation of the rules of natural justice. The rules of

natural justice are not written in stone; whether or not these rules have been violated

must be determined based on the unique facts and circumstances of each individual case.”

Has the Petitioner been afforded a fair hearing? That being the legal position and being of the view that the Petitioner was entitled to be

heard prior to a decision being taken, I shall first deal with the allegation that the

Petitioner was not afforded a fair hearing by the Working Committee and/or the

Disciplinary Committee prior to being expelled. This allegation is furthest from the truth.

The mechanism provided in P2 does not require a hearing to be afforded by the Working

Committee itself but instead provides for a hearing to be afforded by a Disciplinary

Committee that is appointed by the Working Committee. To that extent, the grievance of

the Petitioner is unfounded.

51

I have already referred to the correspondence between the 1st – 3rd Respondents on the

one hand and the Petitioner on the other, commencing with P4(a) and culminating in P9.

The Petitioner was invited by P4(a) at the first available opportunity to provide an

explanation and/or show cause relating to his suspension. Whether the Petitioner

submitted an explanation is in doubt. Having stayed its hand for a period of about five

months, the Petitioner was put on notice by 1R9 that a Disciplinary Committee has been

appointed to conduct a formal disciplinary inquiry. The Disciplinary Committee thereafter

invited the Petitioner by 1R10a to present himself for an inquiry on 24th January 2023 and

informed him that he is entitled to legal representation. A copy of the charge sheet

together with the list of witnesses and documents were served on the Petitioner together

with 1R10. Thus, the Petitioner was fully aware of the scope and ambit of the disciplinary

inquiry and of the material that was to be presented at the said inquiry. Even though the

Petitioner did not respond to 1R10, the Disciplinary Committee on its own volition

postponed the inquiry to 24th February 2023 and informed him of such fact by P4(c). The

Petitioner responded to the Disciplinary Committee for the first time with P5(a) and

sought an adjournment on the basis that he has to attend a previously scheduled meeting

at the Presidential Secretariat.

The Disciplinary Committee accepted the excuse offered by the Petitioner and afforded

the Petitioner a further opportunity to participate at the formal inquiry and even went to

the extent of giving the Petitioner a choice of two dates to choose from. It is then that the

Petitioner challenged the authority of the Disciplinary Committee by P5(c), for reasons

which had not been disclosed. The Petitioner thereafter clearly displayed his intention

not to participate before the Disciplinary Committee by filing action in the District Court

of Nugegoda.

In these circumstances, it is clear to me that the Disciplinary Committee has acted with

patience and has afforded the Petitioner every possible opportunity of providing his side

of the story and of being heard by an independent disciplinary body. The Petitioner could

not have asked for more opportunities to present his case, and cannot blame others for

his failure to attend the inquiry. Thus, the Petitioner cannot be heard to state that he was

not afforded an opportunity of presenting an explanation for his actions.

52

The findings of the Disciplinary Committee, which included its findings that the Petitioner

is guilty of all charges, have thereafter been placed before the Working Committee. It is

the Working Committee which had arrived at the decision to expel the Petitioner after

considering the said findings. I therefore see no merit in the argument of the learned

President’s Counsel for the Petitioner that the Petitioner was not afforded a fair hearing

prior to the Working Committee taking a decision on 18th July 2023.

There is one other matter that I must advert to. The learned President’s Counsel for the

Petitioner submitted that it is necessary to place before Court the minutes of the meeting

which confirmed the decision taken on 18th July 2023 to expel the Petitioner, once such

decision is challenged. The requirement to tender minutes of meetings was considered in

Ameer Ali and Others v Sri Lanka Muslim Congress and Others [supra; at page 198]

where it was held that, “Since the final decision to expel the Petitioners is said to have

been made at this meeting it was essential for the Respondents to have produced the

minutes of the meeting that indicate the persons who were present and the manner in

which the serious issues raised by the Petitioners were considered before a final decision

was made.” [emphasis added]. A similar view was expressed in Safiul Muthunabeen

Mohamed Muszhaaraff v S. Suairdeen and Others [supra].

In the above two cases, this Court was referring to the minutes of the meeting that took

the decision to expel the member concerned. In this case, not only have the minutes of

the meeting that took the decision to expel the Petitioner been tendered but those

minutes confirm that disciplinary proceedings were initiated by the Working Committee

by appointing the Disciplinary Committee, and that the final decision to expel the

Petitioner was taken by the Working Committee. While there is no requirement to tender

the minutes by which the above decision was confirmed, in the above circumstances, I

am satisfied that the Working Committee (a) met on 18th July 2023, (b) was apprised of

the findings of the Disciplinary Committee, and (c) arrived at the decision to expel the

Petitioner only after having considered the said findings.

53

Conclusion

In the above circumstances, I am of the view that the expulsion of the Petitioner from the

1st Respondent is valid. This application is accordingly dismissed, without costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT Vijith K. Malalgoda, PC, J I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT Achala Wengappuli, J I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT