1 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application under and in terms of Articles 17 and 126 of the Constitution SC /FR/ Application No 28/2018

1. Deva Wisaru Damdhara Wijesiri

No. 59/10, Mahayaya, Bogahawatte, Ambalangoda. 2. Dewarahandi Sabeetha De. Silva

No. 59/10, Mahayaya, Bogahawatte, Ambalangoda.

Petitioners Vs,

1. Hasitha Kesara Wettamuni,

Principal, Dharmashoka College, Ambalangoda. Chairman, Interview and Administrations Board 2. Dhammika Kodikara,

Secretary, Interview and Administrations Board 3. K. Janika Jayamali de. Silva,

Head of Primary Member Interview and Administrations Board 4. Sarath Somathilake,

School Development Society Representative Member Interview and Administrations Board

2

5. Ashoka Kumara

Representative Past Pupils Associates Member Interview and Administrations Board Member of the Interview Board in relation to admission of students to Grade 1 of the Dharmashoka College, Ambalangoda for year 2018 6. K. K. K. Kodithuwakku,

Chairman, Appeals and Objections Board 7. R. N. Mallawarachchi

Secretary Appeals and Objections Board 8. S. K. S. D.de. Silva

Member Appeals and Objections Board 9. Monaka Niranjana

School Development Society Representative Member Appeals and Objections Board 10. Ravindra Assalaarachchi

Representative Past Pupils Associates Member Appeals and Objections Board

Members of the Appeals and Objections Board in relation to admission of students to Grade 01 of Dharmashoka College, Ambalangoda for years 2018

3

11. Secretary,

Unit to admit students to Grade 1, Ministry of Education, “Isurupaya” Pelawatta, Battaramulla. 12. Secretary,

Ministry of Education, “Isurupaya” Pelawatta, Battaramulla. 13. Director of National Schools,

Ministry of Education, “Isurupaya” Pelawatta, Battaramulla. 14. Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12. Respondents

Before: Justice Vijith K. Malalgoda PC Justice S. Thurairaja PC Justice E.A.G.R. Amarasekera Counsel: Vishwa De. Livera Tennekoon for the Petitioners Instructed by Ms. Lilani

Ganegama

Suren Gnanaraj, SSC for Attorney General

Argued on: 25.07.2019

Judgment on: 07.11.2019

4 Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J

The two Petitioners before this court, the five years old son and his mother, have alleged

violation of their fundamental rights guaranteed under Article 12 (1) of the Constitution by

denying the admission of the 1st Petitioner to grade one of Dharmashoka College Ambalangoda.

As revealed before us the 2nd Petitioner being the mother of the 1st Petitioner minor, submitted

an application for admission of her son to grade one of Dharmashoka College Ambalangoda

under the category, Children of Officers employed with the State, Corporations, Statutory Boards

or State Banks, who have been transferred on exigency of service, commonly known as transfer

category as laid down in Clause 7.6 of Circular number 22/2017 which governed the school

admission to grade one for the year 2018.

Under clause 7.6 of the said circular 4% of the total number of vacancies were allocated to the

children come under the said category and how such parents should establish their eligibility to

come within the said clause and the allocation of marks to them is explained under the said

clause.

The 2nd Petitioner who is a Grama Niladhari by profession was working at 88A Kandegoda Grama

Niladhari Division at the time she submitted the application on behalf of her son the 1st Petitioner

to gain admission to Dharmashoka College under the said category. Appointed as a Grama

Niladhari in the year 2009, (P-2) 2nd Petitioner was attached to Balapitiya AGA’s Division of the

Galle District and was working as Grama Niladhari at 19B Makumbura Ahungalla until she

received a transfer to 88A Kandegoda Grama Niladhari Division with effect form 09.03.2016 by

letter dated 08.03.2016 (P-4) on exigency of service. She reported to work on 15.03.2016 to 88A

5 Kandegoda Grama Niladhari Division and changed her residence to a place closer to the new

division with effect from 16.03.2016 (P-7)

Duly filled application along with supporting documents required under Clause 7.6 was submitted

to Dharmashoka College by the 2nd Petitioner and the Petitioners were called to attend an

interview on 30th August 2017. When the Petitioners attended the said interview on 30th, the

Interview Board consist of 1st to the 5th Respondents after going through the documents

submitted by the 2nd Petitioner before them, had rejected their application without giving any

marks. When rejecting their application the 1st Respondent informed the reason for rejection as

“former residence, current residence, former place of work and the present place of work are

within the radius of 10 km, and as such the Petitioners cannot be considered under the transfer

category.”

The above position was written on her mark sheet by the 1st Respondent in Sinhalese language as

follows (P-14) “fmr mosxÑh" miq mosxÑh fmr fiajd ia:dkh miq fiajd ia:dkh hk ia:dk y;ru 10

km wrh f.k w|sk jD;a; iSudj ;=, msysgd we;' mosxÑfha fjkila .Khg wod,j ke;'”

The Petitioners have appealed against the said decision of the Interview Board under the

provisions of the said circular but the Objections and Appeal Board informed the Petitioners that

the application submitted by the 2nd Petitioner cannot be considered under the said category.

The main requirements that should be fulfilled under Clause 7.6 is explained under the said

clause as follows;

“Under this category applicants who are permanently residing with the child in the feeder

area of school, after being transferred to a Government, Corporation, State Bank or

statutory institution situated within the area of the school on exigency of service (not at

6

the request of the employee) during a period of 5 years prior to the date of calling for

applications are entitled to come under the said clause of the circular.”

It is further required that the applicant should come to the new place of residence with the child

from the previous place.

The following explanation too had been given to the term “area of the school” under the said

clause in the following manner;

“The area of school means the relevant institute should be located within a circle drawn

with a radius of ten kilometers having taken the school as the center”

When it comes to the allocation of marks under this category, the distance between the previous

work place to the present work place, plays a significant importance and the applicant is entitled

to a maximum of 40 marks under the following guide lines;

More than 150 km 40 marks

From 149 km to 100 km 32 marks

From 99 km to 50 km 24 marks

From 49 km to 25 km 16 marks

Less than 25 km 8 marks

When going through the requirements and the marking guide lines referred to above it appears

that the applicant should fulfill the following requirements to comes within Clause 7.6 of the

circular,

1. Permanently reside with the child in the feeder area of the school after the transfer

7

2. The institution to which the applicant is transferred should locates within the area of

the school

3. The transfer should be on exigency of service

4. The transfer should be within 05 years prior to the date of calling for application

5. The applicant should come to the new place of residence with the child from the

previous place

Whilst referring to the above, the Petitioners submitted that Clause 7.6 of the circular does not

refer to the “previous place of residence” and/ or the previous place of work but the

requirements under the circular are,

a) Transfer must be to an institution located within the area of school

b) The applicant should permanently resides in the feeder area of the school after being

transferred

c) Applicant should come to the new place of residence with the child from the previous

place

and since the distance between the previous work place to the present work place is less

than 25 km, the applicant is entitled to obtain 8 marks under the transfer category.

However whilst challenging the above position, the 1st Respondent had explained the

requirement under Clause 7.6 in paragraph 21 of his affidavit as follows;

21 (1) for an applicant to be eligible to apply for school admission under the

category for “Children of Officers in Government/Corporation/Statutory

Boards/State Banks receiving transfers on exigencies of service” as set out

8

in Clause 7.6 of the School Admission Circular marked P-9 to the petition,

as applicant must satisfy the following requirements namely;

a) The transfer must be on exigencies of service and not made on the

personal request of the applicant

b) The transfer should have been effected 5 years prior to the closing

date for application

c) The transfer must be to an institution located within the “area of

the school”. The area of the school is defined as an area having a 10

kilometers radius from the school

d) The applicant must have commenced his/her residence within the

feeder area of the school only after having assumed duties in the

institution to which he/she was transferred. The term “feeder area

of the school” is defined in Clause 4.7 of the School Admission

Circular to mean the Administrative District in which the school is

located.

e) The applicant and the child should have relocated from the place of

previous employment to the new place of employment

f) Only the final destination of transfer will be considered for the

purpose of this category

g) Change in residence for the purpose of being attached to a

particular institution or for the purpose of training and education

will not qualify under this category.

9 Submitting the above requirements as the eligibility criteria for an applicant to succeed under the

said category, the 1st Respondent had analyzed the application submitted by the 2nd Petitioner

and submitted under sub-paragraphs 2 and 3 as follows;

2. According to the Petitioner’s application, the 2nd Petitioner’s transfer as Grama

Niladhari was from 19B Makumbura situated in the Ahungalla Grama Niladhari

Division of the Balapitiya Divisional Secretariat to the 88A Kandegoda Grama

Niladhari Division of the Balapitiya Divisional Secretariat. Therefore the 2nd

Petitioner’s transfer was not a transfer from an institution outside the “area of

the school” to an institution within the ‘area of the school as contemplated

under Clause 7.6 of the School Admission Circular, but was a transfer between

two institutions which were within the same’ area of the school”

3. Furthermore, according to the Petitioner’s application the 2nd Petitioner was

previously resident at No 708/A/9 Makumbura, Ahungalla and pursuant to her

transfer had relocated her residence to No 59/10 Mahayaya Bogahawatte,

Ambalangoda. Therefore the 2nd Petitioner had always been resident in the Galle

district within the “ feeder are of the school” and had not commenced residing in

the “feeder area” pursuant to the transfer as required under Clause 7.6 of the

School Admission Circular.”

As observed by this court the interpretation given to term “area of the school” was amended in

the year 2016 (School Admission for year 2017) to extend the area from 2 km to 10 km and the

identical provisions were included in the year 2017 when the new circular was issued with regard

to the School Admission for the year 2018.

10 When extending the area from 2 km radius to 10 km radius, the Education Ministry had explained

its decision in Circular 17/2016 (ii) dated 26.09.2016 as follows;

“ia:dk udre .Kh hgf;a mdie,aj, m<uq fY%aKshg <uqka we;=<;a lsrSfïoS" fmr j¾I j, ÿr

iSudj i,ld fkdne,Su ksid" mdi,g wdikak fiajd ia:dkj,g ia:dk udre ,en meñK" ta wjg

mosxÑjQ whÿïlrejkag mdi,g we;=<;aùug ;snQ wjia:dj wysñù we;s nj ksrSCIKh úh' tu

;;ajh wju lsrSu wruqKq lr f.k 2016'05'16 oske;s 17$2016 pl%f,aLfha wxl 6'5 j.ka;sh

hgf;a ia:dk udreùï ,enQ ks<OdrSkaf.a orejka f;dard .ekSfïoS mdi, msysá m%foaYh f,i" mdi,

flakaøh lr lsf,daóg¾ 2la wrh f,i w|sk jD;a;hl iSudj ;=, wod< wdh;kh msysgd ;sìh hq;=

nj olajd we;' tkuq;a" ia:dk udreùï ,nd meñKs fndfyda ks<OdrSkaf.a j¾;udk fiajd

ia:dkh yd mdi, w;r ÿr" lsf,da óg¾ 2 iSudj blaujd hk ksid jeä msrsilg mdie,a

fkd,eîhdu iïnkaOfhka ,eî we;s b,a,Sï ie,ls,a,g .kakd ,oS'

fiajd ia:dk kd.rsl m%foaYfhka neyerg f.khEfï rcfha m%;sm;a;sh u; lsf,da óg¾ 2 iSudj

;=< mdi,a fkdue;sùu ksid ia:dk udreùï ,nd meñfKk ks,OdrSkag uqyqK oSug isÿjk

ÿIalr;d yd wmyiq;d ie,ls,a,g f.k 17$2016 pl%f,aLfha wxl 6'5 j.ka;sfhysa ia:dk udreùï

.Kh hgf;a" i,ld n,k ÿr m%udKh lsf,da óg¾ 2 fjkqjg lsf,daóg¾ 10la f,i wod<

j.ka;sh ixfYdaOkh lrkq ,efí' ”

When going through the reasoning given in the above Circular, it is clear that the reason for

extending the radius from 2 km to 10 km was to accommodate more children to apply under the

said category and not to restrict children applying under the said category.

However, as observed by this court, when rejecting the application submitted by the Petitioner to

admit her child the second Petitioner into Dharmashoka College Ambalangoda, the only reason

given by the Interview Board was that, “former residence, current residence former place of work

11 and the current place of work are within the radius of 10 km” which was introduced to the above

circular for the 1st time in the year 2016 in order to accommodate more children, as explained in

the Circular 17/2016 (II).

It is further observed that, Clause 7.6 which refers to the Children of Officers employed with the

State Corporations, Statutory Board, State Banks, who have been transferred on exigency of

service had only required such employees to come and live with the child in the area where the

school is located, from the previous place, if he or she fulfills the other requirements under the

said Circular, but is silent whether the previous place comes within or outside the area where the

school is located.

In this regard I have further observed that the Respondent in paragraph 21 (1) (d) of his

objections had averred that;

“The applicant must have commenced his/her residence within the feeder area of the

school only after having assumed duties….” (Emphasis added)

but, Clause 7.6 of the Circular, does not contain the term “only” when referred to the

residence after assuming duties.

When going through the provisions of Clause 7.6 it appears to me that the 1st Respondent had

introduced the term “only” to impress the position he has taken in paragraph 21 (3) of his

objections.

When considering the material already discussed, it is clear that the 2nd Petitioner who has

received a transfer order on exigency of service, had reported to work in the New Grama

12 Niladhari Division on 15.03.2016 which is within the area of Dharmashoka College Ambalangoda

and moved to a new residence within the feeder area of the school with effect from 16.03.2016.

The said transfer was effected within the 5 years period stipulated in Clause 7.6 of the School

Admission Circular. As observed above, the Circular is silent on the place of previous stay and the

previous work place and in the said circumstances we observe that Petitioners were eligible to

come under Clause 7.6 of the said Circular.

In the case of Mallika Jothirathna and Another Vs. Principle Dharmashoka Vidyalaya and Other

SC FR 412/2016 SC minute dated 31. 10. 2018 this court had observed the instances where this

court would interfere in cases of School Admissions as follows;

“….. Nevertheless, these Circulars aim at achieving the best possible frame work for

admission of students to Grade one of all Government Schools each year and, are from

time to time, refined and revised by the lessons learnt from the experience of each year.

In these circumstances this court would be reluctant to question the provisions as, of such

circular unless they are manifestly inadequate, unreasonable, arbitrary or unfair.

At the same time, this court is aware of the onerous nature of the task faced by officers

who implement the provisions of such Circulars and handle and decide on admissions to

grade one, especially in National Schools which receive a very large number of

applications.

Therefore, this court has intervened in the decision making process of applications for

admission of Grade one only where it has been established that the provisions of the

applicable Circular have been ignored, violated, misapplied or misinterpreted or there has

been an abuse of process or a mistake which prejudices a child or other similar grounds”

13 In the case of Laksith and Another Vs, Chairman, School Committee Dharmashoka Vidyalaya

Ambalangoda and other 2009 (2) Sri LR 267, court observed, “Education is one of the most

important aspects in any civilized society as such authorities concerned are under a public duty to

ensure and grant the right to admit a child to a school (if possible of his choice) if the admission

requirements are fulfilled.

During the argument before this court it was further revealed that the full quota under Clause

7.6, i.e. 4% of total number of vacancies was not admitted for the year 2018. The Interview Panel

had refused to assess the Application submitted by the Petitioner to gain admission to

Dharmashoka College Ambalangoda and the said decision was arbitrary and not supported by any

provision of the School Admission Circular 22/17.

Referring to arbitrariness in E.P. Royappa Vs. State of Tamil Nadu and another (AIR 1974 SC 555)

Justice Bhagawati (as he was then) observed,

“In fact equality and arbitrariness one sworn enemies; one belongs to the rule of law in a

republic while the other, to the whim and caprice of an absolute monarch. Where an act

is arbitrary, it is implicit in it that it is unequal both according to political logic and

constitutional law and is therefore violative of Article 14….”

For the aforementioned reasons I hold that the fundamental right of the Petitioners guaranteed

under Article 12 (1) of the Constitution has been infringed by refusing the admission of the 2nd

Petitioner to grade one of Dharmashoka College Ambalangoda by the Respondents. Even though

the application submitted under Clause 7.6 of the Circular 22/17 was not assessed by the 1st to

5th Respondents, for the reasons given in this judgment, I am satisfied that the Petitioners have

had the necessary requirement to gain admission under Clause 7.6 of the said Circular. In the said

14 Circumstances I direct the 1st Respondent to make necessary arrangement for the 1st Petitioner

to be admitted to appropriate grade forthwith.

Application allowed. No costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Justice S. Thurairaja PC

I agree,

Judge of the Supreme Court

Justice E. A. G. R. Amarasekara

I agree,

Judge of the Supreme Court

15