==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the maƩer of an Appeal under SecƟon 5C of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990, as amended by Act No. 54 of 2006.

SC Appeal No: 78/2024 CP/HCCA/Kandy No: 161/2018 (F) DC Kandy Case No: SPL/524/2006

Dissanayake Mudiyanselage Devapirya Bandara Dehideniya, 301/35, Sir Cuda RatwaƩe Mawatha, Didamwala, Kandy. PLAINTIFF Vs. Kumburegama Walawwe Ratnayake Mudiyansela Ralahamilage Anoma Subashinie Ratnayake, ‘Ratnagiri’, Arambegama, Kumburugama. DEFENDANT And Dissanayake Mudiyanselage Devapirya Bandara Dehideniya, 301/35, Sir Cuda RatwaƩe Mawatha, Didamwala, Kandy. PLAINTIFF – APPELLANT Vs. Kumburegama Walawwe Ratnayake Mudiyansela Ralahamilage Anoma Subashinie Ratnayake,

2

‘Ratnagiri’, Arambegama, Kumburugama. DEFENDANT – RESPONDENT And Now Between Kumburegama Walawwe Ratnayake Mudiyansela Ralahamilage Anoma Subashinie Ratnayake, ‘Ratnagiri’, Arambegama, Kumburugama. DEFENDANT – RESPONDENT – APPELLANT Vs. Dissanayake Mudiyanselage Devapirya Bandara Dehideniya, 301/35, Sir Cuda RatwaƩe Mawatha, Didamwala, Kandy. PLAINTIFF – APPELLANT – RESPONDENT

Before: Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J Arjuna Obeyesekere, J Counsel: Chathura Galhena with Devmini Bulegoda for the Defendant – Respondent – Appellant Yuwin Matugama with Patalee DoraƟyawa, Gihini Yapa and Tharushi Bethmage for the PlainƟﬀ – Appellant – Respondent Argued on: 10th October 2025 WriƩen Tendered by the Defendant – Respondent – Appellant on 1st August 2024 Submissions:

Tendered by the PlainƟﬀ – Appellant – Respondent on 17th June 2025 Decided on: 20th March 2026

3

Obeyesekere, J (1) The primary issue that needs to be decided in this appeal is whether the PlainƟﬀ –

Appellant – Respondent [the PlainƟﬀ] is enƟtled to speciﬁc performance of the obligaƟon undertaken by the Defendant – Respondent – Appellant [the Defendant] in terms of the Agreement to Sell No. 73 dated 9th October 2005 [P1] to transfer the property referred to in the Schedule of P1 to the PlainƟﬀ. Facts in brief (2) The Defendant is the owner of the property referred to in P1 in extent of 4A 0R 26P

by virtue of Deed No. 36710 dated 20th June 1994 [P7]. The PlainƟﬀ and the Defendant entered into P1 in terms of which the Defendant agreed to sell the aforemenƟoned property to the PlainƟﬀ for a sum of Rs. 2,200,000. The PlainƟﬀ made an advance payment of Rs. 300,000 to the Defendant, and was required to pay the Defendant the balance sum of Rs. 1,900,000 within six months of the execuƟon of P1, that being on or before 9th April 2006. The Defendant was required at that point, and simultaneously with the payment of money, to execute a deed of transfer in favour of the PlainƟﬀ. (3) In order to raise the balance sum of money, the PlainƟﬀ states that he obtained an

overdraŌ facility of Rs. 1 million from the Bank of Ceylon in January 2006. The statement issued by the Bank of Ceylon [P3] conﬁrms that the current account of the PlainƟﬀ had a credit balance of Rs. 1,013,591 by 5th April 2006. In need of a further sum of Rs. 900,000 to complete the transacƟon in terms of P1, the PlainƟﬀ states that he made arrangements with Ceylon Trust Investment and Finance Company Limited [Ceylon Trust Limited] to obtain a sum of Rs. 2,500,000. The PlainƟﬀ claims that the said sum of money was made available to him by Ceylon Trust Limited on 4th April 2006. (4) The PlainƟﬀ states that he met the Defendant on 5th April 2006, informed her that

he is ready to complete the transacƟon and requested the Defendant to call over at the oﬃce of Ceylon Trust Limited in order to sign the deed. He states further that the Defendant refused to do so on the basis that the property has a higher value than what the parƟes had agreed to sell it for in P1. The Defendant however denies

4

that she was informed by the PlainƟﬀ that he was ready to proceed with the transacƟon and/or that he has raised the balance sum of money to pay her and/or was asked to come to sign the deed. It is admiƩed by the PlainƟﬀ that other than having informed the Defendant verbally, the PlainƟﬀ did not send the Defendant a leƩer informing her that he is ready to complete the transacƟon or requesƟng her to be present at a parƟcular locaƟon and on a parƟcular date in order to execute the deed.

(5) The PlainƟﬀ claims further that aŌer the Defendant declined to proceed with the

transacƟon in terms of P1, he sought the advice of the AƩorney-at-Law who had prepared P1 on the course of acƟon he should adopt. The PlainƟﬀ states that he was advised to ﬁle a caveat at the Land Registry, which he did on 6th April 2006 [P5], and to make a complaint to the Police that the Defendant had not come to sign the deed which he did on the same day at the Galagedara Police StaƟon [P9]. The PlainƟﬀ however did not call as a witness the AƩorney-at-Law who is said to have advised him.

(6) The AƩorney-at-Law for the PlainƟﬀ had thereaŌer sent a leƩer of demand dated

24th April 2006 [P8] to the Defendant demanding that the deed be executed within 14 days as undertaken by the Defendant in P1. The PlainƟﬀ states that the Defendant did not respond to P8. Thus, the posiƟon of the PlainƟﬀ is that he was ready and willing to perform his obligaƟon in terms of P1, but that the Defendant had breached her obligaƟon undertaken in P1 to transfer the said property upon payment of the balance sum of money. Speciﬁc Performance (7) Withers, J stated in Holmes v Alia Marikar (1 NLR 282; at page 285) that, “The right

speciﬁcally to compel a person to give something which he has promised to give, or to do something which he has promised to do, has been frequently recognized and given eﬀect to in our Courts. If the thing cannot be given or done, then its equivalent, id quod creditoris interest praestaƟonem ﬁeri, is exacted.” (8) In Jeremias Fernando and another v Perera and another [(1926) 28 NLR 183; at page

184] Lyall Grant, J stated that, “unless the Court is saƟsﬁed that the plainƟﬀs have

5

fulﬁlled their part of the contract, so far as it is possible for them to do so, namely, by tender of the price, it seems obvious that it cannot order the defendants to perform their part of the contract inasmuch as the condiƟon precedent to such performance has not been fulﬁlled.” [emphasis added] (9) GraƟaen, J stated in Thaheer v Abdeen (57 NLR 1; at page 3) that, "In this country,

the right to claim speciﬁc performance of an agreement to sell immovable property is regulated by the Roman-Dutch Law and not by the English Law. … Under the Roman-Dutch Law, on the other hand, the accepted view is that every party who is ready to carry out his term of the bargain prima facie enjoys a legal right to demand performance by the other party; and this right is subject only to the overriding discreƟon of the Court to refuse the remedy in the interests of jusƟce in parƟcular cases.” [emphasis added] (10) In Dedigama Group Private Limited v Nagoda Manalage Piyasena and another [SC

Appeal No. 49/2017; SC minutes of 8th October 2025], Janak De Silva, J stated as follows:

“It is trite law that the party seeking to enforce the contract must be ready and willing to perform his part of the bargain. … … A plainƟﬀ who has failed to perform his obligaƟon, which is condiƟonal to requiring the defendant to perform his obligaƟon, will not be granted the remedy of speciﬁc performance. … In the case of a contract which imposes reciprocal obligaƟons on the parƟes, the plainƟﬀ is enƟtled to speciﬁc performance only if he has in fact made performance of his own obligaƟons, or if he is able and prepared to do so. …” [emphasis added] (11) Having considered the law relaƟng to speciﬁc performance in detail, Wegappuli, J

stated in P.N. Wimalaratne v T.T.P. Anthony Fernando and another (SC Appeal No.244/2014; SC minutes of 16th June 2022] as follows:

“Thus, it appears from the above cited judicial precedents that the actual tendering of the purchase price in the form of cash by the purchaser was not

6

parƟcularly insisted on by the Courts as an absolute pre-condiƟon to hold that there was in fact a tender of the agreed purchase price. If the aƩendant circumstances indicate the purchaser’s demonstraƟon of willingness, readiness and ability to pay the purchase price, coupled with an unqualiﬁed and uncondiƟonal oﬀer of same to the seller, it is reasonable to conclude that there was proper tender of the purchase price by the purchaser.” [emphasis added] (12) While each case would depend on the intenƟon of the parƟes as reﬂected in their

agreement to sell and on the evidence that had been presented before the trial Court, it is clear that in order to succeed a plainƟﬀ must prove that he had the money to proceed with the transacƟon and that he was ready and willing to proceed with the transacƟon. AcƟon in the District Court and the appeal to the High Court (13) It is in the above factual background that the PlainƟﬀ ﬁled acƟon in the District Court

of Kandy [the District Court] on 29th May 2006 seeking speciﬁc performance of the obligaƟon undertaken by the Defendant under and in terms of P1 to transfer to the PlainƟﬀ the said property. (14) By its judgment delivered on 5th June 2017, the District Court dismissed the acƟon

of the PlainƟﬀ. The District Court held that although the PlainƟﬀ had claimed that he had obtained a sum of Rs. 2,500,000 from Ceylon Trust Company and was therefore ready and willing to complete the transacƟon with the Defendant, that was not so since Ceylon Trust Company was only willing to make available the said sum once the PlainƟﬀ had transferred the property that he was due to purchase from the Defendant to Ceylon Trust Company, whereas in terms of P1, the obligaƟon of the Defendant was to execute the deed transferring the property to the PlainƟﬀ at the Ɵme that the PlainƟﬀ hands over the money to the Defendant.

(15) Aggrieved, the PlainƟﬀ invoked the appellate jurisdicƟon of the Civil Appellate High

Court of the Central Province holden in Kandy [the High Court] which allowed the appeal of the PlainƟﬀ by its judgment dated 2nd September 2022.

7

(16) The High Court has correctly idenƟﬁed the legal posiƟon that in order to obtain

speciﬁc performance of a contractual obligaƟon, the party seeking such performance must establish that he/she was ready and willing to proceed with the obligaƟon cast on such party but that the other party, in breach of their contractual undertaking, failed or refused to perform their part of the bargain.

(17) Having done so, the High Court concluded that the PlainƟﬀ was ready and willing to

fulﬁll the terms of P1 by 9th April 2006. In arriving at the said conclusion, the High Court relied on three items of evidence. The ﬁrst is that the PlainƟﬀ had ﬁled a caveat on 6th April 2006, the second is that the PlainƟﬀ had ﬁled a police complaint on the same date and the third was that Ceylon Trust Company had “approved a sum of Rs. 2,500,000” to the PlainƟﬀ.

(18) Accordingly, the High Court concluded that the District Court had failed to consider

the above three items of documentary evidence presented by the PlainƟﬀ which in the view of the High Court, was suﬃcient evidence that the PlainƟﬀ was ready and willing to perform his part of the bargain. The High Court thereaŌer set aside the judgment of the District Court and granted the PlainƟﬀ the relief prayed for. QuesƟons of Law (19) The Defendant sought and obtained leave to appeal from this Court on 13th June

2024 against the judgment of the High Court on the following three quesƟons of law:

(a) Did the High Court err in law in evaluaƟng the conduct of the PlainƟﬀ in having the transacƟon completed on or before the due date? (b) Did the High Court err in law in analysing the evidence and the documents

submiƩed by the Finance Company regarding the release of the money for the transacƟon? (c) Did the High Court err in law in concluding that the PlainƟﬀ has proved the fact that he has made himself available before the Defendant to complete the transacƟon with the required amount of money on or before the due date?

8

TransacƟon with Ceylon Trust Company (20) In my view, of the three documents relied upon by the High Court, the most

important is the transacƟon that the PlainƟﬀ claimed that he had with Ceylon Trust Company, since it is only if that transacƟon is established can it be said that the PlainƟﬀ was ready and willing to perform his obligaƟon on 9th April 2006. The complaint to the Police and the ﬁling of the caveat would at its best only be supporƟve evidence of the posiƟon of the PlainƟﬀ and would become relevant only if the PlainƟﬀ succeeds in establishing that Ceylon Trust Company had given him at least a sum of Rs. 900,000 in order to pay the Defendant. (21) In Muhandiram and another v Salam and another [(1947) 49 NLR 80; at page 82] it

was held that “Unless otherwise agreed delivery of the property and payment of the price are concurrent condiƟons: the seller must be ready and willing to give possession of the property to the buyer and the buyer must be ready and willing to pay. ... It is a fundamental principal that the payment of the purchase money and the delivery of the conveyance are to be simultaneous acts to be performed interchangeably.” [emphasis added] (22) With regard to the transacƟon with Ceylon Trust Company, there are three items of

evidence that must be considered. They are, a leƩer issued by Ceylon Trust Company on 21st April 2006 [P4], the evidence of the PlainƟﬀ and the evidence of an oﬃcer from Ceylon Trust Company. (23) P4 has been issued by the Manager of Ceylon Trust Company to the PlainƟﬀ and

reads as follows:

“Ǩưඥ ගාස්Ʊ හා ආයතනෙɏ අෙනýƮ පɜපාලන ɪයදȼ ලබා ගැǨම සȼබǦධෙයǧ. ඉහත නȼ සදහǦ ƌ.එȼ.ƌ. බƜඩාර ෙදʏෙදƝය වන ඔබ ɪʆǦ අප ආයතනෙයǦ ɼ ලංකා වලංě ȿදɣǦ ɞȘයɢ ɪʆපǦ ලúෂයක (ɞ.2,500,000/-) ȿදලú Ǩưඥ ෙහ්.ɜŸගහෙපාල මහතා ɪʆǦ ɣයා සහƯක කල ඔȗȚ අංක 36710 හා බලයලƮ ȽǧǦෙදʤɞ ආə.ź.සමරʆංහ මහතා ɪʆǦ මැන සහƯක කල ȘɉුɞපƮ අංක 980 ʏ සදහǦ ෙǊපල වන අúකර - 4, ɞƊ - 2, පəචස් - 26 ක Ȫȼ ȝමාණය ʆǦනúකරව ඉහත ආයතනයට ɪýණා ඉහත සදහǦ ȿදල 2006.04.04 ʆට 2006.04.10 ǎන දúවා, ǧýƮ කල අතර එම ȿදල ඔබ ɪʆǦ ලබා ෙනාගැǨම ǧසා අප ආයතනය ɪʆǦ දැɝමට ʆǐ ɭ Ǩưඥ ගාස්Ʊ හා අෙනýƮ ɪයදȼ ෙලස ඔබ ɪʆǦ අප ආයතනයට ɼ ලංකා වලංě ȿදɣǦ ɞȘයɢ Ưස් හතර දහස් හƮʆය පනහක (ɞ.34,750/-) ක ȿදලú ෙගɪය ɒƱ බව ෙමɐǦ ඔබ ෙවත

දǦවා ʆŹȽ.”

9

(24) On a ﬁrst reading of P4, it appears that the PlainƟﬀ has sold a property that he owned

by virtue of Deed No. 36710 to Ceylon Trust Company for a sum of Rs. 2,500,000 but that the PlainƟﬀ has not taken the money from Ceylon Trust Company. In other words, that the PlainƟﬀ was ready and willing to pay the Defendant the balance sum as he had sold a property owned by him to Ceylon Trust Company and obtained the said sum of Rs. 2,500,000. However, what is important is that Deed No. 36710 is the deed by which the Defendant had become the owner of the said property and therefore the PlainƟﬀ could not have raised any money by the sale of that property since the PlainƟﬀ was yet to become its owner. It is perhaps important to state that it was not the posiƟon of the PlainƟﬀ that he was obtaining a loan from Ceylon Trust Company and that he was due to mortgage the said property as security for the said loan. Thus, the claim of the PlainƟﬀ that he was due to receive a sum of Rs. 2,500,000 from Ceylon Trust Company by 6th April 2006 and that he was ready and willing to pay the balance sum of money to the Defendant on or before 9th April 2006 is not supported by P4. (25) This takes me to the evidence of Ravindranath Athauda, Manager at Ceylon Trust

Company. His posiƟon that the arrangement was for the PlainƟﬀ to sell the said property to Ceylon Trust Company is borne out by the following evidence:

“ආයතනෙයǦ එම ෙǊපළ ȽලǏ ගැǨම සදහා ඔʑ ෙවǩෙවǦ ලúෂ 25 ක ȿදලú ෙවǦ කර ƯȬණා. ඒ වෙĘම එම ෙǊපළ Ƚලට ගǦන කටɒƱ කරලා ƯȬණා. ඒ බව ෙමම ɣȘෙයǦ සනාථ කරලා Ưෙබනවා.” ȝ :- එතෙකාට පැ.04 දරණ ෙɢඛනය ǧýƮ කරලා ƯෙබǦෙǦ ʆෙලʤǦžස්Ÿ ඉǦෙවස්ŸමǦŸ

ඇǦƊ ʝනෑǦස් සමාගෙමǦ? උ :- එෙහමɐ. ȝ :- එතෙකාට ඔය ෙදʏෙදǧය ûයන ȚǊගලයා එයාට අɐƯ ඉඩමú ඔය ආයතනයට ɪýණලා

ɞȘයɢ ලúෂ 25 ක ȿදලú ආයතනෙɏ ƯȪලා Ưෙබනවා. ඔʑ ෙවǩෙවǦ? උ :- එෙහමɐ. ȝ :- එම ȿදල ɞȘයɢ ලúෂ 25ක ȿදල 2006.04.04 වනදා ʆට 2006.04.10 වන ǎන දúවා කාලය

ƱලǏ ඔʑට ලබා ගǦන අවස්ථාව ƯȪලා Ưෙබනවා? උ :- ඔɩ.

10

ȝ :- නȿƮ අරෙගන නැහැ? උ :- අර ගƮෙƮ නැහැ. අȘට පැවɞෙɩ නැහැ. ȝ :- ෙකාෙහාමහɜ පැවɞවා නȼ තමɐ ෙȼ ȿදල ඔʑෙĘ නȽǦ තැǦපƮ ෙවǦෙǦ? උ :- තැǦපƮ කරලා ƯȬණා. ȝ :- කɬද තැǦපƮ කෙɢ? උ :- ආයතනෙයǦ තැǦපƮ කෙɢ. ȝ :- ෙමම ෙǊපළ ɪýණනවා නȼ ɞȘයɢ ලúෂ 25 ú ඕන ෙɩලාවක ෙදǦන ʉදානȼ කරලා ƯȬණා? උ :- ඔɩ. ȝ :- නȿƮ ඔʑ එම ෙǊපළ පැවɞෙɩ නැහැ? උ :- පැවɞෙɩ නැƯ ǧසා ǐǦෙǦ නැහැ. ȝ :- එතෙකාට ඔʑ ෙපාෙරාǦǐ ɬණා ඔʑට අɐƯ ෙǊපළú ɪýණලා ɞȘයɢ ලúෂ 25 ක ȿදල ඕන

ûයලා. එම ȿදල මට ලබා ගැǨම සදහා මට අɐƯ ෙමම ෙǊපළ අȘ ɪýණනවා ෙමම ආයතනයට ûයලා? උ :- ඔɩ. ȝ :- නȿƮ එෙහම ɪýƟෙɩ නැහැ එයා? උ :- නැහැ. ȝ :- ඔʑට ෙමම ෙǊපළ ɜɤස් කරǦන ȚʚවǦකමú ƯȬණද තȿǦලාට? උ :- ෙȼක ɜɤස් කරǦෙǦ ඔȗȚව ɣɩවට පස්ෙස්. ȝ :- එෙහම ʆǦනúකර ඔȗȚවú ɣɩෙɩ නැහැ ෙǦද? උ :- නැහැ. ȝ :- ඒක ǧසා ෙමම කාලය Ʊළ ෙමම ƌ.ș. ෙදʏෙදǧය ûයන ȚǊගලයාට ɞȘයɢ ලúෂ 25 ක

ȿදලú ලබා ගැǨමට ඔʑට හැûයාවú ƯȬෙƜ නැහැ? උ :- ලබා ගǦන හැûයාවú ƯȬෙƜ නැහැ ûයǦෙǦ ƯȬණා. ȝ :- හැûයාවú ƯȬණා ෙවǦනɐ නැƯ ෙවǦනɐ ෙදකú ෙවǦන බැහැ ෙǦද?

11

උ :- ඔɩ. ȝ :- ඒ ûයǦෙǦ සමාගම ʉදානȼ ෙවලා ʏŹයා ලúෂ 25ú ඔʑට ෙදǦන? උ :- එෙහමɐ. ȝ :- ඒක ෙදǦන නȼ සමාගමට ඔʑ ɪʆǦ ෙǊපළ ɪûƝය ɒƱව ƯȬණා? උ :- එෙහමɐ. ȝ :- ඒක ɪûƟෙɩ නැහැ? උ :- නැහැ. ȝ :- ɪûƟෙɩ නැƯ ǧසා එම ȿදල ඔʑට ǧදහස් කරǦන බැɜ ɬණා සමාගමට? උ :- ඔɩ. (26) The PlainƟﬀ admiƩed the above arrangement in his evidence. It is thus clear that the

PlainƟﬀ had agreed with Ceylon Trust Company to sell the property that he was buying from the Defendant to Ceylon Trust Company and for the payment to be made directly to him, and thereaŌer to uƟlise the money that he had by then received from Ceylon Trust Company to seƩle the Defendant. (27) In other words, the PlainƟﬀ was going to do a “double transacƟon” and make a quick

proﬁt. While I don’t see anything objecƟonable with a double transfer, it was not the posiƟon of the PlainƟﬀ that two deeds of transfer were to be executed, one from the Defendant to the PlainƟﬀ and immediately thereaŌer another deed by the PlainƟﬀ to the Ceylon Trust Company. The laƩer deed must be preceded by the former, for the PlainƟﬀ could not have eﬀected a transfer without him having Ɵtle. (28) A single deed executed by the Defendant in favour of Ceylon Trust Company is

contrary to what the PlainƟﬀ and the Defendant had contracted in terms of Clause 2 of P1, which was for the Defendant to be paid the balance sum and for her to simultaneously execute a deed in favour of the PlainƟﬀ, and no other. That was the intenƟon of the parƟes reﬂected in P1 and as pointed by Sisira De Abrew, J in Ginthota Sarukkale Vitharanage Hemalatha Piyathilake v Wicrama Pathiranage Mahesh Ruwan Pathirana [SC Appeal No: 218/2014, SC minutes of 15th February 2017], “When taking a decision whether to grant relief or not in a case of breach of

12

contract it is necessary to examine the intenƟon of the parƟes at the Ɵme that they signed the agreement.” Thus, to my mind, the PlainƟﬀ cannot seek to enforce the contractual obligaƟons of the Defendant in terms of P1 without him complying with his obligaƟon to pay the Defendant. (29) I must also state that in any event, the arrangement that the PlainƟﬀ claimed he had

with Ceylon Trust Company has not been supported by any other evidence. If his claim was genuine, the PlainƟﬀ ought to have produced:

(a) The draŌ deed that was to be executed in favour of Ceylon Trust Company; (b) Evidence of the search that Ceylon Trust Company would have carried out of

the Ɵtle pertaining to the said property at the Land Registry prior to agreeing to purchase the said property; (c) Any other evidence that reﬂects the discussions that the PlainƟﬀ had with the

Ceylon Trust Company pertaining to the sale of the property; and (d) The evidence of the AƩorney-at-Law who was due to aƩest the deed of transfer

from the Defendant to the PlainƟﬀ, as well as from the PlainƟﬀ to Ceylon Trust Company. (30) In view of the above ﬁnding, I am of the view that the complaint made to the Police

and the ﬁling of the caveat does not support the posiƟon of the PlainƟﬀ that he was ready and willing to complete the transacƟon. I am saƟsﬁed that the decision of the District Court is based on a correct interpretaƟon of P4 and the evidence relaƟng thereto. I am therefore unable to agree with the decision of the High Court. (31) There are two other maƩers that I wish to advert to. The ﬁrst is that the PlainƟﬀ did

not inform the Defendant in wriƟng that he is ready to conclude the transacƟon, even though according to him, the Defendant had changed her mind. The PlainƟﬀ had been cross examined on this maƩer and his response was that he acted on legal advice which was to lodge a caveat and complaint to the Police.

(32) The second maƩer that I wish to advert to is Clause 5 of P1, which reads as follows:

13

“ෙදෙවǧ පúෂය ɪʆǦ ඉහත ü ɞȘයɢ ලúෂ දහ නවයක (ɞ.1,900,000.00) ක ȿදල ෙගɭ පʈ ෙමʏ පහත උපෙɢඛනෙɏ සදහǦ ෙǊපල ʆǦනúකර ඔȗȚවú මęǦ ɪýණා පවරා Ǐම පළȿ පúෂය ɪʆǦ පැහැර හɜǩ ලැȬවෙහාƮ ෙදෙවǧ පúෂය ɪʆǦ එü ɞȘයɢ ලúෂ 1,900,000.00 ක ȿදල මහǩවර ǎසා අǝකරණෙɏ තැǦපƮ ෙකාට ඉහත ü ɞȘයɢ 2,200,000 ක ȿදලú සදහා ෙදෙවǧ පúෂය නȽǦ අǝකරණෙɏ ෙරŏස්žාə ලවා ඔȗȚවú ɣයවා ගැǨමට ෙදෙවǧ පúෂයට

අɐƯයú ඇƯ බවƮ පළȿෙවǧ පúෂය ȘʘගǨ.” (33) I must admit that the above clause appears slightly ambiguous as to when the

payment should be made but the intenƟon of the parƟes appears to have been that in the event of the Defendant not performing her part of the bargain, the PlainƟﬀ could deposit the said sum of Rs. 1,900,000 in the District Court and thereaŌer move the Registrar to execute a ﬁscal’s conveyance in terms of an acƟon that is ﬁled. It is admiƩed that the PlainƟﬀ has not deposited the said sum of Rs. 1,900,000 in the District Court at the Ɵme acƟon was ﬁled or at any Ɵme thereaŌer. (34) The High Court has stated that, “Clause 5 shows if the Defendant failed to fulﬁll and

convey the transfer, the PlainƟﬀ has the right to deposit the said sum of Rs. 1,900,000 in the Court Registry and get a ﬁscal conveyance from the Registrar of the District Court. This is the exact relief prayed for from the District Court in this acƟon.” Thus, the High Court has taken the view that the necessity to deposit the money arises only aŌer judgment has been delivered. (35) However, in Dedigama Group Private Limited v Nagoda Manalage Piyasena and

another [supra], Janak De Silva, J referring to clause 6 of the agreement P5 in that case which required the buyer to deposit in Court the sum payable in the event the seller refused to transfer the property in spite of the buyer being able and willing to perform his part of the bargain, stated that, “This is a clear expression of the intenƟon of the parƟes that, the Appellant has the right to seek speciﬁc performance of the agreement to sell only upon deposiƟng the balance amount due in Court. The Court must give eﬀect to their express intenƟon.”[emphasis added] (36) JusƟce De Silva went on to state follows:

“… it is a fundamental legal principle in Roman Dutch Law that the party seeking to enforce a contract must be ready and willing to perform his part of the bargain. This necessarily leads to the conclusion that a party seeking to obtain speciﬁc

14

performance of a contractual sƟpulaƟon which is condiƟonal upon the payment of a sum of money, must bring the amount due to Court and deposit it to the credit of the acƟon at the Ɵme of ﬁling the plaint.

Imposing such a requirement certainly meets the interest of jusƟce. In addiƟon to the principle that a party seeking to obtain speciﬁc performance must be willing and able to perform his part of the bargain, it ensures that a defendant is not dragged through a Ɵme consuming and costly liƟgaƟon only to ﬁnd at the end of the trial that the plainƟﬀ is not in a posiƟon to perform his part of the bargain which is condiƟonal to the obligaƟon of the defendant.” [emphasis added] (37) Thus, the PlainƟﬀ ought to have deposited the said sum of money in the District

Court at the Ɵme of ﬁling acƟon. Failure to do so is a further reﬂecƟon of the fact that the PlainƟﬀ was not ready and willing to conclude the transacƟon as contemplated by P1. Conclusion (38) In the above circumstances, I answer the three quesƟons of law in the aﬃrmaƟve.

The judgment of the High Court is set aside, the judgment of the District Court is aﬃrmed and this appeal is allowed, with costs ﬁxed at Rs. One Hundred and FiŌy Thousand.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT