==== BLOCKS ==== 

SC APPEAL 91/2023 JUDGEMENT Page 1 of 21

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for Special

Leave to Appeal in terms of Section 9 of the

High Court of the Provinces (Special

Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990 against the

Judgement of the High Court of the

Western province holden in Colombo

dated 22.06.2022

SC APPEAL 91/2023

SC SPL LA 202/22

D. R. P. Abeysinghe,

No. 80/6, Temples Road,

Mount Lavinia.

APPLICANT

HC Case no. HC ALT/21/2021

LT Colombo Case No: 2/907/2019

vs

Canwill Holdings Private Limited,

No. 116, Galle Road,

Colombo 3.

RESPONDENT

AND NOW

In a matter of an appeal under Section 31D

of the Industrial Dispute Act No. 43 of

1950 as amended

SC APPEAL 91/2023 JUDGEMENT Page 2 of 21

Canwill Holdings Private Limited,

No. 116, Galle Road,

Colombo 3.

RESPONDENT-APPELLANT

vs

D. R. P. Abeysinghe,

No. 80/6, Temples Road,

Mount Lavinia.

APPLICANT-RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

D. R. P. Abeysinghe,

No. 80/6, Temples Road,

Mount Lavinia.

APPLICANT-RESPONDENT-APPELANT

vs

Canwill Holdings Private Limited,

No. 116, Galle Road,

Colombo 3.

RESPONDENT-APPELLANT-RESPONDENT

SC APPEAL 91/2023 JUDGEMENT Page 3 of 21

BEFORE :S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J

KUMUDINI WICKREMASINGHE, J,

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

COUNSEL :Ms. Shamalie De Silva for the Applicant-Respondent-Appellant

Mr. Ruwantha Coorey with Ms. Keshara Hewavissa Instructed by

Marian Chambers for the Respondent- Appellant-Respondent.

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS : Written submissions on behalf of the Applicant-Respondent-

Appellant on 20th June 2023.

Written submissions on behalf of the Respondent-Appellant-

Respondent on 14th July 2023.

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

:

:

07th February 2024

17.07.2024

S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

The instant case concerns an application to the Labour Tribunal on 15th August 2019, against

the alleged termination of employment of the Applicant-Respondent-Appellant namely Don

Rajendra Prasad Abeysinghe (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the “Appellant”), by the

Respondent-Appellant-Respondent abovenamed Canwill Holdings Private Limited

(hereinafter sometimes referred to as the “Respondent Company”). Upon such application,

an inquiry was held, thereafter which the President of the Labour tribunal by Order dated 20th

January 2021 found the termination of employment to be wrongful and unjust, and awarded

compensation of One Million and Six Hundred Thousand rupees (Rs.1,600,000/-) to the

Appellant. The Respondent Company being dissatisfied with the said order preferred an

appeal to the High Court, wherein, the Learned Judge of the High Court, by Judgement dated

22nd June 2022 allowed the appeal and vacated the order made by the President of the Labour

SC APPEAL 91/2023 JUDGEMENT Page 4 of 21

Tribunal. Being aggrieved with the said Judgment of the High Court, the Appellant appealed

to the Supreme Court which granted leave on 03rd February 2023 on two questions of law,

which have been reproduced below for ease of reference:

“(i) Did the learned High Court Judge err in law in determining that there was

no employer-employee relationship between the Petitioner and Respondent?

(ii) Did the Learned High Court Judge err in law by failing to appreciate that

any termination of employment of the Petitioner by the Respondent must be on

lawful and/or just grounds independent of any removal as a Director of the

Respondent?”

Factual Matrix

The Appellant submits that by virtue of the Letter from Secretary to the Ministry of Finance

dated 25th March 20151, he was appointed as the Managing Director of the Respondent

Company, and that on 23rd July 2019 the Respondent Company had terminated his services

without justful cause.2. It was also submitted that at the time of the alleged termination of

employment, the Appellant was paid a monthly salary of Rs.650,000. Subsequently, the

Appellant filed an application to the Labour Tribunal on 15th March 2019 seeking inter alia the

following reliefs, namely a declaration that the termination of employment was illegal and

unjust, compensation for termination, and back wages.

The Respondent Company in its Answer dated 10th September 2019 stated that the Appellant

was not an employee of the Respondent Company since he was appointed as a Director and

not employed under a contract, thereby the Labour Tribunal had no jurisdiction over this

matter since this application did not fall within the ambit of s.31B(1) of the Industrial Disputes

Act. Accordingly, the Appellant was removed from the position of Director by the Board of

Directors at an Extraordinary General Meeting having followed due process, and thus, it was

not an unlawful termination of employment. The Appellant in his response stated that the

1 vide top pg.16 of the High Court brief, letter marked as “A1” 2 vide top pg.19 of the High Court brief, letter marked as “A2”

SC APPEAL 91/2023 JUDGEMENT Page 5 of 21

positions of Managing Director and Director were distinct and entirely independent of each

other, and that he was only removed from the Board of Directors on 06th August 2019.

The Labour Tribunal by its Order dated 20th January 2021 held in favour of the Appellant and

stated that the Appellant was an employee within the ambit of s.31B(1) of the Industrial

Disputes Act, and that the Respondent Company had wrongfully terminated his employment.

The Appellant was also awarded the sum of Rupees One Million and Six Hundred Thousand

(Rs. 1,600,000/-) as compensation for the wrongful termination.

Being aggrieved by the Order of the Labour Tribunal, the Respondent Company preferred an

Appeal to the Civil Appellate High Court holden in Colombo. The Learned High Court Judge

by his Judgement dated 22nd June 2022 set aside the Order of the Labour Tribunal and held

that an employer-employee relationship did not exist between the Appellant and the

Respondent Company, and that the termination of the Appellant’s employment as the

Managing Director was predicated on the removal of the Appellant as the Director. Therefore,

the Appellant was not wrongfully terminated by the Respondent Company. Being aggrieved

by the Judgement of the High Court, the Appellant has appealed to the Supreme Court.

Having done a thorough examination of the aforementioned questions of law in light of the

facts and circumstances of the instant case, there are three factual issues to be considered.

First, whether the Appellant would be categorized as an “employee” within the purview of the

Industrial Disputes Act. Second, that in the instant case, the removal of the Appellant from the

post of Managing Director is predicated on his removal as Director, thereby, upon the

Appellant being removed as a Director of the Respondent Company on 06th August 2019, his

post of Managing Director is inevitably ceased. Third, the removal of the Appellant from his

directorate is not wrongful nor is it unlawful, for three reasons. First, due process for removal

was followed, second, the cessation from his directorship was not in contravention of his terms

of appointment, and third, the Appellant was not prejudiced as a result of his removal as

director.

In addressing the first factual issue, the legal definition of a “workman” or employee is

provided under s. 48 Industrial Disputes Act, as reproduced below.

SC APPEAL 91/2023 JUDGEMENT Page 6 of 21

" workman " means any person who has entered into or works under

a contract with an employer in any capacity, whether the contract is

expressed or implied, oral or in writing, and whether it is a contract of

service or of apprenticeship, or a contract personally to execute any work

or labour, and includes any person ordinarily employed under any such

contract whether such person is or is not in employment at any particular

time, and includes any person whose services have been terminated.

[Emphasis added]

Further definitions can be found from amongst the plethora of case law on the subject,

of which I have merely cited two. In Ready Mixed Concrete Ltd. (Southeast) v

Minister of Pensions3 uses a three-criterion test to identify a servant or workman.

“(i) The servant agrees that, in consideration of a wage or other

remuneration, he will provide his own work and skill in the performance of

some service for his master. (ii) He agrees, expressly or impliedly, that in the

performance of that service, he will be subject to the other's control in

sufficient degree to make that other master. (iii) The other provisions of the

contract are consistent with its being a contract of service.”

[Emphasis added]

An alternate definition was provided in Ceylon Electricity Board v De Abrew4 whereby

the relationship between the employer and employee was described as follows.

“It is clear that the General Manager has a contract of employment with

the Board; although some parts of the contract may be controlled by the

statutory provisions contained in the Act, the relation between the Board

and the General Manager cannot be explained on any other hypothesis

than on a contractual one”

3 (1976) 78 NLR 79 4 (1969) 2 QB 173

SC APPEAL 91/2023 JUDGEMENT Page 7 of 21

From the above definitions, it can be understood that an employee enters into work under an

agreement or contract to provide some services to the employer to whom he will be

answerable to. It is on this premise that the Appellant claims that the Letter dated 25th March

20155 was a letter of appointment by which he was bestowed the office of Managing Director.

Having perused the said letter, I find this letter by the Secretary to the Ministry of Finance to

be addressed to the Company Secretary of Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation Ltd, who has a

duly registered shareholding of 45.95% in the Respondent Company6. Accordingly, this letter

by the Ministry of Finance amounts to a communication to Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation

Ltd that the Appellant is nominated to be appointed as the Managing Director of the

Respondent Company. The appointment itself was confirmed by way of Letter of Confirmation

of appointment dated 28th March 20157. This letter refers to several Board meetings which

resolved to appoint the Appellant as the Managing Director, which has been reproduced

below.

“We refer to following documentation and wish to confirm your appointment as

Managing Director of Canwill Holdings (Pvt) Ltd, Sinolanka Hotels & Spa (Pvt) Ltd

& Helanco Hotels & Spa (Pvt) Ltd with effect from 20th January 2015.

 Dr R. H. S Samaratunga, Secretary to the Treasury letter ref;

MF2/3/BOD/SLIC dated 24/03/2015 confirming the appointment as at

20/01/2015.

 Dr R. H. S Samaratunga, Secretary to the Treasury letter ref;

MF2/258A/CANWILL dated 25/03/2015 confirming the appointment of

Managing Director.

 Board meeting of Canwill Holdings (Pvt) Ltd held on 26th February 2015

confirming the appointment of Managing Director.

5 vide top pg.16 of the High Court brief, letter marked as “A1” 6 vide top pg.25 of the High Court brief, letter dated 15th July 2019 7 vide pg.124 of the Court brief letter marked “A2”

SC APPEAL 91/2023 JUDGEMENT Page 8 of 21

 Board meeting of Sinolanka Hotels & Spa (Pvt) Ltd held on 11th March

2015 confirming the appointment of Managing Director.

 Board meeting of Helanco Hotels & Spa (Pvt) Ltd held on 11th March 2015

confirming the appointment of Managing Director.

 Board meeting of Canwill Holdings (Pvt) Ltd held on 28th May 2015 on

approval of the remuneration”

Therefore, the alleged Letter of appointment submitted by the Appellant is not a letter of

appointment or contract of employment as claimed by the Appellant but only a

communication to the Respondent Company via Sri Lankan Insurance Corporation Ltd with

regards to the nomination of the Appellant.

A further factual observation in the instant case is that the Appellant was not paid a salary, nor

did he contribute to any EPF/ETF payment as a regular workman. Instead, he was granted a

director’s fee inclusive of allowances. This is evidenced by the Letter of confirmation8 which

sets out the terms and conditions of the Appellant’s appointment, to which the Appellant has

agreed and accepted by signature. I draw my attention to the 1st clause of these conditions

which been reproduced below.

(1) You will be paid an all-inclusive allowance net of taxes of Four Hundred

Thousand only (Rs. 400,000/-) per month.

[Emphasis added]

The clause abovementioned does not refer to the Appellant being paid a “salary” but an

“allowance”. This allowance was approved by the Board of Directors of the Respondent

Company at the Board Meeting held on 28th May 20159. In addition to the above monthly

allowance, the Appellant was also entitled to a transport allowance of Rs. 150,000/- a month,

which can be seen in the Appellant’s payment slip for July 201910. This was further admitted by

8 vide top pg.19 of the High Court brief, letter marked as “A2” 9 vide pg.2 of the Order of the Labour Tribunal dated 20th January 2021 10 vide pg.128 of the High Court brief, document marked as “A4”

SC APPEAL 91/2023 JUDGEMENT Page 9 of 21

the Appellant himself at the cross-examination, the admission of which has been reproduced

below along with an approximate translation11.

“ȝ:- මම ඇʑෙɩ තමǦෙĘ ඔය ɞȘයɢ ලúෂ 4, ɞȘයɢ ලúෂ 6ɐ ගානú ɬෙǦ ෙකාෙහාමද

ûයලා?

උ:- ඒකට ɞȘයɢ ලúෂ 4ට අමතරව වාහන Ǐමනාවú ලැȬනා. ඒ කරලා ඒකට ආදායȼ බǐƮ

එකƱ කරලා තමɐ ෙȼ සැලɜ ස්ɣȗවල මෙĘ සැලɜ එක හැŹයට ෙපǦවǦෙǦ. ෙȼ සැලɜ

ස්ɣȗ එෙú සȼțəණෙයǦම ෙපǦවනවා ස්වාȽƝ”

“Q: I asked you, how did this 4 lakhs become 6 lakhs plus?

A: A vehicle allowance, received in addition to the 4 lakhs, is included in my salary

slips, along with the income tax for my salary. This salary slip indicates all of it.”

It is noted that at all times this payment was referred to by the Appellant himself as “Ǐමනාවú”

(allowance), and not a “වැŻපú” (a salary). Therefore, the Appellant was paid a total director

allowance of Rs. 650,000/- subject to Rs,100,000/- as tax.

Furthermore, the Appellant was aware that he would not be entitled to any EPF or ETF

payments since it was not provided for under his terms of appointment as Managing

Director12. This can be verified by his payment slip for July 201913 which does not include any

contributions such as EPF or ETF. Furthermore, the Public Enterprises Circular No.58(2) dated

13th September 201114 does not provide for any deductions of EPF/ETF under privileges

afforded to a Managing Director/Executive Chairman. While being aware that he was not paid

any EPF/ETF and was not entitled to the same, the Appellant did not raise any complaints to

the Respondent Company during his tenure as Managing Director.

From the above factual and legal analysis, it can be deduced that the Appellant does not

classify as an “employee” within the meaning of s.48 Industrial Disputes Act. Accordingly, this

would disentitle the Appellant from maintaining a cause of action at the Labour Tribunal, since

s. 31B(1)(a) of the Industrial Disputes Act provides as follows.

11 vide pg.20 of the Cross-examination report dated 12th March 2020 12 vide top pg. 19 of the High Court brief, letter marked as “A2” 13 vide top pg. 142 of the High Court brief, document marked “R1” 14 vide pg.144 of the High Court brief, document marked as “R2”

SC APPEAL 91/2023 JUDGEMENT Page 10 of 21

(1) A workman or a trade union on behalf of a workman who is a member of that

union, may make an application in writing to labour tribunal for relief or redress

in respect of any of the following matters:-(See section 7 of Act No. 32 of 1990

relating to pending actions (set out in Annexure to this Chapter). See also Act No.

19 of 1990 in this connection.)

(a) the termination of his services by his employer;

Hence, the Labour Tribunal possesses jurisdiction over relief or redress sought by a workman,

which the Appellant in the instant case is not. The present action by the Appellant is

challenging the decision of the Respondent Company to remove the Appellant from the board

of Directors, as was held by the Labour Tribunal, which is provided below along with an

approximate translation15.

“ෙමම නƍෙɩ ඉɢɥȼකාර ƌ. ආə.ș. අෙȩʆංහ යන අය අයǐȼ පƴයú ෙගාǩ කරȽǦ තමǦව

2015.03.25 ǎන ʆට ඉහත වග උƮතරකාර ආයතනෙɏ කළමණාකාර අධɕúෂක ෙලස ෙස්වයට

බදවා ගǦනා ලද බවƮ, එෙස් ෙස්වය කරȽǦ ʆŹය? 2019.07.23 වන ǎන ûʆǐ ෙහ්Ʊවú

ෙනාදǦවා තමǦෙĘ ෙස්වය අවසǦ කරන ද බවƮ, අවසාන වශෙයǦ ɞȘයɢ 650000/-ක

වැŻපú ලැȬ බවƮ සඳහǦ කරȽǦ ඉත ෙස්වය අවසǦ ûɝම ǨƯ ɪෙරʤǞ සහ අɒúƯ සහගත

බැɪǦ නැවත ෙස්වය ෙහʤ වǦǎ ȿදලú අයැද ඇත.”

“The Applicant, namely D.R.P. Abesinghe, mentioned in his application: that he was

recruited to the post of Managing Director with effect from 25.03.2015; while he

was serving in this capacity, his employment was terminated on 23.07.2019,

without any stated reason; at the time of his dismissal, he was receiving a salary of

Rs. 650000/- and requested either to be reinstated or compensated, claiming that

the termination of his service was illegal and unjustifiable. The Application to the

Labour Tribunal does not concern any alleged rights as an employee, as seen

above.”

15 vide pg.2 of the Order of the Labour Tribunal dated 20th January 2021

SC APPEAL 91/2023 JUDGEMENT Page 11 of 21

The office of a Director is distinct to that of any ordinary workman or employee, by the

undeniable legal reality that a Director is appointed pursuant to the provisions of the

Companies Act, and not hired or employed as is required under the Industrial Disputes Act.

As stipulated under s.204(2) Companies Act, all subsequent directors upon incorporation of

the Company are to be appointed by way of Ordinary Resolution. On the contrary, pursuant

to s.48 of the Industrial Disputes Act a “workman” enters into or works under a contract of

employment with an “employer”. Therefore, it can be construed that a “workman” who is

entitled an application in the Labour Tribunal under s.31B(1) Industrial Disputes Act must be

employed under a contract of employment, whereas a director is appointed by way of an

ordinary resolution in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act. Having perused

the evidence submitted by the Appellant, it appears that his appointment as Managing

Director was by nomination and was resolved at several board meetings as stated above and

thus appointment of the Appellant was in compliance of s.204(2) of the Companies Act.

Further, as per the Letter from the Ministry of Finance dated 24th March 201516, the Appellant

was initially appointed as a Director of the Respondent Company prior to being appointed as

the Managing Director. Even in this instance, he was never employed by the Respondent

Company under a contract to perform duties as an employee but has been appointed as a

member of the board of directors of the Respondent Company. Hence, without being

employed under a contract of employment, such an employer-employee relationship cannot

exist.

However, I acknowledge that there is judicial literature which establishes a Director as a person

of dual capacity, both as workman and director. The distinction is nowhere better illustrated

than in the decision of the Privy Council in Lee v Lee's Air Farming Ltd17. In this case Lee was

the sole governing Director and principal shareholder of a one-man company. Company's

business was air farming for which purpose they used an aeroplane. He entered into a contract

with the company as sole pilot of the company and died while flying the aeroplane. Lee’s

widow claimed compensation from the company. The question was whether he was a

16 vide top pg. 142 of the High Court brief, document marked “R1” 17 (1960) 3 All ER 420

SC APPEAL 91/2023 JUDGEMENT Page 12 of 21

workman within the meaning of New Zealand Workers' Compensation Act which defined a

'worker' as any person who entered into or works under a contract of service with an employer,

whether by way of manual labour, clerical work or otherwise and whether remunerated by

wages, salary or otherwise. It was considered material to determine whether at the time of

death the deceased was acting in his capacity as servant (i.e. as pilot) or as sole governing

director. It was held that that he was acting as a servant and was thus a workman for the

purpose of the Act. Lord Morris stated that it was well established that the mere fact that

someone is a director of a company is no impediment to his entering into a contract to serve

the company.

This dual capacity of a director was also recognized in the Sri Lankan case Collette’s Ltd v

Commissioner of Labour and Others18 where it was held;

“That a Managing Director has a dual capacity of being an employee of the

company and also at the same time takes part in the management of the company.

The fact that as a Managing Director or as a Group Managing Director he takes part

in the affairs of the company does not deprive him of his other capacity as an

employee of the said company”

Also, in Ceylon Meat Products Ltd V Mrs. C. Fernando19 it was held that;

“The mere fact that someone is a Director of a company is no impediment to his

entering into a contract to serve the company; a Director can hold a salaried

employment or an office in addition to his Directorship and so be an employee or

servant”

This concept has been further explained by S. Egalahewa20 which has also been cited in Order

of the Labour Tribunal date21 which provides as follows.

“Persons with dual capacities - A person in one capacity can be a workman and

in another not be a workman. A case in point is a director of a company who, in

18 (1986) 2 SLR 6 19 (1989) 2 SLR 305 20 “Labour Law” 2nd Edn (2020) pages 774-776 21 Vide top pg. 181 of the High Court brief

SC APPEAL 91/2023 JUDGEMENT Page 13 of 21

addition to being a director, may have a contract of service as an executive with

the company.

The relationship between a company and its director is not one of master and

servant. There are Company Directors who also function as working Directors or

Managing Directors. S.R.de Silva citing Palmer's states:

"Directors are not, as such, employees of the Company or employed by the

Company; nor are they servants of the company, or members of the staff... A

director can, however, hold a salaried employment or an office in addition to that

of his directorship which may, for these purposes, make him an employee or

servant, and in such a case he would enjoy any right given to employees as such;

but his directorship and his rights through that directorship are quite

separate from the rights as employee”

The relationship between the company and its Director is not one of master

and servant, and thus qua Director a person cannot seek relief under the

Industrial Disputes Act since he is not a workman as defined. However, since

the law recognizes distinct and divisible capacities, the same person qua executive

would be a workman as defined in the Industrial Disputes Act and could

accordingly seek relief under the Act. The legal basis of this distinction lies in the

fact that a company has no physical but only a legal existence and the

management of its affairs are entrusted to Directors whose exact position with the

company though hard to defined are not considered 'servants’.”

[Emphasis added]

The facts and circumstances of the instant case differ from the case law cited above insomuch

that the Appellant claims to hold the position of both Managing Director and Director and

not a dual capacity as Managing Director/Director and a workman as in the case of Lee v Lee's

Air Farming Ltd22. Therefore, at present the question is not with regards to the Appellant’s

dual capacity as both director and workman but whether such employer-employee

22 vide pg.124 of the Court brief letter marked “A2”

SC APPEAL 91/2023 JUDGEMENT Page 14 of 21

relationship existed between the Appellant and the Respondent Company so as to allow the

Appellant to claim relief for the alleged termination of his employment. Thus, there is no such

employer-employee relationship since the Appellant was nominated and resolved to be

appointed as the Managing Director and was not hired or employed under a contract as

required under s.48 of the Industrial Disputes Act.

Therefore, in light of the factual and legal analysis above, the Appellant was not an employee

of the Respondent Company for the purposes of the Industrial Disputes Act. Thereby, I answer

the first question of law negatively, and hold that the Learned High Court Judge did not err in

law in determining that there was no employer-employee relationship between the Appellant

and the Respondent.

In turning to the second factual issue, the Respondent Company in denying the averments of

the Application of the Appellant before the Labour Tribunal took up the position that the

Appellant was appointed and removed from the post of Director of the Respondent Company

in compliance with the procedure set out in the Companies Act, and that the Appellant, by the

operation of law, ceased to be the Managing Director upon being removed from the board of

directors23. The Appellant in response submitted that the post of Managing Director and

Director are two different positions and led evidence in this regard. While the position of the

Appellant was upheld at the Labour Tribunal, the Learned High Court Judge held otherwise,

stating that the removal of the Appellant as the Managing Director is predicated on his

removal as Director. Thereby, upon the Appellant being removed as a Director of the

Respondent Company on 06th August 2019, his post of Managing Director is inevitably ceased,

and as a result would not therefore constitute a wrongful termination.

The Appellant himself admits during the cross-examination that his appointment as Managing

Director is contingent on him being appointed as member of the board of directors of the

Respondent Company, which I have produced below along with an approximate translation24.

“ȝ:- දැǦ අධɕúෂකවරෙයú ɫම මත ෙǦද කළමණාකාර අධɕúෂක තනƱර ලැෙබǦෙǦ?

23 Vide pg. 30 of the High Court brief, Answer dated 10th September 2019 24 vide pg.29 of the cross-examination report dated 12th May 2020

SC APPEAL 91/2023 JUDGEMENT Page 15 of 21

උ:- එෙහමɐ.

ȝ:- අධɕúෂකවරෙයú ෙනාɬන නȼ ඒක ලැෙබǦෙǦ නෑ, කළමණාකාර අධɕúෂක

වරෙයú වශෙයǦ පƮ ෙවǦන ʏȽකමú ලැෙබǦෙǦ නෑෙǦ, අǧවාəයෙයǦ

අධɕúෂකවරෙයú ɪය ɒƱɐ කළමණාකාර අධɕúෂක වරෙයú ෙවǦන?

උ:- එෙහමɐ”

“Q: The post of Managing Director is obtained upon becoming a director, isn't

it?

A: Yes

Q: It doesn’t entitle anyone other than the Director. It doesn’t give entitlement

to be a Director. One must compulsorily be a Director to be a Managing

Director.

A:Yes”

It for this reason that the Appellant was first appointed as a director of the Respondent

Company and thereafter appointed as the Managing Director25. Both parties seem to place

significant weightage on whether the post of the Appellant has satisfied the legal criteria for

a “workman” as stipulated under the Industrial Disputes Act. While I have ventured on a judicial

excursion to address this issue, at the very essence of the instant case lies the simple truth that

one ought to be a member of the Board of Directors to hold the post of Managing Director.

Therefore, it can be construed that a pre-requisite for being appointed as the Managing

Director is to be a member of the board of directors, and thereby being removed as director

would mean that the Appellant would cease to hold office as Managing Director.

In considering the third factual issue, the removal of the Appellant from his directorate was

not wrongful nor is it unlawful for three reasons namely, first, due process was followed,

second, the cessation from his directorship was not in contravention of his terms of

appointment, and third, the Appellant was not prejudiced as a result of his removal as director.

25 Letter dated 24th March 2015 marked “R1”

SC APPEAL 91/2023 JUDGEMENT Page 16 of 21

It should be noted that the legal procedure for the removal of directors is not found in the

Industrial Disputes Act but in the Companies Act, whereby s.206(1) of the Companies Act

provides that a director may be removed from office by ordinary resolution passed at a

meeting called for the purpose of the removal of the director.

By way of letter dated 10th July 2019 from the Ministry of Finance26, the Appellant was

nominated to be ceased from the post of Managing Director. Following this communication

from the Ministry, the Respondent Company gave notice to all the members of the board of

directors including the Appellant on 22nd July 2019 of a Board meeting scheduled to take place

on 23rd July 2019 at the Ministry of Finance. The said notice indicates that the purpose of this

meeting inter alia was to discuss the position of the Appellant in lieu of the direction received

from the Ministry of Finance with regards to his removal from office27. As indicated in the

Minutes of the said meeting28, the Appellant was present at this meeting and still held the

post of Managing Director of the Respondent Company. At this meeting, the Appellant tabled

his Letter dated 22nd July 2019 at this meeting which is reproduced below for ease of

reference29.

“I write with reference to your notice dated 22nd July 2019 calling for a Board

Meeting at a location other than the registered office of the Company calling

for my removal from the Board of Directors of Canwill Holdings (Pvt) Ltd.

I wish to place on record that by notice issued by the Mr, H.G. Sumanasinghe,

Additional Secretary of the Ministry of Finance bearing reference number MF

1/05/16/317-CH/01 dated 10th July 2019 I have been nominated to be ceased

from the Post of Managing Director of the Board of Directors of the Canwill

Holdings (Pvt) Ltd with immediate effect in breach of the terms and conditions of

my Contract of Employment with Canwill Holdings (Pvt) Ltd, Despite being

arbitrarily and orally being informed that l will be terminated by Mr. B. M. D. B

26 vide pg.126 of the High Court brief, document marked “A3” 27 vide pg. 21 of the High Court brief 28 vide pg.153 of the High Court brief, document marked “R4” 29 Vide: top pg. 153 of the High Court brief, at pg. 2 of the document marked as “R4” to the Written Submissions of the Respondent Company at the Labour Tribunal

SC APPEAL 91/2023 JUDGEMENT Page 17 of 21

Basnayake, Chairman of the Board of Directors of Canwill Holdings (Pvt) Ltd. I

note that no formal letter has been issued to me apart from the aforesaid letter

dated 10th July 2019 by the Ministry of Finance, sent to me today 22nd July 2019

at 10.27 am by the Company Secretaries, P R Secretarial Services (Pvt) Ltd of, 9,

Gregory's Road, Colombo 07.

[Emphasis added]

The Minutes provide that the Chairman of the Respondent Company had informed the

Appellant that his appointment as the Managing Director was upon the instructions of the

Ministry of Finance, and it is the same Ministry which has now advised the Respondent

Company that he cease to be Managing Director30. Thus, it was resolved that in following such

instructions of the Ministry of Finance, that the Appellant be removed from the post of

Managing Director but will remain as a Director of the Respondent Company until he be so

removed by the Shareholders. This can be substantiated by two facts namely, first, the

Appellant was paid his monthly allowance until the end of July, as indicated by his pay slip31,

and second, in the Minutes of the meeting dated 06th August 2019 the Appellant is still

recognized as the Managing Director of the Respondent Company under the list of

attendees32.

At this same meeting it was resolved that another meeting be convened on 06th August 2019

at the registered premises of Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation Ltd. The meeting was for the

purpose of the shareholders of the Respondent Company exercising their right to remove

directors. The Resolution has been reproduced below33.

“THAT Mr. Don Rajendra Prasad Abeysinghe be and is hereby removed from the

office of Director of Canwill Holdings (Pvt) Lid, including the position of the

Managing Director, under and in terms of section 206 of the Companies Act No

7 of 2007 read with Article 25 (4) of the Articles of Association of the Canwill

30 Vide pg. 154 of the High Court brief, Meeting minutes dated 23rd July 2019, marked as “R4” 31 vide pg.128 of the High Court brief, document marked as “A4” 32 vide pg.151 of the High Court brief 33 vide pg.151 of the High Court brief, document marked “R3”

SC APPEAL 91/2023 JUDGEMENT Page 18 of 21

Holdings (Pvt) Ltd, subject to allowing 14 days for the Director to be removed to

make representation as allowed by section 206 (3) of the Companies Act.”

The Appellant was not present at the Meeting dated 06th August 2019. The Chairman recorded

that the Appellant had sent his excuses, that he will not be attending the Meeting which was

to be held at a location other than at the registered address of the Company. The resolution

was passed as an ordinary resolution, and on 06th August 2019 the Appellant ceased to be a

Director of the Respondent Company.

Notwithstanding the issues at hand, it should be noted that while the Appellant expressed his

displeasure to attend a meeting to be held at a location other than the registered premises of

the Respondent Company, he has in fact attended the meeting dated 23rd July 2019 held at

the Ministry of Finance.

Thus, it can be further construed from the above facts and circumstances that the Appellant

was not an employee and was appointed to the post of Director and subsequently the

Managing Director. The due process to be followed with regards to the removal of the

Appellant as a director is provided for under s.206 of the Companies Act. Therefore, the

Appellant remained as the Managing Director until 06th August 2019, on which day the

shareholders resolved to remove him from the board of directors by way of an ordinary

resolution passed at the Extraordinary General Meeting on the said date. In addressing the

second reason abovementioned, the Appellant alleges that his removal from the post of

Managing Director was contrary to the terms of his employment, and thereby amounts to a

wrongful termination34.However, first, as established above there was no contract of

employment but a letter of confirmation which confirms his nomination by the Ministry of

Finance to be appointed to the post of Managing Director, and second, this letter sets out as

follows with regards to the appointment of the Appellant35.

“(1) You will be paid an all-inclusive allowance net of taxes of Four Hundred

Thousand only (Rs. 400,000/-) per month.

34 Vide pg.154 of the High Court brief, Meeting minutes dated 23rd July 2019, marked as “R4” 35 vide pg.142 of the High Court brief, document marked “A2”

SC APPEAL 91/2023 JUDGEMENT Page 19 of 21

(2) You will be entitled to this payment until you relinquish the position of

Managing Director/ Chief Executive Officer of the said Companies. However, at

the end of the Project your service will be ceased without any payment of

any compensation.

(3) You will be required to serve this Company and its’ subsidiaries as directed by

the Board of Directors and will be responsible for the day-to-day management of

the affairs of the Company and its’ subsidiaries.”

[Emphasis added]

It is observed from the above terms that he is bound by the decisions of the board of directors

and will be liable to be ceased from his post without any compensation. The Appellant has in

fact read, understood and agreed to the above terms by signature.

In addressing the third reason above mentioned, the Appellant was not prejudiced in anyway

by such cessation of his post, for the reasons provided below. First, even though he was

nominated to be removed from the post of Managing Director on 10th July 2019, he was

allowed to remain as the Managing Director until 06th August 2019, on which date he ceased

to be director. This is apparent by the fact that the Minutes of the meeting at Sri Lanka

Insurance Corporation Ltd on 06th August 2019 make note of the position of the Appellant as

being the Managing Director. Second, as it appears from his July Payslip36, he has been paid

his full director fee plus allowance for the month of July without calculating pro-rata up until

10th July 2019, which was the date on which he was nominated to cease to be Managing

Director. Further, I wish to make note of the fact that contrary to the Public Enterprises

Circular37, the Appellant was paid the monthly director fee equivalent to that of the Chairman,

and not the fee granted to the Managing Director which was Rs. 250,000 plus allowance. Third,

during his tenure as Managing Director of the Respondent Company, the Appellant

simultaneously held the position of Managing Director and was a Shareholder of another

company namely Hydro Mac International. The Appellant himself admits that he did not resign

36 vide document marked “A4”, pg.128 of the High Court brief 37 vide pg.144 of the High Court brief, document marked as “R2”

SC APPEAL 91/2023 JUDGEMENT Page 20 of 21

from his post even after being appointed as the Managing Director of the Respondent

Company and remained in this post even at the time of filing this application. Under these

circumstances the Appellant cannot claim that him not being made aware of his removal was

in contravention of the terms and conditions of his appointment. Hence, there was no wrongful

termination of employment and the Appellant was removed from the post of director having

followed due process.

Therefore, for the reasons stated above, the removal of the Appellant from his directorate is

not wrongful nor is it unlawful.

Conclusion

The allegations of the Appellant seem to be founded on the premise that his termination of

contract of employment was on unlawful and unjust grounds without being given sufficient

reason or notice of such termination. I would like to formally note the surprising nature of the

Appellant's allegations, given his position as Managing Director of not one but two companies

and possessing 35 years of executive management experience. It is concerning that such a

seasoned professional appears to be unfamiliar with fundamental distinctions between an

employee and a director, as well as the associated protocols. If the Appellant was so aware,

he would have known that the any such relief to be sought with regards to removal from

directorate is beyond the jurisdiction of the labour tribunal. While I do applaud the efforts of

the Counsel for the Appellant Ms. Shamalie De Silva in drafting a well-researched written

submission, the facts of the instant matter is to her misfortune for this very reason.

In conclusion, I will now answer both questions of law that were placed before this court

having regard to the factual and legal analysis provided above.

In addressing the first question of law, the Appellant was appointed to the post of Managing

Director and was not employed under a contract of employment. Since the Appellant does

not constitute an employee within the meaning of the Industrial Disputes Act, no such

employer-employee relationship exists between the Appellant and the Respondent Company.

Therefore, the Learned High Court Judge did not err in law in determining that there was no

employer-employee relationship between the Appellant and Respondent.

SC APPEAL 91/2023 JUDGEMENT Page 21 of 21

In addressing the second question of law, putting aside the fuss and frills of semantics, the

post of Managing Director is predicated on being a Director, thereby once the Appellant is

removed from the board of directors, he by default ceases to hold the post of Managing

Director. It is for this reason that the Appellant remained as the Managing Director until he

was removed from his Directorate on 06th August 2019.Therefore, cannot amount to unlawful

or unjust grounds for termination as the Appellant was aware of this fact. Further, the

Appellant was not prejudiced in anyway by his removal from directorate. Therefore, the

Learned High Court Judge did not err in law by failing to appreciate that any termination of

employment of the Appellant by the Respondent must be on lawful and/or just grounds

independent of any removal as a Director of the Respondent.

Decision

In light of the facts and circumstances of the instant matter, I hereby the affirm the Judgement

of the High Court Judge dated 22nd June 2022. Considering all reasons stated above, I am

inclined to disallow the appeal and dismiss the same awarding no costs.

Appeal dismissed with no costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

KUMUDINI WICKREMASINGHE, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT