==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Vijitha Malini Dias Jayasekera,

No. 21, New Street,

Galle.

(deceased)

2nd Defendant-Appellant-Appellant

Theekshana Shakya Premalal,

No. 21, New Street, Galle.

Substituted 2A Defendant-Appellant-

Appellant

SC/APPEAL/37/2019

SP/HCCA/GA/49/2005(F) Vs.

DC GALLE 11132/P

Umagiliyage Kanthi Hemalatha,

No. 08, Deniyawatta,

Kapuhempala, Akmeemana.

(deceased)

Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent

Paandigamage Mendis de Silva alias

Lesly Paandigama,

No. 68/1,

Hospital Road, Kalubowila,

Colombo.

1st Defendant-Respondent-

Respondent

2

SC/APPEAL/37/2019

Deepani Paandigama,

No. 167/1, Hospital Road,

Kalubowila, Colombo.

1A Defendant-Respondent-

Respondent

Before: Hon. Justice Mahinda Samayawardhena

Hon. Justice Sobhitha Rajakaruna

Hon. Justice Sampath B. Abayakoon

Counsel: Manohara de Silva, P.C., with Hirosha Munasinghe and

Dilmini de Silva for the 2nd Defendant-Appellant-Appellant.

Shiraz Hassan for the Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent.

Argued on: 31.10.2025

Decided on: 05.12.2025

Samayawardhena, J.

The plaintiff filed this action in the District Court of Galle in 1990, seeking

partition of the land morefully described in paragraph 2 of the plaint

between the plaintiff and the 1ˢᵗ defendant. The 2ⁿᵈ defendant was named

as a party as she disputed the plaintiff’s rights to the land. It is admitted

that the 2ⁿᵈ defendant is not a co-owner of the land. The 2nd defendant

claimed title to the land on prescription.

After trial, the District Court entered judgment partitioning the land

between the plaintiff and the 1ˢᵗ defendant, and rejected the 2ⁿᵈ defendant’s

prescriptive claim. On appeal by the 2ⁿᵈ defendant, the High Court of Civil

Appeal of Galle affirmed the judgment of the District Court. Hence this

appeal to this Court. A previous Bench of this Court granted leave on the

3

SC/APPEAL/37/2019

question whether the High Court erred in fact and in law in rejecting the

prescriptive claim of the 2ⁿᵈ defendant.

On the facts and circumstances of this case, I have no hesitation in holding

that the 2ⁿᵈ defendant’s prescriptive claim must fail. There is no necessity

to rewrite the well-written judgment of the District Court. At the trial, a

number of witnesses were called and a number of documents were marked.

I do not wish to refer to all of them. I will refer only to three documents, the

author of which is the 2ⁿᵈ defendant herself.

The 2nd defendant, who is now deceased, was a close relative of the parties

and their predecessors in title. The 2ⁿᵈ defendant was a lawyer. This

partition action was filed on 06.07.1990. The 2ⁿᵈ defendant’s complaint to

the police dated 16.01.1990 was marked P21. In that complaint she states

that the land in suit is a co-owned land. She does not state that the land

belongs to her by prescriptive title.

More importantly, the 2ⁿᵈ defendant had sent letters marked P1 dated

13.05.1989 and P2 in the same year to Piyaseeli Jayaweera, the wife of

Soloman De Silva, in which she offered to purchase the land. This

completely cuts across her prescriptive claim. Piyaseeli and the 2ⁿᵈ

defendant are not strangers. They are close relatives. Soloman was a

predecessor in title of the plaintiff and a brother of the 2ⁿᵈ defendant’s

mother, Misina. These letters were produced by the recipient, namely

Piyaseeli herself. The envelopes were marked P1(a) and P2(a). Although the

2ⁿᵈ defendant denied these letters, the Court can accept them as evidence

having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case.

There is no need to further dwell on this appeal. I answer the question of

law in the negative. I affirm the judgments of the District Court and the

High Court and dismiss the appeal with costs.

4

SC/APPEAL/37/2019

Judge of the Supreme Court

Sobhitha Rajakaruna, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court