==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the High Court of the Western Province in the exercise of its civil jurisdiction sitting in Colombo. Sampath Bank PLC, No. 110, Sir James Peiris Mawatha, Colombo 02. Having an office or branch at People’s Park, Bodhiraja Mawatha, Colombo 11. Plaintiff Vs. S.C. (CHC)Appeal No.19/2010 HC (Civil) Case No. 275/2006(1). 1. Ceylon & Overseas Traders (Pvt)Ltd. No. 54, 4th Cross Street, Colombo 11. 2. Nellainayagam Eskiappan Thaumanasundaram 3. Nellainayagam Manickam Both of No.54, Cross Street, Colombo 11. Defendants. AND NOW BETWEEN

Sampath Bank PLC, Having its registered office at No. 110, Sir James Peiris Mawatha, Colombo 02. Having an office or branch at People’s Park, Bodhiraja Mawatha, Colombo 11. Plaintiff-Appellant

S.C.(CHC) Appeal No.19/2010

2

Vs. 1. Ceylon & Overseas Traders (Pvt)Ltd. No. 54, 4th Cross Street, Colombo 11. 2. Nellainayagam Eskiappan Tayumanasundaram 3. Nellainayagam Manickam Both of No.54, Cross Street, Colombo 11. Defendant-Respondents. BEFORE : S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J. A. L. SHIRAN GOONERATNE, J. ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J. COUNSEL : Chandaka Jayasundera, PC with Ms. Vishmi Fernando for the Plaintiff-Appellant Respondents are absent and unrepresented. ARGUED ON : 25th March, ,2024 DECIDED ON : 26th February, 2026

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

The Plaintiff Bank instituted an action in the Commercial High

Court of Colombo against the 1st, 2nd and 3rd Defendants to recover a sum of

Rs.19,119,910.62 and interest calculated from 30.09.2006, which it claimed

from them as dues arising over an overdraft facility obtained by the 1st

Defendant.

S.C.(CHC) Appeal No.19/2010

3

The parties proceeded to trial with recording of nine admissions and

a total of 53 trial issues between them. The Commercial High Court, by its

judgment dated 15.01.2010, dismissed the Plaint, solely on the basis of the

admission No. 5, by which the parties have accepted that the contents in

paragraph 5 of the Answer as being an admitted fact. In paragraph 5 of the

Answer, the 1st Defendant asserted that he has repaid all the monies so

overdrawn so far and as such there is no money remaining due from the 1st

Defendant to the Plaintiff Bank.

Being aggrieved by the dismissal of its Plaint, the Plaintiff Bank

thereupon preferred an appeal against the said judgment and thereby

sought to have set it aside.

The Defendants, despite the repeated issuances of notice of appeal

informing them of the appeal pending before this Court, were absent and

unrepresented. The hearing of the appeal therefore proceeded before the

Commercial High Court without the Defendants.

At the hearing of the instant appeal, learned President’s Counsel for

the Plaintiff Bank submitted that the said “admission”, relied on by the trial

Court to dismiss the Plaint, was not acted upon by either party as they

have proceeded to trial on multiple issues, which are even touching upon

the very scope covered by the said admission (Issues Nos. 29 and 30). He

therefore submitted that the parties have continued to litigate before the

trial Court on the premise that at all material times, none of the parties

have admitted of the position that no money was due to the Plaintiff Bank

from the 1st Defendant. In these circumstances, it was contended by the

learned President’s Counsel, that the said “admission”, in reference to an

S.C.(CHC) Appeal No.19/2010

4

averment of the Defendant’s answer, had been recorded “erroneously” by

the Court stenographer.

Learned President’s Counsel further submitted that the Commercial

High Court, in addition to that ground, had erroneously relied on the

judgment of Uvais v Punyawathie (1993) 2 Sri L.R. 46, in support of its

impugned finding that the said admission could not subsequently be

amended or retracted. It was argued on behalf of the Plaintiff Bank that the

said judgment is not applicable to the instant case as it referred to an

instance where parties agreed to record an admission and thereafter

sought to retract that admission whereas the instant matter is in relation to

a situation where the Plaintiff Bank had taken the position that it did not in

fact made such an admission and that it has “ in fact been ERRONEOUSLY

recorded.”

Before I proceed to consider the merits of these two grounds of

appeal, that were urged by the learned President’s Counsel for the Plaintiff

Bank, in the light of the applicable principles of law and decided

authorities, it is helpful at this stage, if an attempt is made to set out the

respective factual positions placed before the Commercial High Court by

the contesting parties in terms of their pleadings, albeit briefly, as it would

provide the context against which the trial Court arrived at its impugned

finding could be tested.

The Plaint filed by the Plaintiff Bank, describing the cause of action

on which it sued the 1st Defendant, averred that it had accrued when the

latter failed to pay the capital and interest amounting to Rs.19,119,910.62,

due to the former, over an overdraft facility granted in a sum of Rs.

S.C.(CHC) Appeal No.19/2010

5

25,000,000.00, when demanded to do so. These monies became payable by

the 1st Defendant in terms of a loan agreement entered into between the

parties on 05.09.2005. The total of the sum claimed from the 1st Defendant

was arrived at only after making adjustments to the payments made from

time to time by the 1st Defendant. The Plaint also indicated that the

Plaintiff Bank had first granted the overdraft facility to the 1st Defendant

in a sum of Rs. 20,000,000.00 on 05.08.1998 upon his request and another,

in a sum of Rs. 10,000,000.00 on 06.06.2002.

It was also averred in the Plaint that the cause of action against the

2nd and 3rd Defendants accrued when the 1st and 2nd Defendants failed to

pay the said capital and interest, when demanded to do so, as they stood

as guarantors to the loan agreement between the Plaintiff Bank and the 1st

Defendant jointly and severally.

The three Defendants have taken up the position in their joint

Answer that although they admit that an overdraft facility was obtained

from the Plaintiff Bank, the 1st Defendant has repaid all the monies he had

overdrawn ( vide paragraph 5) and that there is no money due from the 1st

Defendant to the Plaintiff Bank. The Defendants accordingly denied that

there is any outstanding due to the Plaintiff Bank over the said overdraft

facility. The Defendants further denied that a sum of Rs. 25,000,000.00 was

granted on 05.09.2005, as averred in the Plaint and assert that the Plaintiff

Bank did not release any monies after 05.09.2005 despite agreeing to do so.

With that general background of the contents of the pleadings, I now

turn to the specific averments made by the parties in their respective

S.C.(CHC) Appeal No.19/2010

6

pleadings that were presented before the Commercial High Court and as

such are directly relevant to the determination of the instant appeal.

Paragraph 7 of the Plaint reads as follows;

“ ú;a;slre ish .sKqu mj;ajdf.k hk w;r;=r meñKs,sldr nexl=fjka whsrd

iajNdjfha nexl= myiqlï b,a,d isêk ,o w;r” 1 jk ú;a;slref.a b,a,Su u;

meñKs,sldr nexl=j úiska 1 jk ú;a;slreg ish cx.u .skqfuka whsrd myiqlï

,nd fok ,os’”

Paragraph 5 of the joint Answer reads thus;

“[R]eplying paragraph 7 of the Plaint, these Defendants only admit

that the 1st Defendant obtained banking facilities by way of overdraft

from the Plaintiff and the 1st Defendant has repaid the monies so

overdrawn and there is no money due from the 1st Defendant to the

Plaintiff.”

Now, I wish to refer to the circumstances under which these

admissions were marked.

The Plaint was filed on 23.11.2006 and the joint answer of the

Defendants was filed on 27.03.2007. In compliance with the procedural

requirement of framing issues, in terms of Section 146 of the Civil

Procedure Code, was fixed for 03.07.2007. The Plaintiff Bank tendered a

document to Court on that day containing five proposed admissions and

setting out the 29 issues it had identified. The 5th admission proposed by

the Plaintiff Bank reads as follows; “ meñKs,af,a 7 jk fcaofha i|yka nexl= whsrd

myiqlï ,nd .;a nj ms<s.kS”. The Defendants, on their part, proposed four

admissions and identified 28 issues. The 4th proposed admission of the

Defendants in this regard reads as “[T]he 1st Defendant obtained banking

S.C.(CHC) Appeal No.19/2010

7

facilities by way of overdraft from the Plaintiff” is at variance with the

proposed admission No. 5 by omitting the reference to paragraph 7 of the

Plaint.

The proceedings of Court on 13.07.2007 indicate a total of nine

admissions were recorded on that day, in addition to accepting 1st to 27th

issues for the Plaintiff Bank and 28th to 53rd issues for the Defendants.

The nine admissions made by the parties at the commencement of

the trial and recorded by the Court are as follows;

“ ms<s.ekSï(

1’ meñKs,af,a 1 jk fPaoh ms<s.kS

2’ 1 jk ú;a;slre úiska meñKs,sldr nexl=fõ 1996’05’17 oske;s

.sKqï b,a¨ïm;%h bosrsm;a l, nj ms<s.kS’

3’ 1 jk ú;a;slre wxl 0002 1001 5183 orK cx.u .sKqu

mj;ajd f.k .sh nj ms<s .kS’

4’ 1 jk ú;a;slre meñKs,sldr nexl=fõ .kqfokqlreljl= nj ms<s

.kS’

5’ W;a;rfha 5 jk fcaoh ms<s.kS’

6’ wêlrK n,h ms<s .kS’

7’ m<jk ú;a;slre kSlsh bosrsfha ixia:dmkh lrk ,o ixia:dms;

iud.ula nj ms<s .kS’

8’ W;a;rfha 12^w& fcaofha i|yka lr we;s remsh,a ñ,shk 25 la

i|yd jQ whsrd myiqlula m<jk ú;a;slre úiska 2005

wf.`ia;= ui meñKs,slref.ka b,a,d isá nj ms<s .kS’

9’ meñKs,slre 1 jk ú;a;slreg ñ,shk 25 l uqo,la nexl=

myiqlula f,i ,nd oSug 2005 iema( udifhaoS tlÕ jQ nj

ms<s.kS’”

S.C.(CHC) Appeal No.19/2010

8

Perusal of the appeal brief revealed that the document containing

the proposed admissions and issues, tendered by the Plaintiff Bank had its

5th admission struck off with a single line drawn across the text by

someone. In addition, the proposed issues that were initially numbered as

issues 1 to 29 were renumbered to read as issues 1 to 27 after striking out

the 1st and 2nd proposed issues. The two proposed issues that were struck

out are as follows;

“ úi|sh h;= m%Yak

1’ fuu kvqj wid ;SrKh lsrSug fuu .re wêlrKhg wêlrK n,h we;af;ao@

2’ 1 jk ú;a;slre ksis mrsos ixia:dms; iud.ulao@”

The learned High Court Judge, who presided over the Commercial

High Court, at the time of recording these admissions and issues and

proceeded to trial, was elevated to the Court of Appeal, before he could

pronounce the judgment. The parties have consented before the

succeeding High Court Judge to adopt the evidence already led and to

pronounce judgment on that evidence.

The succeeding High Court Judge, in the process of writing the

judgment, has realised that the admission No. 5 has effectively nullified

any cause of action that may have accrued to the Plaintiff Bank against the

Defendants. He therefore directed the parties to address Court on that

point by offering clarifications. The parties were at variance over the

question whether the said admission was correctly recorded. The

Defendants have resisted any changes made to the said admission.

Learned High Court Judge had thereupon conducted an inquiry into the

accuracy of the recoding of the said admission by verifying it with the

S.C.(CHC) Appeal No.19/2010

9

shorthand notes of the Court stenographer that were made

contemporaneously and retained in the Registry of that Court. The

proceedings of Court conducted on 07.05.2009, indicate the out-come of

that inquiry.

The verification of the notes of the stenographer revealed that;

“ ,>q f,aÅldjf.a igyka wkqj weh okajd isákafka” ms<s.ekSï 4 la kvq jd¾;dfõ

fh`ckd ;=< we;s nj;a” W;a;rfha 7 jk fcaoh ms<s .ekSu f,i m<uqj igyka lr

we;s w;r” miqj th W;a;rfha 5 jk fcaoh f,ig ksjeros lr we;s nj;a” W;a;rfha 5

jk fcaoh ms<s .kS hk f,i tu osk igyka lr f.k we;s nj;ah’”

On this material, the Commercial High Court concluded;

“ wêlrKh ksrSlaIKh lrkafka” tosk ms<s .kSï iy fh`ckd igyka lrk úg Bg

fmr meñKs,a, ú;a;sh úiska ms<s .ekSï iy úi|kd fjka fjkaj fh`ckd lr ;snQ

nj;a” meñKs,af,a 1”2”3” iy 4 ms<s .ekSï ta f,iu ms<s .ekSï f,i igyka lr we;s

nj;a” meñKs,af,a 5 jk ms<s .ekSu f,i fh`ckd lr ;snQ "meñKs,af,a 7 jk fcaofha

i|yka nexl= whsrd myiqlu ,nd .;a nj ms<s .kS” hkak lmd yer we;s nj;a” ta

fjkqjg fuu 5 jk kj msz<s .ekSu meñK we;s nj;ah’ Bg wu;rj 6”7”8 iy 9

f,io ms<s .ekSï igyka ù we;a nj;ah’”

The contention that the admission No. 5 was erroneously recorded

contrary to the intentions of the parties therefore could not be accepted. On

03.07.2007, when the admissions were recorded, there were three more

admissions, not initially proposed by either party, were also recorded. The

stenographer’s note also indicates the fact that, initially the admission was

recorded to read as admitting paragraph 7 of the Answer, but was

immediately corrected by the parties to read as admitting paragraph 5 and

not paragraph 7 of the Answer, as it now appears in the proceedings. It is

paragraph 5 that primality contains “… the circumstances of the case upon

S.C.(CHC) Appeal No.19/2010

10

which the defendant means to rely for his defence; …” averred by them in

compliance with Section 75(d) of the Civil Procedure Code.

Paragraph 7 of the Answer reads as follows;

“[T]hese Defendants further state that the Plaintiff –

(a) has wrongfully and unlawfully charged excessive interest

on the overdraft;

(b) has appropriated the monies that the Defendants paid

towards the overdraft interest.”

Thus, it is clear that the averments contained in paragraph 7 of the

Answer are not directly relevant to the defence taken up by the Defendants

and, as a result, the admission No. 5 required to be corrected to reflect the

position they have actually taken up in paragraph 5.

After the trial Court recorded admissions and issues on 03.07.2007,

the Plaintiff Bank did not immediately proceed to present any evidence

before Court on that day itself and the trial was accordingly adjourned to

16.01.2008. On that day, after the witness for the Plaintiff Bank commenced

his oral evidence and, halfway through the Examination-in-Chief itself, the

Court granted an adjournment for the Plaintiff Bank. As the learned High

Court Judge rightly observed that the witness had no clear understanding

of the matters in relation to the case was presented on behalf of the

plaintiff. The evidence of the said witness was eventually concluded on

02.07.2008 and the case of the Plaintiff Bank was closed after reading the

documents marked X 1 to 21A, immediately thereafter.

S.C.(CHC) Appeal No.19/2010

11

There was no application made by the Plaintiff Bank in any of these

days on which the trial continued thereafter seeking to ‘correct’ the

admission No. 5, which now it claims to have been recorded “erroneously”

or to invite the Commercial High Court to exercise its discretion conferred

under the proviso to Section 58, where it is stated that “ … the Court may, in

its discretion, require the facts admitted to be proved otherwise than by such

admissions.”

The Defendants, have highlighted the following instances where the

Plaintiff Bank, could have moved Court to correct the admission recorded

erroneously, as it alleged. In any of the subsequent trial dates, 01.11.2007,

16.01.2008, 31.03.2008, 02.07.2008 or 19.09.2008 no such application was

made and therefore they taken up the position that the said admission

should not be ‘corrected’ after a lapse of nearly a year and a half since the

commencement of trial. In this respect, it is relevant to note that, in the set

of written submissions filed by the Defendants at the close of evidence but

before the issue of admission No. 5 was brought up by the succeeding trial

Judge, they have mentioned therein the fact of 9 admissions recorded by

Court. In contrast, the Plaintiff Bank, in its set of written submissions,

made no reference to any admission so recorded at all. Interestingly, the

Defendants, whilst proposing to the trial Court that the manner in which

the issues raised by them ought to be answered by, submitted, particularly

in relation to issues Nos. 21 and 30, the respective suggested answers as

“No sum is due” and “No money is due on account of the matters referred to in

the Plaint.” This leads to justifiable inference that the Defendants have in

fact relied on the admission No. 5, in support of their position.

S.C.(CHC) Appeal No.19/2010

12

The issue No. 21 was framed to the effect the amount of money to be

paid by the 2nd and 3rd Defendants on the guarantee bond whereas issue

No. 30 was framed to the effect whether there is no money due to the

Plaintiff Bank from the 1st Defendant.

These proposed answers to the two issues indicate that the

Defendants have relied on the admission No. 5, even before the correctness

of that admission was challenged, when the trial Court sought to clarify

the respective positions of the parties over the same.

The Civil Procedure Code, from its earliest version enacted in 1890,

did not contain any specific provision among its many Sections, by which

enabling contesting parties to formally indicate their agreement to treat

certain factual positions relevant to the dispute presented before Court

and, of which are not at variance with their respective positions taken up

in the pleadings as being proved, and thereby relieving them of the burden

of adducing formal proof before Court to establish the same. Chapter XIX

of the said Code that contains general procedure in conducting trials

before District Courts, commences that procedure with Section 146, which

only speaks of identifying questions of facts to be decided between them

“in the form of issues.” The only reference made in the Civil Procedure Code

regarding formal admissions on factual matters could be found in Sections

509 and 631, which has no bearing to the instant appeal.

However, over the years, a practice had developed among the trial

Judges and the Counsel to record factual admissions that the parties are

not at variance, as contained in the pleadings, followed by the framing of

issues, on which the parties invite the trial Court to adjudicate over the

S.C.(CHC) Appeal No.19/2010

13

dispute exists between them. This they could do either at the

commencement of a trial or during its course. The existence of this practice

is evident from a reported judgment pronounced in the early 19th Century.

In the head note of the judgment of Cathiravelu v Dadabhoy (1912),

reported in 15 NLR 339, describes the question presented before the

Supreme Court for determination as follows; “[N]o evidence was taken and

no admissions were recorded. The District Judge answered the issues in the

negative. On appeal it was contended that the District Judge had no right to

dispose of the case on an issue in regard to which no evidence had been taken.” In

the absence of a specific provision in the Civil Procedure Code, it is

obvious that the said practice had its legal base upon Section 58 of the

Evidence Ordinance, which states “[N]o fact needed to be proved in any

proceedings which the parties thereto or their agents agree to admit at the hearing

or which, before the hearing, they agree to admit by any writing under their

hands, or by which any rule of pleading in force at the time they are deemed to

have admitted by their pleadings.” This provision was further supplemented

by Section 8(1) of the Evidence (Special Provisions) Act No. 14 of 1995,

where it was stated “[I]n any proceedings it shall not be necessary for any party

to tender any evidence of any fact which is admitted by the opposing party.”

Although, not applicable to the instant appeal, the continued

practice of marking of admissions in Court on both factual and legal

matters has received statutory recognition with the amendments

introduced to the relevant provisions contained in the Civil Procedure

Code, by Act No. 8 of 2017. The newly inserted Section 142A to the Code

made it obligatory on the parties to propose admissions and issues during

the pre-trial hearing while a corresponding duty is imposed on trial Judges

S.C.(CHC) Appeal No.19/2010

14

by Section 142D(c), which required them to obtain and record admissions

of facts and of documents from the parties, during that stage.

Coming back to the appeal of the Plaintiff Bank, it is clear that the

parties, following the said general practice, have recorded several factual

and legal admissions, along with the set of issues, prior to proceeding to

trial on that basis. Of these several admissions, the admission No. 5, which

is under scrutiny now could undoubtedly be taken as an admission of fact.

Learned High Court Judge, after an inquiry into the correctness of

the ‘admission’ as found in the proceedings, has held that an admission of

fact could not be withdrawn, citing the judgment of this Court in Uvais v

Punyawathie (supra). The said conclusion is being challenged by the

learned President’s Counsel before this Court on the premise that the ratio

of that judgment has no application to the instant appeal, as what has been

decided in that instance was that the parties should not be permitted to set

out a case materially different from what is placed on record.

The effect of such an admission of fact, once formally recorded with

the concurrence of the parties as well as of the trial Judge, was considered

in the case of Mariammai v Pethurupillai et al (1918) 20 NLR 200, where

Bertram CJ, held (at p.202); [I]f a party in a case makes an admission for

whatever reason, he must stand by it; and it is impossible for him to argue a point

on appeal which he formally gave up in the Court below.”

The judgment of Uvais v Punyawathie (supra), delivered by

Fernando J, also considered the situation where the admission made in

relation to a variation to the terms of the contract of tenancy with an

increase of rent, which was later disputed by the defendant in the appeal.

S.C.(CHC) Appeal No.19/2010

15

At the trial before the District Court, the plaintiff had relied on letters,

dated 19.09.1970 and 30.06.1971, of the defendant by which she admitted

that once her appeal made against the increased assessment of rent is

decided, she would remit the correct rent amount with arrears. The appeal

of the defendant was subsequently dismissed. In addition to the said

correspondence, the defendant, in her answer, expressly admitted that she

had agreed to pay the increased rent but had not done so owing to

financial difficulties, which position the trial Court rejected. The District

Court held with the plaintiff.

In judgment of the Court of Appeal in Jayalath v Karunathilaka

(2013) 1 Sri L.R. 337, HNJ Perera J (as he then was) stated that (at p. 344)

“[I]t is well established principle of law that parties to a case cannot resile from

admissions of fact”. This pronouncement was made by that Court after

making reference to the reasoning contained in the judgments of

Mariammai v Pethurupillai et al (supra) and Uvais v Punyawathie (supra).

The judgment of this Court in Uvais v Punyawathie (supra) refers to

an instance where the defendant contended for the first time in appeal that

what the plaintiff demanded was damages and not the increased rent. She

offered to pay an increased amount as rent but, in the absence of any

demand to pay the increased rent, there was no agreement to pay the

higher amount. The Court of Appeal accepted that contention and held

that the plaintiff failed establish that the defendant was in arrears of rent

and allowed the appeal.

Of the three questions presented for consideration of this Court in

that instance, the question that has a direct bearing on the issue to be

S.C.(CHC) Appeal No.19/2010

16

determined in relation to the instant appeal is stated therein as follows (at

p.49); “ [W]as the respondent [the defendant] entitled at the stage of the appeal to

withdraw the admissions that she had agreed to pay the increased rent, but had

failed to do so?”

Considering the submissions made on this particular question,

Fernando J has held (at p.51) that;

“ [I]n the present case by the time the matter came up for decision in

the trial Court, difficulties as to whether parties meant rent or

damages, and the need for the tenant’s consent to an increased rent,

had been completely removed by reason of the defendant’s express

and unambiguous admissions that she agreed to pay the increased

rent of Rs. 552.41 per month, but had not done so. On that basis, she

pleaded inability to pay that rent, for reasons which the learned trial

Judge properly rejected. Those admissions were not withdrawn

during the trial and the judgment of the trial Judge was therefore

perfectly correct.”

Thus, the Courts were consistent with adopting the view that a

formal admission of fact could not be retracted or ignored at all,

particularly when raised at the appeal stage for the first time. His Lordship

further noted (at 52) “ [W]hile it is sometimes permissible to withdraw

admissions on questions of law, the admissions now under consideration are

primarily questions of fact” which “may equally well have the result of express

instructions given by the client.” However, the Courts have acted with

caution in relation to admissions of fact, and unless they are considered to

qualify to be termed as ‘admissions’, any admissions that are recorded in

“so perfunctory manner that one cannot be certain as to who made the admission

S.C.(CHC) Appeal No.19/2010

17

and in what circumstances, it was made” were not considered as such (per

Soertz J in Punchibanda v Punchibanda et al (1941) 42 NLR at 382.

Similarly, where “ uncertainty as to the meaning of the admission” too made

the Courts reluctant of placing reliance on such admissions (per Basnayake

CJ in Zahir v Devid Silva (1959) 61 NLR 357, at p. 359). In Sivaratnam and

Others v Dissanayake and Others (2004) 1 Sri L.R. 144, Amaratunga J,

whilst dealing with a situation where an admission of a fact made by a

party in an affidavit that had been tendered during consideration of

interim relief but denied that fact contained in the Plaint when filing the

answer. The Court held (at p. 147);

“[I]n this case the plaintiff’s contention was that averments in

paragraphs 2 to 6 of the Plaint have been admitted in the affidavit

filed for the purpose of the interim injunction inquiry. An affidavit

is written evidence. But such written evidence cannot be used to

force an admission on the defendants when they, in their answer,

have taken up a contrary position. The learned Judge was therefore

correct in refusing to record that the averments in paragraphs 2 to 6

of the plaint as admissions.”

It must be noted that in Punchibanda v Punchibanda et al (ibid) it

was also held (at p. 382) “[I]t has been held in several cases that a proctor has

the right to settle or compromise a matter or case entrusted to him even without

consulting his client in regard to it.”

However, it is important to highlight the position that the effect of

an admission on law is materially different to the effect of an admission on

facts, as indicative from the judicial precedents cited above. In the cases of

an admission of law, Katiritamby et al v Parupathipillai et al (1921) 23

S.C.(CHC) Appeal No.19/2010

18

NLR 209, Garvin AJ held (at p. 211), “… as regards the law, an erroneous

decision [ made by a party in making an admission of law] does not prevent the

Court from deciding the same question arising between the same parties in a

subsequent suit according to law.” Bertram CJ, in Perera v Samarakoon (1922)

accepted the view expressed by Indian Courts (at p. 504) to the effect that

“an erroneous admission of Counsel on a point of law has no effect, and does not

preclude the party from claiming his legal rights in the Appellate Court.”

Sharvananda J (as he then was) held the identical view in the case of

Soloman Ranaweera v Solomon Singho (1978) 79 II NLR 136, when stating

that the admission under consideration (at p.141); “… is a mistaken

admission in law and is not binding on the plaintiffs.”

In view of the approach consistently taken by this Court in relation

to admissions on facts, the contention that admission No. 5 has

erroneously been recorded by the Commercial High Court cannot succeed.

When the stenographer’s note indicates the position that the admission

No. 5 was initially recorded to read as admitting paragraph 7 of the

Answer, but immediately thereafter was corrected to read as admitting

paragraph 5 and not paragraph 7 of the Answer makes it abundantly clear

that it was not a mistake. This is clear evidence that the parties were fully

conscious of exactly what they have agreed on during the proceedings,

after shifting from the scope of their original proposed admissions made in

relation to admission No. 5, while introducing several other admissions in

the process, which they did not include in their proposed admissions and

issues, signed by the respective Attorneys.

S.C.(CHC) Appeal No.19/2010

19

It is in these circumstances, the determination reached by the

learned High Court Judge that the Plaint should be dismissed, particularly

in view of the admission No. 5, and following Uvais v Punyawathie

(supra) is clearly a justifiable one. This is because Fernando J observed in

that judgment (at p.52) “ [Q]uite apart from any question of estoppel or

prejudice, to permit admissions to be withdrawn in these circumstances would

subvert some of the most fundamental principles of the Civil Procedure Code in

regard to pleadings and issues.”

In my view, the appeal of the Plaintiff Bank is devoid of any merit

and, with the affirmation of the judgment of the Commercial High Court

dated 15.01.2010, it should stand dismissed.

I make no order as to costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

A. L. SHIRAN GOONERATNE, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT