==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

1. Rajapaksha Pedige Sajeewa

Dhammika Rajapakshe,

‘Rajapaksha Nivasa’, Kobbewela,

Galigamuwa Town.

Presently in Japan and appearing by

Rajapaksha Pedige Priyantha Luxman

Rajapaksha, his power of attorney

holder

2. Rankoth Pedige Sunil Premachandra,

‘Sunil Sevana’, Kobbewela,

Galigamuwa Town.

Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellants

SC/APPEAL/29/2024

SP/HCCA/KEG/26/2019(F)

DC KEGALLE 28146/P

Vs.

3. Ranasinghe Pedige Jayathileke

Ranasinghe.

10. R. P. Wimalarathne.

11. R. P. Upananda Ranasinghe.

All of Kobbewela,

Galigamuwa Town.

3rd, 10th and 11th Defendant-

Appellant-Respondents

1. Rajapaksha Pedige Rajasiri

Seneviratne, Paranawatte,

Kobbewela, Galigamuwa Town.

2

SC/APPEAL/29/2024

2. Rajapaksha Pedige Rajarathne,

Paranawatte, Kobbewela,

Galigamuwa Town.

4. Marasinghe Pedige Sunil,

Kobbewela, Galigamuwa Town.

5. Rajapaksha Pedige Nandawathie,

Paranawatte, Kobbewela,

Galigamuwa Town.

6. Wijayalatha Pedige Bandula

Gunasinghe, Kobbewela,

Galigamuwa Town.

7. Wijayalatha Pedige Samaraweera

Kularathne, Kobbewela,

Galigamuwa Town.

8. Hapan Pedige Susilawathie,

Kobbewela, Galigamuwa Town.

9. Wijayalata Pedige Kusumalatha,

Kobbewela, Galigamuwa Town.

1st, 2nd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th

Defendant-Respondents.

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Dr. Sobhitha Rajakaruna, J.

Sampath K. B. Wijeratne, J.

Counsel: Dr. Sunil Coorey with Ms. Sudarshani Coorey for the

Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant.

Pubudu Alwis with Supun Jayathilake for the 3rd, 10th &

11th Defendant-Appellant-Respondents.

M.S.M. Kanil for the 1st & 2nd Defendant-Respondent-

Respondents.

Argued on: 09.03.2026

Decided on: 20.03.2026

3

SC/APPEAL/29/2024

Samayawardhena, J.

The plaintiffs instituted this action in the District Court of Kegalle

naming two defendants seeking to partition the land known as

Hitinawatta, described in the schedule to the plaint, according to the

pedigree set out in the plaint. The land is morefully depicted in

Preliminary Plan No. 2100.

At the preliminary survey, the 3ʳᵈ to 9ᵗʰ defendants intervened, and the

3ʳᵈ defendant later disclosed the 10ᵗʰ and 11ᵗʰ defendants as necessary

parties. The 1ˢᵗ, 2ⁿᵈ and 5ᵗʰ defendants filed a joint statement of claim,

whereas the 3ʳᵈ defendant filed a separate statement of claim. The other

defendants did not file statements of claim.

The contest at the trial was between the 3ʳᵈ defendant together with the

10ᵗʰ and 11ᵗʰ defendants on the one hand and the plaintiffs together with

other defendants on the other. After trial, by judgment dated 11.12.2018,

the District Court accepted the pedigree of the plaintiffs and decided to

partition the land among the plaintiffs and the 1ˢᵗ, 2ⁿᵈ and 5ᵗʰ defendants.

Being dissatisfied with the said judgment, the 3ʳᵈ, 10ᵗʰ and 11ᵗʰ

defendants jointly appealed to the High Court of Civil Appeal in Kegalle.

The High Court, by judgment dated 05.11.2020, set aside the judgment

of the District Court and dismissed the plaintiffs’ action on the basis that

the plaintiffs had failed to identify the corpus. Hence this appeal by the

plaintiffs.

This Court granted leave to appeal against the judgment of the High

Court on several questions of law which, in essence, raise the question

whether the High Court erred in law and in fact in dismissing the

plaintiffs’ action in toto on the ground of non-identification of the corpus

when the 3ʳᵈ, 10ᵗʰ and 11ᵗʰ defendants, or any other party, had not raised

a specific issue on identification of the corpus in the District Court.

4

SC/APPEAL/29/2024

I have, inter alia, examined the statement of claim filed by the 3ʳᵈ

defendant, the issues raised on behalf of the 3ʳᵈ, 10ᵗʰ and 11ᵗʰ defendants,

the evidence led on their behalf, and the oral and written submissions

filed in support of their claims.

The plaintiffs instituted this action seeking to partition Hitinawatta on

the pedigree set out in the plaint. Their position is that the land depicted

in the Preliminary Plan is Hitinawatta. They unfolded their pedigree and

produced deeds in support of their claim to Hitinawatta. The 3ʳᵈ, 10ᵗʰ and

11ᵗʰ defendants, on the other hand, claimed title to Rajapakshage Watta

on a different pedigree. They produced deeds in support of their claim to

Rajapakshage Watta.

Although the 3ʳᵈ, 10ᵗʰ and 11ᵗʰ defendants caused Surveyor General’s Plan

No. 2009/67 to be prepared, both the Preliminary Plan and the Surveyor

General’s Plan depict the same land. There was therefore no dispute

regarding the identification of the corpus. The real dispute related to the

title to the corpus. This position was placed beyond doubt by the 3ʳᵈ, 10ᵗʰ

and 11ᵗʰ defendants themselves, inter alia, in paragraph 25 of their

Petition of Appeal tendered to the High Court dated 18.01.2019 where

they stated: “X පිඹුරේ සතර මායිම් හා 3වි4 දරණ රජරේ මිනිනරදෝරුවරයාරේ පිඹුර

[No.2009/67] සලකා බැලීරම්දී පැමිණිල්ල කියන ඉඩම හා 3, 10, 11 විත්තිය කියන

එකම ඉඩමක් බව සනාථ වන බව ර ෞරවරයන සැලකර සිටී.” This is further fortified

by the first issue raised by the 3ʳᵈ, 10ᵗʰ and 11ᵗʰ defendants (issue No. 11)

at the trial, which is whether the land depicted in the Preliminary Plan

is also known as Rajapakshage Watta. (“රමම නඩුව සඳහා ඒ.සී.පී ගුණරසේන

බලයලත්ත මානකතැන විසින මැන සකසේකර ඇි 2100/පී පිඹුරේ සඳහන ඉඩම රාජපක්ෂරේ

වත්තත නමිනද හඳුනවනු ලබනරනද?”)

The relief sought by the 3ʳᵈ, 10ᵗʰ and 11ᵗʰ defendants from the District

Court was either the exclusion of Lots 3 and 4 of the Preliminary Plan

(which correspond to Lots (ඇ), (ඈ), (ඉ), (එ), (ඒ) in Surveyor General’s Plan

No. 2009/67) on the basis of prescriptive title or, in the alternative, an

5

SC/APPEAL/29/2024

undivided ¼ share of the land. They did not seek the dismissal of the

plaintiffs’ action on the ground of non-identification of the corpus.

As stated earlier, the District Judge came to the conclusion that the land

depicted in the Preliminary Plan is Hitinawatta and that the 3ʳᵈ, 10ᵗʰ and

11ᵗʰ defendants had no rights over that land either by deeds or by

prescriptive possession. The District Judge did not accept the pedigree

put forward by the 3ʳᵈ, 10ᵗʰ and 11ᵗʰ defendants. The actual complaint of

the 3ʳᵈ, 10ᵗʰ and 11ᵗʰ defendants before the High Court was that their

pedigree, deeds and prescriptive claim had not been properly considered

by the District Judge in granting the relief prayed for by them.

However, the High Court, without examining the pedigree dispute,

adopted a convenient method of dismissing the entire action on the

ground of non-identification of the corpus, mainly by comparing the

boundaries described in the schedule to the plaint with those described

in the Preliminary Plan. Although failure to identify the corpus is a valid

ground for the dismissal of a partition action without going into the

merits, in the present case there was no dispute regarding the

identification of the corpus. The dispute related to the title to, or the

undivided rights in, the land depicted in the Preliminary Plan, which had

to be determined on the basis of the pedigrees of the competing parties,

the relevancy of the deeds relied upon by them, and their respective

claims of prescription.

The High Court has stated in its judgment that in a partition action, even

if the defendants have not disputed the corpus, the High Court can

dismiss the plaintiff’s action on the ground of non-identification of the

corpus. I am unable to agree. Failure to identify the corpus is clearly a

question of fact. A pure question of fact cannot be raised for the first time

in appeal. This principle applies not only to the parties to the appeal but

also to the Court itself. Had the identification of the corpus been raised

as a specific issue in the District Court, either by a party or by the Court,

the plaintiffs could have led specific evidence to remove any doubts. The

6

SC/APPEAL/29/2024

mere fact that a party seeks the exclusion of some Lots from the corpus

on the basis of prescription as the contesting defendants have sought in

this action does not warrant the dismissal of the action on non-

identification of the corpus.

The 3ʳᵈ, 10ᵗʰ and 11ᵗʰ defendants have not appealed against the judgment

of the High Court which did not consider their claim on the merits.

For the aforesaid reasons, I answer the question of law on which leave to

appeal was granted in the affirmative. The judgment of the High Court is

set aside and the judgment of the District Court is restored. Accordingly,

the appeal is allowed. Since the parties should not suffer for the error

committed by the High Court, I make no order as to costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Dr. Sobhitha Rajakaruna, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Sampath K. B. Wijeratne, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court