1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

In the matter of an appeal after obtaining from the Supreme Court leave to appeal against the Judgment dated 03/08/2010 delivered by the High Court of the Sabaragamuwa Province in Appeal No: SP/HCCA/KAG/587/2008(F) DC Kegalle Case No: 23878 Vidanalage Dingiri Banda (Deceased), of Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura.

Plaintiff Vithanalage Senathileke of Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura.

Substituted Plaintiff S.C. Appeal No. 198/2012 Vs. SP/HCCA/KAG Case No. 587/2008(F) D.C. Kegalle Case No. 23878/P

1. Henaka Ralalage Punchi Banda alias

Vijitha Bandara, Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 2. Henaka Ralalage Podi Appuhamy

(Deceased), No. 29, Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 2A. Henaka Ralalage Wimalasiri Menike, No. D27, Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura.

2

3. V.P.C. Vitharana,

No. D34, Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 4. Henaka Ralalage Somarathne,

No. D33, Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 5. Henaka Ralalage Wijeratne (Deceased),

No. D33/1, Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 5A. Henka Ralalage Sriyani Wijeratne, No. 400/1, Kadurugashena, Hiyare East, Hiyare, Galle. 6. Henaka Ralalage Dingiri Appuhamy

(Deceased), Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 6A. Henaka Ralalage Piyarathne, Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 7. Henaka Ralalage Mohotti Appuhamy

(Deceased), Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 7A. Henaka Ralalage Kamalawathie, No. D29, Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 8. Henaka Ralalage Gunathilake,

Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 9. Henaka Ralalage Dingiri Appuhamy

(Deceased), Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura.

3

9A. Henaka Ralalage Piyaratne, Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 10. Ranasinghe Hettiarachchige Gunasekara,

Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 11. H.R. Podiralahamy (Deceased),

Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 11A. Henaka Ralalge Premadasa,

Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 12. Henaka Ralalage Piyaratne,

Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 13. Henaka Ralalge Wimalsiri Manike (legal

representative of the 2nd Defendant deceased), Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 14. P.R.Ranmenike,

Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura.

Defendants AND 3. V.P.C. Vitharana,

No. D34, Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 4. Henaka Ralalage Somarathne,

No. D33, Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 5. Henaka Ralalage Wijeratne (Deceased),

No. D33/1, Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura.

4

5A. Henka Ralalage Sriyani Wijeratne, No. 400/1, Kadurugashena, Hiyare East, Hiyare, Galle. 10. Ranasinghe Hettiarachchige Gunasekara,

Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura.

Defendant-Appellants Vs.

Vidanalage Dingiri Banda (Deceased), of Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura.

Plaintiff-Respondent

Vithanalage Senathileke of Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura.

Substituted Plaintiff-Respondent 1. Henaka Ralalage Punchi Banda alias

Vijitha Bandara, Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 2. Henaka Ralalage Podi Appuhamy

(Deceased), No. 29, Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 2A. Henaka Ralalage Wimalasiri Menike, No. D27, Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 6. Henaka Ralalage Dingiri Appuhamy

(Deceased), Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura.

5

6A. Henaka Ralalage Piyarathne, Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 7. Henaka Ralalage Mohotti Appuhamy

(Deceased), Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 7A. Henaka Ralalage Kamalawathie, No. D29, Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 8. Henaka Ralalage

Gunathilake,Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 9. Henaka Ralalage Dingiri Appuhamy

(Deceased), Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 9A. Henaka Ralalage Piyaratne, Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 11. H.R. Podiralahamy (Deceased),

Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 11A. Henaka Ralalge Premadasa,

Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 12. Henaka Ralalage Piyaratne,

Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 13. Henaka Ralalge Wimalsiri Manike (legal

representative of the 2nd Defendant deceased), Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura.

6

14. P.R.Ranmenike,

Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura.

Defendant-Respondents AND NOW BETWEEN

3. V.P.C. Vitharana,

No. D34, Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 10. Ranasinghe Hettiarachchige Gunasekara,

Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura.

Defendant-Appellant-Petitioners Vs.

Vidanalage Dingiri Banda (Deceased), of Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura.

Plaintiff-Respondent Vithanalage Senathileke of Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura.

Substituted Plaintiff-Respondent 1. Henaka Ralalage Punchi Banda alias

Vijitha Bandara, Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 2. Henaka Ralalage Podi Appuhamy

(Deceased), No. 29, Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura.

7

2A. Henaka Ralalage Wimalasiri Menike, No. D27, Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 6. Henaka Ralalage Dingiri Appuhamy

(Deceased), Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 6A. Henaka Ralalage Piyarathne, Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 7. Henaka Ralalage Mohotti Appuhamy

(Deceased), Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 7A. Henaka Ralalage Kamalawathie, No. D29, Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 8. Henaka Ralalage

Gunathilake,Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 9. Henaka Ralalage Dingiri Appuhamy

(Deceased), Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 9A. Henaka Ralalage Piyaratne, Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 11. H.R. Podiralahamy (Deceased),

Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 11A. Henaka Ralalge Premadasa,

Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura.

8

12. Henaka Ralalage Piyaratne,

Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 13. Henaka Ralalge Wimalsiri Manike (legal

representative of the 2nd Defendant deceased), Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 14. P.R.Ranmenike,

Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura.

Defendant-Respondent-Respondents 4. Henaka Ralalage Somarathne,

No. D33, Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 5. Henaka Ralalage Wijeratne (Deceased),

No. D33/1, Kurunegoda, Kotiyakumbura. 5A. Henka Ralalage Sriyani Wijeratne, No. 400/1, Kadurugashena, Hiyare East, Hiyare, Galle.

Defendant-Appellant-Respondents

9

Before: L.T.B. Dehideniya, J.

Janak De Silva, J.

Achala Wengappuli, J.

Counsel:

Dr. F.A. Sunil Cooray with Nilanga Perera for the 3rd and 10th Defendants-Appellants-

Appellants

Ranil Samarasooriya with Shashiranga Sooriyapatabendi for the Substituted

Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent

Niranjan De Silva with Isuri Jayawardena for the 1A Defendant-Respondent-

Respondent

Tharanga Edirisinghe for the 2A and 13th Defendants-Respondents-Respondents

Written Submissions on :

28.03.2013 by the 3rd and 10th Defendants-Appellants-Appellants

06.05.2013 by the 1A Defendant-Respondent-Respondent

05.04.2017 and 16.03.2021 by the 2A and 13th Defendants-Respondents-

Respondents

Argued on: 19.02.2021

Decided on: 06.07.2021

Janak De Silva J.

The Plaintiff filed this action in the District Court of Kegalle seeking to partition two

contiguous lands called Narangahamulahena containing in extent 12 lahas of paddy

sowing and Kalahugahamulahena containing in extent 3 pelas and 5 lahas of paddy

sowing.

The dispute between the parties related only to the devolution of title to the

corpus.

10

The learned District Judge upheld the pedigree pleaded by the Plaintiff. Aggrieved

by the judgment of the learned District Judge, the 3rd and 10th Defendants-

Appellants-Appellants (hereinafter referred to as “Appellants”) and the 4th and 5th

Defendants-Appellants-Respondents appealed to the High Court (Civil Appeal)

Sabaragamuwa Province holden at Kegalle.

By judgment dated 30.08.2010, the appeal was dismissed by the High Court and

hence this appeal. Court has granted leave to appeal on the following questions of

law:

(a) Has the High Court erred by holding that apart from the oral testimony of the

3rd Defendant there is no evidence to arrive at the conclusion that Siyathuhamy was

a child of Menik Ethana, because the judgment in the earlier partition case between

the parties, namely Case No. 1661/P, produced marked P15 upholds the same

position (pp. 508-509)?

(d) Did the High Court come to the finding that the Defendant-Appellants had not

established prescriptive possession of the respective lots, in that the High Court only

considered the law relating to prescription contained in certain decided cases, but

not the evidence led in this case?

(e) Had the Defendant-Appellants established by oral and documentary evidence led

in this case the devolution of title set out in their amended statement of claim?

I will address the issues raised in the same order. The first point to be considered is

the maternity of Siyathuhamy and the second is whether the necessary conditions

to establish prescription among co-owners have been fulfilled.

The pedigree pleaded by the Appellants was based upon Menik Ethana being the

mother of Siyathuhamy which fact was contested by the Plaintiff.

11

The best evidence of this fact in issue would have been the birth certificate of

Siyathuhamy. The evidence indicates that he was born sometime in the 1830s. Due

to the absence of a formalized system of registration of births in the country at that

time, no adverse inference should be drawn against the Appellants for the failure

to produce the birth certificate of Siyathuhamy.

The learned counsel for the Appellants submitted that there was a previous

partition action in the District Court of Kegalle bearing No. 1661/P between the

parties where it was held that Menik Ethana is the mother of Siyathuhamy and that

this finding was disregarded by the High Court. I observe that the evidence in that

case as to the mother of Siyathuhamy was inconsistent and various documents

suggested that the name of the mother was Menik Ethana, Kuda Ethana or Dingiri

Ethana. Upon a careful examination of the judgment in D.C. Kegalle 1661/P (P15), I

find that the learned District Judge did not come to any definitive finding that Menik

Ethana is the mother of Siyathuhamy. On the contrary he proceeds to hold that

irrespective of the name of his mother, Siyathuhamy inherited a share of the corpus

on maternal inheritance.

The learned counsel for the Appellant further submitted that the death certificate

of Siyathuhamy (4D4) indicated that his mother was Henaka Ralalage Menik Ethana

which fact was also overlooked by the High Court. This raises an important question

viz. the relevancy and probative value of the details of the father or the mother

contained in the death certificate of the deceased.

The registration of births and deaths was first brought within a legislative

framework by Ordinance No. 18 of 1867 which was repealed by Ordinance to

Amend the Laws on Registration of Births and Deaths No. 1 of 1895. The death

certificate of Siyathuhamy (4D4) was issued in terms of this Ordinance. Section 42

therein mandates that a certified copy of a death certificate shall be received as

prima facie evidence of the birth or death or still-birth to which it refers without

12

any further or other proof of such entry. This is descriptive of the probative value

of the details of the birth or death or still-birth only. Ordinance No. 1 of 1895 did

not give any probative value to other details contained in a death certificate.

The present law relating to the registration of births and deaths is contained in

Births and Deaths Registration Act No. 17 of 1951 as amended. Section 57 therein

mandates that a certified copy of a death certificate shall be received as prima facie

evidence of the birth or death or still-birth to which it refers and applies to death

certificates issued under Ordinance No. 1 of 1895 as well as this Act. This is

descriptive of the probative value of the details of the birth or death or still-birth

only. Thus, the Births and Deaths Registration Act No. 17 of 1951 as amended also

did not give any probative value to other details contained in the death certificate.

Accordingly, I hold that the probative value of the contents of a death certificate

issued under both Ordinance No. 1 of 1895 and Births and Deaths Registration Act

No. 17 of 1951 is limited in terms of those two enactments to the details of the

birth or death or still-birth to which it refers and applies to. The two enactments do

not confer any probative value to any of the other details contained in a death

certificate. Hence the details of the mother of Siyathuhamy contained in his death

certificate (4D4) have no probative value in terms of those two enactments.

However, it does not necessarily mean that this information has no relevancy in

terms of the Evidence Ordinance. Its relevancy depends on sections 32(5) and 32(6)

of the Evidence Ordinance, which deal with the proof of relationship by blood,

marriage or adoption between deceased persons, and section 50 of the Evidence

Ordinance which deals with the relationship of one person to another.

13

Upon an examination of these provisions, I am of the view that the details of the

mother of Siyathuhamy contained in (4D4) may be relevant only if the required

conditions in section 32(5) of the Evidence Ordinance are satisfied as the other

provisions have no application to the details of the paternity or maternity contained

in the death certificate.

Section 32(5) of the Evidence Ordinance reads:

“When the statement relates to the existence of any relationship by blood,

marriage, or adoption between persons as to whose relationship by blood,

marriage, adoption the person making the statement had special means of

knowledge, and when the statement was made before the question in

dispute was raised.”

According to the death certificate of Siyathuhamy (4D4), the details contained

therein were provided by one Henaka Ralalage Dingiri Banda who is described

therein as a close relative. Whilst this information has been provided ante litem

motam, no evidence has been led as to the special means of knowledge of Dingiri

Banda about the family details of Siyathuhamy. The importance of establishing the

special means of knowledge of the person providing the information was

emphasized in Chellammah v. Vyravan Kanapathy and Others (65 N.L.R. 49) where

the Privy Council did not act on the details of the mother of the deceased included

in the death certificate as it was never proved from whom that information came.

Therefore, I hold that the details of the mother of Siyathuhamy set out in the death

certificate (4D4) are not relevant in terms of section 32(5) of the Evidence

Ordinance.

In any event, the mere fact that Dingiri Banda is identified as a close relative of

Siyathuhamy is insufficient by itself to make the information about his mother

relevant in terms of section 32(5) of the Evidence Ordinance in view of the

contradictory nature of the evidence before court on this issue.

14

In particular, I observe that in deed No. 16288 (2V5), the vendor of which is

Siyathuhamy, the recital states that Siyathuhamy became the owner on maternal

inheritance from his mother Kuda Ethana. This is relevant, as an admission, in terms

of section 21 of the Evidence Ordinance or in terms of section 32(5) of the Evidence

Ordinance due to the special knowledge of Siyathuhamy.

Indeed, such evidence would be very strong evidence of the family relationship as

decided in Cooray v. Wijesuriya (62 NLR 158 at 162) where Sinnetamby J. stated:

“It is a practice with some notaries to recite the vendor’s title in the deed they

attest. For instance, a deed may recite that the vendor’s title to a share is

derived by inheritance from a deceased father and the father’s name is given.

Such a recital being a statement made by a deceased vendor having special

means of knowledge and made ante litem motam would be admissible to

establish relationship: in fact it would be very strong evidence of the family

relationship.”

On the contrary, deed No. 15345 (4V1) tendered on behalf of the 4th Defendant-

Appellant-Respondent, where also the vendor is Siyathuhamy, the recital does not

identify the mother of Siyathuhamy although it is claimed that he derived title to

the land on maternal inheritance.

The burden of proof of the pedigree pleaded by the Appellants was on them.

Consequently, they should have proved that Menik Ethana was the mother of

Siyathuhamy. Although the Appellants placed much reliance on the death

certificate of Siyathuhamy (4D4), its probative value is limited to the details of the

death. The fact that his mother is identified as Menik Ethana in the death certificate

(4D4) is irrelevant as the required conditions in section 32(5) of the Evidence

Ordinance are not met. The learned District Judge in the judgment in D.C. Kegalle

1661/P (P15) did not come to any definitive finding that Menik Ethana is the mother

of Siyathuhamy.

15

For the foregoing reasons, I hold that the Appellants have failed to prove that

Siyathuhamy was the son of Menik Ethana.

On the issue of prescription, the case of the Appellants, in terms of points of contest

44 and 46, is that they have prescribed to lot 5 in plan No. 979 and lot 7A in plan

No. 979A. Where a party invokes the provisions of Section 3 of the Prescription

Ordinance in order to defeat the ownership of an adverse claimant to immovable

property, the burden of proof rests fairly and squarely on him to establish a starting

point for his or her acquisition of prescriptive rights [Chelliah v. Wijenathan et al

(54 N.L.R. 337)]. In their statement of claim, the Appellants claim to have possessed

these two lots for more than 60 years prior to the institution of the action in 1983

after an amicable partition. Hence it was incumbent on the Appellants to prove that

at least by 1933 they had prescribed to the lots claimed by them.

The legal position on prescription among co-owners is well-settled. In Corea v. lseris

Appuhamy (15 NLR 65) the Privy Council held that, in law, the possession of one co-

owner is also the possession of his co-owners and that it was not possible to put an

end to that possession by any secret intention in his mind and that nothing short of

ouster or something equivalent to ouster could put an end to that possession. In

Tillekeratne v. Bastian (21 NLR 12) it was held that it was open to the Court, from

lapse of time in conjunction with the circumstances of the case, to presume that

possession originally that of a co-owner had since become adverse. Whether the

presumption of ouster is to be drawn or not depends on the circumstances of each

case.

The preliminary plan no. 979 indicates that lot 5 had defined boundaries at the time

of the survey. The fact that co-owners possessed lots having defined boundaries on

the ground has probative value indicating that an amicable partition may indeed

have taken place amongst the co-owners. However, in my view this by itself is not

conclusive of a change of circumstances amounting to an ouster required to put an

16

end to co-ownership. Indeed, there is other evidence available in this case which

negates any such conclusion.

In Abdul Majeed v. Ummu Zaneera (61 N.L.R. 361) De Silva J. with Fernando J.

agreeing held that in considering whether or not a presumption of ouster should

be drawn by reason of long-continued possession alone, of the property owned in

common, it is relevant to consider inter alia documents executed on the basis of

exclusive ownership. However, I observe that in this case evidence of the execution

of several deeds over a period of nearly fifty years indicates the contrary. Several

deeds executed after 1933 by the co-owners, such as deed No. 1999 (P4) executed

in 1935, deed No, 2779 (P5) executed in 1940, deed No. 13100 (2V2) executed in

1946, deed No. 6120 (P7) executed in 1960, deed No. 3745 (P6) executed in 1965,

deed No. 21744 (4V6) executed in 1967 and deed No. 927 (P8) executed in 1972

describe their share of the corpus as undivided shares which indicate that the co-

owners continued to consider the corpus as co-owned.

Furthermore, the preliminary survey plan prepared in 1985 indicates that

admittedly there was common plantation ranging from 20 to 50 years in the several

lots identified therein which in my view negates any presumption of ouster by long

possession beginning from 1933.

For the foregoing reasons I hold that the Appellants have failed to establish that the

co-ownership came to an end by amicable partition and them prescribing to the

lots claimed by them. I agree with the conclusion of the learned High Court Judge

that the only conclusion one could arrive at from the evidence adduced in this case

is that the co-owners possessed the corpus in separate lots for the convenience of

possession and not with the intention of ending the co-ownership.

Therefore, I answer all three questions of law in the negative.

17

Accordingly, I affirm the judgment of the learned District Judge of Kegalle dated 16th

September 2008 and the judgment of the High Court (Civil Appeal) Sabaragamuwa

Province holden at Kegalle dated 30th August 2010 and dismiss this appeal with

costs. The Registrar is directed to take steps accordingly.

The Substituted Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent shall be entitled to his costs both

in the High Court (Civil Appeal) Sabaragamuwa Province holden at Kegalle and in

this court.

Appeal dismissed.

Judge of the Supreme Court

L.T.B. Dehideniya, J.

I agree. Judge of the Supreme Court

Achala Wengappuli, J.

I agree. Judge of the Supreme Court