SC Appeal/115/2017

1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the Matter of an application for Special Leave to Appeal against the judgement of the High Court of the Western Province in Case No. WP/HCA//103/2013/LT, Under and in terms of Article 128 (2) of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka and the Section 31DD of the Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, No. 32 of 1990 as amended. SC Appeal 115/2017 SC SPL LA No. 219/2015 RSK LANKA PRIVATE LIMITED WP/HCA/103/2013/LT Phase 11, Case No. LT 21/2545/2009 Export Processing Zone Katunayake. Employer-Respondent-Appellant Vs. P.M. NADIKA R. PATHIRAJA SiriNiwasa Wadumunnegedara. Applicant-Appellant-Respondent Before : Jayantha Jayasuriya, PC, CJ

Buwaneka Aluwihare, PC, J.

S. Thurairaja, PC, J.

Counsel : Kushan D Alwis PC with Ayendra Wickremasekara and Sashendra Mudannayake for the Employer-Respondent-Appellant.

Anura Gunaratne for the Applicant-Appellant-Respondent.

Written Submissions : 24.07.2017 and 17.03.2023 by the Employer-Respondent- filed on Appellant. 12.05.2020 and 29.03.2023 by the Applicant-Appellant- Respondent.

SC Appeal/115/2017

2

Argued on : 09.12.2022

Decided on : 31.05.2023

Jayantha Jayasuriya, PC, CJ.

The applicant-appellant-respondent (hereinafter referred to as the respondent) filed an

application in the labour tribunal alleging that the employer-respondent-appellant (hereinafter

referred to as the appellant) constructively terminated her services. The respondent sought inter

alia re-employment with back wages or reasonable compensation if re-employment is not

granted. The appellant pleaded that no relief should be granted to the respondent as no

termination of services had taken place. Therefore, it was further pleaded that the respondent is

not entitled to any of the reliefs prayed for and moved that the application be dismissed.

The labour tribunal after an inquiry, by its order dated 15 January 2013 dismissed the application

on the basis that the tribunal lacks jurisdiction as the respondent failed to establish termination of

services. The president of the labour tribunal held that proof of termination, either actual or

constructive is necessary for an application under section 31B (1)(a) of the Industrial Disputes

Act (hereinafter referred to as the Act), to succeed. Being dissatisfied with the aforesaid order,

the respondent invoked the appellate jurisdiction of the Provincial High Court under section 31D

of the Act and the High Court pronounced its Order on 14 September 2015. The learned High

Court judge in his order interalia held that the respondent should be accorded with an

opportunity to report for work with half wages for the period of absence.

The appellant is impugning the aforesaid order of the High Court.

This Court granted special leave to appeal on the following two questions:

(a) Has the learned High Court judge erred and / or misdirected himself in law by

proceeding to hold that the respondent be reinstated in the employment of the

petitioner with half wages, after having correctly concluded that the employment of

the respondent has not been terminated, and that the said Application of the

respondent could not have been maintained due to a patent lack of jurisdiction?

(b) After having correctly arrived at the conclusion that there is no reason to interfere

with the decision of the learned president of the labour tribunal, has the learned High

Court judge erred and / or misdirected himself in law by proceeding to award the

SC Appeal/115/2017

3

respondent the relief of reinstatement with half wages, without dismissing and / or

disallowing the aforesaid appeal filed by the respondent?

The learned High Court judge in his impugned judgment had initially reached the conclusion that

the appellant has not terminated the services of the respondent and therefore the labour tribunal

lacks patent jurisdiction. Accordingly, the learned High Court judge had further decided that

there is no reason to interfere with the order of the labour tribunal.

Both the president of the labour tribunal as well as the learned High Court had examined in

detail, all the evidence pertaining to the issue whether the initial suspension of work followed by

interdiction of the respondent pending the disciplinary inquiry amounts to a constructive

termination in the given situation. Sequence of events commencing from 11 October 2008 up to

the date on which the respondent made her application to the labour tribunal namely 29 January

2009 had been considered in the context of the evidence of the witnesses and correspondence

between the appellant and the respondent. Such evidence reveal that the refusal of the respondent

to comply with certain directions of the management had taken place on 11 October 2008 and the

respondent has been placed on interdiction on 29 October 2008, initially being temporally

suspended on 15 October 2008. There had been a series of correspondence between the two

parties and the respondent made the application to the labour tribunal on 29 January 2009, while

the disciplinary inquiry was scheduled for 10 February 2009. The respondent in her evidence at

the labour tribunal in the cross-examination had admitted that failure to attend the disciplinary

inquiry was a grave error on her part.

However, the learned High Court judge having concurred with the decision of the labour tribunal

that no constructive termination had taken place and therefore there is no reason to interfere with

the decision of the labour tribunal had thereafter proceeded to hold that the respondent should be

accorded with an opportunity to report for work with half wages for the period of absence. In

arriving at this decision the learned Judge had observed that the respondent would lose an

opportunity to obtain any relief, as she is not reporting for work. The learned Judge had observed

that such pronouncement is warranted when all surrounding facts and circumstances are

examined in a just and equitable manner.

The learned Presidents Counsel for the appellant contended that there is no legal basis for the

High Court to have made this order after holding that the labour tribunal lacks patent jurisdiction.

SC Appeal/115/2017

4

However, the learned counsel for the respondent contended that the impugned order of the High

Court is within the purview of sections 31B(4) and 31C(1) of the Act.

Section 31B(4) reads:

Any relief or redress may be granted by a labour tribunal to a workman upon an application

made under subsection (1) notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any contract of service

between him and his employer

Section 31C reads:

Where an application under section 31B is made to a labour tribunal, it shall be the duty of the

tribunal to make all such inquiries into that application and hear all such evidence as the tribunal

may consider necessary, and thereafter make such order as may appear to the tribunal to be just

and equitable.

Examination of both these sections clearly reflect that the exercise of powers vested on the

labour tribunal by those provisions are restricted to situations where its jurisdiction is invoked by

an application made under section 31B of the Act. The three matters for which relief or redress

from a labour tribunal can be sought on an application made to a labour tribunal are stipulated in

section 31B(1). The instance which is relevant to this appeal namely that termination of services

of a workman by the employer is set out in Section 31B(1)(a). Therefore, proof of termination

of services by the employer is a necessary pre-requisite for a labour tribunal to grant any relief

or redress to a workman who has made an application made under section 31B(1)(a).

In the instant matter, the learned president of the labour tribunal after careful analysis of the

evidence placed at the inquiry had arrived at a finding of fact that the respondent failed to

establish termination of her services. The learned High Court judge had neither found fault with

this finding nor has set aside it. To the contrary he concurred with the finding of the learned

president of the labour tribunal. Thus, both the president of the labour tribunal and the learned

High Court judge found that the services of the respondent were not terminated. Under these

circumstances, the respondent is not entitled to invoke the jurisdiction of the labour tribunal, in

terms of section 31B(1)(a) of the Industrial Disputes Act.

Therefore, the learned president of the labour tribunal had correctly proceeded to dismiss the

application of the respondent after holding that the respondent failed to establish termination of

employment. However, the learned judge of the High Court had erred when he proceeded to hold

SC Appeal/115/2017

5

that the respondent should be accorded with an opportunity to report for work with half wages

for the period of absence, while holding that the respondent had no right to maintain the

application and therefore there is no reason to interfere with the order of the learned president of

the labour tribunal.

The Supreme Court in Arnolda v Gopalan 64 NLR 153, in reference to jurisdiction of labour

tribunals under the Act, had observed that the powers as well as its jurisdiction has to be looked

for within the four corners of this statute. (at 156-157). When a labour tribunal granting any

relief or redress to a workman under section 31C of the Act, the just and equitable order must be

fair to all parties (Peoples Bank v Gilbert Weerasinghe [2008] BLR 133 at 135) and that the

labour tribunal does not have the freedom of the wild ass in exercising powers vested on it

under section 31C of the Act (Walker sons & Co Ltd v Fry, 68 NLR 73 at 99). Furthermore

court had agreed with the view that justice and equity can be measured not according to the

urgings of a kind heart but only within the framework of the law (Richard Peiris & Co Ltd v

Wijesiriwardane, 62 NLR 233 at 235).

Hence, I am of the view that the relief granted in the order of the learned High Court Judge while

exercising appellate jurisdiction, exceeded the original jurisdiction of the Labour Tribunal.

In view of my findings above I proceed to answer both questions of law on which Special Leave

to Appeal was granted in the affirmative and allow the appeal. The Order of the Labour Tribunal

is affirmed and the Judgment of the High Court is accordingly set aside.

Chief Justice Buwaneka Aluwihare, PC, J. I agree. Judge of the Supreme Court S. Thurairaja, PC, J. I agree. Judge of the Supreme Court