==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the maƩer of an appeal in terms of ArƟcle 128(1) of the ConsƟtuƟon of the DemocraƟc Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka read with Paragraph 3(b) of ArƟcle 154(P) of the ConsƟtuƟon and SecƟon 3 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990

SC Appeal No: 136/2015 HC Colombo No. HCALT No. 75/2010 LT Case No: LT/2/525/2004

L. J. Abeywickrema, 388/4, Araliya Gardens, Nawala Road, Rajagiriya

APPLICANT

Vs. Bartleet and Company Limited, 65, Braybrook Place, Colombo 2.

RESPONDENT And between

L. J. Abeywickrema, 388/4, Araliya Gardens, Nawala Road, Rajagiriya

APPLICANT – APPELLANT

Vs. Bartleet and Company Limited, 65, Braybrook Place, Colombo 2. RESPONDENT – RESPONDENT

2

And now between L. J. Abeywickrema, 388/4, Araliya Gardens, Nawala Road, Rajagiriya

APPLICANT – APPELLANT – APPELLANT

Vs. Bartleet and Company Limited, 65, Braybrook Place, Colombo 2.

RESPONDENT – RESPONDENT – RESPONDENT SC Appeal No: 136A/2015 HC Colombo No. HCALT No. 76/2010 LT Case No: LT/2/525/2004

L. J. Abeywickrema, 388/4, Araliya Gardens, Nawala Road, Rajagiriya

APPLICANT

Vs. Bartleet and Company Limited, 65, Braybrook Place, Colombo 2.

RESPONDENT And between

Bartleet and Company Limited, 65, Braybrook Place, Colombo 2. RESPONDENT – APPELLANT

Vs.

3

L. J. Abeywickrema, 388/4, Araliya Gardens, Nawala Road, Rajagiriya

APPLICANT – RESPONDENT

And now between Bartleet and Company Limited, 65, Braybrook Place, Colombo 2.

RESPONDENT – APPELLANT – APPELLANT

Vs. L. J. Abeywickrema, 388/4, Araliya Gardens, Nawala Road, Rajagiriya

APPLICANT – RESPONDENT – RESPONDENT Before: S. Thurairaja, PC, J Arjuna Obeyesekere, J Dr. Sobhitha Rajakaruna, J Counsel: Chandana Liyanapatabendi, PC with Vijaya Gamage, Heshan ThambimuƩu, Ershan Ariyaratnam and Anjali Ratnasekera for the Applicant – Appellant – Appellant in SC Appeal No. 136/2015 and for the Applicant – Respondent – Respondent in SC Appeal No. 136A/2015 Shammil J. Perera, PC with Duthika Perera for the Respondent – Respondent – Respondent in SC Appeal No. 136/2015 and the Respondent – Appellant – Appellant in SC Appeal No. 136A/2015 Argued on: 11th July 2025 WriƩen Tendered by the Applicant – Appellant – Appellant on 6th December 2019 Submissions: and 25th April 2024 Tendered by the Respondent – Respondent – Respondent on 21st March 2024 and 24th April 2024 Decided on: 6th March 2026

4

Obeyesekere, J (1) The Applicant – Appellant – Appellant [the Applicant] was an employee of the

Respondent – Respondent – Respondent [the Employer]. Pursuant to the issuance of a charge sheet and the ﬁndings of a domesƟc inquiry, the services of the Applicant were terminated by leƩer dated 8th July 2004. The Applicant thereaŌer invoked the jurisdicƟon of the Labour Tribunal claiming that the terminaƟon of his services was arbitrary and unjusƟﬁed. (2) While the Employer led the evidence of ﬁve witnesses, the Applicant gave evidence

and led the evidence of two witnesses. In response to two quesƟons posed to the Applicant by the Tribunal at the end of his re-examinaƟon, the Applicant had stated that he is not seeking reinstatement and that he is only seeking the payment of four years’ salary as compensaƟon. By its Order dated 4th June 2010, the Labour Tribunal held that the terminaƟon of the services of the Applicant was unjusƟﬁed and ordered the Employer to pay as compensaƟon a sum of Rs. 2,375,000 which is equivalent to the basic salary of 38 months. (3) Aggrieved by the said Order, two appeals were ﬁled in the High Court. The ﬁrst was

by the Applicant who alleged that the quantum of compensaƟon awarded is grossly inadequate and that the allowances that the Applicant was enƟtled to should have been included in the calculaƟon of the compensaƟon. The second appeal was by the Employer who complained that the ﬁnding that the terminaƟon of services is unjusƟﬁed is wrong. The two appeals were consolidated by the High Court and by its judgment delivered on 19th September 2014, the High Court dismissed both appeals. Appeal to the Supreme Court and QuesƟons of Law (4) DissaƟsﬁed, the Employer sought and obtained leave to appeal from this Court on

22nd July 2015 in SC Appeal No. 136A/2015 on the following quesƟons of law:

“(a) Does the serious misconduct and disobedience of the Applicant employed

in the capacity of a ‘Manager’ in the Employer Company amount to loss of conﬁdence which would in turn jusƟfy his terminaƟon?

5

(b) Did the High Court err in law when it upheld the decision of the Labour

Tribunal in spite of the ﬁnding of the Labour Tribunal that the Applicant was guilty of several wrongdoings and the Applicant not having an unblemished record of service with the Employer? (c) Is there a legal requirement placed on the Employer to adduce the order of

the domesƟc inquiry held against the Employer and would the failure to do so be fatal to the case of the Employer?” (5) The Applicant too sought and obtained leave to appeal in SC Appeal No. 136/2015

on the following quesƟon of law:

“Did the High Court err in law and/or misdirect itself when it failed to consider the provisions of SecƟons 31C(1), 33 and specially SecƟon 33(1)(d) of the Industrial Disputes Act which gives Court the power to consider the wages and other emoluments when considering the granƟng of compensaƟon in lieu of or in addiƟon to reinstatement.” (6) When this maƩer was taken up for hearing on 11th July 2025, an applicaƟon was

made by the learned President’s Counsel for both parƟes that these two appeals be consolidated. The said applicaƟon was allowed and with the consent of the learned President’s Counsel, it was agreed that one judgment shall be delivered in respect of both appeals. The learned President’s Counsel for the Employer submiƩed further that he would not be pursuing the 3rd quesƟon of law raised by him. Alleged irregulariƟes of the Applicant – R1 (7) The Applicant joined the Employer on 1st July 1985 as a Trainee ExecuƟve. In 1999,

he was promoted as Manager of the Tea Department of the Employer. It is admiƩed that: (a) The Applicant’s father was a director and a shareholder of the Employer at one Ɵme; (b) At all Ɵmes relevant to this appeal, the Applicant’s family owned a tea estate

situated in Deniyaya by the name of Seetha Eliya Estate; and

6

(c) The teas produced by the said estate were sold at the tea aucƟons held in Colombo with the Employer acƟng as the broker. (8) On 12th March 2003, the Applicant was served with the following leƩer [R1]:

“We write further to the recent invesƟgaƟons conducted by us regarding the storage and sale of tea in our Bloemendhal Stores. As you are aware, consequent to the cyclone on 9th December 2002, which caused severe damage to our Bloemendhal Stores, including the roof being blown away in certain secƟons, the necessity arose for the management to take a complete stock of the tea in our possession. In the process of our stock veriﬁcaƟon, certain serious irregulariƟes have been detected in relaƟon to the work performed by you as Manager – Tea Department, some of which we have already discussed with you. Listed hereunder are the irregulariƟes, which were revealed in respect of the period 9th December 2002 to 21st January 2003.” (9) The aforemenƟoned irregulariƟes have been referred to in R1 as Charge Nos. 1, 2

and 3, and are set out below.

Charge No. 1 - Teas supposedly belonging to the “Seetha Eliya” mark have been keyed-in and included for the payment of advances from the Employer on four consecuƟve occasions according to a table contained in R2, although no such teas had ever been received at the Stores. The table contained 8 invoices and the Employer claimed that it had paid Seetha Eliya Estate as an advance an aggregate sum of Rs. 1,037,981.84. Charge No. 2 – Certain “Seetha Eliya” invoices, referred to in a table, had been amalgamated on the instrucƟons of the Applicant with other invoices of the same mark and the tea referred to in such invoices had been sold under a single invoice. ThereaŌer, further advances have been made on some of those invoices that was iniƟally amalgamated and later reintroduced to the system. The table contained 15 invoices with the Employer claiming that as a result of amalgamaƟng invoices, it had made an overpayment in a sum of Rs. 1,494,610.14 to Seetha Eliya Estate. Charge No. 3 – The Applicant had instructed the Cataloguing Department on 13th December 2002 to key-in “Seetha Eliya” invoices set out in a table in respect of teas

7

that were not physically in the Stores of the Employer and advised that these invoices be indicated as stored in Store Nos. 3B and 6A at Bloemendhal Road at a Ɵme the said stores were closed as a result of the cyclone, thus enabling to claim from the insurer for teas that were not at the Stores at the Ɵme of the cyclone. The table referred to in this charge contained 31 invoices of Seetha Eliya Estate. Response of the Applicant – R2 (10) The Applicant responded to R1 by his leƩer dated 24th March 2003 [R2]. With regard

to Charge No.1, the Applicant admiƩed that he had instructed the relevant oﬃcer to enter the invoices referred to in the Table as the Manager of Seetha Eliya Estate, who was the brother of the Applicant, had on an earlier occasion informed him that certain quanƟƟes of tea dispatched by him remains unaccounted (unsold) as per the records of Seetha Eliya Estate. The Applicant admiƩed that he had given instrucƟons in respect of the invoices referred to in Charge Nos. 2 and 3, as well. However, in respect of all three charges, the Applicant’s posiƟon was that he had instructed that the invoices be entered in the “secondary bin” for further invesƟgaƟon since no payments are made in respect of invoices that are entered in the secondary bin and that without any involvement on the part of the Applicant, those invoices had been paid. (11) Thus, the Applicant did not deny the maƩers set out in R1 but instead took up the

posiƟon that he had not acted with any dishonest intenƟon. He submiƩed further that in any event, the Employer had not suﬀered any loss since any advances paid to Seetha Eliya Estate had been set oﬀ against payments due from the Employer. (12) The Employer had rejected the said explanaƟon and held a domesƟc inquiry in

respect of the above charges and one other charge in respect of which the Applicant had been exonerated. On the basis of the ﬁndings arrived at such inquiry, the services of the Applicant had been terminated with eﬀect from 12th March 2003.

Evidence before the Tribunal (13) The Employer ﬁrst led the evidence of its Joint Managing Director but he was not

made available for cross examinaƟon. Thus, his evidence cannot be considered. He was followed by (a) Dahanayake, the Clerk in charge of cataloguing the tea that was

8

received at the stores, (b) Anton Silva who entered on the computer the details given to him by Dahanayake, (c) Chandrasekera, the Chief Accountant, and (d) Jayasundera, the Stores ExecuƟve. (14) AŌer the case of the Employer was closed, the parƟes had admiƩed a series of

factual maƩers, including the following:

(a) The Applicant was responsible for the cataloguing of tea, the entering of data relaƟng to the tea that was received from suppliers including Seetha Eliya Estate, and issuing invoices; (b) There is a discrepancy with regard to the sums of money that the Employer

alleged in Charge Nos. 1 and 2 as having been paid to Seetha Eliya Estate as an advance [;jo b,a,quslreg jsreoaOj Tmamq js we;ehs lshd isgsk 01 iy 02 fpdaokdj,

w;a;sldrus ms,sno m%YaKhla we;']; (c) There was no proper scheme to pay advances as it was sought to be made out in the tables aƩached to R1 [flfia kuq;a fpdaokd m;%fha we;s j.+fjs wdldrfh;a

w;a;sldrus ksoyia lsrSfus l%shdoduhla fkd;snq njo ms,s.kS']. (15) In his evidence, the Applicant reiterated the maƩers that he had stated in R2. He

stated further that any tea that is delivered to the Stores of the Employer is acknowledged by the issuance of a Goods Received Note and it is only thereaŌer that cataloguing and data entry takes place but that on certain occasions, even though goods had not been physically received at the Stores, he had instructed the relevant Clerks that details of such goods be entered in the secondary bin in the computer system. The Applicant admiƩed that aŌer the cyclone, he had instructed that details of teas that his brother had informed him had been sent prior to the cyclone be entered without checking if such teas had actually been received. The Applicant also admiƩed that he had amalgamated invoices but not as alleged by the Employer and that he had not amalgamated any invoices of suppliers other than that of Seetha Eliya Estate. The essence of the evidence of the Applicant was that he has not acted dishonestly and that no loss had been caused to the Employer.

9

The Order of the Labour Tribunal and the judgment of the High Court (16) The Labour Tribunal has carefully evaluated the evidence and concluded that even

though: (a) the charges alleged that advances had been paid for teas that were never

delivered, that was not correct; (b) the Applicant is correct when he claimed that entering invoices on the

secondary bin does not result in payment, but once invoices are amalgamated, one invoice gets subsumed within another and hence, even if invoices had been entered in the secondary bin, it is diﬃcult to ascertain if payments had been made on the invoices that were subsumed in the amalgamated invoice; (c) the charges proceeded on the basis that an accepted procedure was followed in making advance payments, the reality was that there existed no such accepted procedure. (17) The Labour Tribunal had therefore concluded that the Employer had failed to

substanƟate by way of evidence the charges referred to in R1. The High Court has aﬃrmed this ﬁnding. I have examined the evidence and I am in agreement with the ﬁnding of the Labour Tribunal that even though evidence had been led for several days, the Employer was unable to establish that the Appellant was guilty of the charges levelled against him. (18) The Labour Tribunal had thereaŌer stated as follows:

“by; i|yka fpdaokd ;=k j.W;a;rldr mlaIh Tmamq lsrsug wiu;a jk wjia:djlos jsksYaph iNdj l=ula l< hq;=o@ fuu m%Yakhg ms<s;=re iemhsfusos jsksYaph iNdj jsfYaI fldg lshd isgskafka b,a,quslre ms<snoj j.W;a;rldr mlaIh idlaIsfhka fmkajd fok wdldrfha fkdfhla jeros isoqlr we;s njg meyeos,s idlaIs we;;a" tu fpdaokd, fpdaokd m;%h u.ska bosrsm;a fkdfjs' b,a,qusldr mlaIhg bosrsm;a fkdjq fpdaokd mokus lrf.k ta wkqj lghq;= lsrsug jsksYaph iNdjg yelshdjla ke;' f.dkqlr we;s fpdaokd ksis whqrska ilia fkdlsrSu ksid j.W;a;rlre lshk wdldrfha fpdaokdj,g b,a,quslre jrolre lsrSfus yelshdj jsksYaph iNdj i;=js ke;'”

10

(19) The Labour Tribunal has not speciﬁed the alleged wrongdoings of the Applicant that

it had in mind when it made the above statement. However, relying on the above ﬁnding of the Labour Tribunal, the learned President’s Counsel for the Employer submiƩed that the terminaƟon of the services of the Applicant is in fact jusƟﬁed. I am unable to subscribe to that view as the terminaƟon was due to the Applicant being found guilty of certain speciﬁed charges and therefore terminaƟon cannot be jusƟﬁed on charges that could have been made but were not. (20) Seetha Eliya Estate was owned by the family of the Applicant and, while avoiding any

conﬂict of interest, the Applicant had to be above board in dealing with the invoices of Seetha Eliya Estate, leaving no room for any allegaƟon of wrongdoing. However, when one considers the manner in which the Applicant had acted in respect of invoices of Seetha Eliya Estate, it is clear that the Applicant had not exercised the highest levels of probity that was required of him. That is not to say that the Applicant has acted dishonestly, but being a Manager with 19 years of experience, the Applicant ought to have exercised beƩer judgment. (21) The Tribunal has thereaŌer considered what relief can be granted to the Applicant

and expressed the following view:

“fujeks wjia:djlos ud jsiska i<ld ne,sh hq;af;a b,a,quslreg l=uk iykhla ,ndfokjdo hkak ms<sn|jhs' b,a,quslre m<uqj kej; fiajh msysgqjsug b,a,sus l<o" uq,sl idlaIsfhaoS lshd isgsfha kej; fiajh fjkqjg jkaoshla ,ndfok f,ihs' idudkH rs;sh hgf;a b,a,quslre jeroslre lsrSug wfmdfydi;a jk wjia:djl kej; ;snq ;;a;ajhg m;alsrsu kS;suh wOslrKhl iajdNdjhhs' kuq;a" hqla;suh wOslrKhlg tfia lsrsfus wksjdrahh wjYH;djhla ke;' fuu kvqfjs bosrsm;a jq lreKq wkqj fpadokd ilia lsrsfus jro u; b,a,quslre hus ksoyia lsrsula ,enqjo" b,a,quslref.a hus fodaI iy.; njla idlaIsfhka meyeos,s jk nejska" jsksYaph iNdj lsisfia;a kej; fiajfha msysgqjSfus yelshdjla o fkdue;' osh yelafla jkaos muKs' fpdaokdj,ska i|yka lrk wdldrfha w;a;sldrus ,nd.eksula isoqfkdjqjo" ,nd.;a w;a;sldrus wod< wdh;kh jsiska wdmiq f.jd we;s np idlaIsfhaos lshefjs' tnejska" uq,Huh ydkshla isoqjs fkdue;' tnejska" ta lreK o ie,ls,a,g f.k jkaoshla f.jug ;SrKh

lrus'” (22) The Tribunal has referred to the fact that even though the Applicant had sought 4

years salary as compensaƟon, he is only awarding 38 months salary as compensaƟon based on two months salary for each year of completed service. It is clear that the Tribunal was inﬂuenced by the conduct of the Applicant that I have referred to in

11

paragraph 20 when it decided to limit the compensaƟon to the basic salary for a period of 38 months. QuesƟons of law (23) This brings me to the quesƟons of law raised by the Employer. While the Applicant

should have acted more responsibly when dealing with invoices related to his family estate and even though his conduct was wanƟng, the fact remains that the Employer did not allege loss of conﬁdence and has failed to establish serious misconduct on the part of the employer. I would therefore answer the ﬁrst quesƟon of law in the negaƟve. (24) Although the Labour Tribunal has referred to several wrongdoings on the part of the

Applicant without specifying what they are, it has also stated that it cannot go outside the charges on which the services of the Applicant were terminated. In the absence of any evidence relaƟng to such wrongdoings which may have resulted in a blemish of the service record of the Applicant, I am of the view that the High Court could not have arrived at any other conclusion but to have aﬃrmed the ﬁnding of the Labour Tribunal. I would therefore answer the second quesƟon of law in the negaƟve. (25) The sole quesƟon of law raised by the Applicant is that the Labour Tribunal failed to

take into consideraƟon the provisions of SecƟon 31C(1), SecƟon 33 and in parƟcular SecƟon 33(1)(d). While SecƟon 33 contains the types of decisions or relief that a Tribunal may grant, SecƟon 33(1)(d) provides that the Tribunal may make a decision as to the payment by any employer of compensaƟon to any workman, the amount of such compensaƟon or the method of compuƟng such amount, and the Ɵme within which such compensaƟon shall be paid. I have examined the Order of the Labour Tribunal and I am saƟsﬁed that there has been suﬃcient compliance with the provisions of SecƟon 33. (26) SecƟon 31C(1) imposes on a Labour Tribunal the duty to make all such inquiries into

that applicaƟon and hear all such evidence as the Labour Tribunal may consider necessary, and thereaŌer make an order as may appear to the Labour Tribunal to be just and equitable. In awarding compensaƟon, the Labour Tribunal has not taken into

12

consideraƟon the fuel allowance, the value of the medical beneﬁts and the bonus payable to other employees on the basis that those are allowances and beneﬁts that are available to an employee who is in actual employment.

(27) While the discreƟon in deciding the relief to be granted is with the Labour Tribunal,

in exercising its discreƟon and arriving at a just and equitable order, the Labour Tribunal must not only act reasonably but it must give reasons which must be raƟonal and supported by the evidence that was available to the Tribunal. As pointed out by Amerasinghe, J in Jayasuriya v Sri Lanka State PlantaƟons CorporaƟon [(1995) 2 Sri LR 379]:

“There must eventually be an even balance, of which the scales of jusƟce are meant to remind us. The Tribunal must endeavour to give each man that which is his right: “Sum clique tribuere", as the Roman Law, to which our legal systems owe so much, felicitously phrased that concept.” [at page 407] (28) In calculaƟng the loss, Amerasinghe, J stated as follows:

“With regard to ﬁnancial loss, there is, ﬁrst, the loss of earnings from the date of dismissal to the determinaƟon of the maƩer before the Court, that is, the date of the Order of the Tribunal, or, if there is an appeal, to the date of the ﬁnal determinaƟon of the appellate court. The phrase “loss of earnings" for this purpose would be the dismissed employee’s pay (net of tax), allowances, bonuses, the value of the use of a car for private purposes, the value of a residence and domesƟc servants and all other perquisites and beneﬁts having a monetary value to which he was enƟtled. The burden is on the employee to adduce suﬃcient evidence to enable the Tribunal to decide the loss he had incurred.” [page 410] “Once the incurred, i.e., the ascertainable past losses have been computed, a Tribunal should deduct any wages or beneﬁts paid by the employer aŌer terminaƟon, as well as remuneraƟon from fresh employment… If the employee had obtained equally beneﬁcial or ﬁnancially beƩer alternaƟve employment, he should receive no compensaƟon at all, for he suﬀers no loss... The principle is this: He is enƟtled to indemnity and not proﬁt.” [emphasis added; page 411]

13

(29) Considering the factual circumstances of this case and in parƟcular the posiƟon

taken up the Applicant both in R2 and in his evidence before the Tribunal and the explanaƟon of the Labour Tribunal why the allowances are not included, I am saƟsﬁed that the Order for compensaƟon being limited to the basic salary is just and equitable. I would therefore answer the quesƟon of law raised by the Applicant in the negaƟve.

(30) The Labour Tribunal has not addressed its mind to the contribuƟons that the

Employer was required to make on behalf of the Applicant towards the Employers Provident Fund and the Employers Trust Fund [the Funds] on the 38 months salary. The Employer is directed to remit to the relevant Funds the contribuƟons that it was required to make in terms of the law on behalf of the Applicant within three months of this judgment. If however, the Applicant has already withdrawn the monies that were lying to his credit in the said Funds, the Employer shall make the payment directly to the Applicant within the said Ɵme period. The Applicant shall also be enƟtled to gratuity in terms of the Payment of Gratuity Act for his period of service between 1985 – 2003. Conclusion (31) In the above circumstances, the judgment of the High Court is aﬃrmed. Subject to

any variaƟon that may arise by giving eﬀect to the maƩers set out in the preceding paragraph of this judgment, SC Appeal Nos. 136/2015 and 136A/2015 are dismissed, without costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT S. Thurairaja, PC, J I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT Dr. Sobhitha Rajakaruna, J I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT