==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for

substitution in terms of Section 760

A of the Civil Procedure Code.

SC/Appeal No. SC/APP/165/2015 Asana Lebbege Segu Mohammadu, SC/LA/Application No. Kekunagolla Post, SC/HCCA/LA/77/2013 Dampitiya. Civil Appellate High Court of Kurunegala Case No. WP/HCCA/KUR/131/2009/F DC Kuliyapitiya Case No. 13990/03/L PLAINTIFF

vs 1. Mohamed Sharibuge Adampulle,

Kekunagolla Post, Dampitiya. 2. Ahamadu Lebbe Hajari Umma,

Kekunagolla Post, Dampitiya. DEFENDANTS Between

` Ahamadu Lebbe Hajari Umma, Kekunagolla Post, Dampitiya.

2

2nd DEFENDANT - APPELLANT vs Asana Lebbege Segu Mohammadu, (Deceased) PLAINTIFF – RESPONDENT Segu Mohammadu Neina Mohideen, Kekunagolla Post, Dampitiya. SUBSTITUTED PLAINTIFF - RESPONDENT And Mohamed Sharibuge Adampulle, Kekunagolla Post, Dampitiya. 1st DEFENDANT – RESPONDENT And Now Between

Ahamadu Lebbe Hajari Umma, Kekunagolla Post, Dampitiya. 2nd DEFENDANT – APPEALLNT – APPELLANT vs Asana Lebbege Segu Mohammadu, (Deceased) PLAINTIFF – RESPONDENT Segu Mohammadu Neina Mohideen,

3

Kekunagolla Post, Dampitiya. SUBSTITUTED PLAINTIFF – RESPONDENT – RESPONDENT And

Mohamed Sharibuge Adampulle, Kekunagolla Post, Dampitiya. 1st DEFENDANT – RESPONDENT – RESPONDENT Now Between 2. Ahamadu Lebbe Hajari Umma,

(Now Deceased) 2nd DEFENDANT – APPELLANT – [PETITIONER] 2A. Mohamed Sharibuge Adampulle,

Kekunagolla Post, Dampitiya. 2A DEFENDANT - APPELLANT–PETITIONER – [APPELLANT] vs Asana Lebbege Segu Mohammadu (Deceased) PLAINTIFF – RESPONDENT) Segu Mohammadu Neina Mohideen, Kekunagolla Post,

4

Dampitiya. SUBSTITUTED PLAINTIFF – RESPONDENT – RESPONDENT - RESPONDENT 2. Mohamed Sharibuge Adampulle,

Kekunagolla Post, Dampitiya. 1st DEFENDANT – RESPONDENT –RESPONDENT- [RESPONDENT]

BEFORE : A. L. Shiran Gooneratne, J. K. Priyantha Fernando, J. M. Sampath K. B. Wijeratne, J. COUNSEL : Samantha Vithana with Mahanama Dissanayake instructed by Samudika de Silva for the Substituted 2A Defendant- Appellant - Appellant. Faisz Musthapha, P.C., with Thushani Machado Instructed by Sanjeewa Kaluarachchi for the

Substituted Plaintiff - Respondent - Respondent - Respondent. ARGUED ON : 16.10.2025

DECIDED ON : 30.03.2026

M. Sampath K. B. Wijeratne J.

Introduction

The Plaintiff-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as “the Plaintiff”) instituted the

present action in the District Court of Kuliyapitiya, seeking, inter alia, a

5

declaration of title to the land more fully described in Schedule “B” to the plaint,

the ejectment of the 1st Defendant-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as “the 1st

Defendant”) therefrom, and damages.

The 2nd Defendant-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as “the 2nd Defendant”), the

mother of the 1st Defendant, was subsequently added as a party to the action.

However, the Plaintiff did not file an amended plaint in terms of section 21 of

the Civil Procedure Code, and consequently, no relief has been sought against

the 2nd Defendant in the plaint.

The 1st Defendant, in his answer, sought a dismissal of the action, whereas the

2nd Defendant, while seeking the same relief, also made a claim in reconvention

that she has acquired prescriptive title to the subject matter of the action, more

fully described in Schedule “B” to the plaint.

When this matter was taken up for trial on September 26, 2006, the Plaintiff

moved to amend paragraph 15 of the original plaint, which application was

allowed subject to a draft being tendered. Upon the draft amended plaint being

filed, the 1st and 2nd Defendants objected thereto, and the Court, after inquiry,

made order rejecting the proposed amended plaint. Accordingly, the case

proceeded on the original plaint dated October 21, 2003.

At the trial, two admissions were recorded, and four issues on behalf of the

Plaintiff, three issues on behalf of the 1st Defendant, and eight issues on behalf

of the 2nd Defendant were framed.

After trial, the learned Additional District Judge delivered his judgment dated

November 26, 2009, in favour of the Plaintiff, granting the reliefs prayed for in

the plaint, except for paragraph (අ) thereof.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid judgment of the learned Additional District

Judge, the 2nd Defendant preferred an appeal to the High Court of Civil Appeal,

6

Kurunegala. The learned Judges of the High Court of Civil Appeal dismissed the

appeal, thereby affirming the judgment of the learned Additional District Judge.

Hence, this appeal by the 2nd Defendant to this Court.

Accordingly, this Court granted leave to appeal on the questions of law set out

in paragraph 30, except sub-paragraphs (vi) and (ix), of the Petition dated

February 6, 2013, which read as follows:

“

i. Have Their Lordships of the High Court of Civil Appeal have erred in law

as they have failed to take into account that effect of converting an action

of one character into an action of another and inconsistent character of

the suit is barred by Section 46(2) of the Civil Procedure Code?

ii. Have Their Lordships of the High Court of Civil Appeal erred in law as

they have failed to take into account that the Plaintiff has neither pleaded

possession ut dominus in his plaint nor framed an issue with effect to

possession ut dominus but the Learned Additional District Judge

misdirected himself that the above styled action was a possessory action

although the Plaintiff's action is infact a rei vindicatio action?

iii. Have Their Lordships of the High Court of Civil Appeal erred in law as

they have misdirected themselves that when a Plaintiff filed an action

seeking a declaration of title and failed to prove his title, the said action

could be converted into a possessory action?

iv. Have Their Lordships of the High Court of Civil Appeal erred in law as

they cited number of authorities in their judgment which are irrelevant to

the issue in this case, as none of the cases cited in the judgment do not

permit to convert a rei vindicatio action into a possessory action. ?

7

v. Have Their Lordships of the High Court of Civil Appeal erred in law as

they held that the Learned Additional District Judge has correctly

answered issue no. 2,3 & 4 affirmative?

vi. [omitted]

vii. Have Their Lordships of the High Court of Civil Appeal erred in law in

misapplying the Section 4 of the Act No: 22 of 1871?

viii. Have Their Lordships of the High Court of Civil Appeal erred in law in

holding that a rei vindicatio action could be converted into a possessory

action according to the facts of the case

ix. [omitted]”

Analysis

There is no dispute regarding the identification of the corpus, which is the subject

matter of this action, more fully described in Schedule “B” to the plaint and

depicted as Lot 2 in Plan No. 272 dated October 16, 1985. As the Plaintiff does

not seek to challenge the finding of the learned Additional District Judge that he

had failed to prove title on a balance of probabilities to the satisfaction of the

Court, in order to obtain a declaration of title, the crux of this case is, more or

less, confined to the question whether the Plaintiff is entitled to the possessory

relief granted by the learned Additional District Judge and affirmed by the

learned Judges of the High Court, as raised in several questions of law upon

which leave to appeal was granted in this matter.

Questions of law No (i), (iii),(iv) and (viii)

The 2nd Defendant contends that the Plaintiff is not entitled to possessory relief,

as the Plaintiff is pursuing a claim of a rei vindicatio nature rather than a claim

8

of a possessory character. In support of this proposition, the 2nd Defendant cites

a series of cases, including Ekanayake vs Ekanayake1, Sellaiah Marimuttu vs

Sivapakkayam2, and Wijeratna vs Lenora3. The 2nd Defendant further relies on

the observations of Sampayo J. in Philippu vs Pedris4, where it was held that:

“I am strongly of the opinion that that the original order converting this

action from one of declaration of title into a possessory action was

wrong.”

The learned Counsel for the Plaintiff draws our attention to the case of

Ekanayake vs Gunawardhane5, where it was held that:

“Although the Plaintiff has not succeeded in establishing a title upon

which he can claim a declaration in a rei vindicatio action, he has

undoubtedly had possession for a year and a day prior to the ouster by

the defendants and has instituted his action within a year and a day

thereafter. ........In the case already referred to it was held that even though

no application is made to convert a rei vindicatio action into a possessory

one, the Court may ex mero motu grant a possessory decree when all the

necessary evidence is before it. The principle there applied was extended

in the case of Juwanis as Caro Appu S.C. W.R. 33 which held that the

possessory remedy could be granted by this Court on appeal”

The High Court of Civil Appeal relied on Fernando vs Fonseka6 and Juwanis

vs Caro Appu7 to hold that it is possible to convert a rei vindicatio action into a

possessory action, depending on the facts of each case.

1 63 NLR 188. 2 [1986] 1 CALR 264. 3 60 NLR 457. 4 [1916] K. Balasingham Law Reports Vol. V page 39. 5 51 CLW 70. 6 [1909] Balasingham Law Reports Vol. IV page 167. 7 [1920] Ceylon Weekly Reports Vol. VIII page 33.

9

After a perusal of the existing case law, it is more accurate to state that possessory

relief can be granted in a rei vindicatio action if the proven facts entitle the

Plaintiff to such relief. Furthermore, since the cases cited by the learned Judges

of the High Court address issues similar to those before us, I see no reason to

conclude that the learned High Court Judges relied on irrelevant authorities.

The learned Counsel for the Plaintiff contends that the principle of “greater

includes lesser” applies to the present case, relying on the recently decided case

of M.M.M. Ashar vs T.H. Kareem8. If the Court has before it all the material

facts necessary to grant the lesser relief, I see no reason to deprive a deserving

party of a remedy to which he is entitled.

A similar view was expressed in Juwanis vs Caro Appu (supra), as follows:

“The cases of Silva v. Appuhamy [15 NLR 297] and Fernando v. Fonseka

[4 Bal 167] are examples of cases which, although the claim was

originally based on actions for vindication of title, were subsequently

converted into possessory actions upon the facts being proved entitling

the plaintiff to such a remedy.

[…] It was objected for the respondent that it is now too late to change

the form of the action and give the plaintiff this relief which he might and

did not claim in the lower court, but I see no reason why this Court should

not, when the facts show that the plaintiff is entitled to this remedy, allow

it upon the appeal […]” [emphasis added]

The Courts are now less concerned with the label attached to a cause of action

than with the substance of the relief sought and the facts proved. In other words,

if the Plaintiff has established facts entitling him to such relief, the Court will not

deny it merely because the pleadings categorize the cause of action differently.

8 SC/Appeal/ 171/2019, SCM 22.05.2023.

10

It is my considered view that, in circumstances where strict adherence to the

letter of the law would result in injustice, the Court should exercise its judicial

discretion to temper the rigidity of the law, allowing the spirit of justice to prevail

by granting a deserving litigant the relief to which he is entitled.

For the reasons discussed above, I answer Questions of Law Nos. (i), (iii), (iv),

and (viii) in the negative.

Question of Law No (ii)

Although the Plaintiff has failed to prove title on a balance of probabilities, as

required in a rei vindicatio action, the facts of the case indicate that the Plaintiff

was in possession of the disputed property. He had cultivated it and derived

produce therefrom. The Plaintiff’s possession can be inferred from the evidence

he presented.

ප්‍ර: එහි ප ොල් ගස් කීයක් තිබුනොද?

උ:11 ක් මන තිපෙනවො.

ප්‍ර: ඒ 11 තමො බුක්ති වින්දොද?

උ: බුක්ති වින්දො.

ප්‍ර:ඒ ප ොල් ගස් 11 හී ප ො මණ ප ොල් ැපෙනවොද?

උ:200 ගනනක් මණ ැපෙනවො

[….]

ප්‍ර:ඒ ප ොල් ෙන විටඔහුට කීයක් පගවනවොද?

උ: ඒ ොලපේ රුපියල් 40/= ක් මණ පදනවො.

(Appeal brief page 96)

11

It is also evident from the evidence presented before the Court that the Plaintiff

was forcibly ejected by the 1st Defendant on or around October 8, 2003.

In his cross-examination, the Plaintiff stated as follows:

ප්‍ර:සොක්ි රු තමො සොක්ිපේදී ප්‍ර ොශ ලො තමොපේ ැමිණිල්පල් 'බී' අක්ෂරය

දරන උ පල්ඛණපේ ඤහන් ඉෙමට 1 පවනි විත්තති ොර ආදම් පුල්පල්

ම්ිම්වැට ගලවො ෙලහත්ත ොරපයන් ඇතුල වුනො කියලො

උ: ඔව්.

ප්‍ර: වදද පම් සිද්ධිය වුපන්?

උ:2003 කියලො මත යි. දිනය හරියට මත නැහැ.

ප්‍ර:පම් සිද්ධිය සම්ෙන්ධපයන් ප ොලීසියට ැමිණිලි ලොද?

උ: ඔව්.

[…]

ප්‍ර: ව්ද ප ොලීසියට ැමිණිලි පල්?

උ: මපේ පුතො

(Appeal brief page 96)

The police complaint dated June 26, 2003, marked “P7,” corroborates the

Plaintiff’s contention that the 1st Defendant unlawfully interfered with the

Plaintiff’s possession of the disputed portion of land.

Be that as it may, the learned District Judge’s observation that that ‘වොර්තො ගත

ර ඇති විසදිය යුතු ප්‍රශ්න සල ො ෙැලීපම්දී ැමිණිලි රු පමම නඩුව වරො ඇත්තපත්ත

ප්‍රධොන වශපයන් භුක්ති සහනයක් ලෙො ගැනීම සදහො ෙව ප නී යයි is, prima facie,

erroneous, since the action was instituted to obtain a declaration of title and to

recover possession, as is clearly evident from the prayer of the original plaint,

which reads as follows:

(අ) ැමිණිලි රු 'බී' අක්ෂරය දරන උ පල්ඛනපේ විස්තර ර ඇති ඉෙපම්

නීතයනුකුල අයිති රු හැටියට තීන්ුවක්ද

12

(ආ) විත්තති රුද, ඔහුපේ වුපල් සොමොජි යන් සහ ඔහු යටපත්ත ඇති සියලු ...

එකී ඉෙපමන් පනර ො හැර එකී ඉෙපම් නිරවුල් බුක්තිය ලෙො ගැනීමට තීන්ුවක්ද

[…]

However, the learned Judges of the High Court, instead of following the same

rationale, reached a similar conclusion on the basis that a rei vindicatio action

can be converted into a possessory action if the essential elements of a possessory

action are established.

Let me further clarify the law on this point. Both a rei vindicatio action and an

action for a declaration of title are instituted primarily for the recovery of

possession. In an action for a declaration of title, possessory relief can be granted

even if it has not been specifically pleaded. In the case of Silva vs Appuhamy9,

Wood Renton J., delivering a concurring opinion, observed as follows: “Mr.

Hector Jayewardene argued that there had been no claim for or issue as to a

possessory remedy, and that the District Judge ought not to have given that relief

to the respondent in an action where only a declaration of title had been claimed.

I do not think, however, that the appellant has any reason to complain of the

decree on this ground. It has been the practice for the Courts to grant such

decrees in actions for declaration of title, and although this has usually been

done on the application of the plaintiff at the trial, there is nothing to prevent the

Court from granting such a decree ex mero motu when all the necessary evidence

is before it.”

The absence of a prayer for a specific form of possessory relief is not, in itself, a

bar to granting such relief, provided that the necessary ingredients are established

and there is a general prayer for possession founded on proof of title. In the

present case, however, the Plaintiff has not proved title. Nevertheless, the

Defendants have also failed to establish that they possess a better title than that

9 15 NLR 297.

13

of the Plaintiff. Despite having no valid title to the property, the 1st Defendant

forcibly deprived the Plaintiff of his possession of the disputed corpus.

In such circumstances, possessory relief can be granted in a rei vindicatio action

if the Plaintiff has satisfied the criteria laid down in Section 4 of the Prescription

Act, No. 22 of 1871 (as amended), even where the Plaintiff has failed to prove,

on a balance of probabilities, that he is the owner of the disputed corpus.

Section 4 of the Prescription Ordinance reads as follows:

Section 4- “It shall be lawful for any person who shall have been dispossessed

of any immovable property otherwise than by process of law, to institute

proceedings against the person dispossessing him at any time within one year of

such dispossession. And on proof of such dispossession within one year before

action brought, the plaintiff in such action shall be entitled to a decree against

the defendant for the restoration of such possession without proof of title.”

In order to grant possessory relief, ut dominus possession, as contended by the

2nd Defendant, is not required under the law of Sri Lanka, provided that the party

seeking the relief satisfies the criteria set out in the aforementioned section. In

the instant case, considering that the Plaintiff had undisputed possession for at

least one year prior to the unlawful ouster by the 1st Defendant, and instituted his

action within one year thereafter, the criteria set out in Section 4 can be said to

have been met. Thus, the Plaintiff is not required to plead ut dominus possession,

nor do the learned Judges of the High Court have a duty to examine the nature

of the Plaintiff’s possession.

Accordingly, I answer Question of Law (ii) in the negative.

14

Questions of Law (v) and (vii)

Although the Plaintiff’s action is a rei vindicatio action, for the reasons stated in

this judgment and in light of the facts proved, possessory relief can be granted in

the instant case.

Hence, the learned District Judge was correct in answering Issue Nos. 2, 3, and

4 in favour of the Plaintiff, despite answering Issue No. 1 in the negative. In these

circumstances, the learned Judges of the High Court also correctly analysed the

facts of the instant case in applying Section 4 of the Prescription Ordinance.

Thus, I answer both Questions of Law (v) and (vii) in the negative as well.

Conclusion

I answer all the questions of law raised in the negative.

Accordingly, I affirm the judgments of the learned Judges of the High Court as

well as the learned District Judge.

The appeal is dismissed with costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

A. L. Shiran Gooneratne, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

K. Priyantha Fernando, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT