==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 12

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

SC Case No. SC/Appeal/41/2024

SC/HCCA/LA/90/2023

High Court (Civil Appellate

Court) Kegalle Case No

SP/HCCA/KEG 27/2021/(F)

DC Kegalle Case No. 8228/L

Medawala Lekamalage Sujatha Medawala,

Nape, Nelundeniya.

PLAINTIFF

Vs.

1. Medawala Lekamalage Laxman

Medawala.

Medawala, Wathura.

2. Medawala Lekamalage Nirodhi Lakmali

Medawala.

Medawala, Wathura.

3. Medawala Lekamalage Shashanika

Chathumali Medawala.

Medawala, Wathura.

DEFENDANTS

AND BETWEEN

1. Medawala Lekamalage Laxman

Medawala.

Medawala, Wathura.

2. Medawala Lekamalage Nirodhi

Lakmali Medawala.

Madawala, Wathura.

Page 2 of 12

3. Medawala Lekamalage Shashanika

Chathumali Medawala

Madawala, Wathura.

DEFENDANT-APPELLANTS

Vs.

Medawalal Lekamalage Sujatha Medawala,

Nape, Nelundeniya.

PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

Medawalal Lekamalage Sujatha Medawala,

Nape, Nelundeniya.

PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT-

APPELLANT

Vs.

1. Medawala Lekamalage Laxman

Medawala.

Madawala, Wathura.

2. Medawala Lekamalage Nirodhi

Lakmali Medawala.

Madawala, Wathura.

3. Medawala Lekamalage Shashanika

Chathumali Medawala.

Madawala, Wathura.

DEFENDANT-APPELLANT-

RESPONDENTS

Page 3 of 12

Before: Justice A. L. Shiran Gooneratne

Justice Janak De Silva

Justice Dr. Sobhitha Rajakaruna

Counsel: Seevali Amitirigala, PC instructed by Pathum Wijepala for the

Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant.

Ruvendra Weerasinghe instructed by Kaushalya Hapuarachchi

through the Legal Aid Commission of Sri Lanka for the

Defendant-Appellant-Respondents.

Argued on: 23/01/2026

Decided on: 04/03/2026

A. L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

By Amended Plaint dated 29/08/2014, the Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant

(hereinafter referred to as the Plaintiff-Appellant) filed action No. D.C. Kegalle

8228/L against the Defendant-Appellant-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the

Defendant-Respondent), and sought a declaration that she be declared the owner of

the land described in the schedule to the Plaint, and a decree to eject the Defendant-

Respondent from the said land.

The Defendant-Respondent, by answer dated 31/10/2014, pleaded that the action is

res judicata, that no land is identified as what is claimed in the Plaint, and moved for

a dismissal of the action.

This Appeal was filed by the Plaintiff-Appellant against the Judgment dated

19/01/2023 of the Civil Appellate High Court of Sabaragamuwa Holden in Kegalle,

(“the Appellate Court”), which set aside the Judgment of the learned District Judge

of Kegalle dated 18/01/2021, which held in favour of the Plaintiff-Appellant.

Page 4 of 12

The Appellate Court allowed the Appeal and set aside the judgment of the District

Court primarily on the basis that the Plaintiff-Appellant had failed to identify the

corpus as required in a rei vindicatio action.

Leave to Appeal was granted by this Court on the following questions of law;

1. Has the Learned High Court Judges erred in law in deciding that the land has

not been identified when in fact the land has been identified.

2. Has the Learned High Court Judges erred in law by not applying the legal

principle that a claim for a greater relief than entitled to by a party should not

prevent him from getting judgement for a lesser relief.

3. The Learned High Court Judges erred in law by not considering the legal

principle that an owner of an undivided share of land is entitled to sue a

trespasser in order to get a declaration to his undivided share and the

ejectment of the trespasser.

The land described in the schedule to the Plaint is named “Berawa Kumbura Gawa

Hena,” with an extent of 7 Lahas. The title deeds to the said land were marked in

evidence by the Plaintiff-Appellant as P2 to P5, with no objections.

The Plaintiff-Appellant claimed entitlement to the land shown in the Survey Plan

No. K/14/08, dated 27/05/2014, prepared by K. Gamunu Kulasiri, licensed

surveyor, and the report marked as P1 and P1(a) respectively. The surveyor

identified the surveyed land as “Berawa Kumbura Gawa Hena,” with an extent of 2R,

7.57P.

In cross-examination, the Plaintiff-Appellant claimed that she was in possession of

the land in suit, enjoying its produce since 1985, since the property was gifted to her

by her father. She further stated that Partition Action No. 27363 was instituted in

respect of the same land. However, in terms of the survey report marked V1(a), the

3rd Defendant in the said Partition Action was found to be in possession of the land.

Page 5 of 12

In that context, when questioned regarding the 3rd Defendant, the Plaintiff-Appellant

stated thus:

!: මහ$%ය 2002 ෙවන ෙකාට /01 2ඳලා නැහැ. මහ$%ය අසත:ය0 ෙ;ද =ය;ෙ;?

උ: අ> ඒකට යනවා එනවා අසත:ය0 ෙනාෙA. එයා පCංE ෙවලා ඉ;න Gසා එෙහම =යලා

1ෙබ;ෙ;.

During cross-examination, the Plaintiff-Appellant admitted that the land depicted in

Survey Plan No. K/14/08 dated 27.05.2014, prepared by K. Gamunu Kulasiri,

Licensed Surveyor, materially differs in its boundaries from the land described in the

report marked P1 and P1(a).

!: පැ.2 ෙ'ඛණෙ* ද,- මා0මට 2ෙබ4ෙ4 56-5ලෙහ්න ;යලා 2ෙබ4ෙ4 න5= පැ.1

?@ෙA ද,- මා0මට 2ෙබ4ෙ4 ෙ'කමයලාෙC ව=ත ෙ4ද?

උ: ද,- පැ=තට ෙ'කමයලාෙC ව=ත ඒකට 56-5ලෙහ්ෙ4 GකH අ02 ෙවනවා.

!: ද,- මා0මට ෙමාකJද 2ෙබෙ4?

උ: ෙ'කමයලාෙC ව=ත.

!: පැ.2 ෙ'ඛණෙ* ද,- මා0ම 56-5ලෙහ්න?

උ: ඉස්සර එෙහම දාලා 2ෙබ4ෙ4 දැ4 ෙ'කමයලාෙC ව=ත. පැරP ඔRS වල මා0T එහාට

ෙමහාට ෙවලා 2ෙබ4ෙ4.

!: මා0T එහාට ෙමහාට ෙව4න UVහH නැහැ ෙ4ද?

උ: භාUතා කර නැහැ.

!: පැ.2 ඔRSෙවX මා0T පැ.1 ?TYරට ගැලෙප4ෙ4 නැහැ?

උ: එෙහම ;යලා 2ෙබනවා.

The Defendant-Respondent’s position is that Berawa Kumbura Watta and Berawa

Kumbura Gawa Hena are two contiguous lands, described separately in the 1st

schedule, and that the Defendant-Respondent and his children are in possession of

the said land as an amalgamated land, as described in the 2nd schedule to the

Answer. The Plaintiff-Appellant's action for a declaration of title is only to the land

Page 6 of 12

called Berawa Kumbura Gawa Hena. According to the survey plan, the names of the

land boundaries to the west and to the north of the land Berawa Kumbura Gawa

Hena are not the same as described in the schedule to the Plaint.

It is the position of the Defendant-Respondent, that the Plaintiff-Appellant had

instituted Partition Action No. 27363 in the District Court of Kegalle to partition the

said two lands separately described in the 1st schedule, where the Plaintiff-Appellant

and the Defendant-Respondent were the 3rd Plaintiff and the 3rd Defendant,

respectively.

In paragraphs 13 and 14 of the Answer, the Defendant-Respondent states that the

survey plan No. 511, dated 23/06/2003, commissioned by the Plaintiff-Appellant,

and its report marked V1 and V1(a) in the partition action, showed that the

Defendant-Respondent was in possession of the two lands described in the 1st

schedule to the Answer.

In paragraphs 15 and 16 of the Answer, the Defendant-Respondent states that the

Plaintiff-Appellant's position when seeking an interim injunction in the partition

action No. 27363 was based on the title deeds marked as P2 to P5, in which she

claimed an undivided right to the land described in the 1st schedule to the Answer.

However, the Court ruled that the said deeds had no application to the lands

described in those schedules.

The Plaintiff-Appellant admits the institution of the Partition Case No. 27363, in

which the Plaintiff-Appellant was the 3rd Plaintiff. The judgment of that action was

marked as V5; the survey plan No. 511, and the report was marked V1 and V1(a). The

Plaintiff-Appellant's position is that the Partition Action was filed to partition three

distinct lands, namely Berawa Kumbura Watta, Berawa Kumbura Gawa Hena, and

Berawa Kumbura Langa Hena, which the Plaintiff-Appellant states are more fully

established by documents marked as P10 to P14. It is an admitted fact that the

Partition Action was dismissed because the corpus was not identified.

According to the Plaintiff-Appellant's own admission, the Plaintiff-Appellant clearly

knew of the outcome of the Partition Case that the corpus sought to be partitioned

Page 7 of 12

consisted of two or more distinct lands, and not of one land, before filing the present

action.

The Plaintiff-Appellant submits that the plan marked V1 in the Partition Action

depicts more than one parcel of land. Notably, the schedule to the Plaint describes

the land sought to be declared as owned by the Plaintiff-Appellant as Berawa

Kumbura Gawa Hena, one of the lands that form the amalgamation. Therefore, it is

clear that the land depicted in plan P1 in the present action is part of the

amalgamated land depicted in plan V1 in the Partition Action.

The Plaintiff-Appellant filed the Partition Action claiming that the land described in

the schedule to the Plaint consisted of three lands considered as one. However, the

evidence showed that the property actually consisted of several separate lands, and

because there was no proper identification of the corpus, the matter was dismissed.

The 4th and 5th issues raised by the Plaintiff-Appellant in the trial court are as

follows;

4. පැ%IJකාKය සංෙශMNත පැ%IOෙO සඳහ; පKC ඔQR මත ලබන අS1වාTකU සඳහා

සංෙශMNත පැ%IOෙO උපෙOඛණ ගත ඉඩම ඇ\]ව තව$ ඉඩU ෙදකක අS1වාTකU

ලබ%; එ^ ඉඩU /01 2C_ ලබ;ෙ;ද?

5. සංෙශMNත පැ%IOෙO 07 වන සUaකාශෙb සඳහ; cCය;ෙස්ෙe අS1වාTකU වJ;

පැ%IJකාKය එf සඳහ; පKC එ^ ඉඩU \ෙනf අS1වාTකU ෙව_වට සංෙශMNත

පැ%IOෙO උපෙOඛණගත ඉඩම /01 2C_ ලබ;ෙ;ද?

Before filing the present action, the Plaintiff–Appellant was well aware of the fact

that the corpus, as described in the schedule to the Plaint, and in respect of which

the prescriptive title is claimed, consisted of several lands amalgamated into one.

According to the surveyor’s evidence, the boundaries of the land were identified by

the Plaintiff-Appellant. Having identified the land claimed to be in possession, the

Plaintiff-Appellant concealed from the surveyor the fact that the corpus had

previously been surveyed pursuant to a Court commission in the Partition Action.

Page 8 of 12

The surveyor, in his report marked P1(a), has noted certain discrepancies in the

extent of the corpus and the absence of physical identification of its boundaries. In

the cross-examination, the surveyor was posed pointed questions when he was

asked;

!: ඔබට පැ[P\කා]ය ^කාශ කලාද `ට ෙපර ෙමම ඉඩමට නbවH එෙහම 2Yනා ;යලා?

උ: නැහැ.

!: එෙහම ෙRනවා c4ෙ4 නැJද `ට ෙපර ෙමම අdකරණෙ* 27363 ;යලා ෙබcT නbවH 2Yනා

;යලා ෙප4වා c4නාද?

උ: නැහැ. එෙහම hෙi නැහැ.

!: ඒ ෙබcT නbවට අjව එයට මැkT කළ ?@ෙA ෙ'කමලාෙC ව=ත ;යන ඉඩමට mද4 ව=ත

;යලා ;යනවා ;යලා පැ[P\කා]ය ෙප4වා c4නා ;යලා ඔබට අවෙබnධයH නැහැ?

උ: ඔi.

The Plaintiff-Appellant, being well aware that the corpus described in the schedule

to the Plaint consisted of several other lands as determined by the learned District

Judge of Kegalle in the said Partition Action and also disclosed by the Plaintiff-

Appellant in the plaint filed in the present action, failed to disclose those material

facts to the Surveyor.

In view of the Plaintiff-Appellant’s aforesaid disclosure, it was incumbent upon the

Plaintiff-Appellant to question the Surveyor specifically regarding the non-

identification of the boundaries to the west and to the north in the survey plan.

When these infirmities were revealed during cross-examination, the Plaintiff-

Appellant did not pose a single question to the Surveyor in re-examination. The

position that several lands had been amalgamated into the corpus claimed was

conveniently kept away from the Surveyor’s attention.

The learned District Judge relied on Deeds marked P2 to P5 and also considered the

acreage tax receipts marked as P6 to P10, and concluded that the Plaintiff-Appellant

had proved title to the corpus. The learned President’s Counsel, in his submissions

Page 9 of 12

before this Court, conceded that in Deed No. 35794 dated 13/12/1907, marked P2,

there is a reference to title passing to one Ukkuhamy and another unknown party.

When the Plaintiff-Appellant was questioned, she stated that she was not aware of

the person referred to as the “unknown party”. However, when it was suggested that

the Defendant-Respondent also had rights to the said property, the Plaintiff-

Appellant admitted the same, thereby creating an uncertainty as to the title claimed

by the Plaintiff-Appellant.

It is therefore clear that, apart from the Plaintiff-Appellant’s own assertion that the

corpus consisted of several other parcels of land, there were other material

infirmities in the Plaintiff-Appellant’s failure to identify the corpus before the Trial

Court. The Judges of the Appellate Court subscribed to the said assertion when

concluding;

“අංක: 27363/ෙබkU දරණ නmෙA 2ෂය වස්\ෙව; “පැ.01” දරණ >rෙs සඳහ; කැබJ අංක

01 දරණ ඉඩU ෙකාටස ෙව;t ආකාරය >vබඳව පැහැCJ =wමට පැ%IJකාKය

අෙපාෙහාස$ x ඇ1 බව ඇයෙe සා0yය 2ශ්ෙOෂණය =wෙUz පැහැCJ x ඇත.

ඒ අ_ව ෙපර සඳහ; කළ ආකාරයට පැ%IOල 2T; නmවට අදාළ 2ෂය වස්\ව GTෙලස

හ|නාෙගන ඇ1 බවට එළැ} Gගමනය 2වාදයට ල0 වන බව පැහැCJය.”

In discussing the duties and obligations of the Plaintiff-Appellant and the

Defendant-Respondent, respectively, in an Action for declaration of title to land (as

in this instance), reference can be made to the following cases decided by our

Appellate Courts.

In Dharmadasa Vs. Jayasena (1997) 3 SLR 327 it was stated that, “the Plaintiff

sued the Defendant for a declaration of title and ejectment. The Plaintiff based his

claim on a Grant from the Urban Council, Anuradhapura. Held, in a rei vindicatio

action the burden is on the Plaintiff to establish the title pleaded and relied on by

him. The Defendant need not prove anything. The Grant relied on by the Plaintiff

was invalid. Hence the Plaintiff has failed to establish his title.”

Page 10 of 12

In the course of the Judgement in the above case, the Supreme Court stated that,

“the Authorities unite in holding that the Plaintiff must show title to corpus in

dispute and that if he cannot, the action will not lie”. Per Macdonell C.J., in De

Silva Vs. Goonetilleke (1931) 32 NLR 217, the principle was lucidly stated by Stuat

J. in Wanigaratne Vs. Juwanis Appuhamy (1964) 65 NLR 167 in the following

terms “the defendant in a rei vindicatio action need not prove anything, still less his

own title. The plaintiff cannot ask for a declaration of title in his favour merely on

the strength that the defendant’s title is poor or not established. The plaintiff must

prove an establish his title. Thus, the plaintiff has failed to do, and his action must

therefore fail.”

In Terrence Clinton Percival Thirunayake Vs. M George Anthony Fernando

(SC Appeal No.18B of 2009), the Plaintiff instituted a rei vindicatio action in 1994,

in the District Court of Kurunegala, inter alia, seeking a declaration of title that the

Plaintiff is the owner of the land described in the second schedule to the plaint, and

for an order ejecting the Defendant and his agents occupying a portion of the land.

The learned District Judge decided in favour of the Plaintiff, against whom the

Defendant appealed to the Civil Appellate High Court.

The Civil Appellate High Court allowed the Appeal and dismissed the Judgment of

the learned District Judge on the basis that the land in dispute has not been precisely

identified and the land described in the schedule to the plaint is different in that the

land is a larger land, against which order of the Civil Appellate High Court, the

Plaintiff filed an Appeal to the Supreme Court.

In the course of the Judgement in the said Appeal, the Supreme Court –

I. citing the decision in Peiris Vs. Sinnathamby, 54 NLR 207, stated that “….

in a rei vindicatio action claiming a declaration of title and ejectment, it is a

paramount duty on the part of the petitioner (appellant in this case) to

establish correct boundaries in order to identify the Corpus.” Referring to

the evidence produced by the Appellant the Court stated further, “Therefore,

it is obviously clear that the Appellant has failed to produce evidence to

Page 11 of 12

identify the land in dispute” and that “this burden on the part of the

Appellant to prove not only that he has a domination to the land in dispute

but also the specific precise and definite boundaries when claiming a

declaration of title”, and

II. agreeing with the submissions of the Counsel for the Respondent, concluded

that “[…] the land in dispute has not been precisely and definitely described

in the schedule to the Plaint in terms of the Law […]” dismissed the Appeal,

affirming the Judgement of the Civil Appellate High Court.

In view of the above, and from what has been stated earlier in this Judgement, it is

clear that the Plaintiff-Appellant has failed to fulfil the obligations and duties and

duly discharged the burden of proof, which is required of a Plaintiff in a rei

vindicatio action, which has been described above, particularly, in regard to the

establishment of the identity of the property in respect of which declarations are

sought in such a rei vindicatio action; and the due establishment of the title of the

Plaintiff-Appellant thereto.

It is of crucial importance that the land sought to be vindicated by the party asserting

title be identified, primarily by reference to a survey plan. Where that plan creates a

doubt in establishing the identity of the land, resort to an equally effective method,

which still leaves room for reasonable doubt, plainly establishes a failure to meet the

requisite standard of proof.

On the said premise, I am satisfied that the Plaintiff-Appellant has not satisfied this

Court of sufficient title to the land claimed on a balance of probabilities.

In the circumstances set out above, I have no hesitation in agreeing with the findings

of the Appellate Court.

The question of law No. 1 is answered in the negative.

Accordingly, I am of the view that, in deciding on this Appeal, the questions of law

No. 2 and 3 on which Leave to Appeal to this Court has been granted, and which

Page 12 of 12

have been quoted earlier in this judgment, need not be considered, and therefore, I

answer these two questions accordingly.

In these reasons, the Judgement dated 19/01/2023 of the Appellate Court is thereby

affirmed.

Appeal is dismissed. No order for Costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Janak De Silva, J.

I agree

Judge of the Supreme Court

Dr. Sobhitha Rajakaruna, J.

I agree

Judge of the Supreme Court