[SC FR 287/2023] - Page 1 of 8

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA.

In the matter of a petition in terms of Article 126

read with Article 17 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

1. B. G. T. G. D. K. Bopitiya

Chairman.

2. R. M. Jayasena

Secretary.

3. N. A. U. Buddika

Treasurer.

4. K. M. D. Mangala Malinda

Vice President.

5. W. M. N. Deshapriya

Executive Committee Member.

6. W. A. L. S. Wickramarathne

Executive Committee Member.

7. K. Kantha Ruban

Executive Committee Member.

8. D. R. S. C. Dabaliyadda

Executive Committee Member.

9. P. G. R. D. Bandara

Executive Committee Member,

Technical Education Demonstrator

Union,

College of Technology,

SC (FR) No. 287/2023

[SC FR 287/2023] - Page 2 of 8

Ratnapura.

PETITIONERS

-Vs-

1. S. C. Jagath

Director General,

Department of Technical

Education and Training,

P. O. Box 557,

Olcott Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

2. Dr. Susil Premajayantha

Minister,

Ministry of Education,

Isurupaya,

Battaramulla.

3. M. N. Ranasinghe

Secretary,

Ministry of Education,

Isurupaya,

Battaramulla.

4. Sanath J. Ediriweera

Chairman,

Public Service Commission.

5. Mrs. S. M. Mohamed

Member.

6. N. H. M. Chithrananda

Member.

7. Prof. N. Selvakkumaran

Member.

[SC FR 287/2023] - Page 3 of 8

8. M. B. R. Pushpakumara

Member.

9. Dr. A. D. N. De Zoysa

Member.

10. Mrs. R. Nadarajapillai

Member.

11. C. Pallegama

Member.

12. G. S. A. De Silva PC

Member.

13. Mrs. W. H. M. M. C. K. Dayaratne

Secretary.

All of

Public Service Commission

No. 1200/9,

Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

14. H. A. Chandana Kumarasingha

Director General of

Establishments Division,

Ministry of Public Administration,

Home Affairs,

Provincial Councils and Local

Government,

Independence Square,

Colombo 07.

15. Dr. (Eng.) Udeni Wickramasinghe

[SC FR 287/2023] - Page 4 of 8

Chairman,

Tertiary and Vocational Education

Commission,

3rd Floor, Nipunatha Piyasa,

Elvitigala Mawatha,

Narahenpita, Colombo 05.

16. Dr. K. A. Lalithadheera

Director General,

Tertiary and Vocational Education

Commission,

3rd Floor,

Nipunatha Piyasa,

Elvitigala Mawatha,

Narahenpita,

Colombo 05.

17. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

BEFORE : P. Padman Surasena, J.

A. L. Shiran Gooneratne, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

COUNSEL : Sapumal Bandara with Vishmi Yapa Abeywardena

instructed by Manjula Balasuriya for the Petitioner

Sureka Ahmed, SC for the Respondents.

ARGUED &

DECIDED ON : 14-03-2024

P. PADMAN SURASENA, J.

[SC FR 287/2023] - Page 5 of 8

Court heard the submissions of the learned Counsel for the Petitioner as well as the

submissions of the learned State Counsel who appeared for all the Respondents.

Having considered the submissions, Court decided to grant Leave to Proceed in respect of the

alleged violations of the Petitioners Fundamental Rights guaranteed under Articles 12(1) and

14(1)(g) of the Constitution.

The learned State Counsel brought to the attention of Court, paragraphs 6 and 7 of the

affidavit dated 29th February 2024 filed by the 13th Respondent annexed to the motion dated

01-03-2024. In light of the submissions and the material adduced by the Petitioners and also

in light of the fact that the Court has decided to grant Leave to Proceed to this Petition, the

learned State Counsel informed Court that there is no new material that can be adduced by

way of filing any further Statement of Objections.

It was in those circumstances that the learned Counsel for the Petitioner as well as the learned

State Counsel for the Respondents concurred that the Court can proceed to hear and

determine this case forthwith dispensing with the compliance of the provisions of the Supreme

Court Rules in regard to taking other relevant steps preparatory to the hearing of the case.

Thus, we proceed to hear and determine this case forthwith. Counsel for both parties were

heard on the merits of the case.

The primary concern of the Petitioners in the instant case is the decision by the Public Service

Commission to remove one of the hitherto existed pre-requisite educational qualification to

become eligible for appointment to the Post of Demonstrator in Technical Colleges. The said

hitherto existed pre-requisite educational qualification can be seen in Clause 7.2.2.1 of the

document attached to the letter (produced marked P 3) dated 20-02-2014 bearing No.

PSC/EST/8/1/44/1/1/2013 issued by the Secretary to the Public Service Commission which

had introduced the procedure to recruit Demonstrators under the category of Management

Assistant (Technical) Grade III.

The 1st Respondent by the notice published in the Gazette No. 2,3501 dated 22-09-2023, has

called for applications from suitable persons for enrolment as Demonstrators under the

category of Management Assistant (Technical) Grade III. The removal of the said hitherto

existed pre-requisite educational qualification can be seen in page No. 2397 of the said Gazette

[SC FR 287/2023] - Page 6 of 8

and in page No. 2404 of the same Gazette. The two pages above referred to, show that the

said removal of the hitherto required educational qualifications for appointment to the Post of

Demonstrator in Technical Colleges has been made applicable to both the Limited Competitive

Examination (at page No. 2397 of the said Gazette) and the Open Competitive Examination

(at page No. 2404 of the Gazette).

As per the procedure to recruit Demonstrators under the category of Management Assistant

(Technical) Grade III set out in P 3 (Clause 7.2.2.1), one should have passed G.C.E. (Ordinary

Level) Examination to become eligible for enrolment as a Demonstrator in the Technical

Colleges. It is the requirement of having passed G.C.E. (Ordinary Level) Examination that the

Public Service Commission has removed by the subsequently published Gazette No. 2,3501

dated 22-09-2023 marked P 13.

Having regard to the functions assigned to the persons to be recruited for this post namely,

for the Demonstrators in Technical Colleges, we are unable to summarily dismiss the

submission made by the learned Counsel for the Petitioners that such Demonstrators in order

to teach the students under them, must be persons with a least qualification of G.C.E.

(Ordinary Level) Examination. Indeed, we observe that if the step to remove this Educational

Qualification is to be upheld, it would be inevitable that some persons who are illiterate could

also become eligible for appointment as Demonstrators in Technical Colleges.

The 13th Respondent in his affidavit dated 29-02-2024 has stated that the Public Service

Commission has decided to bring back the aforesaid qualification which was removed by the

Gazette P 13. However, the 13th Respondent in paragraph 7 has stated that the said

amendment would only apply prospectively without prejudice to any action taken on the

previously taken decision by the Public Service Commission. The paragraphs 6 and 7 of the

affidavit dated 29th February 2024 annexed to the motion dated 01-03-2024 filed by the 13th

Respondent are as follows.

6. I state that the Public Service Commission intends to amend the current

scheme of recruitment for the post of Management Assistant (Technical)

Segment 3 service category of the Department of Technical Education and

Training. The proposed amendments are annexed hereto marked X and

pleaded as part and parcel hereof.

[SC FR 287/2023] - Page 7 of 8

7. I state further that Public Service Commission has decided that the proposed

amendments will come into effect prospectively without prejudice to any action

or decision taken by the relevant authorities in accordance with the prevailing

provisions of the scheme of recruitment.

We observe that the Public Service Commission has made this decision after the Petitioners

have filed the instant case. Thus, invariably the said decision to re-introduce the afore-said

removed qualification has been taken by the Public Service Commission either because the

Petitioners have challenged the said decision before Court or its own realisation of the

inappropriacy of its decision. It is significant to note that the Public Service Commission has

changed its mind even before this Court had granted Leave to Proceed to this Petition. The

Public Service Commission is silent as to why they had decided to re-introduce the afore-said

removed qualification. The said removal and later on re-introduction of the said qualification

at two different times are contrary to each other in the absence of any plausible reason

thereto. We observe that the reservation made by the Public Service Commission that the re-

introduction of the removed qualification should not apply retrospectively, has no justification

at all. The Public Service Commission has not given any reason thereto. Therefore, the decision

of the Public Service Commission to apply the re-introduction of the said qualification only

prospectively without prejudice to any action or decision taken by it earlier is arbitrary and

therefore should not have any force in law.

The only reason submitted by the learned State Counsel in that regard is the fact that the

Government has already spent some money to conduct the Examination as per P 3. We cannot

permit an examination to be held on such unjustifiable/illegal basis merely because the

Government has spent some money in that regard. If the removal of hitherto required

educational qualifications for appointment to the Post of Demonstrator in Technical Colleges

is wrong, then any subsequent conduct of any examination on that footing would also become

wrong. In view of the above, we decide that the Petitioners are entitled to succeed.

For the foregoing reasons, we grant a declaration that the Fundamental Rights guaranteed to

the Petitioners under Article 12(1) and 14(1)(g) of the Constitution have been infringed by

the Public Service Commission. Therefore, we proceed to quash the decision to amend the

Scheme of Recruitment for the post of Demonstrators under the service category of

Management Assistants (Technical) of Grade III at P 10(B). We also proceed to quash the

decision published in Government Gazette, bearing No. 2,3501, by the 1st Respondent to call

[SC FR 287/2023] - Page 8 of 8

for the applications for the post of Demonstrators under the service category of Management

Assistants (Technical) Grade III contained in P 13.

For the purpose of clarity, we specify here what we have quashed: that is the decision of the

Public Service Commission to permit the afore-said removal of the said qualification to remain

effective for the previously held examination which was held on 10-12-2023 in terms of P 3.

We direct the Public Service Commission and the relevant authorities to refrain from acting or

taking any further steps on the results of the Examination conducted as per P 3.

Petition is allowed. No costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

A. L SHIRAN GOONERATNE, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

MAHINDA SAMAYAWARDHENA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

PR/-