1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for Leave to

Appeal in terms of Article 128 of the Constitution

of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka,

read with Section 5C of the High Court of the

Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990

as amended by the Act, No. 54 of 2006.

Lindamulage Paul Jesudasa De Silva, No. 508/1, De Soyza Road, Molpe, Moratuwa.

PLAINTIFF SC APPEAL 232/2016 SC/HCCA/LA 502/2014 CA Appeal: WP/HCCA/MT/No. 01/13/RA DC Moratuwa No. 254L

Vs. Rambukkanage Lesman Fernando De Soyza Road, Molpe, Moratuwa.

DEFENDANT

AND THEN Lindamulage Paul Jesudasa De Silva, No. 508/1, De Soyza Road, Molpe, Moratuwa.

PLAINTIFF-PETITIONER

Vs. Rambukkanage Lesman Fernando De Soyza Road, Molpe, Moratuwa.

DEFENDANT-RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

2

Rambukkanage Lesman Fernando De Soyza Road, Molpe, Moratuwa. DEFENDANT-RESPONDENT-APPELLANT

Vs. Lindamulage Paul Jesudasa De Silva, No. 508/1, De Soyza Road, Molpe, Moratuwa. PLAINTIFF-PETITIONER-RESPONDENT BEFORE: Hon. Buwaneka Aluwihare, PC, J

Hon. Murdu N. B Fernando, PC, J

Hon. Yasantha Kodagoda, PC, J

COUNSEL: Darshana Kuruppu with Chinthaka Udadeniya for the Defendant-

Respondent-Appellant. Dhanya Gunawardena for the Plaintiff-petitioner-Respondent. WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS: 21st November 2016 and 22nd May 2020 for the

Defendant-Respondent Appellant. ARGUED ON: 10.03.2020. DECIDED ON: 13.10.2023

Judgement

Aluwihare, PC, J

(1) The Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent [hereinafter referred to as the

Plaintiff] filed action against the Defendant-Respondent-Petitioner-

Appellant [hereinafter the Defendant] in the District Court seeking an

order to obtain a right of way over the Defendants land on the basis that

3

the Plaintiff had acquired prescriptive rights over the roadway by

immemorable user of the right of way.

(2) At the conclusion of the trial, the learned trial judge held with the Plaintiff

and delivered judgement holding that the Plaintiff is entitled to the right of

way sought by him.

(3) The Defendant asserts that, consequent to the entering of the decree, the

writ was executed and possession in respect of the right of way had been

handed over to the Plaintiff on 19.06.2003.

(4) The Defendant, however, sought to have the decree amended on the basis

that the same was not in conformity with the judgement. Having heard the

parties, by his order dated 04.03.2004, the learned District Judge rejected

application of the Defendant.

(5) Aggrieved by the order referred to in the preceding paragraph, the

Defendant moved the High Court of Civil Appeals by way of an appeal.

Upon consideration of the same, the appeal was dismissed by the learned

Judges of the Civil Appellate High Courts on 29th March 2011.

(6) During the pendency of the appeal filed by the Defendant referred to above,

in 2009, the Plaintiff had filed charges of contempt against the Defendant

for obstructing his roadway. The District Court, however, by its order dated

31.03.2010, held that the District Court does not have the power to inquire

into and determine the allegation of contempt against the Defendant.

(7) Consequent to the dismissal of the Defendants Appeal, [referred to in

paragraphs 4 and 5 above] the Plaintiff, in 2012, by way of Petition and

affidavit moved the District Court for a direction on the fiscal, to have the

obstructions removed and to have the possession of the 8-foot roadway

handed over to the Plaintiff, who became entitled to the same, by virtue of

the judgement delivered by the District Court in 2001.

4

(8) The said application was made by the Plaintiff on the premise that the

Defendant had constructed a building on the entire property in a manner

causing obstruction to the usage of the roadway the Plaintiff was granted

by virtue of the judgement aforesaid.

(9) It was in this backdrop that the Plaintiff sought an order directing the fiscal

to hand over possession of the roadway, free from any obstacles. The relief

prayed for by the Plaintiff [according to the petition he filed] is reproduced;

(10) The learned District Judge by his order dated 28-11-2012, rejected the

relief sought by the Plaintiff on the basis that the Plaintiff had been handed

over possession of the roadway once, way back in the year 2003 and as

such there is no provision in the law to order the execution of the writ [of

possession] for the second time.

(11) Aggrieved by the said order, the Plaintiff moved the High Court of Civil

Appeal by way of revision and after the inquiry, the High Court held that

the Plaintiff was entitled to have the writ executed again. The basis for

drawing this conclusion was that, the Plaintiff had not received the

complete and effectual possession in terms of Section 325 of the Civil

Procedure Code and in the instant case the rights of the parties were finally

determined only on 29.03.2011, when the High Court of Civil Appeals

dismissed the Defendants appeal. The Court went on to observe that the

issue of lapse of time does not arise as the Plaintiff had not got complete

and effectual possession in terms of Section 325 of the Civil Procedure

Code. On this basis, the learned judges of the High Court of Civil Appeals

held that the Plaintiff was entitled to have the writ executed as the

5

application [for writ] was made after all the disputes in relation to the rights

of the parties had been settled. Accordingly, acting in revision, the relief

sought by the Plaintiff was granted.

(12) Being aggrieved by the said Judgement of the High Court of Civil Appeals,

the Defendant invoked the jurisdiction of this Court by way of leave to

appeal, to have the judgement of the High Court set aside.

(13) On the 6th of June 2016, this Court granted leave to appeal on the questions

of law referred to in sub-paragraphs (i) to (v) of Paragraph 13 of the

petition of the Defendant dated 7th October 2014. At the hearing of this

appeal, however, the learned counsel for the Defendant confined himself to

the following questions:

i. Have the Learned Judges of the Civil Appellate High Court of Mount

Lavinia failed to consider that the Plaintiff has not averred any

exceptional circumstances in his petition?

ii. Have the learned Judges of the Civil Appellate High Court of Mount

Lavinia erred in Law by holding that the application for issue of a

fresh writ was not time barred when there is one year and six months

delay from 29/03/2011?

Respective positions of the parties;

(14) The Plaintiff, in explaining the delay, submits that he could not have sought

the remedy that was available to him in terms of Section 325 of the CPC to

have the writ executed for the second time as the Defendants appeal

relating to the variation of the decree, was pending and it was on that basis

that his complaint of contempt against the Defendant was rejected. As such,

he had no option but to await the conclusion of the appeal process in 2011,

before moving court to have the writ executed for the second time as

provided in Section 325(1) of the CPC in 2012.

(15) Elaborating the delay further, the Plaintiff takes up the position that, it was

correct that the writ was executed in 2003, but when he complained to the

6

District Court of the disturbance to his peaceful enjoyment of the rights he

had obtained from the court, the District Court was functus, as far as the

case was concerned, in view of the appeal[of the Defendant] challenging

the District Court order rejecting his application to vary the decree was

pending before an appellate forum.

(16) It was argued on behalf of the Plaintiff that the jurisprudence developed

over the years has now crystalised into a rule, that the Court can exercise

its inherent powers vested in it under the Section 839 of the Civil Procedure

Code to avert injustices in situations of this nature, particularly in instances

where parties take the law into their own hands and that the court was not

hamstrung by the period statutorily stipulated [Section 325] in the CPC

relating to issuing of the writ for the second time which is one year and one

day from being disposed.

(17) The learned Counsel for the Plaintiff relying on the decision of Senevirathne

Vs. Francis Fonseka Abeykoon 1986 2 SLR and Sirinivasa Thero Vs.

Suddassi Thero 63 NLR 31, submitted that in the case of Senevirathne

[supra] it was held that since the plaintiff had taken the law into his hands

and forcibly evicted the defendant alleging abandonment and deterioration

of the premises, the Court could in the interest of justice resort to its

inherent powers saved under Section 839 of the Civil Procedure Code and

make order of restoration of possession for the fiscal to execute even though

the Civil Procedure Code provided for such restoration to possession only

on a decree to that end entered under section 217(c) of the Civil Procedure

Code.

(18) The Defendant, on the other hand argued that the application for a writ in

terms of Section 325 of the CPC requires strict compliance and even if the

appellate process had come to an end on 29.03.2011, the Plaintiff had

moved court for the execution of the writ for the second time only on

06.09.2012, which is almost 18 months after the decision of Defendants

Appeal was delivered.

7

(19) Before I address the questions of law on which leave to appeal was granted,

it would be of significant importance to consider the findings and the

conclusions of the learned District Judge in refusing the application of the

Plaintiff to refuse to issue the writ for the second time based on his

application made in 2012.

(20) The reason being, the judges of the High Court set aside the order of the

learned District Judge who refused to issue the writ for the second time, in

exercising the revisionary jurisdiction vested in them. The criteria for

exercising revisionary power, as a discretionary remedy, is when the court's

conscience is shocked by the illegality of the order that is sought to be

revised.

(21) In the circumstances aforesaid, it would be pertinent to consider the order

made by both the learned District Judge as well as the High Court of Civil

Appeals. It is significant to note that the learned High Court judges have not

referred to any illegality of the order of the learned District Judge but have

merely stated in their order that a writ for the second time cannot be issued

only if the Plaintiff gets complete and effectual possession in terms of section

325 of the Civil Procedure Code. In the instant action the parties can only

obtain complete and effectual possession of a land only after the rights of

parties are finally determined. In this case the rights of the parties were

finally determined only on 29.03.2011. Thus, the issue of lapse of time does

not arise as the Plaintiff had not got complete and effectual possession in

terms of Section 325 of the Civil Procedure Code [page 5 of the Order].

(22) Apart from the passage referred to above, nowhere in the order had the

High Court pointed out any illegality of the impugned order of the learned

District Judge. Essentially, it appears to me that the only element which the

learned Judges of the High Court deem to have been incorrectly concluded

by the learned District Court Judge is that parties can only obtain complete

and effectual possession of a land only after the rights of parties are finally

determined [supra]. The power of the court to issue a writ for the second

8

time is undisputed. In my opinion, the issue which had to be determined by

the learned Judges of the High Court, is whether the impugned order of the

learned District Judge was illegal or whether in refusing to issue the writ

for the second time, he had exercised his discretion wrongly, and in a

manner which shocked the conscience of the court. The same question

whether in refusing to issue the writ for the second time, the Order of the

learned District Judge had broached legality, is now placed for

determination before this Court.

(23) I have given the sequence of events in paragraphs 2 to 7 of this judgement.

For convenience, I shall briefly refer to them here;

(i) The Judgement of the District Court was delivered in 2001.

(ii) The writ of possession was executed in 2003.

(iii) The defendant sought a variation of the decree in 2004.

(iv) The Defendant challenged the refusal before the High court in 2004.

(v) The Plaintiff filed contempt proceedings in 2009.

(vi) Contempt charges were rejected by the District Court in 2010.

(vii) The High Court refused the application of the Defendant for a

variation of the Decree in 2011.

(24) From the sequence of events referred to above, it is clear that from 2003 up

to 2009, there had been no complaint by the Plaintiff of any obstruction on

the part of the Defendant. The District Court by its considered order

delivered on 31.03.2010, held that the District Court has no jurisdiction to

inquire into the contempt charges filed by the Plaintiff. The Plaintiff did not

challenge the said order.

(25) It was in this backdrop that the Plaintiff moved the District Court in 2012

for a writ of possession for the second time. The ground on which this

application was made is that the District Court rejected the contempt

charges on the basis that there was a connected matter pending in appeal

and that the District Court is functus officio due to that reason.

9

(26) Although the petition filed before this court also states that the reason to

dismiss the contempt proceeding filed by the Plaintiff was due to the fact

that the challenge by the Defendant to vary the decree was still pending

before an appellate forum, when perusing the said order of the District

Court, it is evident that the refusal to proceed with the contempt charges

was based on the ratio of the case of Regent International Hotel Ltd v. Cyril

Gardiner 78-79 1 SLR 278 and the order does not refer to any pending case

before an appellate forum as a fetter to inquire into the allegation of

contempt against the Defendant.

(27) The assertion, therefore, of the Plaintiff, that he had to wait to make an

application to issue the writ for the second time till the rights of the parties

were finally determined in 2011, does not appear to be accurate. The fact

remains that the Plaintiffs complaint of interruption to his peaceful

enjoyment of the roadway was only after six years from the date of the

execution of the writ which was in 2003.

(28) Undoubtedly, the Defendant appears to have prevented the Plaintiff from

enjoying the right he won years after litigation and the conduct of the

defendant cannot be condoned by this court; however, this court is called

upon to decide on specific legal issues and not the contumacious conduct

of the Defendant.

(29) As referred to earlier, all we are called upon to decide is whether the High

Court of Civil Appeals had corrected an illegality of the Order made by the

learned District Judge.

(30) The learned District judge, in refusing to issue the writ for the second time,

had observed that the application was made many years [six years] after

the previous order was made, and in terms of Section 325(1) of the CPC,

where after the officer [fiscal] has delivered possession, the Judgement-

Creditor is hindered or ousted by the Judgement-Debtor, in taking

complete and effectual possession, in the case of immovable property,

where the judgement creditor had been hindered or ousted within a period

10

of one year and one day, the judgement-creditor any time within one month

of the date of such obstruction or hindering or ouster, complain thereof to

the court by a petition. The learned District Judge relying on the decision

of Badrun Nisa Wazeer Vs. Velayuthan 90 2 SLR 146 held that the Plaintiff

was not entitled to have the writ obtained for the second time.

(31) As stated before, in granting the writ for the second time and revising the

Order of the learned District Judge, the learned Judges of the High Court

had only noted that per Section 325, a writ sought for the second time could

only be refused if the Plaintiff who sought such writ had obtained complete

and effectual possession, and since the matter was pending in appeal and

the legal rights of the parties were, at the time, unresolved, the issue of

lapse of time does not arise as the Plaintiff had not got complete and

effectual possession in terms of Section 325 of the Civil Procedure Code

[Supra]. No reliance is placed on any judicial precedent to support the above

position.

(32) The concept of complete and effectual possession does not in any way

contemplate the legal entitlement or rights of the parties. In my view, all

that is contemplated by the phrase is de facto possession of the property

concerned, in a manner which allows for the complete enjoyment of the

property. The fact that legal entitlement to such property was being resolved

by a Court of Law did not and should have any bearing on the factum of

physical possession of the property.

(33) The issue of time lapse is therefore central to this determination of this case.

Section 325(1) and its requirements have been comprehensively addressed

in a recent judgement of this court.

In Saleem Mohamed Fawsan v. Majeed Mohamed & Others, SC Appeal No.

135/2017, S.C Minutes of 31.03.2023, his Lordship Justice

Samayawardhena observed that; [at pages 18 and 19]

According to section 325(1)

(a) Wherein the execution of a decree for the possession of immovable

11

or movable property the fiscal is resisted or obstructed by the judgment-

debtor or any other person, or

(b) where after the fiscal has delivered possession of immovable or movable

property the judgment-creditor is hindered or ousted in taking complete

and effectual possession by the judgment-debtor or any other person the

judgment-creditor may at any time within one month from the date of such

resistance or obstruction or hindrance or ouster complain to the District

Court by way of a petition.

The first limb of Section 325(1) contemplates a situation where the fiscal is

totally prevented by the judgment-debtor or any other person from

delivering possession to the judgment-creditor by resistance or obstruction.

The second limb of section 325(1) contemplates two situations:

(i) after the fiscal had delivered possession of the property, the judgment-

creditor has been hindered in taking complete and effectual possession

thereof; or

(ii) ousted therefrom.

.

It may further be observed on a careful reading of section 325(1) that, in a

situation of (a) above, the judgment-creditor shall come to Court within one

month from the date of resistance or obstruction to the fiscal, but in a

situation of (b) above where possession has been delivered, if it is

immovable property, in addition to the one month restriction from the date

of the hindrance or ouster, such hindrance or ouster shall also fall within

one year and one day from the date of delivery of possession. [Emphasis

added]

(34) The limb which would be applicable to the present case is the second limb

of Section 325(1). As noted above, the Plaintiff was hindered by the

Defendant from enjoying the effectual possession of the property after the

execution of the decree and after the fiscal had delivered possession.

Accordingly, the Plaintiff could seek a writ by invoking the jurisdiction of

the District Court if and only if the hindrance occurred within one year and

12

one day from the date the fiscal delivered the property, and only by

complaining to the court within one month of the date of the hindrance.

This position was previously affirmed in Badrun Nisa Wazeer Vs.

Velayuthan 90 2 SLR 146 and in Sinna Lebbe Saliya Umma Vs. Shahul

Hameed Mohammed & Others, S.C Appeal No. 99/2014, S.C Minutes of

04.04.2018. In the case of Badrun Nisa Wazeer, it was held that the time

clause in S. 325(1) of the Civil Procedure Code is mandatory, and that per

the Section, in matters relating to immovable property, a party who was

dispossessed or obstructed from exercising possession within one year and

one day can complain to court within one month of ouster or hindrance.

The learned District Court Judge had also relied on the aforementioned

judgement in his Order.

(35) The Fiscal delivered possession to the Plaintiff on 19th June 2003. The

Plaintiff invoked the jurisdiction of the District Court to seek a writ for the

second time on 06th September 2012. If there had been a hindrance to the

Plaintiff enjoying complete and effectual possession within one year and

one day of 19th June 2003, the Petitioner should have invoked the

jurisdiction within one month of such hindrance. The Petitioner had only

made an application under Section 325(1) after 9 years of being delivered

possession. Therefore, it is evident that the Plaintiff had not invoked the

jurisdiction of the District Court in the manner required by the law and the

Order of the learned District Cort Judge was lawful and could not have

shocked the conscience of the court.

In the circumstances, I find that it would not be necessary to determine the

first (i) question of law since the application for the issue of a fresh writ, as

stated in the question of law (ii) was in fact time barred. Accordingly, the

questions of law; Have the learned Judges of the Civil Appellate High Court

of Mount Lavinia erred in law by holding that the application for issue of a

fresh writ was not time barred when there is one year and six months delay

from 29/03/2011 is answered in the affirmative.

13

For the reasons stated above, the Order of the High Court dated 26.08.2014

is hereby set aside and the Order of the learned judge of the District court

dated 28.11.2012 is hereby affirmed.

In the circumstances of this case, the parties may bear their own costs.

Appeal Allowed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

MURDU N. B FERNANDO, PC, J I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

YASANTHA KODAGODA, PC, J I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT