==== BLOCKS ==== 

In the matter of an application for Leave to

Appeal under Section 5C of the High Court of the

Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 54 of 2006.

Warnakulasuriya Nicholas Peter

Kurera,

Kabalewa,

Deegalla.

PLAINTIFF

-Vs-

1. Anthony Raymond Leopold Peiris,

His Worship the Bishop of the Roman

Catholic Church of Kurunegala,

Bishop’s House,

Kurunegala.

2. Adikari Mudiyanselage Saman

Sanjeewa,

Bandara,

Kabalewa,

Deegalla.

3. Warnakulasuriya Mahamala Arachchige

Harold Kingsley,

SC / APPEAL / 149 / 2014

SC / HCCA / LA / 61 / 2012

NWP / HCCA / KUR / 133 / 2004 (F)

DC Kuliyapitiya: 11980 / P

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

SC / APPEAL / 149 / 2014 1

Kabalewa,

Deegalla.

4. Warnakulasuriya Mary Kurera,

Kabalewa,

Deegalla.

5. Subasinghe Aarachchige Don Padmini

Srikanthi,

Kabalewa,

Deegalla.

6. Subasinghe Aarachchige Don Newton

Stanley,

Kabalewa,

Deegalla.

7. Subasinghe Aarachchige Don

Priyadharshana Kumara,

Kabalewa,

Deegalla.

DEFENDANTS

AND BETWEEN

3. Warnakulasuriya Mahamala Arachchige

Harold Kingsley,

Kabalewa,

Deegalla.

SC / APPEAL / 149 / 2014 2

4. Warnakulasuriya Mary Kurera,

Kabalewa,

Deegalla.

5. Subasinghe Aarachchige Don Padmini

Srikanthi,

Kabalewa,

Deegalla.

6. Subasinghe Aarachchige Don Newton

Stanley,

Kabalewa,

Deegalla.

7. Subasinghe Aarachchige Don

Priyadharshana Kumara,

Kabalewa,

Deegalla.

3RD TO 7TH DEFENDANTS-

APPELLANTS

-Vs-

Warnakulasuriya Nicholas Peter Kurera,

Kabalewa,

Deegalla.

PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT

1. Anthony Raymond Leopold Peiris,

His Worship the Bishop of the Roman

SC / APPEAL / 149 / 2014 3

Catholic Church of Kurunegala,

Bishop’s House,

Kurunegala.

2. Adikari Mudiyanselage Saman Sanjeewa

Bandara,

Kabalewa,

Deegalla.

1ST AND 2ND DEFENDANTS-

RESPONDENTS

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Warnakulasuriya Mahamala Arachchige

Harold Kingsley,

Kabalewa,

Deegalle.

2. Warnakulasuriya Mary Kurera,

Kabalewa,

Deegalle.

3. Subasinghe Aarachchige Don Padmini

Srikanthi,

Kabalewa,

Deegalle.

4. Subasinghe Aarachchige Don Newton

Stanley,

Kabalewa,

Deegalle.

SC / APPEAL / 149 / 2014 4

5. Subasinghe Aarachchige Don

Priyadharshana Kumara,

Kabalewa,

Deegalle.

3RD TO 7TH DEFENDANTS-

APPELLANTS-PETITIONERS

-Vs-

Warnakulasuriya Nicholas Peter Kurera,

Kabalewa,

Deegalle.

PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT-

RESPONDENT

1. Anthony Raymond Leopold Peiris,

His Worship the Bishop of the Roman

Catholic Church of Kurunegala,

Bishop’s House,

Kurunegala.

2. Adikari Mudiyanselage Saman Sanjeewa

Bandara,

Kabalewa,

Deegalle.

1ST AND 2ND DEFENDANTS-

RESPONDENTS-RESPONDENTS

SC / APPEAL / 149 / 2014 5

Before: S. Thurairaja, PC, J.

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J. &

Janak De Silva, J.

Counsel: Manohara de Silva PC with Harithriya Kumarage for the 3rd

to 7th Defendants-Appellants-Appellants.

Rohan Sahabandu PC for the Plaintiff-Respondent-

Respondent.

Argued on: 30.11.2021

Decided on: 19.03.2026

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J.

1. In this appeal against the judgments of the District Court of Kuliyapitiya and the

Civil Appellate High Court, a pivotal issue falls for determination. That issue has

been advanced before this Court by the 3rd to 7th Defendants–Appellants

(hereinafter sometimes referred to as “the 3rd to 7th Defendants”).

In any event, have Jeremius Appuhamy and upon his death, the 3rd to 7th

Defendants, possessed Lot 1A of Preliminary Plan No. 2509 which is a

divided portion of Lot 1 of Plan No. 3509 and have obtained prescriptive title

thereto?

2. As regards a second issue that relates to Lot 3 of the corpus and the aforesaid main

issue, the learned District Judge of Kuliyapitiya answered both issues as “not

proved” by his judgment dated 28 October 2004.

3. The 3rd to 7th Defendants-Appellants-Appellants (hereinafter sometimes referred

to as the 3rd to 7th Defendants) preferred an appeal initially to the Court of Appeal

SC / APPEAL / 149 / 2014 6

but in its final adjudication when the appeal was transferred to the Civil Appellate

High Court, the Civil Appellate High Court pronounced judgment dismissing the

appeal of the 3rd to 7th Defendants by way of its judgment dated 28 December 2011.

4. In the dismissal of the appeal of the 3rd to 7th Defendants in both fora, it has to be

borne in mind that it is the 3rd to 7th Defendants who contested the case of the

Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the

Plaintiff) as regards Lot 1A depicted in the Preliminary Plan of the case.

5. The 1st and 2nd Defendants in the case had no demurrer to the case of the Plaintiff

which was to the effect that the Plaintiff prayed for a declaration that he was

entitled to 728/937 share of the land as stated in paragraph 24 of the plaint.

6. The Plaintiff had instituted this action seeking the partition of the land in suit

and the allotment of defined shares to the 1st and 2nd Defendants, as set out in the

plaint. The corpus of the action was described as the land known as

“Neriyayewatta,” situated in the village of Kabalewa within the District of

Kurunegala. In the course of the trial, the Preliminary Plan bearing No. 2509 was

duly produced and marked in evidence.

7. As I observed earlier, the contest advanced by the 3rd to 7th Defendants is confined

to Lot 1A delineated in Preliminary Plan No. 2509. Their challenge is mounted

against the Plaintiff’s asserted entitlement to Lot 1A, on the premise that the

Plaintiff, Nicholas Peter Kurera, could not have acquired absolute title thereto.

This contention proceeds on the assertion that the land stood impressed with a

constructive trust in favour of Jeremius Appuhamy, from whom the 3rd to 7th

Defendants purport to trace their entitlement to the said Lot 1A.

8. The question then arises as to whether the assertion of a constructive trust on the

part of the 3rd to 7th Defendants can be upheld by this Court. It has to be recalled

that both the District Court and the Civil Appellate High Court have rejected this

assertion.

SC / APPEAL / 149 / 2014 7

9. It was the assertion of the 3rd to 7th Defendants that the land stood impressed with

a constructive trust in favour of Jeremius Appuhamy, from which, they contended

by a parity of reasoning, a beneficial interest devolved upon them by inheritance.

10. A closer examination of the relationship between the pater familias, Jeremius

Appuhamy, and the 3rd to 7th Defendants discloses that the 4th Defendant, Mary

Kurera, had lived in cohabitation with Jeremius Appuhamy. Consequent upon

that relationship, the 3rd, 5th, 6th, and 7th Defendants, claiming to be the issue of

such union, have put forward a claim to heirship in respect of Jeremius

Appuhamy.

11. A careful perusal of both documentary and oral evidence in the case proves that

while Jeremius Appuhamy had a lawful wife named Medagoda Aratchige Alice

Fernando elsewhere, he had begun to live in cohabitation with Mary Kurera - the

4th Defendant in the case. She was the mother of the 3rd, 5th, 6th and 7th Defendants

who staked this claim to be the intestate heirs of Jeremius Appuhamy by virtue of

their birth through Jeremius Appuhamy and their mother.

12. I must deal at the outset with the claim of the 3rd Defendant that he is a son of the

deceased, Jeremius Appuhamy. The birth certificate produced in respect of the 3rd

Defendant admits of no ambiguity. Jeremius Appuhamy does not figure therein as

the father. Instead, the document unequivocally records the father to be one

Warnakulasuriya Mahamala Arachchige Atman Perera. In the face of this

unimpeachable public record, the assertion of the 3rd Defendant that he is an heir

of Jeremius Appuhamy is wholly unsustainable in law.

13. As for the mother Mary Kurera – the 4th Defendant, she herself could not inherit

the intestate property of Jeremius Appuhamy as she was not his lawful wife.

14. It is undeniable that the 5th, 6th and 7th Defendants had been born out of the illegal

wedlock of Jeremius Appuhamy with Mary Bridgette Kurera (the 4th Defendant).

The corollary is that it was incompetent for the 5th, 6th and 7th Defendants

SC / APPEAL / 149 / 2014 8

themselves to claim to be the legal heirs to succeed to the intestate property of

Jeremius Appuhamy, as they were his illegitimate issues.

15. Section 33 of the Matrimonial Rights and Inheritance Ordinance No. 15 of 1876

states;

“Illegitimate children inherit the property of their intestate mother,

but not that of their father or that of the relatives of their mother.

Where an illegitimate person leaves no surviving spouse or

descendants, his or her property will go to the heirs of the mother, so

as to exclude the State.”

16. Grotius states that by blood relations in the matter of succession ab intestato were

meant as well those born in and out of wedlock, excepting that natural children or

their descendants succeeded ab intestato to property of deceased only so far as they

were related to the deceased through being the illegitimate children of a female

but not of a male; for, in reference to the mother, illegitimate children were in the

same position as legitimate children unless indeed they were sprung ex prohibito

concubitu, in which case they and their descendants could not inherit ab intestato.1

17. Van der Keessel also lays down broadly that natural or spurious children may

succeed ab intestato not only to their mother but to their maternal cognates.2

18. From the foregoing, it is abundantly clear that the 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th and 7th

Defendants were rendered legally incompetent to succeed to the intestate property

of Jeremias Appuhamy namely Lot 1A on which they had been living with

Jeremius Appuhamy provided Jeremius Appuhamy had his entitlement to Lot 1A.

1 Grot. 2. 27. 28 See the Laws of Ceylon by Walter Pereira second edition at pg. 481. 2 V. d. K. 341-345.

SC / APPEAL / 149 / 2014 9

19. There was no dispositive instrument of title in their favour from Jeremius

Appuhamy who had been in an illegal wedlock with the 4th Defendant. At the

most, it would appear, their occupation of the land was precarious.

20. In the case of Tillekeratne et al. v. Bastian et al.3 Bertram C.J. states;

“With regard to possession by permission or license, a person who so

possesses is said to possess precario. This form of possession will be

found discussed in Voet XLIII., 26. A person who is in possession of

property precario cannot prescribe against the owner, however long

his possession may be. A restitutory action in such a case can never be

extinguished.”

21. In the case of Sinno Appu v. Silla Umma4 it was held that although by the

Roman Dutch Law possession precario, however long, gave no prescriptive right,

yet on the local Ordinance which wholly governed the matter such possession

would be sufficient for purposes of prescription, if there was no acknowledgement

of title within the meaning of the Ordinance.

22. It is as clear as a pikestaff that if Jeremius Appuhamy had been in possession of

Lot 1A, and the 3rd to 7th Defendants had been occupying the land along with him,

that precarious possession would not give rise to an adverse possession which was

by sufferance or the express or implied permission of Jeremius Appuhamy. As the

evidence indicates, he had simply been providing accommodation to his consort

(the 4th Defendant) through whom he had fathered the 5th, 6th and 7th Defendants.

23. However, an interesting event took place in 1980 when Jeremius Appuhamy

purchased Lot 1A from a person called Gamini Senaratne but in the name of his

legitimate son Camillus Appuhamy.

3 21 NLR 12. 4 Ram. Rep., 1872-76, 318.

SC / APPEAL / 149 / 2014 10

24. At the instance of the father Jeremius Appuhamy, Gamini Senarathne effected

the transfer on 07 August 1980 in the name of Camillus Appuhamy – his

legitimate son.

25. It has to be noted in passing that Camillus Appuhamy was himself procreated in

the course of a cohabitation that the polygynous Jeremius Appuhamy had been

having with the mother of Camillus Appuhamy - one Medagoda Aratchige Alice

Fernando. I must hasten to add that Alice Fernando became his lawful wife by his

subsequent legitimation of the union and hence my reference to a lawful wife

elsewhere in this judgment.

26. As a marriage between Jeremius Appuhamy and Alice Fernando was solemnized

in 1959 and the illegal union became a holy wedlock, the son Camillus

consequently became legitimate and as is commonplace, legitimacy bestowed on

Camillus Appuhamy was a legal consequence brought about by law. Illegitimate

children can be legitimated by the subsequent marriage of their parents.

27. In Sri Lanka, a legal marriage between any parties has the effect of rendering

legitimate the birth of any children who may have been procreated between the

same parties before the marriage, unless such children have been procreated in

adultery.5

28. In fact, the status of legitimacy or illegitimacy or the capacity to become legitimate

per subsequens matrimonium is governed by the law of domicil of origin and thus,

Legitimacy Act No. 3 of 1970 settled the issue of legitimacy of Camillus Appuhamy.

29. As the narrative unfolded, Jeremius Appuhamy caused one and a half acres of Lot

1A to be conveyed in the name of his legitimate son, Camillus Appuhamy, the

consideration for that transfer having been furnished by Jeremius himself to

Gamini Senaratne under a deed dated 07th August 1980.

5 Ordinance No. 2 of 1895, Section 22; also see Section 3 of Legitimacy Act No. 3 of 1970 (Legitimization of illegitimate children).

SC / APPEAL / 149 / 2014 11

30. Jeremius Appuhamy passed away twelve years later, in September 1992.

Thereafter, on 01 June 1994, the Plaintiff in the present partition action

purchased the said property from Camillus Appuhamy. It is against this factual

backdrop that the 3rd to 7th Defendants impugn the Plaintiff’s title and resist his

claim to entitlement over Lot 1A.

31. The statement of claim of the 3rd to 7th Defendants was founded on two distinct

bases, namely, in the first instance, an alleged constructive trust, and secondly, a

claim of entitlement to the property by way of prescription. I propose to address

these contentions seriatim.

32. Both causes of action, on which the 3rd to 7th Defendants assert an interest in the

land, were rejected by the District Court as well as by the Civil Appellate High

Court. It is against those concurrent findings that the present challenge is

mounted.

Constructive Trust

33. The plea of a constructive trust was advanced on the footing that when Jeremius

Appuhamy caused Lot 1A to be purchased from Gamini Senaratne by deed dated

07 August 1980 in the name of his son, Camillus Appuhamy, the entirety of the

consideration was furnished by Jeremius himself, with the result, it was

contended, that Camillus Appuhamy held the property in trust for his father.

34. In support of this contention, the 3rd to 7th Defendants invoked Section 84 of the

Trusts Ordinance. It is unnecessary to restate the provision in extenso. Its essence

lies in the principle that where consideration for a transfer is provided by one

person, but the property is conveyed in the name of another, and it appears that

the person providing the consideration did not intend the transfer to operate for

the benefit of the transferee, the latter is bound to hold the property for the benefit

of the former.

SC / APPEAL / 149 / 2014 12

35. However, the operation of this principle is not without qualification. Within the

rubric of resulting or constructive trusts arising from the provision of

consideration, it is well settled that such a trust will not ordinarily arise where

the person providing the consideration stands in a relationship of loco parentis to

the transferee. In such circumstances, a rebuttable presumption arises that the

transfer was intended as a gift or advancement in favour of the child, and not as

a trust for the benefit of the transferor.

36. In the case of Perera v. Scholastica Perera6 Gratiaen J. adverted to a

presumption of advancement which will preclude a resulting trust arising under

Section 84 of the Trusts Ordinance, if the transferor stands in a relationship of

loco parentis to the transferee – see Fernando v. Fernando7, Mutalibu v.

Hameed.8

37. The learned judge Gratiaen J. observed that Sections 83 and 84 of our Trusts

Ordinance have introduced the English law on this subject.9

38. The presumption of advancement, however, is not irrebuttable, and it is upon this

footing that the 3rd to 7th Defendants seek to contend that, notwithstanding the

filial relationship, the conveyance of Lot 1A was not intended as an advancement

but gave rise to a constructive trust in favour of the father.

39. What kind of evidence can be used to support or rebut the presumptions of

resulting trust or advancement? The answer can be found in the leading case of

Shephard v Cartwright,10 where the House of Lords examined the question in

the context of the presumption of advancement.

40. In this case, the issue was whether a father, in registering shares in his companies

in the names of his three children, had transferred the beneficial interest in those

6 57 NLR 265. 7 20 NLR 244. 8 (1950) 52 NLR 97. 9 See SC Appeal 169/15 decided on 28.02.2025. 10 (1955) A.C. 431.

SC / APPEAL / 149 / 2014 13

shares to them. Subsequent to the transfers, the father treated the shares as his

own. After the father's death, two of the three children brought an action against

the executors claiming proceeds of sale of the shares previously allotted to them.

41. The question arose as to whether the subsequent actions of the father had rebutted

the presumption of advancement to his children. The House of Lords held, inter

alia, that the executors could not rely on such subsequent conduct to rebut the

presumption of advancement. On this question, Viscount Simonds had this to say;

"It must then be asked by what evidence can the presumption be

rebutted, and it would, I think, be very unfortunate if any doubt were

cast (as I think it has been by certain passages in the judgments under

review) upon the well-settled law on this subject. It is, I think, correctly

stated in substantially the same terms in every textbook that I have

consulted and supported by authority extending over a long period of

time. I will take, as an example, a passage from Snell's Equity (24th

edn.), p.153, which is as follows:

The acts and declarations of the parties before or at the time of the

purchase, or so immediately after it as to constitute a part of the

transaction, are admissible in evidence either for or against the party

who did the act or made the declaration … But subsequent

declarations are admissible only against the party who made them,

and not in his favour.'

I do not think it necessary to review the numerous cases of high

authority upon which this statement is founded. It is possible to find

in some earlier judgments references to "subsequent' events without

the qualifications contained in the textbook statement: it may even be

possible to wonder in some cases how in the narration of facts certain

events were admitted into consideration. But the burden of the

authority in favour of the broad proposition as stated in the passage I

SC / APPEAL / 149 / 2014 14

have cited is overwhelming and should not be disturbed.”11

42. Thus, if A buys property, and has it conveyed into the name of his son B, the effect

of the rule in Shephard v Cartwright appears to be as follows;

The acts or declarations of A before or at the time of the purchase are

admissible as evidence to support or rebut the presumptions of

resulting trust or advancement; and

The acts or declarations of A subsequent to the purchase are

admissible as evidence to rebut the presumption of resulting trust or

to support the presumption of advancement; but

The acts or declarations of A subsequent to the purchase are not

admissible as evidence to support the presumption of resulting trust

or to rebut the presumption of advancement.

43. This has generally been accepted as the scope of the rule in Shephard v

Cartwright since the House of Lords' decision in December 1954.12

44. Both the District Court and the Civil Appellate High Court observe that the 3rd

to 7th Defendants adduced no evidence or insufficient evidence to rebut the

presumption of advancement.

45. If at all, when the Plaintiff purchased the property from Camillus Appuhamy in

1994, Jeremius Appuhamy had passed away in 1992. The partition action was

instituted by the Plaintiff in 1998 and in fact, Jeremius Appuhamy was an

unavailable witness having passed away in 1992.

11 Ibid.,445-446. 12 See, e.g. Snell’s Equity (31st edn.,2005), para.23-10;Lewin on Trusts (17th edn.,2000), para.9-36;Underhill and Hayton:Law of Trusts and Trustees (16th edn.,2003), pp.362-364.

SC / APPEAL / 149 / 2014 15

46. Jeremius Appuhamy was not available in 1998 to give evidence of his intention at

the time of transfer in 1980 and indeed, there was the act of the father staying on

the land till he died, despite his transfer of the land to the son in 1980.

47. He had passed the legal title to the son in 1980 but for 12 long years thereafter till

he crossed the great divide, he had been in possession of the land. In fact, this

evidence was led.

Was this evidence of possession sufficient to rebut the presumption of

advancement?

48. The learned High Court Judges held that it was the burden of the 3rd to 7th

Defendants to assert and prove the existence of a constructive trust and the

Defendants failed to rebut the presumption of advancement.

49. I have perused the evidence led in the case and I would observe that when the trial

came about, Jeremius was long dead and as a result, it was well-nigh impossible

to adduce evidence of the transferor’s intention without running the risk of

offending the rule against hearsay. Except the evidence of possession that was led,

there were no statements adduced of Jeremius Appuhamy that evinced a

continuing intention to rebut the presumption of advancement.

50. A judge in a civil case is equipped to determine the weight to be attributed to

hearsay evidence and pay the appropriate amount of regard to it in assessing the

totality of the evidence. The following pertinent suggestion made by Lord Phillips

M.R. in a very recent case in Lavelle v Lavelle13 ought to be followed by the

modern civil courts;

"In these cases equity searches for the subjective intention of the

transferor. It seems to me that it is not satisfactory to apply rigid rules

of law to the evidence that is admissible to rebut the presumption of

advancement. Plainly, self-serving statements or conduct of a

13 [2004] 2 F.C.R.418 at 424 c-e.

SC / APPEAL / 149 / 2014 16

transferor, who may long after the transaction be regretting earlier

generosity, carry little or no weight. But words or conduct more

proximate to the transaction itself should be given the significance

that they naturally bear as part of the overall picture. Where the

transferee is an adult, the words or conduct of the transferor will carry

more weight if the transferee is aware of them and makes no protest

or challenge to them."

51. In the promises, I take the view that the conclusions of both the District Court and

the Civil Appellate High Court that the presumption of advancement was not

rebutted is not inconsistent with the evidence that has been led.

52. In such circumstances, Camillus Appuhamy took the conveyance absolutely and

what the father transferred to him became his property. When he subsequently

transferred his share to the Plaintiff, the Plaintiff did not take it subject to a

constructive trust.

53. Assuming without conceding that there was a constructive trust in favor of the

purchaser Jeremius Appuhamy as alleged by the 3rd to 7th Defendants, Camillus

Appuhamy became the owner of his share when his father passed away in 1992.

The 3rd to 7th Defendants could not claim to be co-owners with Camillus as they

were not heirs of Jeremius Appuhamy. In the circumstances, the cause of action

founded upon a constructive trust should fail.

Prescriptive Title as claimed by the 3rd to 7th Defendants

54. I now turn to the prescriptive title claimed by the 3rd to 7th Defendants against

Camillus Appuhamy, and, in consequence, against the Plaintiff.

55. As I observed before, Jeremius Appuhamy had been in possession of the land since

1980 – the year in which he purchased Lot 1A from Gamini Senaratne in the name

of Camillus Appuhmay. The 3rd to 7th Defendants had also been there on the land

together with Jeremius Appuhamy who passed away in 1992.

SC / APPEAL / 149 / 2014 17

56. Camillus Appuhamy transferred the property to the Plaintiff in 1994. He was the

only legal heir of Jeremius Appuhamy in 1994 and I have shown that even if he

had held the property subject to constructive trust from 1980, he became the only

heir to succeed to the intestate property of Jeremius Appuhamy in 1992 - the year

in which the father passed away. So, when he transferred his share to the Plaintiff

in 1994, he enjoyed absolute title to transfer the property.

57. Since the Plaintiff filed the partition action in 1998 having bought the property

from Camillus Appuhamy in 1994, the 3rd to 7th Defendants had only 6 years of

possession against Camillus Appuhamy. Absent Jeremius Appuhamy, they

possessed the land as against Camillus for 2 years and 4 years against the Plaintiff

– Camillus’s privy.

58. The said Defendants sought to fill in the deficiency by seeking to tack on to the

possession of Jeremius, which may have begun in 1980 and admittedly he had

begun to possess it from 1980 till he died in 1992.

59. This argument of tacking on to Jeremius’s possession cannot be sustained, as

possession of Jeremius will not inure to the benefit of the 3rd to 7th Defendants.

60. The 3rd to 7th Defendants were not lawful privies to the title of Jeremius

Appuhamy, either by inheritance or any dispositive instrument. Since there was

no inheritance or instrument of transfer in their favor, they could not tack on to a

possession of someone who was not their predecessor in title. One who enjoys

precarious possession by the sufferance of another cannot tack on to the possession

of the latter.

61. Since, an independent possession, if any, the 3rd to 7th Defendants had against

Camillus and his privy the Plaintiff falls short of the requisite 10 years, a case

founded upon prescriptive possession also fails. The first question of law raised

before this court which I would call quintessential has to be answered in the

negative against the 3rd to 7th Defendant-Appellant Appellants.

SC / APPEAL / 149 / 2014 18

62. What remains a second question of law namely;

Upon the rights mentioned in paragraphs 13 to 16 of the statement of claim

of the 3rd to 7th Defendants, has the 3rd Defendant obtained title to Lot 2 of

Plan No. 2509?

63. I have examined the evidence pertaining to the question of law which has also got

to be answered in the negative as I find no evidence to support any finding that

the 3rd Defendant has prescribed to Lot 2.

64. Thus, all causes of action pleaded by the 3rd to 7th Defendants having failed, I

would affirm the judgments pronounced by both Courts and dismiss the appeal.

Judge of the Supreme Court

S. Thurairaja, PC, J.

I agree Judge of the Supreme Court

Janak De Silva, J.

I agree Judge of the Supreme Court