SC (CHC) APPEAL 26/2018 JUDGMENT Page 1 of 24

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal under and in

terms of Section 5(1) of the High Court of

the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act

No.10 of 1996 read together with Chapter

LVIII of the Civil Procedure Code, from the

Judgement of the Hon. Commercial High

Court of Colombo dated 30/01/2018.

SC (CHC) APPEAL 26/2018

HC (Civil) no. 418/2011/MR

Sri Lanka Savings Bank Limited,

No. 265, Ward Place,

Colombo 07.

PLAINTIFF

Vs

1. Property Finance and Investment (Pvt) Ltd,

M and M Center, 2nd Floor,

No. 341/5, Kotte Road,

Welikada, Rajagiriya.

2. Medagodage Thusitha Wijayasena

3. Ganegoda Liyanage Don Swarna

Wijayasena,

Both of No.32/1, Barnes Place, Colombo 7

DEFENDANTS

SC (CHC) APPEAL 26/2018 JUDGMENT Page 2 of 24

BEFORE : S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J

A.L. SHIRAN GOONERATNE, J,

K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J.

COUNSEL : Maura Gunawansha, PC with Prasanna Panawenna

for the Defendants-Appellants instructed by S.G.A.

Gunasekara

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Property Finance and Investment (Pvt) Ltd,

M and M Center, 2nd Floor,

No. 341/5, Kotte Road,

Welikada, Rajagiriya.

2. Medagodage Thusitha Wijayasena

3. Ganegoda Liyanage Don Swarna

Wijayasena,

Both of No.32/1, Barnes Place, Colombo 7

DEFENDANTS-APPELLANTS

Vs

Sri Lanka Savings Bank Limited,

No. 265, Ward Place,

Colombo 07.

PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT

SC (CHC) APPEAL 26/2018 JUDGMENT Page 3 of 24

Kamal Dissanayake with Sureni Amaratunga and

Hasara Mathraarachchi for the Plaintiff-Respondent

Instructed by Hiranti Abeywickrema.

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS : Written submissions on behalf of the Defendants-

Appellants on 10th August 2023.

ARGUED ON

DECIDED ON

:

:

16th January 2024

09th August 2024

S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

1. The instant case is an appeal preferred to the Supreme Court by the Defendants-

Appellants against the Judgement of the Commercial High Court holden in Colombo

dated 30th January 2018. The 1st Defendant-Appellant, namely Property Finance and

Investment (private) limited (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the 1st Appellant

Company) is a Company incorporated under the Companies Act No.07 of 2007. The

2nd Defendant-Appellant, namely Medagodage Thusitha Wijayasena, (hereinafter

sometimes referred to as the 2nd Appellant) is the Managing Director of the 1st

Appellant Company. The 3rd Defendant-Appellant namely Ganagodage Liyanage

Don Swarna Wijayasena (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the 3rd Appellant) is

the wife of the 2nd Defendant, and a Director of the 1st Defendant Company (1st, 2nd

and 3rd Appellants hereinafter sometimes jointly referred to as the Appellants). The

matrix of this case is based on two causes of action arisen against the Appellants for

the recovery of a Term Loan of Rupees Six Million (Rs.6,000,000) with 17.5% interest

per annum under the first cause of action, and a Short-Term Loan of Rupees Eleven

Million (Rs.11,000,000) with 17.5% interest per annum under the second cause of

action, both which have been granted by Pramuka Savings and Development Bank

(hereinafter referred to as the Pramuka Bank) which was subsequently acquired by

SC (CHC) APPEAL 26/2018 JUDGMENT Page 4 of 24

the Plaintiff-Respondent namely Sri Lanka Savings Bank Limited (hereinafter

sometimes referred to as the Respondent Bank) to the Appellants. The said

Pramuka Bank, on 1st October 2007 was taken over by the Monetary board of Central

Bank of Sri Lanka (CBSL) due to mismanagement and vested under the Respondent

Bank, who is a fully state owned licensed specialized bank under the Banking Act No.

30 of 1998, which inter alia provides financial facilities to its customers in its scope of

business.

2. Being aggrieved by the Judgment of the Commercial High Court, the Appellants by

way of Petition of Appeal dated 27th March 2018 preferred an appeal to the Supreme

Court and submitted herein the grounds of appeal listed under paragraph 8(a)-(t),

which in the opinion of this Court was overly abundant and lacked precision. Thereby,

on 05th July 2023, the Counsel for both parties were directed to file a joint motion

setting out the questions of law mutually agreed upon. The Counsel in accordance

with the directions of the Supreme Court filed by way of motion dated 07th July 2023

the following questions of law, which have been provided below.

(i) Did the Learned Judge of the Commercial High Court of Colombo

err by failing to appreciate that the purported statements/documents

marked as "P7", "P8", "P9", "P10", "P14" and "P15" were erroneous,

incorrect, and irregular, and therefore, could not have been relied on in

evidence and/or were they not of any cogent probative value?

(ii) Did the Learned Judge of the Commercial High Court of Colombo

err by failing to duly and properly assess and/or evaluate the

documentary evidence place before the said Court?

3. Prior to delving into the factual and legal assessment of the instant case, for ease of

reference, I have identified and listed below the documents in suit which have been

referred to in the first question of law below namely P7", "P8", "P9", "P10", "P14" and

"P15".

SC (CHC) APPEAL 26/2018 JUDGMENT Page 5 of 24

P7 is the Customer Loan Details of the 1st Appellant Company, which stipulates

the Loan amount of Rs.6 million, print date 18th September 2012, and includes

a certification by the General Manager of the Respondent Bank.

P8 and P9 indicate the Debit and Credit entries of the 1st Appellant Company

in relation to the loan facilities to the accounts maintained for the purpose of

the loan facilities, print date 12th September 2012.

P10 is the Statement of accounts Rs. 6 million (manually prepared) dated 28th

April 2009 for the purpose of preparing letter of demand.

P14 is the Customer loan Details of the 1st Appellant Company, which provides

the Loan amount of Rs.11.5 million, print date 18th September 2012.

P15 is the Statement of accounts Rs. 11.5 million (manually prepared) dated

28th April 2009 for the purpose of preparing letter of demand.

Facts in Brief

4. The Respondent Bank averred that the 1st Appellant Company requested for a loan

facility of sum of Rupees Seventeen Million Five hundred thousand (Rs. 17,500,000/-

) from for the Respondent Bank1 and accordingly entered into a Facilities

Agreement.2 In response, the Respondent Bank provided two loan facilities valued at

Rupees Six Million (Rs. 6,000,000/-), and Rupees Eleven Million five hundred

thousand (Rs. 11,500,000/-) to the 1st Appellant Company. However, it is the

contention of the Respondent Bank the 1st Appellant Company had failed to settle

the said money in total, wherein the 1st Appellant Company are liable to pay a total

sum of Rupees Thirteen Million Three-hundred and eighteen thousand three-

hundred and ninety-six rupees and cents eighty-six (Rs. 13,318,396.86), and Rupees

Twenty-five Million Five-hundred and nine thousand one-hundred and thirty-seven

rupees and cents twenty-one (Rs. 25,509,137.21) together with 17.5% interest upon

1 Letter of Request dated 04th April 2002 marked P4, pg. 148 of the Supreme Court brief

2 Facilities Agreement Form dated 05th April 2002 marked P5, pg. 149 of the Supreme Court brief

SC (CHC) APPEAL 26/2018 JUDGMENT Page 6 of 24

the said capital sums of Rupees Six Million (Rs. 6,000,000/-), and Rupees Eleven

Million five hundred thousand (Rs. 11,500,000/-) respectively. Further, it was averred

by the Respondent Bank that the 2nd and 3rd Appellants had entered into a Guarantee

Bond3 pursuant to which they are jointly liable to pay the moneys due from the 1st

Appellant Company to the Respondent Bank. The Respondent Bank stated that

although it demanded the Appellants to pay and settle the moneys due,4 they have

failed and neglected to pay and settle the same and accordingly, the Respondent

Bank is entitled for a judgment and a decree as prayed for in the prayer to the Plaint

for the recovery of the total moneys due.

5. The Appellants in its answer contend that the Plaintiff cannot maintain this action on

the purported stance that this action is prescribed. It was further contended that the

2nd and 3rd Appellants maintained close relations and are shareholders of the said

Pramuka Bank, now vested upon the Respondent Bank. The Appellants averred that

the internal climate of the said Pramuka Bank was such that it was on the verge of

collapsing. To mitigate any such detriments thereby, the management of the said

Pramuka Bank requested the 2nd and 3rd Appellants to sign several documents to

ascertain and establish the stability of the bank in the eyes of third parties. However,

the Appellants position was that while the 2nd and 3rd Appellants had in fact signed

said documents, especially documents marked A6,5 A9,6 and A12,7 no consideration

had passed to, nor had any incentives been received by the Appellants as stipulated

in the said instruments. Therefore, the contention of the Appellants was that

3 Guarantee Bond marked as P17, pg. 178 of the Supreme Court brief

4 Letters of Demand marked as P11 and P16 found on pgs. 170 and 177 respectively of the Supreme Court brief

5 Loan Agreement Form dated 05th April 2002, Loan Value Rs.6 million, also document marked P6

6 Loan Agreement Form dated 05th April 2002, Loan Value Rs.11 million, also document marked P13

7 Guarantee Bond dated 29th December 1997, pg. 103 of the Supreme Court brief, also document marked P17

SC (CHC) APPEAL 26/2018 JUDGMENT Page 7 of 24

documents signed were not enforceable in law and thus are not liable to pay the

moneys claimed by the Respondent Bank.

Analysis

6. In considering the questions of law before this Court, the pivotal issue to be

addressed is the admissibility of the evidence submitted, particularly the documents

marked P7, P8, P9, P10, P14 and P15, in accordance with the provisions of the

Evidence Ordinance. Having thoroughly perused the facts and circumstances of the

instant case, the Appellants position rests on three tiers. First and initially, the

Appellants raise the preliminary objection of prescription, submitting that the loan

facilities have been rendered unto the Defendants in April 2002, whereas the

application was made to the Commercial High Court on 23rd September 2011,

thereby the present action was prescribed by nine years.8 Second, the Defendants

deny any such loan transactions to have occurred owing to the lack of legally

enforceable evidence which the Defendant attributes to having been defrauded by

Pramuka Bank, subsequently vested in Respondent. Third, the documents marked

P7, P8, P9, P10, P14 and P15 are inadmissible as documentary evidence since they do

not qualify as certified copies nor do they qualify as Bankers books within the

meaning of sections 90A and 90C of the Evidence Ordinance.

7. In addressing the first tier, the preliminary objection of prescription raised before the

High Court was adequately considered and dismissed by the Learned High Court

Judge in the following manner.9

.

8 Paragraph 2, Answer of the Defendants dated 15th March 2012, pg. 79 of the Supreme Court brief

9 Pg. 5, Judgement of the Commercial High Court dated 30th January 2018, pg.25 of the Supreme Court brief

SC (CHC) APPEAL 26/2018 JUDGMENT Page 8 of 24

. 1

.

1

.

The next defence raised by the defendants is that the plaintiff's claim

is prima facie barred by prescription. If the defendants maintain that

they have not obtained a loan from the plaintiff, they cannot assert

that the cause of action has become prescribed. To raise such a defence,

the 1st defendant would need to admit to having received a loan from

the plaintiff. However, the defendants have conceded that the defence

of prescription does not apply to the agreements between the plaintiff

and the 1st defendant, as well as to the guarantee. Therefore, the

defendants cannot rely on the defence of prescription in this case.

8. With the Preliminary objection dismissed, the triumvirate stance of the Appellants

has depleted to consist of two tiers, which form the foundation for the questions of

law before this Court and have been expounded on below in turn.

9. In addressing the second tier, the submission of the Appellants at the High Court are

as follows; The 1st and 2nd Appellants were customers of Pramuka Bank. From time

to time, when Pramuka Bank was facing financial difficulties, Mr. Rohan Perera, its

chairman, who was a personal friend of the 2nd Appellant and his family, would

request the 2ndAppellant and/or the 3rd Appellant and/or the 1st Appellant company,

as a gesture of support, to sign and/or initial various documents, inclusive of security

documents pertaining to banking facilities. The Appellants were informed that these

documents would be used for the purpose of showing that Pramuka Bank was

SC (CHC) APPEAL 26/2018 JUDGMENT Page 9 of 24

financially stable. The Appellants did not receive any incentive from Pramuka Bank

nor from Mr. Rohan Perera for signing any such documents. The documents were

usually blank printed forms and the Appellants never read their contents, neither

were its contents ever read out and explained to the Appellants. The Appellants

signed the said documents in good faith based solely on their good relationship with

Mr. Rohan Perera, and the trust and confidence they had in him. The Appellants were

assured that signing the said documents was not illegal and that the said documents

would never be acted on by Pramuka Bank. The documents marked P4, P5, P6, P13

and P17 are some of the documents signed/initialled by the Defendants at various

times in the circumstances set out above. The Appellants never read the said

documents prior to signing the same and nor were their contents read out and

explained to them. The Appellants were thus ignorant of the true nature and

character of the said documents. Had the 2nd Appellant been aware that the said

documents P4, P5, P6, P13 and P17 were contractually binding, as an experienced

businessman, he would have wanted their contents explained to the Appellants and

he would not have agreed to Clause 13 of the said documents P4, P5 and P13 and

Clause 21 of the said document P17 which state that the defence of

prescription is abandoned.10

10. A concise reiteration of the above is that the 2nd and 3rd Appellants while admitting

having signed the documents marked P4, P5, P6, P13 and P17, claim that there was

no intention to obtain such a loan facility. The documents were signed only as

gesture of support to the Chairman of Pramuka Bank to assert its financial stability,

and consequently that the Appellants have been defrauded by Pramuka Bank who

had got them to sign blank documents without being read and explained it content

and legal effect.

10 Written submissions of the Defendants-Appellants submitted to the Commercial High Court on 08th November 2017, reiterated in the Written Submissions dated 10th August 2023

SC (CHC) APPEAL 26/2018 JUDGMENT Page 10 of 24

11. While the documents marked P4, P5, P6, P13 and P17 have not been challenged in

the present suit, for the purpose of enhancing factual comprehension of the instant

case, I have provided a brief description of the said documents. P4 is a Letter of

request by the 1st Appellant Company dated 04th April 2002 requesting for one, a

Fluctuating Loan line of Rupees Thirty-five Million (Rs. 35, 000,000/-), and two, a Term

Loan facility of Rupees Seventeen Million five hundred thousand (Rs.17, 500,000/-).

This letter was addressed to the Deputy General Manager of Pramuka bank and

signed by the 2nd Appellant as the Director of the 1st Appellant Company. Further,

this letter was forwarded under the letter head of the 1st Appellant Company. In

perusing the contents of the said letter, it is apparent that the Appellants wish to

obtain the said facilities to settle some of their bank liabilities with the Pramuka Bank.

P5 is a facilities agreement form dated 05th April 2002 which identifies 1st Appellant

Company as the Borrowing party for several loan facilities stated herein along with

conditions thereof. The said form was for a Rupees Thirty-five Million (Rs. 35,

000,000/-) as fluctuating line loan facilities, and Rupees Six Million (Rs. 6,000, 000/-)

and Rupees eleven million five hundred thousand (Rs. 11, 500,000/-) as short-term

loans. P6 and P13 are Loan Agreement forms for the short-term loans of Rupees Six

Million (Rs. 6, 000, 000/-) and Rupees eleven million five hundred thousand (Rs. 11,

500,000/-) respectively, signed by the 2nd and 3rd Appellants on behalf of the 1st

Appellant Company, the proceeds of both loans to be credited to the respective

accounts in the name of the 1st Appellant Company at the Respondent Bank. P17

Guarantee signed by 2nd and 3rd Appellants on behalf of the 1st Appellant Company.

12. The Learned High Court Judge having considered the above submissions of the

Appellants stated as follows.

. 2

SC (CHC) APPEAL 26/2018 JUDGMENT Page 11 of 24

.20

2 3

.

.

2 3

.

.

9 ()

.

,

?

The claim made by the defendants that Pramuka Bank obtained

signatures to documents to falsely imply that they provide loan

facilities for the people to demonstrate the financial stability of the

bank is unacceptable. According to the Court of Appeal judgment

marked P 20, submitted during the cross-examination of the 2nd

Defendant, the 2nd and 3rd defendants are prominent businessmen

in the business world. It appears that they are indeed the owners of

the large business known as Kandy City Centre, as indicated in the

said judgment. The judgment also states that the 2nd and 3rd

defendants have borrowed or owe Seylan Bank a sum of Two

Thousand Eighty-Five Million Rupees. It is not admissible that such

established businessmen would engage in placing signatures in a

manner typical of less experienced businessmen. Furthermore, as

noted in the last part of paragraph 9(c) of the answer, The signatories

were included in the securities related to banking services. If

signatures are placed on fraudulent documents to mislead customers,

SC (CHC) APPEAL 26/2018 JUDGMENT Page 12 of 24

how can the financial stability of Pramuka Bank be illustrated by

signing onto guarantees.

13. A Company cannot take a defence of ignorance, especially in an instance where the

2nd Appellant claims as follows.11

(b) I am the Chairman and Managing Director of the 1st Defendant

Company and have at all times been in control of the 1st Defendant

Company

(c) The 3rd Defendant-Appellant is my wife and also a Director of the 1st

Defendant Company

(d) I have been engaged in business activities for about 35 years. I am also

the Chairman and Managing Director of Property Finance and

Investment Kandy (Private) limited, which operates the Kandy City Centre,

the leading commercial and shopping complex in Kandy

14. I concur with the findings of the Learned High Court Judge that such a defence of

ignorance as raised by the appellants is frivolous and ludicrous, or as the Learned

High Court Judge refers to as (Ridiculous/Hilarious). Even if the

Appellants contend that these documents were signed as a symbolic gesture in good

faith, it strains credulity to suggest ignorance of their contents or legal implications.

It is counterintuitive to posit that documents pivotal to affirming the financial stability

of Pramuka Bank were inherently invalid under the law. Hence, such a defence is

bereft of merit.

15. Now I turn to the third tier with regards to the admissibility of the documents marked

P7, P8, P9, P10, P14 and P15 at the High Court. It is the submission of the Appellants

that the abovesaid documents do not qualify as certified copies within the purview

of section 90A of the Evidence Ordinance. In expounding on their stance, the

11 Affidavit para 1

SC (CHC) APPEAL 26/2018 JUDGMENT Page 13 of 24

Appellants assert that the documents marked P10 and P15 are not true copies of

entries of the Respondent Banks books but are handwritten forms prepared with the

aid of entries of the bankers books, and further, that the documents marked P7,

P8, P9, and P14 cannot be considered as certified copies as the purported

certificate by the General Manager was insufficient to meet the requirements of

section 90A of the Evidence Ordinance.12 In furthering its stance, the Appellants

religiously rely on sections 90A and 90C of the Evidence Ordinance and two cases

namely Chandra Gunasekara v. Peoples Bank13 and Agostinu v.

Kumaraswamy.14

16. In this juncture, it will be beneficial to refer to the provisions of the Evidence

Ordinance aforementioned, which have been reproduced below for convenience.

Section 90C of the Evidence Ordinance provides as follows with regards to the

admissibility of evidence of bankers books.

Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, a certified copy of any entry in

a bankers book shall in all legal proceedings be received as prima facie

evidence of the existence of such entry, and shall be admitted as evidence

of the matters, transactions, and accounts therein recorded in every case

where, and to the same extent as, the original entry itself is now by law

admissible, but not further or otherwise.

17. Sections 90A of the Evidence Ordinance15 provides for the definition of certified

copy in the context of the aforementioned provision, as follows.

"certified copy" means a copy of any entry in the books of a bank,

together with a certificate written at the foot of such copy that it is

12 Written submissions of Appellants dated 10th August 2023

13 SC Appeal 43/2012 decided on 11/10/2019

14 59 NLR 132

15 As amended by Act No.6 of 2021

SC (CHC) APPEAL 26/2018 JUDGMENT Page 14 of 24

a true copy of such entry ; that such entry is contained in one of the

ordinary books of the bank, and was made in the usual and ordinary

course of business ; and that such book is still in the custody of the bank,

such certificate being dated and subscribed by the principal

accountant or manager of the bank with his name and official title

and where the bankers' books consist of data stored by electronic,

magnetic, optical or other means in an information system, includes a

printout of such data together with an affidavit made in accordance with

section 6 of the Evidence (Special Provisions) Act, No. 14 of 1995, or such

other document of certification as may be prescribed in terms of any law

for the time being in force relating to the tendering of computer evidence

before any court or tribunal.

[Emphasis added]

18. In Agostinu v. Kumaraswamy,16 it was affirmed that in compliance with the

Evidence Ordinance the only way of proving entries in a bankers book is by either

producing the original or certified copies of the entries therein as prescribed by

section 90C of the Evidence Ordinance. Accordingly, His Lordship Basnayake CJ held

as follows.

The document produced is not a certified copy of the entries in the

bankers book; but a statement prepared with the aid of those entries

certified by the accountant of the bank. Objection was taken at the trial

to the production of the statement in question; but the learned trial Judge

over-ruled it. We are of opinion that he is wrong. Section 90C of the

Evidence Ordinance does not apply to the statements produced.

19. Upon an initial reading of the findings of the Court in Agostinu v. Kumaraswamy,

it is understandable how one might be led astray to assume that any document

16 59 NLR 132

SC (CHC) APPEAL 26/2018 JUDGMENT Page 15 of 24

falling short of an official certification by bank seal and excludes auxiliary statements

prepared by the bank to attest or verify the entries in the original books. However, it

is pertinent to consider the findings in this case in context of its facts and

circumstances of the respective case, for which reason I am inclined to agree with the

interpretation to the findings in Agostinu v. Kumaraswamy as provided by His

Lordship Justice Aluwihare in Chandra Gunasekara v. Peoples Bank17 as has been

reproduced below.

What was produced in Court in the case of Agostinu was a bare

statement, without any certification, and based on some entries

which had been certified by the accountant of the bank. It appears,

then, that although the original entries of the bank had been certified by

the accountant, the transcription of those entries that was produced

in Court carried no certification. Basnayake C.J. correctly held that the

statement was inadmissible in as much as it is a mandatory requirement

under Section 90C, that what is produced in Court should be certified as

stipulated in Section 90A of the Evidence Ordinance.

[Emphasis added]

20. For further clarity, provided below was the certification which was found in the

document in question in the case of Chandra Gunasekara v. Peoples Bank, which

the Court unanimously agreed as to amounting to a valid certification within the

meaning of section 90A of the Evidence Ordinance.

In the instant case, however, as opposed to the facts of the case of

Agostinu, the document marked P9(a) carries a certification to the effect:

I, Uttumalebbe Ali Mohamed, Chief Manager-Special Assets Unit do

hereby certify that the foregoing statement is a true extract of the

17 SC Appeal 43/2012 decided on 11/10/2019

SC (CHC) APPEAL 26/2018 JUDGMENT Page 16 of 24

relevant entries relating to the current account No. 205002 of Wang

Lanka Apparels (Pvt) Ltd., No. 86, Sea Beach Road, Colombo 11 as

appearing in the books of the Peoples bank and that such entries are

contained in one of the ordinary books of the Bank and were made in

the usual or ordinary course of business and that such books are still in

the custody of the Bank.

21. Here, the facts provide that it was above witness Mohamed who had both prepared

and signed the above certification. Accordingly, such a certification was valid for the

document in suit to amount to being a certified copy which was admissible as prima

facie evidence of the bank entries. In consideration of the above, while the Appellants

were right in relying on the above legal provisions and case law, they have failed to

correctly interpret the findings in both the cited cases. Further, E.R.S.R.

Coomaraswamy18 succinctly lists out the requirements of section 90A of the Evidence

Ordinance as follows.

In Sri Lanka, "certified copy" means a copy of any entry in the books of

a bank, together with a certificate written at the foot of such copy:

(a) that it is a true copy of such entry;

(b) that such entry is contained in one ,of the ordinary books of the bank;

(c) that it was made in the usual and ordinary course of business; and

(d) that such book is still in the custody of the bank.

Such certificate shall be dated and subscribed by the principal

accountant or manager of the bank with his name and official title

22. Having laid out the legal jurisdiction prevailing in this regard, I now turn to assess

the admissibility of the documents in suit in the instant case in light of the above.

18 Law of Evidence, Vol II book II, at page 161

SC (CHC) APPEAL 26/2018 JUDGMENT Page 17 of 24

23. The document marked P7 as described above is a customer loan details sheet

generated from the computer accounts book and has been certified by the General

Manager of the Sri Lanka Savings Bank. The Appellant avers that there is no date

provided by the attesting officer. This matter was raised at the trial, with regards to

documents marked P7, P9 and P14, and during cross-examination, the Appellants

witness said that there is no provision for the attesting officer to insert a date because

the computer will provide the date when it was generated, in this case it is provided

as Print Date. The excerpt of the cross-examination report has been provided below

along with an approximate translation.

: .7, .9, .14

?

: .

:

?

:

.

.

.

:

?

:

.

: ?

: .

SC (CHC) APPEAL 26/2018 JUDGMENT Page 18 of 24

Q: Witness, did it specially appear that the documents marked P7,

P9, and P14 were signed by the General Manager of the plaintiff

company?

A: Signature was placed.

Q: However, the said General Manager did not insert the date in the

said three documents, did he?

A: Generally, the signing date is not included on a bank statement.

The transactions recorded in the bank statement are entered into

the computer system. When attesting, the head signs it.

Q: Are you now saying that it is not necessary to insert the date for

such attestation?

A: As per the general practice of the bank, a certified bank statement

does not include the certifying date.

Q: You are saying that, according to the general procedure, the date

is not inserted, arent you?

A: Generally, the date is not inserted.

24. As per document marked P7, the customers name is given as M/S PROPERTY

FINANCE & INVESTMENTS (PVT) LTD., Address No.10/1, Reid Avenue, Colombo 07,

Account number is given as : 102012000499 , Loan amount 6,000,000. , Loan open

date 05 April 2002, and provides PRINT DATE as 09/18/2012. Document marked

P14 also provides for contents similar to the above except the Account number

reads as 102012000502, and the Loan amount as Rupees 11,500,000 and the Loan

date as 08 April 2002, PRINT DATE 09/18/2012. Since the date has been provided in

the body of the document, I am of the view that it will suffice the date of attestation/

certification.

SC (CHC) APPEAL 26/2018 JUDGMENT Page 19 of 24

25. With regards to the documents marked P8 and P9 the same objection was raised,

additionally the Appellants submit that in the attestation the Bank official had

mentioned the name and number of the account, address of the Appellant, and all

other details were mentioned correctly but at the attestation in the bottom it is

mentioned as M/S Nihal Brothers, which was not noticed at the trial and never been

questioned with witnesses called on behalf of Appellant. This was not raised at the

trial court and not even cited in the petition of appeal. This is only taken at the written

submission to the Supreme Court. I once again turn to the findings of Justice

Aluwihare in Chandra v. Gunasekara in relation to the failure of the opposing party

to raise contradictory evidence at trial, and am inclined to agree with the following

statement.

I also must point out that the Appellant raised no objection when the

document was sought to be admitted in evidence by the Plaintiff Bank,

when witness Mohamed testified. Furthermore, every party if it is so

desired is afforded an opportunity to have the originals inspected, in

terms of Section 90E of the Evidence Ordinance, which right the

Appellant could have exercised before the trial Judge.

I am also of the view that this is a fit instance to apply the principle laid

down in the case of L. Edrick De Silva v L. Chandradasa De Silva, 70

NLR 169. In the said case (at page 174) Chief Justice H.N.G Fernando

held:But where the plaintiff has in a civil case led evidence sufficient in

law to prove a factum probandum, the failure of the defendant to

adduce evidence which contradicts it adds a new factor in favour of the

plaintiff. There is then an additional matter before the Court, which

the definition in Section 3 of the Evidence Ordinance requires the Court

to take into account, namely that the evidence led by the plaintiff is

uncontradicted.

SC (CHC) APPEAL 26/2018 JUDGMENT Page 20 of 24

When a party is afforded an opportunity to challenge any evidence

produced in Court, and does not exercise that right, it would be

reasonable for the Court to infer that the party did not do so, because

the party was not capable of challenging the same.

26. Apart from the above facts identified, the certification provided in the documents

marked P7, P8, P9, and P14 provides for a certification at the end of each respective

document which has been signed by the General Manager of the Respondent Bank,

and states as follows in clear compliance with the requirements of section 90A of the

Evidence Ordinance.

I, Edippuli Arachchige Hemappriya Joseph Adrian Weerasekera being

the General Manager of Sri Lanka Savings Bank Ltd of No.265, Ward

Place, Colombo 07 do hereby certify that the foregoing statement is a

true copy of the relevant entries relating to the Loan account

No.102012000499 of M/S Property Finance & Investments (Pvt) Ltd as

appearing in the books /data of Pramuka Savings and Development

Bank and that such entries are contained in one of the ordinary

books/data of the bank and were made in usual ordinary course of

business and that such books/data are still in the custody of Sri Lanka

Savings Bank Ltd. I do here by further certify that there are no other

entries in the books of the bank relating to the above

account as at date.

27. In light of the above, I find no issue with the admissibility of the documents marked

P7, P8, P9 and P14.

28. With regards to the admissibility of the Documents marked P10 and P15, both parties

agree that the said documents are manual forms filled by the officials of the

Respondent Bank to give instructions to their Attorney at Law to prepare the Letter

SC (CHC) APPEAL 26/2018 JUDGMENT Page 21 of 24

of Demand and to proceed with the case. This was properly explained by the

plaintiffs witnesses at the trial in the following manner.19

: .10 .

.10 6,

?

:.10

. .

. .

.

Q: Witness, I am now further showing you the document marked P10.

Am I correct in saying that this document marked P10 is a summary of

the loan valued at 6 million?

A: P10 is an internally prepared document used within the office to

draft the letter of demand for the purpose of suing. It indicates the

outstanding balance as of the relevant date, which represents the

amount in arrears. It notes the interest and the full amount as of that

date for preparing the letter of demand.

29. Contrary to the facts and findings of the case Agostinu v. Kumaraswamy, the

documents marked P10 and P15 would not qualify as bare statements without

certification as it satisfies the minimum threshold of a certified copy, being signed

by the relevant Manager responsible for the recovery of loans along with the date at

the foot of the said documents. Further, the said documents were annexed to the

Letters of Demand marked as P11 and P16. Therefore, the documents marked

19 Cross-examination report dated 11th December 2012, Pg.198 of the Supreme Court brief

SC (CHC) APPEAL 26/2018 JUDGMENT Page 22 of 24

P10 and P15 are also admissible as evidence to verify the existence of the loan

transactions which the Appellants vehemently denies.

30. Despite its aggravated denials, it is important to take note of the document marked

P22 which was submitted by the 2nd Appellant at the trial whereby he admitted to

his signature in the said facsimile. The contents are important, as according to this

letter, the Appellant had acknowledged the loan amount and negotiated with the

Respondent bank officials for a settlement. P22 was addressed to the Mr G. S.

Perera, Manager Recoveries of Sri Lanka Savings Bank, dated 28th January 2009. It

will be helpful to reproduce the contents for easy reference.

Mr.G. S. Perera

Manager Recoveries

Sri Lanka Savings Bank Ltd.

110, D S Senanayake Mawatha

Colombo 08

Dear Sir,

SETTLEMENT OF LOAN OBTAINED FROM PRAMUKA SAVINGS

&DEVELOPMENT BANK

I have been given a copy of your letter dated 12th May 2008 through Mr.

T. S. Abeynanda. Thank you for sending two officers to my office to

discuss the matter mentioned in the said letter.

With regard to the repayment of the loan, please note that since year

2002 I have tried several times to pay it back but I did not get the

opportunity. The director supervising of Central Bank at that time could

confirm this with proof. Since the opening of the new services bank, Sri

Lanka Savings Bank Ltd. I have tried to meet with the General Manager

in order to discuss a settlement for the above three times I got

SC (CHC) APPEAL 26/2018 JUDGMENT Page 23 of 24

appointments but however due to my busy schedule I could not make

it, and I sincerely apologize for same.

However I wish to inform you that somewhere in the middle of next

month (February) I plan to come and meet with the GM to discuss as to

how I could settle the said matter.

Thanking you

Yours faithfully,

(Illegible Signature)

Thusitha Wijayasena

31. Until the aforesaid letter marked P22 was produced in Court, it was the stance of

the Appellants that he knows nothing about the loan, and it was just signing of some

papers on the request of Mr. Rohan Perera and other officials of Pramuka Bank, and

he did not take any money from the Respondent Bank. However, upon perusal of the

contents of the letter, it constitutes a formal recognition of the loan facilities granted

to the 1st Appellant Company, as it demonstrates purported attempts to settle such

loans, thereby rendering the position of the Appellants redundant.

Conclusion

32. The allegations of the Appellants appear to be juxtaposed resulting in the Appellants

wanting to have ones cake and eat it too, or more accurately, has eaten too much

cake themselves and now denies the existence of the cake itself while having frosting

in between its fingers. Having analysed the facts and circumstances of the instant

case, it is undoubtedly established that not one, but two loan facilities have been

granted to the 1st Appellant Bank and have not been paid back.

33. In addressing the first question of law, I find that the learned Judge of the

Commercial High Court of Colombo did not err by failing to appreciate that the

purported statements/documents marked as P7, P8,P9,P10,P14, and P15 were

SC (CHC) APPEAL 26/2018 JUDGMENT Page 24 of 24

erroneous, incorrect and irregular, and therefore, could have been relied on in

evidence. In addressing the second question of law, I find that the learned Judge of

the Commercial High Court of Colombo did not err by failing to duly and properly

assess and/or evaluate the documentary evidence place before the said Court. In

conclusion, I answer both questions of law negatively, and hold in favour of the

Respondent Bank.

34. Considering all reasons stated above, I am inclined to disallow the appeal and dismiss

the same and hereby affirm the Judgement of the Commercial High Court Judge

dated 30th January 2018.

35. The Respondent Bank is thus entitled to the relief as ordered by the Learned Judge

of the Commercial High Court, and to recover the cost of litigation from the

Appellants.

Appeal dismissed with costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

A.L. SHIRAN GOONERATNE, J,

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT