[SC FR 50/2021] - Page 1 of 7

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application in terms of Article

126 read with Article 17 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

SC. FR. NO. 50/2021

1. D. Wathsala Subhashini De Silva 78/E, Gangarama Road, Urawatte, Ambalangoda. 2. Menuwara Gedara Viheli Sehansa Devhari Samarathunga 78/E, Gangarama Road, Urawatte, Ambalangoda. PETITIONERS Vs. 1. Hasitha Kesara Wettimuni Former Principal of Dharmasoka College, C/O, Principal, Dharmasoka College, Ambalangoda. 1A. Sanuja Jayawickrama Principal, Dharmasoka College, Ambalangoda. 2. B. Anthony Secretary, Interview Board, C/o Principal, Dharmasoka College, Ambalangoda.

3. T.M. Dayaratne Member, Interview Board, C/o Principal, Dharmasoka College, Ambalangoda.

[SC FR 50/2021] - Page 2 of 7

4. L.N. Madhavi Dedunu Member, Interview Board, C/o Principal, Dharmasoka College, Ambalangoda. 5. N. Channa Jayampathi Member, Interview Board, C/o Principal, Dharmasoka College, Ambalangoda. 6. Gamini Jayawardene Chairman, Appeals and Objections Investigation Board, Principal, Mahinda College, Galle. 7. Rekha Malawaraarachchi Secretary, Appeals and Objections Investigation Board, C/o, Principal, Dharmasoka College, Ambalangoda. 8. J.P.R. Malkanthi Member, Appeals and Objections Investigation Board, C/o, Principal, Dharmasoka College, Ambalangoda. 9. S.A.B.L.S. Arachchi Member, Appeals and Objections Investigation Board, C/o, Principal, Dharmasoka College, Ambalangoda. 10. Rasika Prabhoda Hendahewa Member,

[SC FR 50/2021] - Page 3 of 7

Appeals and Objections Investigation Board, C/o, Principal, Dharmasoka College, Ambalangoda. 11. Prof. Kapila C.K. Perera Former Secretary to the Ministry of Education, C/o Secretary, Ministry of Education, Isurupaya, Battaramulla. 11A. M. N. Ranasinghe Secretary, Ministry of Education, Isurupaya 12. Sobanahandi Dilani No.77/B/1, Gangarama Road, Urawatte, Ambalangoda. 13. R.T. Dahamsara de Zoysa No.77/B/1, Gangarama Road, Urawatte, Ambalangoda. 14. Hon. Attorney-General Attorney-Generals Department, Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

BEFORE : P. PADMAN SURASENA, J. MAHINDA SAMAYAWARDHENA, J. & ARJUNA OBEYESEKERE, J. COUNSEL : Shyamal A. Collure with Prabhath S. Amarasinghe,

A.P. Jayaweera instructed by Ravindra Silva for the Petitioners.

Ganga Wakishta Arachchi DSG for the Respondents.

ARGUED &

DECIDED ON : 08-01-2024.

[SC FR 50/2021] - Page 4 of 7

P. PADMAN SURASENA, J. Court heard the submissions of the learned Counsel for the Petitioner as well as the

submissions of the learned Deputy Solicitor General and concluded the argument.

The 1st Petitioner is the mother of the 2nd Petitioner who is a minor and whose admission was

sought to the school of which the 1A Respondent is the Principal. The 1st Respondent has

produced (marked 1R2), the application made by 1st Petitioner seeking the admission of her

child (the 2nd Petitioner) to the above school from the close proximity category. According

to the said application (1R2), the address of the permanent residence of the Petitioners is

mentioned as No. 78/E Gangarama Road, Urawatta, Ambalangoda.

The 1st Petitioner has also produced the Deed (marked P4) and the plan relevant to the

property (marked P14). The Petitioners residential premises is depicted as Lot X in Plan No.

2134/2015 (P14) in which two permanent buildings marked P have been clearly depicted.

It is important to note that both the permanent buildings are situated within the afore-said

Lot X.

It is not disputed between parties that there are two houses in the Petitioners compound:

one an old house; the other, a newly constructed house.

We observe that the 1st Petitioner has claimed her entitlement to admit her child, the 2nd

Petitioner on the basis that they are living in house No. 78/E (old house).

The learned Deputy Solicitor General conceded before this Court that if in fact the Petitioners

are living in the old house, the school authorities must admit the 2nd Petitioner to the relevant

school. Thus, the issue we have to decide is whether the Petitioners are entitled to succeed

with their application for the admission to the relevant school on the basis of their claim that

they live in the address provided in the application they had submitted. i.e. No. 78/E,

Gangarama Road, Urawatta, Ambalangoda.

Although, the learned Deputy Solicitor General concedes that the child must be admitted if

the Petitioners family is living in the old house, the school authorities had not admitted the

child. The reason provided to this Court by the learned Deputy Solicitor General for not

admitting the 2nd Petitioner to the school is the fact that the Petitioners family is in fact living

[SC FR 50/2021] - Page 5 of 7

in the newly constructed house and not in the old house. Moreover, it is the submission of

the learned Deputy Solicitor General that the distance to the school was measured from the

newly constructed house as that was the premises shown by the Petitioners to the school

authorities.

At the outset, we need to state here that, so long as both premises (the old house and the

new house) and the land on which those houses are situated, are owned by the 1st Petitioner;

so long as there is no other family living in any of those two houses; so long as the Petitioners

have submitted the other relevant documents such as Water Bills, Electoral Registers &

Electricity Bills, it should be irrelevant for the school authorities to go on the voyage of

discovery as to which part of the premises owned by the Petitioners is actually occupied by

the Petitioners family. Indeed, it is not disputed that the school authorities have awarded

marks for those documents submitted by the Petitioners. However, we wish to add a caution

that the position might have been different if another family is found living in one of those

houses. In the absence of any other family living in any of these houses, we have no basis to

hold that the 1st Petitioner, for the purposes of the application for the admission of her child

to the relevant school, is not occupying the old house.

The Petitioners are relying on the documents produced (marked Y19 and Y20) to further

establish this fact.

According to these two documents, the old house is a house which is 35 years old and is the

house which has been assigned the Assessment No. 78E. Those two documents also establish

that the new house has not been assigned any Assessment Number.

It appears from the document Y19 that the new house has been constructed without a proper

approval from the Rajgama Pradeshiya Sabha. Indeed, the document Y20 states (a letter by

the Divisional Secretariat, Madampagama) that it is not certain as to which house of the

compound has been assigned the Assessment No. 78E.

In the factual circumstances of this case, we are of the view that the Petitioners are free to

reside in any of the houses they own. As to which portion of their properties (in the same

compound) the Petitioners must reside should not be a serious matter for the school

authorities to decide on the application to admit the child particularly in view of the fact that

no other family is occupying any of those houses as has already been mentioned earlier.

[SC FR 50/2021] - Page 6 of 7

We also wish to add that we are mindful that the parties are not permitted to rely on

documents obtained after completion of the admissions/ interview process in School

Admission cases. Documents produced marked Y19 and Y20 are documents which the 1st

Petitioner had obtained subsequently in order to establish the injustice she had suffered at

the hands of the School Authorities.

We note that one need not rely on the documents marked Y19 and Y20 to establish that the

School Authorities had infringed the Fundamental Rights of the Petitioners guaranteed to them

under Article 12 (1) of the Constitution as on the face of the application made by the 1st

Petitioner, the school authorities should have admitted the 2nd Petitioner to the school on

merits. We are unable to accept the reason provided by the learned Deputy Solicitor General

for the refusal by the School Authorities to admit the child. Thus, the presence of the

documents produced marked Y19 and Y20 before us would not create any new grounds for

the Petitioners success. In other words, even in the absence of Y19 and Y20 which are

documents obtained at a later stage, the original decision made by the school authorities not

to admit the 2nd Petitioner to the school still remains illegal. Therefore, one does not have to

rely on the subsequently obtained documents (Y19 and Y20) to decide that the 2nd Petitioner

should have been admitted to the relevant school on the application submitted by the 1st

Petitioner.

We have already held that on the material adduced by the 1st Petitioner with the application

and as per the relevant provisions in the relevant circular produced marked 1R1, the School

Authorities should have admitted the 2nd Petitioner to the relevant school. The refusal by the

School Authorities to admit the 2nd petitioner to the relevant school is therefore an

infringement of the Fundamental Rights of the Petitioners guaranteed to them under Article

12(1) of the Constitution.

It also must be mentioned here that it is not the position of the School Authorities, that the

premises in which two permanent buildings are situated is not owned by the 1st Petitioner.

For the forgoing reasons, we decide to grant a declaration that the Petitioners Fundamental

Rights enshrined in Article 12(1) of the Constitution have been infringed by the respondent

school authorities.

[SC FR 50/2021] - Page 7 of 7

We direct the incumbent Principal of Dharmashoka College Ambalangoda (1A Respondent) to

admit the 2nd Petitioner to the relevant grade as the 2nd Petitioner was entitled to have been

admitted to Grade-I of Dharmashoka College, Ambalangoda in the year 2021. We make no

order for costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

MAHINDA SAMAYAWARDHENA, J I agree,

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

ARJUNA OBEYESEKERE, J I agree,

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Mks