==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for

Appeal in terms of Section 5(c)

of the High Court of the Provinces

(Special Provisions) Amendment

Act No. 54 of 2006.

1. Samaranayake Rajapaksha

Mudalige Thilaka Chandralatha

Samaranayake,

Thalapitiya, Panawela,

Eheliyagoda.

2. Samaranayake Rajapaksha

Mudalige Vanitha Tulin

Samaranayake,

No.199, Malagala, Padukka.

Plaintiffs

SC Appeal No. 03/2016

SC HC (CA) LA No. 80/2015

WP/HCCA/AV/818/2008(F)

D.C. Pugoda Case No.480/P

V.

Samaranayake Rajapaksha

Mudalige Oliver Ranjith

Samaranayake,

No. 926/6, Kotte Road, Ethul Kotte,

Kotte.

2

Defendant

AND BETWEEN

Samaranayake Rajapaksha

Mudalige Oliver Ranjith

Samaranayake,

No. 926/6, Kotte Road, Ethul Kotte,

Kotte.

Defendant-Appellant

V.

1. Samaranayake Rajapaksha

Mudalige Thilaka Chandralatha

Samaranayake,

Thalapitiya, Panawela,

Eheliyagoda.

2. Samaranayake Rajapaksha

Mudalige Vanitha Tulin

Samaranayake,

No.199, Malagala, Padukka.

Plaintiffs-Respondents

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Samaranayake Rajapaksha

Mudalige Thilaka Chandralatha

Samaranayake,

Thalapitiya, Panawela,

Eheliyagoda.

3

2. Samaranayake Rajapaksha

Mudalige Vanitha Tulin

Samaranayake,

No.199, Malagala, Padukka.

Plaintiffs-Respondents-Appellants

V.

Samaranayake Rajapaksha

Mudalige Oliver Ranjith

Samaranayake,

No. 926/6, Kotte Road, Ethul Kotte,

Kotte.

Defendant-Appellant-Respondent

Before : MAHINDA SAMAYAWARDHENA, J.

K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J.

M. SAMPATH K. B. WIJERATNE, J.

Counsel : Chathura Galhena with Naduni Hemantha instructed

by Manoja Gunawardena for the Plaintiffs-

Respondents-Appellants.

Rohan Sahabandu, PC with Chathurika Elvitigala and

S. Senanayake instructed by Amila Kiripitigala for the

Defendant-Appellant-Respondent.

Argued on : 29.09.2025

4

Decided on : 04.11.2025

K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J

1. This is an appeal from the judgment of the High Court of Civil Appeal,

Avissawella dated 23.01.2015 that held in favour of the Defendant-

Appellant-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as Defendant). The 1st

and 2nd Plaintiffs-Respondents-Appellants (hereinafter referred to as

Plaintiffs) preferred this appeal from the judgment of the High Court

that decided on the basis that the corpus of the subject matter has not

been properly identified.

Facts in Brief

2. The land in issue is described in the schedule to the amended Plaint

dated 22.12.1998. The Plaintiffs instituted action to partition the said

land between the Plaintiffs and the Defendant.

3. According to the amended Plaint, the Plaintiffs state that each of them

are entitled to 1/6 share of the said land and that the Defendant is

entitled to 4/6.

4. The Defendant, in the Statement of Claim, has stated that the land in

question has not been identified properly as there is a vast difference

in the extent of the land described in the amended Plaint and the

Preliminary Plan submitted by the Licenced Surveyor J. M. D. T. Patrick

Reginold, which is dated 13.12.2000 and is marked as “X”.

5. The learned District Judge, delivering her judgment dated 26.03.2008

held in favour of the Plaintiff and ordered the land to be partitioned as

prayed for in the amended Plaint.

6. Being aggrieved by the decision of the learned District Judge, the

Defendant preferred an appeal to the Civil Appellate High Court of

Avissawella.

5

7. Upon hearing of the Appeal, the Learned Judges of the High Court

delivered the judgment on 23.01.2015 allowing the Appeal and setting

aside the judgment of the District Court.

8. Being aggrieved by the decision of the High Court, the Plaintiffs

preferred the instant appeal to this Court. Leave to appeal was granted

on the questions of law set out in paragraphs 17 (iii) and 17 (iv) of the

Petition dated 04.03.2015.

Questions of Law

9. Paragraph 17;

“(iii) Did the Civil Appellate High Court err in dismissing the action due to

the disparity or variation in the extent in the corpus morefully described

in the schedule to the plaint and the corpus depicted in the preliminary

plan?

(iv) Did the Civil Appellate High Court fail to follow the decisions of the

Superior Courts in an instant of the disparity or variation in the extent of

the corpus and dismiss the action?”

Analysis of the Questions of Law

10. Section 18(1)(a)(iii) of the Partition Law No. 21 of 1977 states that;

(1) The surveyor shall duly execute the commission issued to him

and, in doing so shall, where any boundary of the land

surveyed by him is undefined, demarcate that boundary on

the ground by means of such boundary marks as are not

easily removed or destroyed and shall, on or before the date

fixed for the purpose, make due return thereto and shall transmit

to the court-

6

(a) a report, in duplicate, substantially in the form set out in

the Second Schedule to this Law, verified by affidavit

stating-

(i) …

(ii) …

(iii) whether or not the land surveyed by him is in

his opinion substantially the same as the land

sought to be partitioned as described in the

schedule to the plaint

(iv) …

[Emphasis mine]

11. In the case of Sopaya Silva and Another v. Magilin Silva [1989 02

Sri LR 105] at 108 it was stated by S.N. Silva, J. that;

“… If the land surveyed is substantially different from the land as

described in the schedule to the plaint, the Court has to decide at

that stage whether to issue instructions to the surveyor to carry

out a fresh survey in conformity with the commission or whether

the action should be proceeded with in respect of the land as

surveyed.”

12. The identification of the corpus is vital to a partition action and as stated

by Samayawardhena, J. in Thiththalapitige Ruban Perera v.

Thiththalapitige Tilakaratne and Another (SC/APPEAL/125/2016

S.C. Minutes of 21 May 2021);

“…In a partition action, if the corpus cannot be identified, ipso

facto, the action shall fail. There is no necessity to investigate title

until the corpus is properly identified. The decision that the corpus

has not been properly identified decides the fate of the action

7

without further ado. This underscores the great care with which

this decision shall be taken by Court. It shall not be used as a

convenient method to summarily dispose of long-drawn-out

and complicated partition actions without embarking on the

arduous task of investigating the title of each party.”

[Emphasis mine]

In that case the discrepancy in the extent was considered not to be a

ground for the dismissal of the partition action as the Surveyor’s Report

depicts satisfactory findings and as the Deeds through which rights are

claimed are consistent with the Plaint.

13. In light of the above, I will take into account the following facts and

arguments in relation to the discrepancy of the extent of the land in

question.

14. The Schedule to the amended Plaint marked “A” describes the land as

follows;

“බස්නාහිර පළාතේ ගම්පහ දිස්ික්කතේ සියනෑ තකෝරළතේ ගඟබඩ පේුතේ

සමණබැද්තෙ තිතබන හල්වලවේත සහ කලහුගහවේත ට මායිම්: උුරට හල්වල සහ

මන්ඩාවිල කුඹුර ෙ, නැතගනහිරට තොන් ජුතස් ජයතිලක තනාතාරිස් මහේමයාතේ ඉඩම සහ

කැකුළුපාය ෙ, ෙකුණට ජී. ඒ. පාවුළු අප්පුහාමිට සහ තව අයට අයිති ඉඩම ෙ, බස්නාහිරට

රාජපක්ෂ ලියනතේ තේමිස් තපතේරා සහ තව අයට අයිති ඉඩම ෙ, යන තමහි ුළ අක්කර

විස්සක් පමණ විශාල…”

15. The Deeds marked “P2” and “P3” dated 07.04.1944 through which the

Plaintiffs and the Defendant derived title also describe the land in the

same manner.

16. On the other hand, the Preliminary Plan marked “X” prepared by

Licenced Surveyor J. M. D. T. Patrick Reginold and dated 13.12.2000,

describes the land as follows;

• උුර - ගම්ුන්ට අයිති කුඹුර, ඇල, හල්වල සහ කැකුල්පාය කුඹුර

8

• නැතගනහිර - හල්වල, කැකුල්පාය කුඹුර සහ ප්‍රැන්සිස් සාතලස් සහ තවේ අයට අයිති

ඉඩම

• ෙකුණ - තර්ස් ජයතිලක, ජුවන් ජයතිලක සහ මයිකල් ජයතිලක යන අයට අයිති ඉඩම්,

පාර, නිමල් කළුතබෝවිලට අයිති ඉඩම සහ එස්. ජී. ඒ. ඒ. තසතනවිරේනට අයිති ඉඩම

• බස්නාහිර - විමලතස්න රාජපක්ෂට අයිති ඉඩම, පී. ඒ. තපාඩිමැණිතක්ට සහ තවේ අයට

අයිති ඉඩම සහ ගම්ුන්ට අයිති කුඹුර.

• The extent has been stated as 14 Acres and 14 Perches.

17. The Surveyor’s Report, dated 13.12.2000, submitted as per Section

18(1)(a)(iii) of the Partition Law No. 21 of 1977, can be found on page

336 of the Appeal Brief. As per paragraph 5 of the said Report it is

evident that the Surveyor is satisfied that the surveyed land is the same

land that has been described in the schedule to the amended Plaint. The

Report reads as follows:

“මනින ලෙ ඉඩම පැමිණිල්තල් උපතල්ඛනතේ සඳහන් ඉඩම් තේ”

Further, the Report also states that all parties were present during the

surveying of the land.

18. It is the Defendant’s current position, by way of written submissions,

that the reason for the discrepancy in extent is because the Schedule to

the Amended Plaint depicts an amalgamation of two lands named

“හල්වලවේත” and “කලහුගහවේත”. However, the Defendant has admitted at

the Trial stage that the land in question was in fact 20 Acres in extent.

Further, the Defendant has not marked any Deed or Plan at the Trial

stage to establish this contention.

19. It is further evident through the first Plaintiff’s evidence during cross-

examination at the Trial stage that “හල්වලවේත” and “කලහුගහවේත” both

refer to the land named “හල්වලවේත” and that “හල්වලවේත” was the more

commonly used name.

9

20. Therefore, taking the above into consideration, I am of the view that the

mere discrepancy in the extent of the land in the Schedule to the

amended Plaint and the Preliminary Plan should not warrant a

dismissal of the Partition action.

21. I will now take into consideration the submissions by the parties on the

variations of the boundaries of the said land.

22. When perusing the evidence recorded in the District Court of Pugoda, it

is clear that the Licenced Surveyor J. M. D. T. Patrick Reginold has

admitted that that the land he surveyed is the same land that was

surveyed by him as the boundaries were the same. I will reproduce the

relevant excerpts for clarity:

“ප්‍ර: තමා සෑහීමකට පේ තවනවාෙ පැමිණිල්තල් උපතල්ඛනතේ තිතබන උුරු මායිමක්

තමා මැන්න උුරු මයිමක් හරිය කියා?

උ: ඔේ”

(Vide page 133-4 of the Appeal Brief)

“ප්‍ර: ෙකුණු මායිම පැහැදිලිව තිබුණාෙ?

උ: තිබුණා”

(Vide page 136 of the Appeal Brief)

“ප්‍ර: බස්නාහිර මායිම තිතබනවා කියලා සැහීමකට පාේවුණාෙ?

උ: ඔේ”

(Vide page 138 of the Appeal Brief)

It is evident that the Licenced Surveyor J. M. D. T. Patrick Reginold was

able to identify 3 out of the 4 boundaries of the land in question.

10

23. While there are slight differences in the names of the boundaries, I will

draw attention to the following excerpt by Samayawardhena, J. in the

judgment of Thiththalapitige Ruban Perera v. Thiththalapitige

Tilakaratne and Another (supra):

“…the Surveyor went to the land 76 years after the execution of

the earliest known Deed. One cannot expect the boundaries of land

in Gampaha to remain unchanged for 76 years. … In the

Preliminary Plan, the Surveyor records the existing boundaries. In

doing so, he gives the names of the present owners.”

24. Similarly, in the instant case too, the Surveyor’s Preliminary Plan is

made in the year 2000 while the Deeds marked “P2” and “P3” are dated

07.04.1944. Thus, realistically one cannot expect the boundaries of a

land and their owners to remain unchanged for a period of

approximately 56 years.

25. Therefore, I answer the first question of law in the affirmative that the

Civil Appellate High Court has erred in dismissing the action due to the

disparity or variation in the extent in the corpus morefully described in

the schedule to the plaint and the corpus depicted in the Preliminary

Plan.

26. In relation to the second question of law, the learned President’s Counsel

for the Defendant, in his written submissions, has referred to several

judgments of this Court throughout several years which have dealt with

issues regarding discrepancies in the extent of a land. However, these

case laws are distinguishable from the case at hand on both legal and

factual premises.

27. Therefore, taking the above into account, I affirm that the corpus has

sufficiently been identified. The learned District Judge has correctly

addressed all aspects in detail having regard to the evidence before the

Court. The two questions of law are answered in the affirmative.

11

28. Hence, I set aside the judgment of the Civil Appellate High Court of

Avissawella dated 23.01.2015 and uphold the judgment of the District

Court of Pugoda dated 26.03.2008.

Appeal is allowed

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

JUSTICE MAHINDA SAMAYAWARDHENA

I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

JUSTICE M. SAMPATH K.B. WIJERATNE

I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT