1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application under and in terms of Article 17 and 126 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Arangallage Samantha No 275/26, Arachchiwatta, Nedagamauwa, Kotugoda, Minuwangoda. Petitioner S.C. (F/R) Application No. 458/2012

1. The Officer-in-charge of the Police

Station Police Station Biyagama

2. A.S.P. Nishantha Soyza A.S.P.’s Office, Police Station Mirihana, Nugegoda.

3. The Headquarter Inspector of Police Police Station, Mirihana, Nugegoda.

4. Police Constable 40841 Kumudesh Police Station, Mirihana, Nugegoda.

5. Police Constable 40937 Samaraweera Police Station, Mirihana, Nugegoda.

6. The Inspector-General of Police Police Headquarters Colombo 01.

2

7. Hon. Attorney-General Attorney-General’s Department Colombo 12.

Respondents

Before: Buwaneka Aluwihare, PC, J.

Murdu N. B. Fernando, PC, J. &

E. A. G. R. Amarasekera, J.

Counsel: R. Navodayan for the Petitioner.

Amaranath Fernando for the 4th and 5th Respondents.

Chrisanga Fernando SC for the Attorney-General.

Argued On: 13. 12. 2019 Decided On: 28. 01. 2020

Aluwihare PC, J,

The Petitioner, a three-wheeler driver by profession, complained of the violation of his

fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 11, 12(1) and 13(1) by the Respondents

and leave to proceed was granted for the alleged infringement of the said Articles

against the 4th and 5th Respondents.

The version of the Petitioner

According to the Petitioner, on the 28th of June 2012, while the Petitioner was driving

his three-wheeler from Rajagiriya to Malwana, at around 8.30 am two persons who

were unknown to him, had blocked his path with their motorcycle and had brought his

three-wheeler to a halt. These two persons who were dressed in civilian clothing had

then forcibly taken the Petitioner to the Biyagama Police Station. After being presented

3

before the Officer-in-charge of the Biyagama Police Station, on his instructions, the

Petitioner had been kept in the police cell for about half an hour without any reasons

being given for his arrest.

Thereafter, the 4th and 5th Respondents who had come over to the Biyagama Police

Station from the Mirihana Police Station, had taken over the custody of the Petitioner.

He had been ordered to drive his three-wheeler to the Mirihana Police Station and

while he was driving, the 5th Respondent who was seated at the back of the three-

wheeler had beaten the Petitioner on the head. When they reached Rajagiriya the

Petitioner had stopped his three-wheeler. The Petitioner alleges that at this point the 5th

Respondent again assaulted the Petitioner on his head and on one ear and due to the

intensity of the attack, the Petitioner fainted. According to the Petitioner, after the

assault, the Respondents had taken the Petitioner to the Mirihana Police Station in his

three-wheeler.

At the Mirihana Police Station the Petitioner had been produced before the Assistant

Superintendent of Police, Nishantha Soyza, the 2nd Respondent, and on his instructions

the Petitioner had been detained in the police cell. In the early hours of the following

day, (29th June 2012) the Petitioner had been released from police custody after having

his statement recorded.

The Petitioner states that as he experienced severe pain he sought treatment at a private

hospital. As his condition, however, did not abate the Petitioner had sought treatment at

the District General Hospital, Gampaha on 5th July 2012, roughly a week after the

alleged assault, where he had been admitted and received treatment for 6 days. The

Petitioner had not produced any of the medical records relating to the treatment he is

said to have obtained from the private hospital.

When one considers the material adduced by the Petitioner before court, several

contradictions can be identified. The Petitioner has averred in the Petition that he was

assaulted by two police officers. On the contrary, the history given by the Petitioner as

recorded in the Medico-Legal Report (MLR) of 10th July 2012 (‘P7’) is that, “Assaulted

by four police officers of the Mirihana Police on 28th June 2012 at 9.30 am with

hands”.

4

Furthermore, the version of the events narrated in the Petition varies from the version

that emerges from the letter marked ‘P5’. ‘P5’ is a copy of the message sent by the

Deputy Inspector General of Police, Western Province (South), dated 13th July 2012,

directing HQI Mirihana to produce the two police officers against whom a complaint

had been made by the Petitioner to the said Deputy Inspector of Police. The complaint

referred to in ‘P5’ had been made regarding two police officers attached to the

Mirihana Police Station for having boarded the Petitioner’s three-wheeler, and

travelling in the three-wheeler the entire day up to around 12 midnight and leaving

without paying any fare after having got themselves dropped near the police sports

grounds at Mirihana. In addition, according to ‘P5’, the Petitioner is alleged to have

complained that he was assaulted and threatened by the said two police officers as well.

This is contradictory to the averments of the Petition where the Petitioner has asserted

that he was held in custody at the Mirihana Police Station and that he was released at

1.00 am on 29th June 2012 after having a statement recorded from him.

As referred to earlier, although the Petitioner claims that following the assault he

obtained treatment from a private hospital, no records of such treatment have been

submitted. The submitted medical records from the District General Hospital Gampaha

are from 5th July 2012 onwards. The only ‘medical report’ is the MLR of Dr.

Wijewickrama (‘P7’) who had recorded that the Petitioner had no external injuries. He

has noted in the MLR; “Patient was complaining of hearing loss on right side and he

was referred to a Neurologist for a special test (Auditory brain stem response). Patient

was advised to come back after the test to complete his medical report, but the patient

did not turn up”.

The other records produced are the Admission Form-District General Hospital,

Gampaha dated 5th July 2012, and Audiological Evaluation Sheet- Pure Tone

Audiometry (‘P6’). In the counter affidavit of the Petitioner at paragraph 7, reference is

made to an endorsement made on top of ‘P6’ (Audiological Evaluation Sheet) in Sinhala

“කන් ඇසීම අඩුයි” (“hard of hearing”) and it has been claimed that to be an

endorsement made by the physician. The body of the entire Evaluation Sheet is

5

perfected in English and this endorsement is found outside the area dedicated to record

findings in that sheet. Thus, to me it appears to be an endorsement made, merely to

enlighten the doctor of the patient’s history rather than a clinical finding by the doctor.

Consultant ENT and Head and Neck Surgeon, Dr. W. M. C. Narampanawa has referred

the Petitioner to a Consultant Neurologist to assess his hearing threshold as his PTA

indicated “R/S mixed hearing loss”. The Brain Stem Auditory Evoked Potential Report

dated 26th July 2012 obtained from the National Hospital (marked ‘P2’) states that “The

findings are suggestive of R/S peripheral lesion (cochlear or immediate retro cochlear)

(exclusion of conductive cause is assumed)”. The Audiological Evaluation Sheet

obtained two years later from the District General Hospital, Gampaha, on 08th October

2014 (marked ‘P8’) records a finding of “Profound sensory neural hearing loss in right

ear”. While these records point to hearing loss suffered by the Petitioner, neither the

MLR or the other medical records produced link the physical infirmity of the Petitioner

with the alleged assault by the 4th and 5th Respondents. The non-production of the

immediate medical records in order to exclude the possibility of the damage being

inflicted at any time during the margin between 29th June 2012 and 5th July 2012 is

another deficiency of the Petitioner’s case.

The violations alleged

Violation of Article 13(1):

Article 13(1) of the Constitution stipulates that “any person arrested shall be informed

of the reason for his arrest”. The Petitioner alleges that no reasons were given for his

arrest. According to the Petitioner he had been arrested by two officers from the

Biyagama Police station and produced before the OIC of the Biyagama Police station.

The Petitioner had not cited the two police officers who arrested him as Respondents.

According to his own admission the 4th and 5th Respondent had come to the Biyagama

police station and then taken him to the Mirihana police station. By that time the

Petitioner had been placed under arrest. As such the 4th and 5th Respondents who had

6

nothing to do with the arrest of the Petitioner cannot be held liable for unlawful arrest

of the Petitioner.

I am mindful of the fact that the failure to make a person who is alleged to have

violated a fundamental right, a Respondent in a petition for relief under Article 126 of

the Constitution is not a fatal defect, which now is settled law under the realm of the

fundamental rights jurisdiction (see Samanthilaka v Ernest Perera and Others [1990] 1

Sri LR 318). All what a Petitioner is required to satisfy is that a violation of a

fundamental right had been occasioned by executive or administrative action.

In the instant case the only material this court has to determine the violation of Article

13(1) is the assertion of the Petitioner that he was arrested without assigning any

reason. Although the Petitioner alleges that he was ‘forcibly taken’, he has not

elaborated on the nature of force used. According to the Petitioner it was the officers of

the Biyagama police station who had arrested the Petitioner. When this application was

supported the court had thought it fit not to grant leave to proceed against the 1st

Respondent who was the Officer-in-Charge of the Biyagama police station. As such I do

not see a reason to consider violation of Article 13(1) in the present application. On the

other hand, when one considers the infirmities of the Petitioner’s version of the events

that unfolded, the bare assertion by the Petitioner that “no reason was assigned to his

arrest” is not sufficient in this backdrop to hold that the Petitioner’s arrest was illegal.

The excerpt from the Information Book of the Mirihana Special Crimes Investigation

Unit (marked ‘4R1’) states that the Petitioner was stopped at the Dompe junction and

later asked to drive the three-wheeler to a house in Rajagiriya which was supposed to

be frequented by one Dinesh Darshika whom the Police officers were seeking to arrest

and had travelled in the Petitioner’s three-wheeler that day. There is no mention of the

Petitioner being held in the police cell at the Mirihana Police Station. According to the

excerpt, from the Rajagiriya house, the Petitioner had been taken to the Mirihana Police

Station where he had been produced before the Officer-In-Charge of the Mirihana

Police Station and the Nugegoda Senior Superintendent of Police, and directed to report

7

to the Police Station if he was called again. The Petitioner’s complaint of detention

without reasons for arrest therefore, does not tally with the version of the Police. Given

the contradictions in the Petitioner’s version of the events, the Information Book

excerpts appear to be more believable.

Violation of Article 11:

The Petitioner has complained of torture at the hands of the 4th and the 5th

Respondents. The Admission Form dated 05th July 2012 as well as the MLR of 10th July

2012 (marked ‘P7’) however, record that there were no external injuries to be seen on

the Petitioner. While external injuries are not an essential indicator of torture, given the

circumstances of the present case the only instance where the Petitioner alleges that he

was assaulted is when he was travelling in the three-wheeler in the company of the 4th

and the 5th Respondents. In addition, the Petitioner’s allegation that he was assaulted on

the head while he was driving the three-wheeler does not appear to be plausible as

such reckless behavior could have led to the Petitioner losing control of the vehicle he

was driving and caused an accident endangering the lives of the assailants themselves.

The Petitioner has also averred that he lost consciousness at Rajagiriya due to the assault

and he had further asserted that the three-wheeler was driven to Mirihana after he re-

gained consciousness. Here, the Petitioner is not clear as to whether he had driven the

three-wheeler or it was one of the Respondents who did so.

It does not appear to be a rational course of conduct on the part of the 4th and 5th

Respondents to have permitted the Petitioner to drive the vehicle for the distance from

Rajagiriya to Mirihana. It is doubtful as to whether any right-minded person would

allow a person to drive a vehicle immediately after such person had fainted and

regained consciousness.

In proceedings of this nature, the court has very limited avenues to test the veracity of

these assertions and necessarily have to depend on the affidavits and other documents

filed. In the circumstances, in arriving at a just and equitable decision in the realm of

8

the fundamental rights jurisdiction, the court necessarily has to apply the test of

probability to the factual matters placed before us.

In this regard I wish to cite with approval the opinion expressed by Wanasundera J. in

the case of Velmurugu v The Attorney General and Others 1981 1 SLR 406, where his

Lordship stated that the test applicable is a “preponderance of probability” adopted in

civil cases. It was stated that although the standard is not as high as that required in

criminal cases there can be different standards of probability within that standard and

the degree applicable would depend on the subject-matter. Further, Soza J. in Vivienne

Goonewardene v Hector Perera 1983 SLR 1 V 305 stated;

“The degree of probability required should be commensurate with the gravity of

the allegation sought to be proved. This court when called upon to determine

questions of infringement of fundamental rights will insist on a high degree of

probability as for instance a Court having to decide a question of fraud in a civil

suit would. The conscience of the court must be satisfied that there has been an

infringement.”

As alleged, the Petitioner may have been assaulted by the 4th and 5th Respondents, the

issue, however, is whether the Petitioner has placed sufficient material before this court

to the degree required for the court to come to a conclusion that the said Respondents

have infringed the Petitioners fundamental right guaranteed under Article 11 of the

Constitution.

It was well within the means of the Petitioner to have the records relating to the

treatment he obtained from the private medical facility produced. According to the

MLR the Petitioner had no external injuries and was requested to consult the Assistant

JMO after undergoing the recommended medical test, which the Petitioner had not

done. There is an endorsement in ‘P2’ (Brain Stem Auditory Evoked Potential Report)

that “the findings are suggestive of R/S peripheral lesion (cochlear or retro cochlear)”.

However, there is paucity of material for the court to come to a conclusion as to the

cause of the medical condition referred to or whether it is compatible with the history

given by the Petitioner. For the reasons given above, I hold that the Petitioner has failed

9

to satisfy the high degree of probability required to prove the infringement of the

absolute right of freedom from torture.

Considering the matters referred to, I am unable to say that the Petitioner has proved

the alleged violation to my satisfaction. The conduct and behavior of the Petitioner

leaves a serious doubt in my mind as to whether or not the incidents spoken of by him

happened in the manner narrated by him. In the circumstances aforesaid, I am of the

view that the alleged acts of torture by the 4th and 5th Respondents has not been made

out or cannot be imputed as a liability of the state as a matter of law.

For the reasons given above, I hold that the Petitioner has failed to satisfy the high

degree of probability required to prove the infringement of the absolute right of

freedom from torture.

As such, in the absence of proof to indicate that the Petitioner was not accorded the

equal protection of the law, I am of the opinion that the Petitioner’s right to equality

under Article 12(1) was not violated by the 4th and 5th Respondents.

In the course of the submissions the court was informed that the 4th and the 5th

Respondents were subjected to disciplinary action based on the complaint made by the

Petitioner. The findings by this court on the alleged infringement of fundamental rights

of the Petitioner should not have any bearing with regard to the disciplinary

proceedings against the said Respondents; for the reason that this court is of the view

that the disciplinary authority would be better equipped to inquire in to the allegation

fully and test the veracity of the Petitioner’s allegations and to come to an independent

finding of its own.

It must, however, be emphasized that the members of the Police force entrusted with

the task of ensuring a peaceful environment for the citizenry to live without fear of

crime or violence, should not themselves consider it their right to resort to violence at

the cost of the well-being of their detainees, in the achievement of those ends.

10

Application dismissed and in the circumstances of this case I order no costs.

Application dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT JUSTICE MURDU N. B. FERNANDO PC I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT JUSTICE E. A. G. R. AMARASEKERA

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT