IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

D.M.D. Ananda Jayaratne,

No. 209, Thalawathugoda Road,

Mirihana, Pitakotte.

Plaintiff

SC APPEAL NO: SC/APPEAL/40/2016

SC LA NO: SC/HCCA/LA/345/2014

HCCA MT LAVINIA NO: WP/HCCA/MT/07/2011 (F)

DC NUGEGODA NO: 076/08/SPL

Vs.

M.D.R.M. Perera,

No. 138/35, Thalahena,

Malabe.

Defendant

AND BETWEEN

M.D.R.M. Perera,

No. 138/35, Thalahena,

Malabe.

Defendant-Appellant

Vs.

2

SC/APPEAL/40/2016

D.M.D. Ananda Jayaratne,

No. 209, Thalawathugoda Road,

Mirihana, Pitakotte.

Plaintiff-Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

M.D.R.M. Perera,

No. 138/35, Thalahena,

Malabe.

Defendant-Appellant-Appellant

Vs.

D.M.D. Ananda Jayaratne,

No. 209, Thalawathugoda Road,

Mirihana, Pitakotte. (Deceased)

Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent

D.M.D. Dhanushka Buddhika Jayaratne,

House/Assessment No. 431/2,

Kattakaduwa Janapada Kotasa,

Grama Niladari Division of Wadugama,

(No. 71), Galgamuwa.

Substituted Plaintiff-Respondent-

Respondent

Before: E.A.G.R. Amarasekara, J.

Achala Wengappuli, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

3

SC/APPEAL/40/2016

Counsel: Harsha Soza, P.C., with Anuruddha Dharmaratne for the

Defendant-Appellant-Appellant.

Substituted Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent absent and

unrepresented.

Argued on: 03.06.2022

Written submissions:

Written Submissions by the Defendant-Appellant-Appellant

on 24.06.2022

Decided on: 06.04.2023

Samayawardhena, J.

The deed No. 2943 is a deed of transfer where the transferor is the plaintiff

and the transferee is the defendant. The plaintiff filed this action against

the defendant seeking a declaration that the defendant is holding the

property described in the deed in trust for the plaintiff. The plaintiff also

sought a declaration that the deed is a nullity on the ground of laesio

enormis vide paragraph 13 of the plaint. The defendant filed answer

seeking only dismissal of the plaintiffs action. After trial, the District

Court entered judgment for the plaintiff granting both reliefs. On appeal,

this was affirmed by the High Court. This appeal by the defendant is

against the judgment of the High Court. Although notices were served on

the plaintiff when he was alive and, after his death, on the substituted

plaintiff, they did not come before this Court to contest the defendants

appeal.

It is admitted that a partition case was filed in the District Court of Mount

Lavinia (Case No. 54/94/P) in respect of the larger land including the

subject matter of this action around the time of the institution of this case

in the District Court. The defendant in his post argument written

4

SC/APPEAL/40/2016

submissions states on the plaintiffs evidence and on a balance of

probability, it is clear that the said deed No. 2943 (P1) has been executed

before the said partition case was registered a lis pendens. The plaintiff is

said to be the 14th defendant in the partition action and the defendant is

not a party to that action. It is not clear what happened in the partition

case.

The plaintiffs evidence that this deed was executed only to be valid until

he paid money (Rs. 125,000) for the development of the land by the

defendant and that he did not want to part with the property is hard to

believe. The defendant says he was not involved in developing this land or

constructing a road across the land. The defendant says he withdrew the

purchase price stated on the deed (Rs. 200,000) from the bank on the date

the deed was executed (vide V6) and paid the same at the notarys office

to the brother of the plaintiff who accompanied the plaintiff. In the

attestation of the deed, the notary says that money was not paid before

him. In any event, failure to pay consideration does not make the deed

invalid although it might give rise to a different cause of action to recover

the money (Jayawardena v. Amarasekera (1912) 15 NLR 280, Nona

Kumara v. Abdul Cader (1946) 47 NLR 457, Pingamage v. Pingamage

[2005] 2 Sri LR 370).

In the Kaduwela Magistrates Court Case No. 21946 (vide V2 and V3) filed

regarding the same transaction, the plaintiff did not take up the position

that the deed is subject to a trust. In the Magistrates Court case the

plaintiff has promised to transfer the portion of land sold to the defendant

by V6 after entering the final decree in the partition case. In my view, the

plaintiff did not prove that the deed was subject to a trust.

As seen from the prayer to the plaint, the plaintiff filed this action claiming

on the one hand that the deed is valid but subject to a trust in his favour

and on the other hand that the deed is invalid on the ground of laesio

5

SC/APPEAL/40/2016

enormis. These are not pleaded as alternative reliefs. The District Court

granted both. These two reliefs cannot co-exist.

The plaintiff cannot succeed in this action. The plaintiffs action in the

District Court shall stand dismissed.

The questions of law on which leave was granted and the answers thereto

are as follows:

1. Have the learned judges of the High Court of Civil Appeal erred in

law in failing to appreciate that the plaint of the plaintiff as presently

constituted is not maintainable in law?

Yes.

2. Have the learned judges of the High Court of Civil Appeals erred in

law in holding that the defendant is holding the property in suit

subject to a constructive trust in favour of the plaintiff and at the

same time ordering a rescission of the sale of the said property to

the defendant by the plaintiff?

Yes.

3. In any event have the learned trial judge and the judges of the High

Court of Civil Appeals erred in considering that the evidence placed

before Court warrants a finding that the property in suit is held by

the defendant subject to a constructive trust in favour of the

plaintiff?

Yes.

4. Have the learned trial judge and the learned judges of the High

Court of Civil Appeals erred in law in failing to appreciate that on

the evidence before Court, there are no grounds to order a rescission

of the sale of the said property in suit to the defendant by the

plaintiff?

Yes.

6

SC/APPEAL/40/2016

I set aside the judgments of the District Court and the High Court and

allow the appeal. No costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

E.A.G.R. Amarasekara, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Achala Wengappuli, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court