==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 14

In the matter of an application to the

Supreme Court against the Judgment dated

11th May 2015 delivered by the Provincial

High Court of the Western Province

exercising Civil Appellate jurisdiction at

Avissawella in WP/HCCA/AV/08/2014/LA

(D.C. Avissawella Case No. D/6739)

Karadana Lekamlage Nilupa Sittari Jayaratne,

53/2, Colombo Road,

Avissawella.

PLAINTIFF

Vs

Waisadura Samantha Priyaruwan Jayaweera,

316/1, Hendala Road,

Hendala,

Wattala.

DEFENDANT

AND THEN

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

SC/ Appeal/ 86/ 2017

WP/ HCCA/ AVI/ 08/ 2014

D.C. Awissawella Case No. D/6739

Page 2 of 14

Waisadura Samantha Priyaruwan Jayaweera,

316/1, Hendala Road,

Hendala,

Wattala.

DEFENDANT-APPELLANT

Vs

Karadana Lekamlage Nilupa Sittari Jayaratne,

53/2, Colombo Road,

Avissawella.

PLAINTIFF - RESPONDENT

AND NOW

Waisadura Samantha Priyaruwan Jayaweera,

316/1, Hendala Road,

Hendala,

Wattala.

DEFENDANT-APPELLANT-APPELLANT

VS

Karadana Lekamlage Nilupa Sittari Jayaratne,

53/2, Colombo Road,

Page 3 of 14

Avissawella.

PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : Vijith Malalgoda, PC. J

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J

Achala Wengappuli, J

COUNSEL : Dr. Sunil Coorey with Diana Stephanie

Rodrigo for the Defendant-Appellant-

Appellant.

Kaushalya Nawaratne PC with Saumya

Wickremasinghe for the Plaintiff-

Respondent-Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 18.05.2023

DECIDED ON : 23.08.2024

Page 4 of 14

A.H. M. D. Nawaz J,

1. This case illustrates the acrimony that can arise in matrimonial disputes. A

proposed amendment by the husband, the Defendant-Appellant-Appellant

(the “Defendant”), to his answer—contested by the wife, the Plaintiff-

Respondent-Respondent (the “Plaintiff”)—has made its way up to this

Court.

2. In the process, the substantive merits of the divorce sought by both

spouses—albeit on different grounds in their Plaint and Answer—remain

unresolved in the District Court. The wife (the Plaintiff) seeks a divorce a

vinculo matrimonii on the ground of the husband’s (the Defendant’s)

constructive malicious desertion, while he seeks to end the marriage on the

grounds of her malicious desertion.

3. The Defendant’s proposed amendment to his Answer—his second

amendment—aimed to introduce an allegation of adultery against the

Plaintiff, bringing another man into the case as a co-respondent. This

amendment was contested by the Plaintiff-wife, and both courts a quo ruled

in her favour, rejecting the amendment. The Defendant now appeals to this

Court.

4. To better understand the trajectory of the case, the timelines are crucial. I

will outline them below in a tabular form.

Page 5 of 14

Chronology of Events

Step Date

Date of marriage 10th May 2010

Alleged date of desertion 10th November 2010

Plaint filed on 6th June 2011

Answer filed on 31st October 2011

First date of trial to be on 19th October 2012

Application for 1st amendment

5th October 2012

Objection (1st amendment) withdrawn

6th August 2013

1st Amended answer filed on

To substitute the word “compensation with alimony” - done after 1st day fixed for trial

28th October 2013

Trial fixed for the 2nd time to be on 7th March 2014

2nd Application for amendment 29th January 2014

Alleged adultery ongoing (even at the time of leaving the husband and the matrimonial home)

10th November 2010

Bride & Groom photoshoot with Co-Defendant

10th March 2012

Page 6 of 14

Actual Knowledge of adultery 20th November 2013

DC Order (6739/D) 2nd June 2014

HC judgment

WP/HCCA/AV/8/2014(LA)

11th May 2015

5. The key issue is whether the Defendant is entitled to amend his answer

after the first trial date has been fixed, as outlined in Section 80 of the Civil

Procedure Code (CPC). Dr. Sunil Coorey, the learned Counsel for the

Plaintiff conceded during the argument that Section 93(2) of the CPC

would govern this situation. For clarity, the relevant sections of the CPC

permitting amendments to pleadings are outlined below.

Sections 93 (1) and (2) of the Civil Procedure Code as amended by Act No.

9 of 1991 reads as follows;

Section 93 (1)

Upon application made to it before the day first fixed for trial of the action, in the

presence of, or after reasonable notice to all the parties to the action, the Court shall

have full power of amending in its discretion, all pleadings in the action, by way of

addition, or alteration, or of omission.

Section 93 (2)

On or after the day first fixed for the trial of the action and before final judgement,

no application for the amendment of any pleadings shall be allowed unless the

Court is satisfied, for reasons to be recorded by the Court, that grave and

Page 7 of 14

irremediable injustice will be caused if such amendment is not permitted, and on no

other ground, and that the party so applying has not been guilty of laches.

6. The crucial question of law for resolution looms large as follows:

Did the High Court err in law by holding that the rights of the Parties in an action

must be decided as at the date of institution of the action and that alternative causes

of action arising subsequently cannot be pleaded by amending the

answer, i.e., the Defendant is not entitled to introduce a new cause of action based

on adultery?

7. Having outlined the relevant provisions permitting amendments, it is clear

that the Defendant seeking to amend his answer must satisfy two key

thresholds: first, that grave and irremediable injustice would result if his amendment

based on adultery is not permitted, and second, that he has not been guilty of laches in

bringing forth the amendment.

8. It is therefore appropriate to examine how the District Court of Avissawella

and the Civil Appellate High Court of Avissawella addressed these

thresholds. The factual matrix having regard to timelines set out above

becomes relevant at this stage.

9. The Plaintiff instituted this action on the grounds of constructive malicious

desertion, seeking a sum of Rs. 2 million as permanent alimony from the

Defendant. In his original answer dated October 31, 2011, the Defendant

countered by seeking a divorce on the grounds of the Plaintiff’s malicious

desertion and claimed what he termed as compensation.

10. The case was first fixed for trial for October 19, 2012. After this date, the

Defendant sought to make a first amendment to his answer, which was

accepted. The first amended answer, filed on October 28, 2012, was

relatively uncontroversial as it merely substituted the word 'compensation'

Page 8 of 14

with 'alimony. A replication soon followed and the trial was rescheduled

for March 7, 2014-the 2nd date for trial.

The 2nd Amendment seeks to introduce Adultery

11. What triggered objections and appeals was the Defendant's attempt to

make a second amendment to the amended answer through a motion dated

January 29, 2014. In this amended answer, the Defendant introduced a new

cause of action, alleging the Plaintiff’s adultery with one Vithanage Don

Ranjith Sirisena, and sought to add him as a Co-Defendant in the divorce

action.

12. The Plaintiff objected to the said application and both parties were directed

to file written submissions. The learned District Judge by his order dated

2nd June 2014 rejected the Defendant’s application to further amend the

answer on the following grounds;

1. Pleadings cannot be amended more than once

2. The Defendant had not disclosed the source of information of the

claim of adultery he made in his 2nd application to amend the answer 3. The Defendant is guilty of laches and thereby does not surpass the

hurdle laid down in Section 92(2) of the Civil Procedure Code. 4. The claim against the co-respondent is barred by prescription. 5. The amendments sought would widen the scope of the action.

13. The main point of contention in the High Court was whether the District

Judge had erred in law by rejecting the application to amend the answer

after the date first fixed for trial on the basis that the case at hand did not

fall within the ambit of Section 93(2) of the CPC. After considering the

Page 9 of 14

arguments from both sides, the learned High Court Judges upheld the

District Judge's decision, drawing on various judicial precedents.

14. The most significant of these was Jayaratne v. Jayaratne and Another1

where Justice Gamini Amaratunga held that if a cause of action based on

adultery arises after the Petitioner has filed their answer, it constitutes a

separate and independent cause of action, and the rights of the parties must

be determined as of the date of the plaint.2

15. The learned High Court Judges concluded that the District Judge had not

erred in law. Under Section 93(2) of the CPC, an amendment to the

pleadings can only be permitted if the court is satisfied that grave and

irremediable injustice will occur if the amendment is denied, and that there

has not been laches. Consequently, the High Court affirmed the District

Court's decision, holding that the Petitioner was not entitled to amend the

answer to introduce a new cause of action based on adultery.

16. This Court by a divided decision granted leave to appeal in this case on the

questions of law set out in Paragraphs 17 (1) a, b, c of the Petition of June,

2015, but essentially the pith and substance of the questions is summarized

in Paragraph 6 of this judgment.

17. I will not concern myself with the slew of cases that have sought to define

the term “the day first fixed for trial” encapsulated in Section 93 of the

CPC as amended by Act No. 9 of 1991. The learned Counsel for the

Defendant accepted before this Court that “the day first fixed for trial” in

1 (2002) 3 Sri.LR 331. 2 See Silva v Fernando 15 N.L.R 499 (PC); Sherieff v Marikkar 27 N.L.R 349 at 350; Eminona v Mohideen 32 N.L.R

145 at 147; Lenorahamy v Abraham 43 N.L.R 68 at 69; Kader Mohideen & Co Ltd v Nagoor Gany 60 N.L.R 16 at

19; Sirisena v Doreen de Silva and Others (1998) 3 Sri.LR 197; HNB v Silva (1999) 3 Sri.LR 113; Jayaratne v Jayaratne

and Another (2002) 3 Sri.LR 331.

Page 10 of 14

this case was October 19, 2012 and the amendment in question was indeed

sought to be introduced after that date. This is on top of his concession that

the Defendant has to satisfy the stringent requirements of Section 93 (2). I

would only refer to some seminal cases that focussed on Section 93(2).

18. The application of Section 93 (2) was discussed by Ranaraja J. in

Gunasekera and Another Vs. Abdul Latiff3, where he stated thus:

"The amendments to pleadings on or after the first date of trial can now be allowed

only in very limited circumstances. It prohibits Court from allowing an application

for amendment at this stage unless (1) it is satisfied that grave and irremediable

injustice will be caused if the amendment is not permitted, and (2) the party

applying has not been guilty of laches. On no other ground can Court allow an

application for an amendment of pleadings. Furthermore, Court is obliged to record

reasons for concluding that the two conditions referred to have been satisfied."

19. In Paramalingam vs. Sirisena and Another4, Wigneswaran J. drew a

distinction between "before the day first fixed for trial” and “on or after the day first

fixed for the trial”.

“The Court’s discretion was unfettered with regard to amendments before the first

date of trial subject to an application having to be made to do it with notice to all

other parties. But its powers on or after the first date of trial were severely curtailed.

The present Section 93 has come through many vicissitudes”.

20. Moving forward, it is necessary to assess the merit of the proposed

amendment against the thresholds that the Defendant is required to meet.

Regarding the issue of whether multiple amendments can be made, as

3 (1995) 1 Sri LR 225 at 232. 4 (2001) 2 Sri LR 239.

Page 11 of 14

highlighted by the learned High Court Judges, I would bear in mind that

the first amendment in this case was not contested by the Plaintiff. While

the case of Gunasekera and Another v. Abdul Latiff (supra) established

that a court cannot permit more than one application for amendment, I take

the view that this is not an inflexible rule. The Court's observation in that

case was aimed at preventing unnecessary delays, but it should not be used

to bar amendments that would facilitate the administration of justice and

prevent multiplicity of litigation. Moreover, since the first amendment in

this case was minor and accepted without objection from the Plaintiff, it

would be overly rigid to refuse further amendments, provided that the

relevant legal tests are met.

Non-disclosure of the source of information

21. In the motion that was filed before the District Court justifying the

amendment on adultery, the Defendant brought to the notice of court that

he had become aware of an adulterous relationship between the Plaintiff

and the person sought to be made as a co-respondent. It was the implication

of the motion that even when the Plaintiff left the matrimonial home on

October 10, 2010, this adulterous relationship had existed. The Defendant

stated that he acquired this information in November 2013 and the

application for the 2nd amendment to the answer to bring in adultery was

made on January 29, 2014.

22. In my view, even if the source of information remains anonymous, this could

be verified at the trial and if the Defendant is disbelieved on his information,

the new cause of action based on adultery will fail in the District Court.

Therefore, there is no prejudice that faces the Plaintiff and Jayaratne v

Jayaratne is no bar to the introduction of adultery by way of an amendment

Page 12 of 14

in this case, as the facts in this case as alleged are distinguishable from

Jayaratne v Jayaratne. Whilst Jayaratne v Jayaratne dealt with adultery

after answer was filed in the case, it would appear that the allegation in this

case is that the adultery existed at the time the plaint was filed on June 6,

2011.

23. In view of the fact that the Plaintiff is not going to be prejudiced by the

amendment which will only shed light on the respective cases of the parties,

I take the view that grave and irremediable injustice would ensue if this

amendment is not allowed. If the allegation as averred by the Defendant is

established, that will entitle the Defendant to secure damages against the

co-respondent subject to the possibility that the assertions of the

Defendant could be tested by the Plaintiff for their testimonial

trustworthiness. As I said before, in the event that the allegation made by

the Defendant turns out to be untrustworthy, unfounded and baseless, the

cause of action based on adultery is bound to fail.

24. The learned High Court Judges make the point that the damages that

would be sought against the co-respondent would be prescribed if the

amendment was to be allowed. Section 15 of the Prescription Ordinance

takes away divorce actions from the ambit of prescription and therefore, no

such plea could be made to defeat a claim of damages against the co-

respondent.

25. What constitutes laches within the ambit of Section 93 (2) has been

extensively dealt with in the case law of this country and the doctrine of

laches is based on the maxim that "equity aids the vigilant and not those who

slumber on their rights." The outcome is that a legal right or claim will be

unenforceable or disallowed if a long delay in asserting the right or claim

has prejudiced the adverse party.

Page 13 of 14

26. The doctrine of 'laches' was extensively discussed in Gunasekera v. Abdul

Latiff (supra) to mean slackness, negligence or neglect to do something

which by law a man is obliged to do. The doctrine of laches in Courts of

equity is not an arbitrary or technical doctrine. In Biso menike v. Cyril De

Alwis and Others5 Sharvananda, J. (as he then was) quoted Ferris - Extra-

Ordinary Legal Remedies - para 176;

"Laches is such negligence or omission to assert a right and taken in conjunction with

the lapse of time, more or less great, and other circumstances causing prejudice to an

adverse party operate as a bar in a Court of equity.

27. In Paramalingam vs. Sirisena and Another (supra), Wigneswaran J. further observed that;

“Laches means negligence or unreasonable delay in asserting or enforcing a right. There are two equitable principles which come into play when a statute refers to a party being guilty of laches. The first doctrine is that delay defeats equities. The second is that equity aids the vigilant and not the indolent. Lord Camden said “Nothing can call forth this Court into activity but conscience, good faith and reasonable diligence”.

28. Having regard to the promptitude with which the application for

amendment has been made as soon as information was acquired as to the

alleged adultery, I do not regard laches to be raised as an impediment to the

adduction of the new cause of action and the addition of the alleged co-

respondent.

29. On an overall consideration of the facts and law surrounding this case, I

take the view that the amendment sought to be made must be allowed along

with the addition of the alleged co-respondent to the case. Accordingly, I

5 (1982) 1 Sri LR 368.

Page 14 of 14

set aside the order of the District Court dated June 2, 2014 and the judgment

of the High Court dated May 11, 2015.

30. I direct that the learned District Judge allows the amendment sought to be

made to the answer based on adultery and the consequent addition of a co-

respondent. The learned District Judge is directed to give priority to this

case as the interlocutory order made in the District Court has made a long

and tortuous journey to this Court and the case requires expeditious

disposal. Subject to these observations, we allow the appeal of the

Defendant and answer the question of law in favour of the Defendant.

Judge of the Supreme Court

V. K. Malalgoda, PC. J

I agree, Judge of the Supreme Court

Achala Wengappuli, J

I agree, Judge of the Supreme Court