==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 13

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal from the

judgment of the High Court of the

Western Province Holden in

Colombo under and in terms of

inter alia Section 31DD of the

Industrial Disputes Act as

amended.

SC Appeal No: 205/2017 R. A. Gunatilaka,

No. 59, Galpotta road,

Nawala.

SC/HC/LA No: 59/2015 APPLICANT

Vs.

HC Appeal No. Hapugastenna Plantations PLC,

HC/ALT/46/2014 No. 186,

Vauxhall Street,

LT Colombo Case No: Colombo 2.

LT/8/540/2011 RESPONDENT

AND

Hapugastenna Plantations PLC,

P.O. Box 2,

Nambapana,

Ingiriya.

RESPONDENT-APPELLANT

Vs.

Page 2 of 13

R. A. Gunatilaka,

No. 59, Galpotta road,

Nawala.

APPLICANT-RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

Hapugastenna Plantations PLC,

P.O. Box 2,

Nambapana,

Ingiriya.

RESPONDENT-APPELLANT-

APPELLANT

Vs.

R. A. Gunatilaka,

No. 59, Galpotta road,

Nawala.

APPLICANT-RESPONDENT-

RESPONDENT

Before : Janak De Silva, J.

: Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

: M. Sampath K. B. Wijeratne, J.

Counsel : Faisz Musthapha, P.C. with Pulasthi Rupasinghe,

Zeneta Ragel and Ms. Nayanthi Wanninayake

instructed by Mrs. Tharmarajah Tharmaja for the

Respondent-Appellant-Appellant.

Page 3 of 13

: Razik Zarook, P.C. with Rohana Deshapriya and

Chanakya Liyanage instructed by Ms. Lakni

Silva for the Applicant-Respondent-Respondent.

Argued on : 08-07-2025

Written Submissions : 15-11-2018 (By the Applicant-Respondent-

Respondent)

: 28-07-2025 (By the Respondent-Appellant-

Appellant)

Decided on : 16-10-2025

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

This is an appeal preferred by the respondent-appellant-appellant (hereinafter

referred to as the appellant) on the basis of being aggrieved of the judgment

pronounced on 01-10-2015 by the Provincial High Court of the Western

Province Holden in Colombo in respect of the appeals bearing No.

HC/ALT/46/2014 and HC/ALT/48/2014.

Both these appeals preferred before the High Court had emanated from the

order pronounced by the learned President of the Labour Tribunal of Colombo

on 30-04-2014.

In HC/ALT/46/2014, the appellant, being the respondent named before the

Labour Tribunal, has preferred an appeal against the order where the Labour

Tribunal declared that the services of the applicant before the Labour Tribunal

have been constructively terminated by the appellant and therefore, allowing

him compensation.

In HC/ALT/48/2014, the applicant-respondent-respondent of the appeal

before this Court (hereinafter referred to as the respondent) has preferred an

appeal against the same order on the basis that he is not satisfied with the

sum granted as compensation in his favour by the Labour Tribunal.

Page 4 of 13

From the impugned judgment, the learned Judge of the High Court has

decided to dismiss both the applications for the reasons stated in the

judgment.

It is against the dismissal of the appeal preferred by the appellant in Case No.

HC/ALT/46/2014, this appeal has been preferred.

When this matter was considered before this Court for the granting of leave

to appeal on 23-10-2017, this Court granted leave on the questions of law set

out in paragraph 8 (a) to (f) of the petition dated 07-11-2015. The appellant

was also allowed to add two more questions for the consideration of the Court.

The respondent, who was the applicant before the Labour Tribunal, was also

allowed to formulate one question of law.

The said questions of law allowed read as follows.

1. Did the learned High Court Judge err in law by failing to come to the

finding that the order of the learned President of the Labour Tribunal

was not just and equitable?

2. Did the learned High Court Judge err in law by failing to consider

and/or correctly evaluate the evidence placed before the Court?

3. Did the learned High Court Judge err in law by failing to take into

account relevant circumstances and misdirected himself by taking into

account irrelevant circumstances?

4. Did the learned High Court Judge err in law by coming to the finding

that the petitioner had constructively terminated the respondent?

5. Did the learned High Court Judge err in law by failing to take into

account that the respondent has accepted that he was retired from

service and had instituted action in the Labour Tribunal as an

afterthought?

6. Did the learned High Court Judge err in law by failing to come to the

finding that the petitioner had retired from service upon attaining the

requisite age of retirement?

Page 5 of 13

7. In any event, the Labour Tribunal possessed of jurisdiction in as much

as the evidence disclosed the retirement situation and not one of

termination?

8. Is the quantum of compensation excessive and not computed according

to law?

9. Does the respondent have a right to justifiable expectation that his

employment should be continued in the circumstances of this case

beyond 60?

At the hearing of this appeal, this Court heard the submissions of the learned

President’s Counsel who represented the appellant and also that of the

learned President’s Counsel who represented the respondent. This Court also

had the privilege of considering the written submissions tendered to the Court

by the parties.

This is a case where the respondent has filed an application before the Labour

Tribunal of Colombo on 08-03-2011 seeking redress. In the application, he

has stated that after joining the plantation sector as a Trainee Planter under

the Sri Lanka State Plantations Corporation, he was employed by the said

corporation as an Assistant Superintendent with effect from 06-06-1978.

After serving the plantation sector over the years, his final assignment has

been under the Hapugastenna Plantations PLC and Udupussellawa

Plantations PLC, which were subsidiaries of James Finlays Group of

Companies as the General Manager (Administration).

He has stated in his application before the Labour Tribunal that whilst

working as the General Manager (Administration), the appellant, who was his

employer sent him on retirement with effect from 15-10-2010 without prior

notice on his completion of 60 years of age.

Claiming that there are several other employees who are above 60 years of age

and still working at the appellant company, he too had a reasonable

expectation that he would also be retained after the completion of 60 years,

he has taken up the position that retiring him on completion of 60 years is

Page 6 of 13

arbitrary, unjust, unreasonable, mala fide, and against the policy of the

appellant company who is an equal opportunity employer.

On the above-mentioned basis, he has prayed before the Labour Tribunal for

the following reliefs.

a) Declare that retiring the applicant on completion of 60 years is unjust

and unreasonable,

b) Reinstate the applicant with back wages,

c) Grant costs and,

d) Such other and further reliefs as the tribunal seems fit.

Answering the above application before the Labour Tribunal, the appellant

has taken up the position that the Labour Tribunal has no jurisdiction to go

into the matter since there is no proper application filed in terms of section

31B (1) of the Industrial Disputes Act. The appellant has also taken up a

preliminary objection on the basis that the respondent, who was the applicant

before the Labour Tribunal, duly retired from service, and therefore, cannot

maintain the application before the Labour Tribunal.

In relation to the above objections as to the maintainability of the application

before the Labour Tribunal, an order has been pronounced on 05-08-2011

overruling the said objections. It has been determined that the claim of the

applicant is on the basis that, retiring him at the completion of 60 years of

age, the appellant has terminated his services, and therefore, that is a matter

that needs to be looked into.

Accordingly, after the completion of the inquiry, the learned President of the

Labour Tribunal pronouncing his order on 30-04-2014 has considered the

policy of the appellant company to retain some of the employees beyond their

retirement age, and has determined that the respondent also had a legitimate

expectation of him being retained as such. It has been determined that

retiring the respondent at his completion of 60 years of age would therefore

amount to constructively terminating his services without a good and

sufficient reason.

Page 7 of 13

Accordingly, it has been decided to grant relief to the respondent by awarding

him compensation.

The learned President of the Labour Tribunal has decided to grant

compensation to the respondent based on his last drawn salary for a period

of 12 months in a sum of Rs. 1,584,000/-.

The matter before this Court now is to determine whether the respondent,

being the applicant before the Labour Tribunal, had a right to go before the

Tribunal in terms of section 31B (1) and if so, whether the decision of the

learned President of the Labour Tribunal to conclude that the appellant has

constructively terminated his services and to order compensation can be

justified.

In the impugned judgment, the learned Judge of the High Court has

determined that the learned President was correct in overruling the

preliminary objections on the basis that this was a matter which needed to be

looked into.

It has been determined that it was the Labour Tribunal who was in a much

better position to inquire into factual matters and reach a just and equitable

finding, and an appellate forum will not disturb the findings unless it carries

serious discrepancies.

It has been held that although the position of the appellant was that the

company policy is to retire its employees after reaching the mandatory

retirement age of 60 years, when considering executive grade officers of the

company, the said policy has rarely been implemented, and hence, the

respondent had a legitimate expectation of being employed beyond 60 years

of age. The High Court has justified the learned President’s determination that

the appellant has failed to inform the respondent that he would be retired,

giving him 12 months’ notice in that regard. It has been determined further

that the Labour Tribunal was correct in granting relief to the respondent on

the basis of a just and equitable remedy and there is no basis for the High

Court to interfere with the order.

Page 8 of 13

At the same time, in determining the respondent’s appeal, it has been held

that the amount of compensation granted was sufficient.

Accordingly, both the appeals have been dismissed by the learned Judge of

the High Court.

Section 31B (1) of the Industrial Disputes Act has provided for the manner in

which a workman can file an application before the Labour Tribunal on the

grounds stated therein.

The said section reads as follows:

31B. (1) A workman or a trade union on behalf of a workman who

is a member of that union, may make an application in writing to

labour tribunal for relief or redress in respect of any of the

following matters:-(See section 7 of Act No. 32 of 1990 relating to

pending actions (set out in Annexure to this Chapter). See also Act

No. 19 of 1990 in this connection.)

(a) the termination of his services by his employer;

(b) the question whether any gratuity or other benefits are

due to him from his employer on termination of his

services and the amount of such gratuity and the nature

and extent of such benefits, where such workman has been

employed in any industry employing less than fifteen

workmen on any date during the period of twelve months

preceding the termination of the services of the workman

who makes the application or in respect of whom the

application is made to the tribunal;

(c) the question whether the forfeiture of a gratuity in terms

of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1983 has been correctly

made in terms of that Act,

(d) such other matters relating to the terms of employment,

or the conditions of labour, of a workman as may be

prescribed.

Page 9 of 13

Although the respondent has failed to specifically aver under what provision

of the said section he is complaining to the Labour Tribunal, it is clear that if

at all, it should be in terms of section 31B (1) (a) as the complaint does not

relate to a question about the payment of gratuity, terms of employment or

conditions of labour.

Since the appellant has raised a preliminary objection as to the

maintainability of the application before the Labour Tribunal and a

determination has been made overruling it, where the learned Judge of the

High Court has also considered it in his judgment, I find it relevant to consider

whether there was any justification in the said preliminary objection raised

and the order pronounced in that regard, before proceeding with other facts

of the matter.

There cannot be any doubt that the respondent had retired from the appellant

company after reaching the mandatory age of retirement upon reaching the

age of 60 years on 15-10-2010.

Although the respondent has claimed that he was not informed of his

imminent retirement and he had a legitimate expectation of being re-employed

beyond the age of 60 years, the letter marked R-06, which was a letter written

on 03-08-2010 by the respondent to the Chairman of Finlays Tea Estates

Lanka Pvt Ltd, and the reply he got in that regard on 04-08-2010 (the

document marked R-07) suggest otherwise. From the reply letter, he has been

informed that only the employees who are necessary to be retained beyond 60

years of age in view of the positions they occupy would be retained. He has

been informed that upon his retirement, the company will not maintain a

position of the General Manager (Administration), and therefore, his services

will not be necessary and that he would not be retained. He has also been

informed of him being given two extensions beyond 58 years of age previously.

Accordingly, the respondent has retired on the due date, and after his

retirement, he has obtained his gratuity and other entitled payments (the

documents marked R-08 and R-09).

Page 10 of 13

I find that it was more than 4 months thereafter that the respondent had

initiated the Labour Tribunal proceedings.

This goes on to show that there was no basis for the respondent to claim that

he had a legitimate expectation of his services being extended beyond his

mandatory retirement age. It is clear that he knew very well that he would

have to retire after reaching the age of retirement.

The judgment pronounced on 07-09-2007 in SC Appeal No. 97/2006 was a

judgment based on exactly the same facts. The applicant in that case went

before the Labour Tribunal on the same basis and the Labour Tribunal held

that his services were unjustly terminated and thereby ordered compensation.

After having considered the relevant facts and the law, Andrew Somawansa,

J. stated;

“The evidence led at the inquiry as well as the subsequent conduct of the

respondent clearly demonstrates that the respondent was retired from

his service. Thus, he ceased to be an employee of the petitioner by virtue

of his retirement and not because of termination of service by his

employer the petitioner. In the circumstances, the respondent had no

legal right to invoke the jurisdiction of the Labour Tribunal as he had

failed to satisfy the requirements as set out in section 31B (1) (a) of the

Industrial Disputes Act and also in terms of the said section the Labour

Tribunal had no jurisdiction to entertain the respondent’s application.

Thus, it appears that the learned President of the Labour Tribunal had

erred in coming to a conclusion that there was termination when in fact

the evidence conclusively shows that it was retirement and not

termination. The learned High Court Judge also affirmed the order of the

Labour Tribunal without considering this aspect of the matter. As such

the order of the learned President of the Labour Tribunal as well as the

judgment of the learned High Court Judge are perverse and cannot be

permitted to stand.”

It is therefore manifestly clear that from the very outset of this action, the

respondent has had no basis to maintain the application before the Labour

Page 11 of 13

Tribunal although the learned President of the Labour Tribunal held

otherwise, and the learned Judge of the High Court exercising his appellate

jurisdiction also justified the order in dismissing the appeal.

It is settled law that an appellate Court will not interfere with a decision of a

Labour Tribunal unless the said determination is perverse.

This aspect was well considered in the case of Jayasuriya Vs. State

Plantations Corporations (1995) 2 SLR 379, which reads as follows.

(2) “In the context of the principle that the Court of Appeal will not interfere

with a decision of a Labour Tribunal unless it is "perverse" it means no

more that the Court may intervene if it is of the view that, having regard

to the weight of evidence in relation to the matters in issue, the Tribunal

has turned away arbitrarily or capriciously from what is true and right

and fair in dealing even-handedly with the rights and interests of the

workman, employer and, in certain circumstances, the public. The

Tribunal must make an order in equity and good conscience, acting

judicially, based on legal evidence rather than on beliefs that are fanciful

or irrationally imagined notions or whims. Due account must be taken of

the evidence in relation to the issues in the matter before the Tribunal.

Otherwise, the order of the Tribunal must be set aside as being perverse.

(3) The Industrial Disputes Act No. 43 of 1950 S. 31D states that the order

of a Labour Tribunal shall be final and shall not be called in question in

any Court except on a question of law. While appellate Courts will not

intervene with pure findings of fact, they will review the findings treating

them as a question of law: if it appears that the Tribunal has made a

finding wholly unsupported by evidence, or which is inconsistent with

the evidence and contradictory of it; or where the Tribunal has failed to

consider material and relevant evidence; or where it has failed to decide

a material question or misconstrued the question at issue and had

directed its attention to the wrong matters; or where there was an

erroneous misconception amounting to a misdirection; or where it failed

to consider material documents or misconstrued them or where the

Page 12 of 13

Tribunal has failed to consider the version of one party or his evidence;

or erroneously supposed there was no evidence. ”

It is clear to me that this was a matter where the learned President of the

Labour Tribunal could have determined it based on the said preliminary

objection alone. It is my considered view that the learned President of the

Labour Tribunal was fundamentally flawed in his determination as to the said

objection and the learned Judge of the High Court was also wrong in justifying

the order of the Labour Tribunal.

Be that as it may, the evidence placed before the Labour Tribunal clearly

establishes the fact that there could have been no legitimate expectation by

the respondent as for him being re-employed after the retirement. The

evidence clearly establishes that the appellant has retained the services of

employees whose services are essential to be retained beyond the retirement

age. However, it has been only done after the retirement of such employees by

re-employing them on contract basis and not otherwise.

Since it has been clearly informed to the respondent that his substantive

position of General Manager (Administration) would not be retained after his

retirement, there was no necessity for the appellant to keep him in service.

The documents that have been submitted to the Labour Tribunal also show

that the respondent had been preparing for his impending retirement knowing

very well that he would be retired on the due date.

The letter marked R-16 shows that he has requested his employer, namely

the appellant, to allow him to purchase a vehicle belonging to the company

on a concessionary basis, which has been allowed by the company having

considered his long-standing service to the company and the industry. He has

been allowed to purchase the vehicle below the price submitted by other

prospective buyers when the said vehicle was offered for sale.

I am of the view that there was no basis whatsoever before the Labour

Tribunal for the learned President of the Labour Tribunal to come to a finding

that the services of the petitioner have been constructively terminated by the

appellant.

Page 13 of 13

For the reasons as considered above, I answer the questions of law No. 1 to 6

in the affirmative. The question of law No. 7 is also answered in the

affirmative. Answering the question of law No. 8 would not arise in view of the

answers to the above questions of law.

In answering the question of law No. 9, I hold that the respondent had no

right to justifiably expect that his employment should be continued beyond

the retirement age of 60 years.

Accordingly, I allow the appeal and set aside the judgment dated 01-10-2015

pronounced by the learned Judge of the Provincial High Court of the Western

Province Holden in Colombo while exercising its appellate jurisdiction.

Consequently, I set aside the order dated 30-04-2014 pronounced by the

learned President of the Labour Tribunal of Colombo as both the said

appellate judgment and the order cannot be allowed to stand.

There will be no costs of the appeal.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Janak De Silva, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

M. Sampath K. B. Wijeratne, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court