IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Lokumanage Sumitra Perera,

Yamuna, Veedagama,

Bandaragama.

Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant in

SC/APPEAL/71/2023

Suriarachchige Rupawathi,

Suriarachchige Kamalawathie,

Suriarachchige Ariyasena,

All of Veedagama, Bandaragama.

5th, 6th and 7th Defendant-

Respondent-Appellants in

SC/APPEAL/72/2023

SC/APPEAL/71/2023 Vs.

SC/APPEAL/72/2023

WP/HCCA/KAL/LA/09/2020

DC HORANA 6490/P

1. Dissanayakage Dona Leelawathie,

2. Dissanayakage Dona

Wimalawathie,

3. Wijemanna Mohottige Kanthi,

4. Suriarachchige Sumanadasa,

8A. Don Lalith Chandana

Dissanayake,

All of Veedagama, Bandaragama.

2

SC/APPEAL/71 & 72 of 2023

Defendant-Respondent-

Respondents

9A. Kankanige Somaratne,

74, Samantha,

Veedagama,

Bandaragama.

Defendant-Petitioner-Respondent

10. K.S. Perera,

11. K. Somasiri,

Both Samantha,

Veedagama, Bandaragama.

12. A. Somawathie,

Veedagama, Bandaragama.

Defendant-Respondent-

Respondent

Before: Hon. Justice P. Padman Surasena

Hon. Justice Kumudini Wickremasinghe

Hon. Justice Mahinda Samayawardhena

Counsel: G. Samaranayake for the Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant in

SC/APPEAL/71/2023.

Shyamal Collure with Prabhath Amarasinghe for the 5th to

7th Defendant-Respondent-Appellants in

SC/APPEAL/72/2023.

Yuwin Matugama with Oshadi Fernando for the 9A, 10th

and 11th Defendant-Petitioner-Respondents.

Argued on: 24.06.2024

Decided on: 09.10.2024

3

SC/APPEAL/71 & 72 of 2023

Samayawardhena, J.

This is a partition action filed by the plaintiff in the District Court of

Horana on 04.09.1997. After the trial, the judgment was delivered by the

District Court on 07.03.2007. Being aggrieved, four parties preferred

appeals to the High Court of Civil Appeal of Kalutara, which delivered

four judgments on 17.11.2011. On appeal, this Court, by judgment dated

11.09.2015, set aside the judgments of the High Court and directed the

High Court to hear the appeals afresh on the basis that the said

judgments had been delivered without taking steps to substitute the 9th

defendant who had passed away while the appeals were pending in the

High Court. Thereafter, the 9(a) defendant was substituted in place of the

deceased 9th defendant.

However, when the case record was sent to the High Court on the second

occasion, the High Court, in my view, adopted a more convenient

approach. The new Bench of the High Court, by judgment dated

02.04.2018, summarily set aside the judgment of the District Court by

stating it is our view that the judgment dated 07.03.2007 is a judgment,

which does not fall within section 187 of the Civil Procedure. Therefore, we

set aside the judgment and send this case back to the District Court for the

present District Judge to write the judgment on the same pedigree, but if

he so wishes he can let the parties to adduce more evidence and the

learned District Judge is further directed to hear the parties in terms of

section 184 of the Civil Procedure Code.

Before reaching this conclusion, the High Court, by two sentences

referred to two contentions made by the appellants counsel against the

District Court judgment. However, it did not clarify whether it accepted

these two contentions or whether they were sustainable in law. The High

Court then stated that the District Judge had failed to provide reasons

for the conclusion.

4

SC/APPEAL/71 & 72 of 2023

Judicial decisions must be clear and specific, without leaving room for

varying interpretations. Clarity and specificity in judicial decisions are

essential to maintain the integrity of the law, foster public confidence in

the judiciary, promote legal certainty, and uphold the rule of law. The

above order of the High Court, in my view, is vague. The District Judge

has been directed to write the judgment on the same pedigree perhaps

because, according to the proceedings, the parties agreed to a composite

pedigree at the trial. When the direction is to write the judgment based

on the same pedigree accepted by Court, it precludes the parties from

adopting new positions which deviate from that pedigree.

Thereafter, the District Judge was further directed to hear the parties in

terms of section 184 of the Civil Procedure Code. I fail to understand how

the parties can be heard under section 184 of the Civil Procedure Code,

as this section pertains solely to the pronouncement of judgment. There

is no provision for a hearing under this section. Section 184(1) reads as

follows: The court, upon the evidence which has been duly taken or upon

the facts admitted in the pleadings or otherwise, and after the parties have

been heard either in person or by their respective counsel or registered

attorneys (or recognized agents), shall, after consultation with the

assessors (if any), pronounce judgment in open court, either at once or on

some future day, of which notice shall be given to the parties or their

registered attorneys at the termination of the trial. The term after the

parties have been heard in this section does not create a fresh right of

hearing.

According to the High Court, the question was not whether the parties

were heard, but rather that the District Judge did not give reasons for

his findings in the judgment in violation of section 187 of the Civil

Procedure Code.

5

SC/APPEAL/71 & 72 of 2023

The procedure for conducting trials including how parties should be

heard are set out in the preceding sections of the Civil Procedure Code.

In any event, procedure for conducting trials in partition cases are set

out in the Partition Law No. 21 of 1977, not in the Civil Procedure Code.

In terms of section 79 of the Partition Law, the Civil Procedure Code is

applicable only where there is casus omissus.

When the case record was returned to the District Court, the 9(a)

defendant moved to file a statement of claim, which was rejected by the

District Court by order dated 07.02.2020 on the basis that the High Court

had not granted permission to file pleadings. On appeal, the High Court

by order dated 10.02.2021 directed the District Court to allow the 9(a)

defendant to file a statement of claim and proceed with the case stating

inter alia that At a trial or inquiry in a partition action whether a party

intends to call evidence or not is up to him and if such party decides to call

evidence, then there should be a statement of claim filed by that party. It

is against this order dated 10.02.2021 that the plaintiff and the 5th-7th

defendants have now appealed to this Court.

If the present District Judge to write the judgment on the same pedigree,

the 9(a) defendant cannot be allowed to take up new positions that

deviate from the accepted pedigree.

There is no dispute that the 9th defendant was made a party to the case

in the plaint itself and served with summons. In paragraph 24 of the

plaint, the plaintiff clearly stated that the 9th defendant does not have soil

rights but was made a party as she is living on the land. The 9th defendant

did not contest this fact by filing a statement of claim, nor did she

participate in the trial. In other words, the 9th defendant does not come

under the pedigree accepted by Court.

6

SC/APPEAL/71 & 72 of 2023

According to the Preliminary Plan and the Report marked at the trial, the

9th defendant has claimed certain buildings and plantations on the land.

Except for a few trees (which were claimed both by the plaintiff and the

9th defendant), other parties have not contested the claim of the 9th

defendant for improvements. Issues have been raised on improvements

and the District Judge has answered them but apparently without

reasons. I cannot agree with the finding of the High Court that if the 9(a)

defendant decides to call evidence, then there should be a statement of

claim filed by the 9(a) defendant. The 9(a) defendant cannot take the

decision whether or not to call witnesses, but if he (the District Judge) so

wishes he can let the parties to adduce more evidence.

The 9(a) defendant who was substituted in place of the deceased 9th

defendant, cannot claim rights superior to those the 9th defendant would

have had if she were alive. A substituted party cannot take up a new

position contrary to or inconsistent with that of the original party, as he

merely steps into the shoes of the original party. If the 9th defendant did

not file a statement of claim or participate in the trial, the legal

consequences that would follow cannot be cured by the substituted 9(a)

defendant presenting himself as a new party, unless the Court decides

otherwise in terms of the law. No such decision has been made by the

Court.

For completeness, let me also state that a party to a partition action (not

a new party) can file a statement of objection to the proposed scheme of

partition before the scheme inquiry (sections 35 and 36 of the Partition

Law). The Court cannot deny filing objections on the basis that he has

defaulted in filing a statement of claim and participating in the trial. In

Anthony Appu v. Margret Fernando and Others [1999] 3 Sri LR 85,

Weerasuriya J. stated that The Partition Law makes no prohibition

against a party who had failed to participate at the trial in terms of section

7

SC/APPEAL/71 & 72 of 2023

25(2) to file objections to the proposed scheme of partition. In the absence

of a specific prohibition it is not possible to presume any such prohibition.

However, in the guise of filing objections to the proposed scheme of

partition, such a party cannot convert the scheme inquiry into another

trial to decide issues on the pedigree. As Soertsz A.C.J. stated in

Appuhamy v. Weeratunge (1945) 46 NLR 461 at 462, there must be an

end to a case, particularly to a partition case which is generally of a

protracted nature and which prevents parties to it from dealing with the

land as freely as they would wish to in the interval. In Hamidu v.

Gunasekera (1922) 24 NLR 143 at 145 it was held that A person entitled

merely to an interest in a building on a land which has become the subject

of a partition action can only obtain compensation for the interest in the

building, and cannot get any share of the land in the partition. In the

instant action, although the 9th defendant does not have soil rights, her

claims for improvements need to be safeguarded.

Section 35 of the Partition Law states: After the surveyor makes a return

to the commission, the court shall call the case in open court and shall fix

a date for the consideration of the scheme of partition proposed by the

surveyor. The date so fixed shall be a date not earlier than thirty days after

the receipt of such return by the court. The thirty-day period shall be

counted not from the date on which the return is received by the Registry

but from the date on which it is received in open Court on the returnable

date fixed for that purpose by Court (Wickremaratne v. Samarawickrema

[1995] 2 Sri LR 212). According to section 36(1)(a) On the date fixed

under section 35, or on any later date which the Court may fix for the

purpose, the Court may, after summary inquiry confirm with or without

modification the scheme of partition proposed by the surveyor and enter

final decree of partition accordingly.

8

SC/APPEAL/71 & 72 of 2023

The first question of law on which leave to appeal has been granted is as

follows:

Can a party to a partition action who has been brought into

substitute a deceased original defendant, who has failed and

neglected to file a statement of claim or even a proxy despite

notice/summons being served on such defendant, be permitted to

file fresh pleadings nearly 24 years after the institution of the action

when the said action has reached the stage envisaged in section 184

of the Civil Procedure Code?

I answer that question in the negative. There is no necessity to answer

the other questions of law raised by the appellants.

I set aside the Judgment of the High Court dated 10.02.2021 and affirm

the order of the District Court dated 07.02.2020 and allow the two

appeals but without costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

P. Padman Surasena, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Kumudini Wickremesinghe, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court