SC Appeal 185/2014

1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter an application for

Special Leave to Appeal in terms

of Article 128(2) of the Constitution

Constitution of Sri Lanka.

Subramaniam Asokan 15, 4th Cross Street, Colombo 11 But residing at No. 44, 36th Lane, Colombo 06. Appellant SC Appeal 185/14 Court of Appeal No. CA 53 A&B/99/F DC Colombo No. 16029/L Vs. Alawala Dewage Premalal Siriwardana of No. 496/5, Ihala-Karagahamune Kaduwela. Respondent Before : Hon. Jayantha Jayasuriya, PC, CJ Hon. L.T.B. Dehideniya, J Hon. S. Thurairaja, PC, J.

Counsel : Hijas Hisbulla for the Petitioner. H. Withanachchi for the Respondent. Argued on : 31.10.2019 Decided on : 04.03.2020

SC Appeal 185/2014

2

Jayantha Jayasuriya, PC, CJ

The Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent (hereinafter called the Plaintiff) sued the

Defendant-Respondent-Appellant (hereinafter called the Defendent) in the District

Court of Colombo for declaration of title to the premises, which is the subject matter

of the action and for the ejectment of the Defendent from the said premises. The

property in question as described in the schedule is a land of one perch and thirty

eight decimal in extent situated at 4th Cross Street of Pettah and the building bearing

assessment number 15 situated thereon. The Defendent resisted the action and

preferred a claim in reconvention.

Both parties admitted that the Plaintiff’s father who was the owner of the

premises in question rented out the said premises to the father of the Defendent, E

Subramaniyam in 1954. Thereafter the Defendent came in to occupy the said

premises, after the demise of his father.

The Plaintiff claimed, that his father died intestate in 1985, leaving his mother

and three siblings along with him, as heirs. Thereafter in 1988, three siblings and the

mother alienated their undivided rights from and out of the property in question to

him and, the plaintiff became the sole owner of the premises in question as from the

year 1988. Three years thereafter, in 1991 the plaintiff requested the Defendant to

attorn and pay the rent. However the Defendant did not attorn as per the said request.

In 1992 the Plaintiff instituted action under consideration in the District Court.

SC Appeal 185/2014

3

Before the District Court, the Defendant refused to admit the ownership of the

Plaintiff. Therefore one of the issues the Plaintiff raised, – issue no 4 – is whether the

plaintiff is the owner of the property as pleaded in the plaint.

The Defendent interalia pleaded that the Plaintiff had no status or cause of

action to institute the action and that the Plaintiff’s action was debarred by section 547

of the Civil Procedure Code. One of the issues raised by the Defendent - issue number

14 – was whether the plaintiff could maintain the proceedings without the estate of the

deceased A.D.P. Siriwardane, being properly administered.

At the conclusion of the evidence presented by both parties, the Learned

District Judge answered issue number 4 as ‘not proved’ and issue no 14 in the

negative.

The Learned District Judge by her judgment dated 23 November 1998

dismissed the plaint subject to costs and denied the claim in reconvention of the

Defendent. The Learned Judge held that no order can be made declaring the Plaintiff

as the owner of this property as the father of the plaintiff had died without a last will

and no testamentary proceedings had been instituted in relation to this property.

Both parties appealed against the Judgment of the District Court. The Court of

Appeal by its judgment dated 26 August 2014 allowed the appeal of the Plaintiff and

directed the learned District Judge to enter decree accordingly. In their Judgment the

Learned Judges of the Court of Appeal held that the Learned District Court judge’s

finding, that no title has passed onto the plaintiff by reason of the fact that the estate

SC Appeal 185/2014

4

of his deceased father had not been administered is a misstatement of law and

amounts to a misdirection.

The Defendant, being dissatisfied with the Judgment of the Court of Appeal

sought leave of the Court of Appeal to appeal to the Supreme Court and the Court of

Appeal by its Order dated 03 September 2014, allowed the leave to appeal application

of the Defendant.

The substantial question on which the Court of Appeal granted leave, reads as

follows. “Where the action is to recover immovable property on the basis of non-

attornment and the defendant has put in issue and challenged the plaintiff’s right to

recover the property in view of the bar contained in section 547 of the civil Procedure

Code, can judgment be entered in favour of the plaintiff without taking into

consideration, particularly the pleas of the defendant that the property is of the value

of Rs 3,000,000/- but pleaded that the father of the plaintiff died and did not leave and

estate of administrable value”.

The Defendan’s main position before this court is that the plaintiff has no legal

status to sue the Defendant as there is a failure to obtain administration of the property

in question and therefore fail to satisfy the pre condition imposed by section 547 of

the Civil Procedure Code.

The Plaintiff submitted that the plaintiff’s action cannot be treated as either a

‘rei vindicatio’ or an action for declaration of title. It is his position that he had to

institute action treating the Defendant as a trespasser even though initially the

SC Appeal 185/2014

5

defendant was treated a tenant by attornment. It is his position, that the learned trial

judge erred when these proceedings were equated to a typical declaration of title case.

The Plaintiff further claims that the property rights of a deceased person would

pass to the heirs by the operation of common law, in the absence of a testamentary

disposition such as last will. He relies on the judgment in Silva v Silva, 10 NLR 234.

He also submits that heirs of the deceased landlord become vested with the

contractual rights and obligations in respect of the premises with the demise of the

landlord. It is his submission that this legal proposition can be deduced from the

judgment of this court in Mohamed v Public Trustee, 1978-1979-80 I SLR 01. It is

his contention that the provisions of Section 547 of the Civil Procedure Code would

not debar the proceedings in question as this is not an action for a declaration of title

or a rei vindicatio action.

Two main aspects will be considered in deciding this matter. Firstly the scope

of Section 547 of the Civil Procedure Code and secondly the nature of the

proceedings that were before the District Court. For convenience, section 547 of the

Civil Procedure Code as it was in force in the year 1992, is reproduced below.

“No action shall be maintainable for the recovery of any property, movable or

immovable, in Sri Lanka belonging to or included in the estate or effects of

any person dying testate or intestate in or out of Sri Lanka within twenty years prior

to the date of institution of the action, where such estate or effects amount to or

exceed in value the sum of twenty thousand rupees unless grant of probate or

letters of administration shall first have been issued.

In the event of any such property being transferred in any manner other than under

the provisions of subsection (1) of section 539B of this Ordinance or under section

SC Appeal 185/2014

6

28 of the Estate Duty Ordinance or section 22 of the Estate Duty Act, as the case may

be, without such probate or administration being so first taken out, every transferor

or transferee of such property shall be guilty of an offence, and in addition to any

penalty imposed under this Ordinance, it shall be lawful for the State to

recover from such transferor and transferee or either of them, such sum as would

have been payable to defray estate duty. The amounts so recoverable shall be

a first charge on the estate or effects of such testator or intestate in Sri Lanka or any

part of such estate or effects, and may be recovered by action accordingly.”

It is pertinent to observe that one of the issues framed before the trial court

was “whether the plaintiff is the owner of the property as pleaded in the plaint”. The

learned District Judge answered this issue as ‘not proved’. The learned District Judge

held that no determination can be made declaring the plaintiff as the owner of the

property. The reason being that no proper inheritance can take place from a transfer

without having testamentary proceedings in place, in a situation where the initial

owner of the property had deceased intestate.

It is settled law that succession of the property of a deceased person does not

depend on the institution of testamentary proceedings. Succession and inheritance of

the property of a deceased person will have to be determined in accordance with the

legal principles governing the same. It had been held that “On the death of a person

his estate, in the absence of a will, passes at once by operation of law to his heirs, and

the dominium vests in them. Once it so vests they cannot be divested of it except by

the several well-known modes recognised by law” (Grenier A.J in Silva v Silva at el

(Full Bench) 10 NLR 234 at 242.). It was further observed that “An administrator in

Ceylon deals with immovable property and applying the English Law it seems clear

that no conveyance from an administrator is necessary to pass title to the heirs, for

that has already passed by operation of law” (Silva v Silva at el, 10 NLR 234 at 244).

SC Appeal 185/2014

7

Section 547 of the Civil Procedure Code does not deal with either inheritance

or succession of the property of a deceased person. Therefore, this section has no

impact on a title derived through succession or inheritance. However it is important to

note that the plaintiff in this case claims title in two different lines.

It is admitted that the plaintiff was not the sole heir of the deceased. He was a

joint heir with the other heirs namely the mother and three siblings. Therefore with

the death of the father, the plaintiff derived co-ownership of the property along with

the other four heirs. Section 547 has no application or impact on this aspect of

succession.

Three years thereafter the other co-owners transferred their rights to the

plaintiff. It is admitted that the aforesaid transfer between the co-owners had taken

place without a grant of probate or letters of administration first have been issued. The

plaintiff did not reject the suggestion that the value of the property concerned at the

time the co-heirs gifted to him, is approximately two million rupees even though the

Deed of Gift dated 1.6.1988 which was produced marked P3 has given the value as

sixty five thousand rupees.

Section 547 of the Civil Procedure Code is in two parts. The first part deals

with regard to the maintainability of certain types of actions. The scope of this part of

the section will be dealt with later in this decision. The second part deals with

situations of the transfer of property belonging to the estate of a person dying testate

or intestate, where such transfers had taken place without a grant of probate or letters

SC Appeal 185/2014

8

of administration first have been issued where the value of such property exceeds

twenty thousand rupees. According to this provision, both the transferor and the

transferee are guilty of an offence unless the transfer had taken place within the

limited instances recognised by the provision it self.

An examination of the facts of this case reveal that both the plaintiff and the

co-heirs have breached this provision and therefore are guilty of an offence. However,

it is necessary to consider whether section 547 invalidates any transfer that had taken

place in breach of that provision?

In Hassen Hadjiar v Levane Marikar (15 NLR 275 at 279) Wood Renten J

held “Section 547 of the Code does not prohibit the transfer of property which ought

to have been, but has not been, administered. It penalizes such a transfer, but the

language in which the penalty is imposed as well as that of the section as a whole

point, in my opinion, to the conclusion that the Legislature did not intend to do

anything more than this”.

I see no reason to deviate from this view. Therefore I hold that the Plaintiff has

derived title to the property in question lawfully.

However the remaining issue to be resolved is whether there is any bar

imposed on the Plaintiff in the context of these proceedings by operation of Section

547. Limitation imposed in the first part of section 547 relates to property of a

deceased person, which is twenty thousand rupees, or more in value. It’s applicability

in scope is in relation to the ‘actions for the recovery of (such) property’ (emphasis

SC Appeal 185/2014

9

added). The said provision deals with the ‘maintainability’ (emphasis added) of such

actions. Restriction imposed on the maintainability of such action is that the need to

have the grant of probate or letters of administration have been issued first, or a period

of twenty years have lapsed since the death of the initial owner.

The issue that arises therefore is whether the plaintiff, even he is the rightful

owner, could he have maintained these proceedings?

It is held that “..section 547 in unmistakable language rendered an action not

maintainable without due administration for the recovery of any property included in

an intestate estate. In interpreting that section this court laid down that it formed a

statutory bar which could not be got over by the mere acquiescence, or even by the

express agreement of the parties to any particular litigation” - Wendt J in Gunaratne

v Perera Hamine 6 NLR 373 at 376.

Plaintiff’s position in this regard is that the action in the District Court is not

an action ‘for the recovery of property’. It is his position that the Plaintiff’s case

cannot be treated in law as either a ‘rei vindicatio’ or an action for declaration of title

and therefore the limitation in Section 547 is not applicable. I am not inclined to

decide in favour of this assertion of the plaintiff. Examination of the prayers in the

plaint and the issues raised by the plaintiff, clearly reflect that the action concerned is

to recover the property from the defendant. Infact in Ponnamma v Arumugam (8

NLR 223) the Privy Council held that the limitation in Section 547 of the Code of

Civil Procedure is applicable to a partition action. In Kandiah v Karthigesu 31 NLR

172 even an action to declare that the signature of the deceased in two deeds are

SC Appeal 185/2014

10

forgeries was considered as ‘action to recover property’ coming within the purview of

Section 547. Therefore the proceedings relating to this matter is an action for the

recovery of property as coming within the purview of Section 547 of the Civil

Procedure Code.

In view of these findings taken together with the admitted facts in the case I

hold that the action initiated by the Plaintiff in the District Court comes within the

purview of Section 547 of the Civil Procedure Code.

Therefore the substantial question of law upon which leave was granted to this

Court should be answered in the negative.

However, in deciding the remedy that can be granted, this court has to

consider another issue namely the effect of Section 547 on the proceedings before the

District Court.

The Learned trial judge having come to the conclusion that no order can be

made declaring the plaintiff as the owner of the property due to non-satisfaction of

Section 547 proceeded to dismiss the plaint. It is pertinent to note that the trial judge’s

decision to dismiss the plaint is not in accordance with the jurisprudence on this

matter.

In Alagakawandi v Muttumal 22 NLR 111, recognised “that the words ‘no

action shall be maintainable’ did not amount to the same thing as ‘no action shall be

instituted’. In Ponnamma v Arumogam (PC) it is observed that “whenever it

SC Appeal 185/2014

11

appears in the course of a case which a Court is trying, that administration is

necessary, it becomes the duty of that Court to see that the provisions of Section 547

are complied with before the litigation proceeds any further” (8 NLR 223 at 225). In

Hassen Hadjiar v Levane Marikar Court acknowledged that the jurisprudence

recognised “while section 547 of the Code is imperative it was open to the Court to

give the party suing an opportunity of taking out the necessary administration.” The

court further held that “The primary object of Section 547 is to protect the revenue.

That object is obviously secured by the refusal of the Courts to allow an action for the

recovery of property liable to administration, but not administered, to proceed until a

grant of administration has been obtained. We ought not to place upon section 547 an

interpretation which its language does not compel us to adopt, and which, as in the

present case, can only serve to support purely technical objections” (15 NLR 275 at

280). In Jayawickrama v David Silva, Supreme Court cited with approval the

following finding of the trial Court in relation to Section 547 of the Civil Procedure

Code - “this section does not say that action cannot be instituted. The action cannot be

maintained without obtaining letters of administration. The decree can be entered after

such letters of administration have been obtained” (76 NLR 427 at 430).

In relation to the proceedings under consideration, the father of the plaintiff

died intestate in the year 1985 and the co-heirs transferred their rights to the plaintiff

in the year 1988. Action to recover the property in question was instituted in 1992.

Therefore the proper course of action that should have been adopted by the trial judge

was to have given an opportunity for the Plaintiff to satisfy the requirements of

Section 547.

SC Appeal 185/2014

12

The learned trial judge in entering the judgment mainly focused only on this

issue. The judgment does not reflect any evaluation of the evidence and decisions

relating to other issues. It is also pertinent to note that the time limitation recognised

under Section 547 namely twenty years had elapsed now. Therefore the limitation

under Section 547 is no longer in operation relating to the property in question.

The main issue that had been addressed both by the trial court as well as the

appeal court is whether the plaintiff could have maintained these proceedings.

However, the Court of Appeal has come to the conclusion that the Plaintiff should

have succeeded in the District Court and answered the issues raised by the plaintiff in

his favour. Thereafter made order directing the learned District Judge to enter

judgement for the Plaintiff as prayed for. However the judgement of the Court of

Appeal does not reflect a proper analysis of the evidence relating to other issues. It is

also pertinent to note that no submissions were made before this Court on other

issues, as the sole issue on which leave was granted had been the applicability of

Section 547.

Under these circumstances this court is not in a position to make a

determination on the other issues raised before the trial court. We are mindful of the

fact that this is a matter where proceedings had been instituted in the District Court in

the year 1992. Yet, I am of the view that the only way, justice can be served to both

parties is by ordering a re-trial in this matter.

Taking into account all the factors that are enumerated hereinbefore both

judgments, namely the Judgment of the Court of Appeal dated 26.08.2014 and the

SC Appeal 185/2014

13

judgment of the District Court dated 02.10.1998 are set aside and a re-trial is ordered.

The District Court is directed to give priority to this matter and conclude proceedings

without delay.

Chief Justice

L.T.B. Dehideniya, J

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

S. Thurairaja, PC, J. I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court