==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of Article 128 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka read with Section 5C of the Act No.54 of 2006 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act as amended . Mahabadalge Rita Malkanthi, No.169, Sapugahawatta, Wiharakumbura, Kirindiwela.

Plaintiff S.C. Appeal No.127/2017 SC (HCA) LA No. 307/2015 WP/HCCA/AV/Appeal No. 1313/2012(F) Vs. D.C. Pugoda No.691/L 1. Ilandari Pedige Kamalawathi, No.168, “Thilaka Wila”, Sapugahawatta, Kirindiwela. 2. Ilandari Pedige Premasiri, No.168/D, Sapugahawatta, Wiharakumbura, Kirindiwela. 3. Warushamana Pedige Weerasingha, Sapugahawatta, Wiharakumbura, Kirindiwela.

Defendants AND BETWEEN

S.C. Appeal No. 127/2017

2

Mahabadalge Rita Malkanthi, No.169, Sapugahawatta, Wiharakumbura, Kirindiwela. Plaintiff-Appellant Vs. 1. Ilandari Pedige Kamalawathi, No.168, “Thilaka Wila”, Sapugahawatta, Kirindiwela. 2. Ilandari Pedige Premasiri, No.168/D, Sapugahawatta, Wiharakumbura, Kirindiwela. 3. Warushamana Pedige Weerasingha, Sapugahawatta, Wiharakumbura, Kirindiwela. Defendant-Respondents

AND NOW BETWEEN Mahabadalge Rita Malkanthi, No.169, Sapugahawatta, Wiharakumbura, Kirindiwela. Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant Vs. 1. Ilandari Pedige Kamalawathi, No.168, “Thilaka Wila”, Sapugahawatta, Kirindiwela.

S.C. Appeal No. 127/2017

3

2. Ilandari Pedige Premasiri, No.168/D, Sapugahawatta, Wiharakumbura, Kirindiwela. 3. Warushamana Pedige Weerasingha, Sapugahawatta, Wiharakumbura, Kirindiwela. Defendant-Respondent-Respondents

*********

BEFORE : KUMUDINI WICKREMASINGHE J. ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J. MENAKA WIJESUNDERA, J. COUNSEL : Harindra Rajapaksha for the Plaintiff-Appellant- Appellant. Kamal Perera for the Defendant-Respondent -Respondents. ARGUED ON : 03rd June, 2025 DECIDED ON : 27th March, 2026 ********* ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

The Plaintiff instituted the instant action to seek a declaration of

Court, recognising her right of servitude, to have access to the property

described in the 1st schedule to the Plaint, to which she holds title, along

S.C. Appeal No. 127/2017

4

the Northern boundary of the 1st Defendant’s land, through an 8-foot-wide

roadway, now narrowed down to mere 2-foot footpath. She also sought a

declaration of Court recognising her entitlement to have that 8-foot

roadway widened to a 15-foot roadway on the basis of necessity and to

have that widened roadway extending over the land of 2nd and 3rd

Defendants as well.

In their joint answer, the 1st to 3rd Defendants have denied that the

Plaintiff ever had any access to her land over their respective lands with an

08-foot-wide roadway. They further claim that when the Plaintiff

attempted to draw electricity lines over their lands, they successfully

resisted. They totally denied that the Plaintiff had access to her land over

the land held by the 2nd Defendant. The Defendants have accordingly

prayed for the dismissal of the Plaint, by which a right of way is sought

over lands that are owned by several other co-owners, without naming

them as parties.

Parties proceeded to trial after settling for a total of 24 issues

between them. At the conclusion of the trial, the District Court dismissed

the Plaintiff’s action on the premise that the Plaintiff has failed to establish

her title to the land described in the first schedule to her Plaint as she did

not tender the title deed No. 378 of 22.05.2000. It also decided to dismiss

the action for the reason that there was no evidence presented, indicating

there was an 8-foot-wide roadway used by the Plaintiff over the 1st

Defendant’s land, except for the existence of a footpath, only three feet

wide.

S.C. Appeal No. 127/2017

5

The appeal preferred by the Plaintiff against the said judgment too

was dismissed by the High Court of Civil Appeal. The Plaintiff sought to

challenge the judgment of the District Court before that Court on the

grounds of appeal that the trial Court was wrong in holding that she did

not acquire a right of way of servitude over the 8-foot roadway and that

she had no alternate access to a public road. The appellate Court was not

convinced of the merits of these two grounds of appeal. The Plaintiff,

thereupon sought Leave to Appeal against that judgment from this Court.

On 20.06.2017, having considered the submissions of the parties, this

Court thought it fit to grant Leave to Appeal to the Plaintiff on the

questions of law that are set out in paragraphs 14(b), (c) and (d) of her

petition dated 25.09.2015. The said three questions of law are as follows;

i. Did the Learned Judges of the Civil Appellate High

Court holden in Avissawella err in law by concluding

that the Plaintiff failed to establish that she used a right

of way 8 feet width over the 1st Defendant’s land for a

period of time exceeding 10 years disregarding the oral

and documentary evidence produced at the trial?

ii. Did the Learned Judges of the Civil Appellate High

Court holden in Avissawella err in law by holding that

the Plaintiff has failed to prove that she is entitled to a

right of way of necessity over the 1st to 3rd Defendant’s

land disregarding the settled law pertaining to a way of

necessity in the given circumstances and in the present-

day context?

S.C. Appeal No. 127/2017

6

iii. Did the Learned Judges of the Civil Appellate High

Court holden in Avissawella and the learned District

Judge err in law by disregarding the evidence presented

by the Plaintiff to prove the way of necessity and by

failing to appreciate the evidence placed by the

Respondents which has a corroborative value?

In support of her appeal before this Court, learned Counsel for the

Plaintiff contended that the appellate Court has fallen into grave error

when it failed to consider the evidence presented by the Plaintiff and her

witnesses, particularly the surveyor, who surveyed the lands on a

commission issued by Court, on the request of the Plaintiff. It was stressed

upon before us by the learned Counsel that there was in fact a roadway

with a width of 8 feet, over which a tractor was used to transport metal

that had been quarried from the Plaintiff’s land and, admittedly the

Defendants’ have obstructed that roadway, which action led to the

complaint made to police on 02.09.2003. Learned Counsel thereupon

invited attention of this Court to the fact that the 1st Defendant conceded

that the Plaintiff has no other access to a public road and is willing to grant

her some relief.

In that factual backdrop, learned Counsel submitted that the

appellate Court has failed to apply the relevant principles of law that had

been laid down in the judgments of Roaslin Fernando v Alwis and Others

S.C. Appeal No. 127/2017

7

(1957) 61 NLR 302 and De Vass v Mendis (1948) 49 NLR 525 and SC

Appeal No. 83/2012 – decided on 17.10.2014.

Learned Counsel for the Defendants contended that the Plaintiff

instituted an action before the trial Court claiming her entitlement to 8-

foot-wide roadway, which she claimed to have acquired on prescription.

The declaration of her entitlement to 8-foot roadway was not sought out of

necessity. She pleaded necessity only in respect of her other relief to have

that roadway widened to 15 feet. The applicability of the principles in

relation to right of way of necessity is therefore confined to her claim to

have that 8-foot roadway, widened to be a 15-foot roadway, in order to

facilitate vehicular movement to her land. He further referred to the

evidence of the surveyor, who confirmed that there was no 8-foot-wide

roadway in existence but only a 2-foot-wide footpath was noted.

Therefore, learned Counsel invited attention of this Court to the principles

of law enunciated in the judgment of Kandiah v Seenttamby (1913) 17

NLR 29 by De Sampayo J, where his Lordship has held that the evidence to

prove the acquisition of a prescriptive right to a servitude of way over

lands belonging to others should be of “precise and definite” in nature and

the evidence presented by the Plaintiff fails to satisfy this standard.

It was also brought to the notice of Court that the evidence clearly

indicated that the Plaintiff has built a two storied house with frontage to a

public road in the same locality and therefore the necessity to have the 15-

foot-wide road to have access to her ancestral home cannot be accepted in

view of the judgment of Amarasuriya v Perera (1944) 45 NLR 348.

S.C. Appeal No. 127/2017

8

Learned Counsel for the Defendant also raises the point that the

Plaintiff, having failed to establish her title to the land in respect of which

the servitude claimed, is not entitled to that relief as she also failed to name

the necessary parties to the case, as the lands described in the 2nd to 4th

schedules are held in common by several others, in addition to the three

Defendants, who are named as parties to the instant matter.

It appears that the Plaintiff’s case was presented before the trial

Court with a view to achieve two distinct objectives. First, the Plaintiff

wants to have the servitude of 8-foot-wide roadway recognised by Court

and then to have that 8-foot roadway widened to a 15 foot roadway, out of

necessity.

In respect of the 1st objective, the Plaintiff has raised issues Nos. 5(i)

to (iii), which are to the effect; whether there is a 8-foot-wide road

providing access to her land, along the Northern boundary of the 1st

Defendant’s land, whether she and her predecessors in title have enjoyed

that roadway over the past 10 years and whether she acquired a right of

servitude of having access to a public road.

In relation to the second objective, the Plaintiff raised issue No. 8 to

the effect whether the Plaintiff is entitled to have that 8 feet road widened

to a 15-foot-roadway out of necessity.

The trial Court, having considered the evidence presented before

that Court, answered all these issues in the negative, before proceeding to

dismiss the Plaint. In appeal, the High Court of Civil Appeal too has

affirmed those factual findings made by the trial Court.

S.C. Appeal No. 127/2017

9

In view of the questions of law and the submissions made by

learned Counsel for the Plaintiff as well as for the Defendants, it is

incumbent upon this Court to consider the evidence presented by the

parties, particularly the Plaintiff, in respect of these issues, and review the

validity of those findings, when considered along with the applicable

principles of law.

The Plaintiff’s first objective of obtaining a declaration that she had

access to her property through 8-foot-wide roadway over the 1st

Defendant’s land must be examined before proceeding to consider any

other contention.

It is undisputed that the nearest public road to all these lands is

Katupitiya Road. All the parties have accessed that public road through

another roadway known as Sapugahawatta or Vihara Kumbura Road. This

part of the road is owned by the local authority. The surveyor, in

conducting his survey, in terms of the commission issued by Court,

proceeded to the land held by the Plaintiff, by walking through Vihara

Kumbura Road and thereafter continued through the front portion of the

land (ñÿ,) held by the 1st Defendant. He then demarcated the 8-foot-wide

roadway, claimed to have existed by the Plaintiff, (but nothing to support

it existed) and also demarcated the boundaries, if that access road is

widened to 15 feet, in his Plan No. 2814 (Y) the Northern boundary of that

widened road would extend into the lands held by the 2nd and 3rd

Defendants. Plan Y, depicts these two specific demarcations.

There is no dispute that in the past, the means of access to the land

claims to be held by the Plaintiff, was gained through a 2-foot-wide

S.C. Appeal No. 127/2017

10

footpath that ran along the Northern boundary which also forms a portion

of the front garden of the 1st Defendant. The Plaintiff, in order to

substantiate her claim of acquiring the servitude on the basis that there

was 8-foot-wide road used by her for over ten years, relied on the fact that

a tractor was used to transport metal that was quarried from her land, over

the 1st Defendant’s land. The Plaintiff’s position is that 8-foot-wide road

was used by her until the 1st Defendant put up obstacles across that road

sometime in June 2003, which resulted in making complaints to the police.

The factual claim of transporting metal through the disputed

roadway has different variations. The Plaintiff maintains that it was her

predecessors in title who used the tractors to transport metal from her land

as it did happen sometime back, which she estimates to be around 10 to 12

years ago. The Defendants, during cross-examination, suggested that the

dispute over transporting of metal using tractors has erupted between the

1st Defendant and one Premasiri. The Plaintiff admitted that position and

also admitted it was the 1st Defendant’s brother, Wimaladasa, who

transported metal by his tractor.

Samaradiwakara, who served as the Grama Niladhari of the area,

whilst giving evidence on behalf of the Plaintiff, admitted that he

intervened in his official capacity to bring about a settlement of a dispute

that erupted over the use of land belonged to others to transport metal.

He states that the dispute was between the Plaintiff and one

Pranshawathie. The witness has settled the dispute by adding 3 feet to the

existing roadway along the boundaries enabling a tractor to be taken to the

land. According the recollection of the witness, this dispute has erupted

S.C. Appeal No. 127/2017

11

somewhere around 1993 or 1994. However, although this witness claims to

have added 3 feet to the existing roadway facilitating the transport of

metal, did not specifically state the width of the access road before the

widened area was added. Obviously, this indicates that the roadway

before the dispute was not 8 feet wide and that is why it needed to be

widened to accommodate the movement of a tractor. During cross-

examination, Samaradiwakara, also admitted that the tractor must have

made about only 7 or 8 trips in total, transporting metal.

The evidence of Grama Niladhari, relied on by the Plaintiff, over the

dispute that erupted between her and one Pranshawathie presented another

challenge. The Plaintiff required the proof of the use of 8-foot-wide

roadway over a period of ten years to have that servitude recognised by

Court. She became the owner of the property only in May 2000, and the

instant action was instituted in December 2003. The time duration is less

than the number of years required to acquire prescriptive title if the

Plaintiff restricts the period of prescription to that period. She therefore

needed to tack her claim of prescription to time period during which her

predecessors in title were the owners of the property. The transportation of

metal has taken place during this time. This seems to be the only item of

evidence the Plaintiff had to substantiate her claim of having an 8-foot-

wide roadway.

This evidence also indicates that the claim of transporting metal

using tractors was confined to a one-off incident. That act of transporting

metal by tractor over these adjoining lands was done with the intervention

of the Grama Niladhari, in order to facilitate the act of transportation and

that too only for a limited number of trips. The Plaintiff or any of her

S.C. Appeal No. 127/2017

12

predecessors in title never owned vehicles and would not have used that

‘widened’ roadway, in that form, after the necessity of transporting of

metal from that land was over. This seemed a more probable proposition

to act on, as it is also undisputed among the parties that the section of the

roadway from the 1st Defendant, connecting same to Vihara Kumbura Road,

is about only 6 feet wide. Those 6-foot-wide roadway ends with the 1st

Defendant’s land. This stretch of roadway connecting the 1st Defendant’s

land to Vihara Kumbura Road is used by almost all the parties, and if that is

only of 6 feet in width, there cannot be any valid reason to have an 8-foot-

wide road between the Plaintiff’s land and the 1st Defendant’s, merely to

serve only the Plaintiff, who walked along the foot path to gain access to

that property.

This proposition is further confirmed by the observations of the

surveyor. He did not notice any signs to indicate there existed an 8-foot-

wide roadway along the access route pointed out by the Plaintiff. Nor did

he note any obstructions that had been erected across the roadway

narrowing it down only to a 2-foot-wide footpath, which is the only

observable roadway that was in existence on that land.

Siriyawathie, in her evidence claimed that there was a 9-foot-wide

road, improving on her own sister’s claim, who asserted that the roadway

was only of 8 feet wide. After few tractors loads of metal were transported

in 1993 (ignoring the Grama Niladhari’s evidence), up until the action was

instituted in 2003, there is absolutely no evidence to indicate there was any

regular vehicular movement along the disputed roadway between the

Plaintiff’s land and Vihara Kumbura Road for the past ten years. Thus, the

inference that the Plaintiff used only a 2-foot-wide footpath all along,

S.C. Appeal No. 127/2017

13

except the few instances of the tractor was transporting metal, and that too

with the intervention of the Grama Niladhari in order to diffuse a dispute

that has erupted between neighbours seemed a more probable proposition

to act on. However, that fact alone cannot provide clear and definitive

evidence in support of her claim of acquisition of a servitude for an 8-foot-

wide roadway.

In view of this evidence, the trial Court had no other option to

answer the issue No. 5 in the negative. Therefore, the affirmation of the

said finding of fact reached by the trial Court in determining the instant

appeal by the appellate Court could not be faulted at all. In view of the

reasoning in the preceding paragraphs, I concur with the decisions of the

Court below on this particular point.

It was for the Plaintiff to establish on a balance of probability, that

she used a roadway with a width of 8 feet from 1993 for ten years over the

1st Defendant’s land. Basnayake J ( as he then was) in De Vaas v Mendis

(supra, at p. 527), highlighted the principle that in “ … a claim for a via

necessitatis, the onus of proving necessity is upon the person alleging it”.

Moving on to consideration of the issue No. 8, which has been

framed by the Plaintiff to the effect whether she is entitled to have that 8

feet road widened to a 15-foot roadway out of necessity, perhaps require

no consideration as it does not arise in view of the answer to issue No. 5. If

the Plaintiff has failed to establish of her servitude of an 8-foot roadway

over the Defendant’s lands, whether it should be widened to 15-foot

roadway does not arise. Nonetheless, it shall be considered on the basis

that the rights of way of necessity of a 15-foot-wide roadway as a sole

S.C. Appeal No. 127/2017

14

ground pleaded in the Plaint, although it is not. One of the authorities

relied on by the Plaintiff herself is relevant in this regard.

In the case of Rosalin Fernado v Alwis and Others (1957) 61 NLR

302, T.S. Fernando J, after having quoted a section from the text of a South

African judgment Peacock v Hedges (1876) 6 Buchana’s Cape S.C.R. at 69,

which read, “ … the authorities in the Roman Dutch law clearly show that a

right of road of necessity can be claimed no further than the actual necessity of the

case demands” and stated (at p. 304) “ [I]f I may say so, with great respect, this

simpler and more readily understood expression appears to afford an easier test to

be adopted when a Court is called upon to decide a question of the grant of a right

of way of necessity.”

In my view, the test indicated in the words “actual necessity of the case

demands” encapsulates the very essence of the test that should be applied

by a Court, in determining a claim made by a party to a right of necessity

to have access to a public road over someone else’s land.

The question before me for consideration is did the Plaintiff establish

her “actual necessity” of a 15-foot-wide roadway, as her case demands in

this particular instance. In this regard, it is relevant to note that the land to

which the said right of access sought by the Plaintiff, on the basis of

necessity, is her own ancestral home where she and her siblings grew up

under parental care. The evidence is clear that the Plaintiff has already put

up a two storeyed residential house in Sapugaswatte area. Moreover, even if

in respect of that ancestral house, the Plaintiff had no vehicle to be brought

into her land through that widened roadway. Her claim is purely based on

a future eventuality of her elderly mother falling sick and if she is required

S.C. Appeal No. 127/2017

15

to be taken to a hospital for medical treatment in a vehicle. She, being an

employee of a government hospital, is very well justified in showing

concern for the welfare of her mother in case of a medical emergency. But

throughout her childhood and until she got married, there would have

been many similar instances which they have apparently successfully

managed with those 2-foot-wide footpath, used to gain access to a public

road.

In this regard, I respectfully adopt the principle recognised in the

judgment of Fernando et al v De Silva (1928) 30 NLR 56, which the

Defendants have relied on. In that instance, Drieberg J relied on the

judgment of Peacock v Hedges (supra) in holding (at p. 59) that when there

is free access to a road by “a path” leading to the public road is available to

a party, he “… cannot say that a cartway is a necessity”.

The contention of the learned Counsel, which was advanced before

this Court on behalf of the Plaintiff, is that she has no other means of

access to her house and the Defendants in their evidence have conceded

that they refused to grant the way of necessity because of personal enmity

is not supported by the proceedings. It is also the contention of the Plaintiff

that some of the Defendants have admitted her entitlement to have road

access. But these factors cannot provide additional support to her

evidence, simply because they conceded in their respective evidence only

of her right to have access to the public road through the foot path and not

the 8 feet wide or 15-foot-wide roadway.

The conclusion reached by the trial Court that the Plaintiff failed to

establish her title to the property was not argued before us. That finding

S.C. Appeal No. 127/2017

16

was affirmed by the appellate Court. Then, even if the questions of law are

answered in the affirmative, the Plaint should be dismissed.

In view of the reasons that are set out in the preceding paragraphs of

this judgment, I am of the considered view that all three questions of law

on which the instant appeal was heard should be answered in the

negative.

Therefore, I proceed to answer the three questions in the negative.

Accordingly, the judgments of the District Court as well as the High

Court of Civil Appeal are hereby affirmed.

The appeal of the Plaintiff is dismissed with costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

KUMUDINI WICKREMASINGHE J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

MENAKA WIJESUNDERA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT