==== BLOCKS ==== 

SC Rule No. 01/2021 RULING Page 1 of 12

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

BEFORE: S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

A. L. SHIRAN GOONERATNE J. &

JANAK DE SILVA, J.

COUNSEL: Punya Kumari Paleketiya Respondent appeared in person.

Rohan Sahabandu, PC for the Bar Association of Sri Lanka.

Rajitha Perera, DSG for the Hon. Attorney-General.

INQUIRY ON: 08 August 2023, 01 March 2024, 18 June 2024

DECIDED ON: 31 July 2024

In the matter of a Rule in terms of Section 42(2) of

the Judicature Act, No. 2 of 1978 against Punnya

Kumari Palaketiya, Attorney-at-Law.

Hon. Judge S.A.I.S. Suraweera,

Provincial High Court Judge,

Provincial High Court,

Polonnaruwa,

COMPLAINANT

Vs.

Punnya Kumari Palaketiya,

14/18, Onegama

Polonnaruwa.

RESPONDENT

SC Rule No. 01/2021

SC Rule No. 01/2021 RULING Page 2 of 12

THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

1. The Rule against the Respondent Attorney-at-Law, Punnya Kumari Palaketiya, was

preferred pursuant to the order of the Provincial High Court of Polonnaruwa dated 07th

February 2019, directing that her conduct, revealing details of deceit, malpractice, and

dishonourable conduct unbefitting of an Attorney-at-Law, be brought to the notice of

the Registrar of this Court.

2. The Rule so issued details the allegations against the Respondent Attorney-at-Law as

follows:

“WHEREAS, upon an application made by the Learned State Counsel prosecuting in

the Provincial High Court of Polonnaruwa in Provincial High Court of Polonnaruwa

Case no HC 05/2017, the Learned Judge of the Provincial High Court by order dated

07.02.2019 has thought it fit and appropriate to bring to the notice of the Registrar

of the Supreme Court of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka (hereinafter

referred to as the Complainant) of the alleged deceit and malpractice on your part;

AND WHEREAS the said complaint discloses that:

1) You on or around 03rd of July 2018, whilst being the duly appointed Attorney for

the Accused in Provincial High Court of Polonnaruwa Case No HC 05/2017,

inquired for and/or provided instructions that are of a professional nature to

Prosecution Witness No 1 (hereinafter referred to as PW 1) in order to prepare an

affidavit by PW 1 to be filed in the above proceedings.

2) You on or around 03rd of July 2018, whilst being the duly appointed Attorney for

the Accused in High Court of Polonnaruwa Case No HC 05/2017, agreed with

PW 1 to prepare an affidavit for PW 1 to be filed in the above proceedings.

SC Rule No. 01/2021 RULING Page 3 of 12

3) You on or around 03rd of July 2018, whilst being the duly appointed Attorney for

the Accused in High Court of Polonnaruwa Case No HC 05/2017, accepted and

received a stamped blank sheet of paper signed by PW 1 from PW 1, in order to

prepare an affidavit to be filed in the above proceedings.

4) You on or around 03rd of July 2018, whilst being the duly appointed Attorney for

the Accused in High Court of Polonnaruwa Case No HC 05/2017, provided

instructions that are of a professional nature to PW 1 in relation to the affidavit

filed by PW 1 in the above proceedings.

AND WHEREAS, the aforesaid complaint disclose that you have by reasons of the

aforesaid acts of misconduct, committed:

a) Deceit and/or malpractice with the ambit of Section 42(2) of the Judicature Act

(read with Rule 79 of the Supreme Court Rules of 1978), which renders you unfit

to remain as an Attorney-at-Law;

b) By reason of the aforesaid acts, you have conducted yourself in a manner which

would reasonably be regarded as disgraceful or dishonourable of Attorney-at-

Law of good repute and competence and have thus committed a breach Rule No.

60 of the Supreme Court (Conduct of and Etiquette of Attorney-at-Law) Rules of

1988 made under Article 136 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka;

c) By reason of the aforesaid acts, you have conducted yourself in a manner which

is inexcusable and such as to be regarded as deplorable by your fellows in the

profession and have committed a breach of Rule 60 of the said Rules; and

d) By reason of the aforesaid acts and conduct, you have conducted yourself in a

manner unworthy of an Attorney-at-Law and have thus committed a breach of

Rule No. 61 of the said Rules…”

SC Rule No. 01/2021 RULING Page 4 of 12

3. The aforesaid complaint against the Respondent Attorney-at-Law was preferred by the

Learned Judge for the manner in which she conducted herself as Counsel for the accused

in High Court of Polonnaruwa Case No. HC 05/2017. The said case involves a charge of

grave sexual abuse of a thirteen-year-old girl by the accused, her uncle, which is an

offence punishable under Section 365B(2)(b) of the Penal Code. The case record reveals

how the victim had gone to spend the night at her uncle’s residence on the fateful night,

as she often did whenever her parents were away. The abuse had taken place as she slept

on her uncle’s bed, having found no room beside her aunt’s. After a period of silence,

the abuse had come to light following an attempt by the victim to take her own life.

4. The Respondent, retained by the Accused when the incident came before the High Court,

is accused of having provided the PW 1 (who is also the Prosecutrix) of the said case with

professional instructions in preparing an affidavit conveying her intention to conclude

the case expeditiously. She is further accused of obtaining a signed blank sheet of paper

in order to prepare the same. According to the proceedings of the HC Polonnaruwa Case

No. 05/2017 dated 07th February 2019, the Prosecutrix has testified before the High Court

Judge to this effect.

5. The content of this affidavit dated 31st July 2018, purportedly prepared on behalf of the

Prosecutrix, paints the accused in a relatively positive light stating that the Prosecutrix

used to frequent her uncle’s place and that the accused never sexually harassed or

coerced her. It further states that she willingly and knowingly visited the accused’s house

on the night in question and voluntarily, without any compulsion, went on to sleep on

her uncle’s bed as there was no room on her aunt’s. In addition, it claims that there had

not been any sexual contact between them except for the instance relating to the High

Court case. Having stated the above, it is averred in the affidavit that she does not object

to finishing the case using an expeditious method (often referred to as a ‘shortcut’ in

practice, somewhat inappropriately) as she is now married with a productive family life.

SC Rule No. 01/2021 RULING Page 5 of 12

6. In the inquiry before this Court, the Respondent Attorney-at-Law initially pleaded guilty

on 31st March 2021, and then again changed her plea to not guilty on 14th February 2023.

The Rule was thereafter fixed for inquiry on 24th March 2023, and the Registrar of the

Supreme Court as well as the Registrar of the High Court of Polonnaruwa were all led in

evidence. Thereafter, the defence was called and the Respondent gave evidence-in-chief.

Once the said evidence was led, the Respondent once again opted to change her plea

and pleaded guilty on 18th June 2024.

7. There is no need for this Court to consider the circumstances of the instant case in detail

as the Respondent opted to plead guilty. In her plea of mitigation, she noted that this is

the first allegation of misconduct levelled against her and appealed this Court to consider

her age, the fact that her husband is a retired school principal with medical needs as well

as that she is a mother of two, both of whom have finished schooling. She further pleaded

with this Court to consider her past service as a teacher and her pro bono work providing

legal aid.

8. While I take full cognisance of this plea, I can hardly overlook the fact that a considerable

amount of judicial time has been invested by the point she pleaded guilty. Moreover, the

gravity of her misconduct and the bearing such conduct would have on the judicial

process and, more importantly, the victim cannot be gainsaid.

9. A defence counsel has to understandably act in the best interest of those who retain

them. This often proves more difficult a task than one could bargain for, as this duty is

one that must be counterpoised by the overriding duty of such counsel towards the court

and the cause of justice. Surely, then, being officers of the court, defence counsel are not

to act as apathetic devil's advocates in achieving whatever the unscrupulous thing that

may be demanded of them. They must at all times act within honest, honourable,

legitimate and lawful means.

SC Rule No. 01/2021 RULING Page 6 of 12

10. Considering her plea, and especially the fact that she pleaded guilty and accepted

responsibility, albeit belatedly, I am inclined to impose a sentence of extreme leniency.

Accordingly, the Rule is affirmed and the Respondent is suspended for a period of ten

years from the date of this Ruling. The Register is directed to take all necessary steps in

furtherance of this Ruling.

Rule Affirmed.

Judge of the Supreme Court

A. L. SHIRAN GOONERATNE J.

11. I have had the privilege of reading the judgment of my brother Hon. Justice S. Thurairaja

P.C. in draft and to consider the views expressed therein and I disagree that for the

reasons set out hereinafter, the sentence imposed on the Respondent Attorney-at-Law

should be varied. To avoid any repetition, I will refrain from a detailed discussion of the

facts relevant to the Rule application.

12. I am possessed with the mitigatory circumstances pleaded before this Court by the

Respondent Attorney-at-Law. The said Respondent has publicly expressed her remorse

and apology before this Court and has undertaken to refrain from any conduct which

would reasonably be regarded as disgraceful or dishonourable of an Attorney-at-Law of

good repute and competence.

13. Justice and fairness require that the offender be entitled to a punishment in the facts and

circumstances of the offence, the situation of the victim and the situation of the offender.

SC Rule No. 01/2021 RULING Page 7 of 12

14. Taking into consideration the Rule affirmed against the Respondent Attorney-at-Law, I

am of the view that in the light of its objective circumstances, suspending the said

Respondent for a period of 5 years from the date of this ruling is justified to be an

appropriate and proportionate sentence, The Registrar is directed to act accordingly.

Judge of the Supreme Court

JANAK DE SILVA, J.

15. I have had the benefit of reading in draft the orders proposed to be delivered by my

brothers Justice Thurairaja and Justice Gooneratne. I am inclined to agree with the

sentence proposed by my brother Justice Gooneratne. While agreeing with my brother

Justice Gooneratne that suspending the Respondent for a period of 5 years from the date

of this ruling is justified to be an appropriate and proportionate sentence and his reasons

for the sentence, I wish to set out my own reasons.

16. In my view, the gravity of the breach of professional ethics must be considered upon the

facts and circumstances of each case.

17. The Respondent was acting for the accused in the Provincial High Court of Polonnaruwa

case No. HC 05/2017. The indictment was served on the accused on 22.06.2017. He

pleaded not guilty. On 03.07.2018, the lawyer representing PW1 (“victim”) informed Court

that she was now married and a mother of two children, one of whom was two months

old. The incident had happened eleven years ago and it was difficult for the victim to

recollect the events. The need for the victim to come for the case in Polonnaruwa is

affecting her marriage. Therefore, the lawyer representing the victim informed Court that

she does not have any objections to finishing the case in an expeditious manner.

SC Rule No. 01/2021 RULING Page 8 of 12

18. The Respondent informed Court that the accused also wanted to conclude the case in an

expeditious manner without going to trial. The accused was willing to pay the victim

compensation.

19. As at this date, no evidence had been led. Thereafter, the learned High Court Judge

directed the victim to file an affidavit setting out her position and warned her to appear

on the next day. He made further order that the affidavit of the victim should be tendered

to Court through her lawyer. A date was given for the State to inform of its position. The

case was postponed to 31.07.2018.

20. On that day the victim was represented by another lawyer who tendered her affidavit to

Court. Thereafter, the Court granted the State further time to inform of its position. The

affidavit tendered to Court by the lawyer for the victim on 31.07.2018 forms the basis for

the Rule issued against the Respondent.

21. When this matter was called on 07.02.2019, the Respondent, who continued to appear

on behalf of the accused, informed Court that the victim had filed an affidavit and that it

was possible to conclude this matter in an expeditious manner by pleading guilty. At that

point, the learned State Counsel informed Court that he wished to lead the evidence of

the victim about a matter that occurred that morning. This application was allowed by

the learned High Court Judge.

22. The evidence of the victim was then led by the learned State Counsel. She repeated what

her lawyer had informed Court previously, namely that she was married, it was difficult

for her to come, she also wants to conclude the matter expeditiously, the two parties

had discussed this and had met the Respondent together. She testified that she had to

tender an affidavit and because it was difficult for her to come, she had signed on a

stamp pasted on a blank half sheet and given it to the Respondent. The complete

evidence of the victim, with certain redactions to maintain the anonymity of the victim,

is as follows:

SC Rule No. 01/2021 RULING Page 9 of 12

ප්‍ර: ........................... අද දින උදේ අධිකරණයට ආදේ කීයටද?

උ: 7.30 ට පමණ.

ප්‍ර: ඔබ දබොරු කියන දකදනක්ද?

උ: නැහැ.

ප්‍ර: අද ගරු අධිකරණයට පැමිණිදේ කොත් සමඟද?

උ: මහත්තයත් එක්ක.

ප්‍ර: මහත්තයො අද පැමිණ තිදබනවො දේද?

උ: ඔේ.

ප්‍ර: දමම ගරු අධිකරණයට පැමිණියොට පසුව දමම චූදිත තැනැත්තො දහෝ ඔහුදේ ඥාතිදයකු හමු

වුණොද?

උ: ඔේ.

ප්‍ර: කොවද?

උ: ද ොකු අම්මො.

ප්‍ර: ද ොකු අම්මො කියේදේ දම් චූදිත තැනැත්තොදේ කවුද?

උ: බිරිඳ.

ප්‍ර: ඇයදේ නම සඳහේ කරේන?

උ: ............................................

ප්‍ර: චූදිත තැනැත්තොදේ නම සඳහේ කරේන?

උ: ....................................................

ප්‍ර: ඔහුව නැවත දැක්දකොත් අඳුන ගේන පුළුවේද?

උ: පුළුවේ.

SC Rule No. 01/2021 RULING Page 10 of 12

ප්‍ර: දපේවො සිටිේන?

උ: විත්ති කූඩුදේ සිටින විත්තිකරු දපේවො සිටී හඳුනො ගනී.

ප්‍ර: ද ොකු අම්මො ඔබට උදේ දමොකටද කතො කදේ?

උ: අපි ගිය පොර ආවට පස්දස් කතො කර ගත්තො දම්ක අවසේ කර ගේන. ඒ කියේදේ මම

විවොහකයි. මට එේන අපහසුයි. ඒ පැත්දතේ ප්‍රශ්න හිේා. මටත් අවශ්‍යතොවයක් තිදබනවො දම්ක

ඉවර කර ගේන. ඒ හිේා අපි දදදගොලද ෝ කතො වුණො. ඒ කල ො අපි එයො ො සමග ද ෝයේ

හමු වුණො. කලිේ ආවට පස්දස් දිවුරුම් ප්‍රකොශ්‍යක් ඉදිරිපත් කරේන මට තිබ්බො. මට එේන

අපහසු හිේා මුේදරයක් පිට මම හොප්ෂීට් දකොළයක අත්ස්ේ කර ො එ ද ෝයේට බොර දී ො

ගිහිේ තිබ්බො. මට ඒක බ ො ගේන එේන කිය ො තිබ්බො. මම ඒක බ ො ගේන උදේ ගියො. ඒ

කල ො ආදේ ආවො.

ප්‍ර: ඔබ මුේදරයක් පිට අත්සේ කදේ කිසිවක් දනොමැති දලඛනයක් ද?

උ: ඔේ. මට එේන අපහසු හිේා ඒදක් අත්සේ කර ො ගියො.

ප්‍ර: කවුද එම දලඛනය අත්සේ කරේන කිේව නීතීඥතුමිය?

උ: මම නම දේනෑ.

ප්‍ර: දැක්දකොත් අඳුන ගේන පුළුවේද?

උ: ඔේ.

ප්‍ර: බ ේන ඉේනවොද කිය ගරු ඇධිකරණදේ?

උ: ඇධිකරණදේ දපනී සිටින නිතීඥ පුණයො ප කැටිය මිය දපේවො සිටී. හඳුනො ගනී.

ප්‍ර: නිතීඥතුමිය ඔබට සඳහේ කදේ කුමක්ද?

උ: විදශ්ෂදයේ දදයක් කිේදේ නැහැ. ඒක දමොනවො හරි කර ො දදේනම් කිය ො කිේවො. දිවුරුම්

ප්‍රකොශ්‍යක් හද ො දදේනම් කිය ො කිේවො.

ප්‍ර: ඔදබේ දිවුරුම් ප්‍රකොශ්‍යට අඩංගු වේන ඕදේ දමොනවොද කිය ො ඇහුවොද?

SC Rule No. 01/2021 RULING Page 11 of 12

උ: මදගේ ඇහුවො විවොහකද අහුවො. දරුවේ ඉේනවොද කිය ො ඇහුවො. එේන යේදේ දකොදහොමද

ඇහුවො. විදශ්ෂදේ දදයක් ඇහුදේ නැහැ.

ප්‍ර: අද උදෑසන ද ොකු අම්මො එක්ක ගිහිේ කවුරු හරි හම්බ වුණොද?

උ: ඔේ.

ප්‍ර: අද උදෑසන කවුද හම්බ වුදේ ද ොකු අම්මත් එක්ක ගිහිල ො?

උ: ඒ මැඩම්මයි. ද ෝයේමයි.

ප්‍ර: ඒ දැේ ඔබ අඳුරො ගත්ත නීතීඥ මහත්මියද හම්බ වුදේ?

උ: ඔේ.

ප්‍ර: අද දමොකටද හම්බ වුදේ?

උ: දිවුරුම් ප්‍රකොශ්‍ය මට බො ගේන කිේවො. ඒ කල ො මම කිේවො මට දම්ක ඉවර කර ගේන

ඕන. ඔයො ොදේ පැත්දතේ සහොය දදේන කිේවො. එයො ො ඒක කර ො දදේනම් කිය ො කිේවො.

ප්‍ර: ඔබ දේනවොද දම් වනවිට දම් නීතීඥ මහත්මිය කවුරු නිදයෝජනය කරන දකදනක්ද කිය ො?

උ: ඔේ.

23. Based on this evidence, the learned State Counsel made an application for the matter to

be referred to the Supreme Court which was allowed by the learned High Court Judge.

Subsequently, the Rule was issued on the Respondent.

24. When the criminal case was called on the next day, 25.04.2019 the Respondent continued

to appear for the accused. At that point the learned State Counsel informed Court that

the accused should be asked to inform Court as to whether he has any objections to the

Respondent continuing to appear for him if the matter was to be concluded

expeditiously. Upon inquiries been made by Court, the accused informed that he has no

objections to the Respondent continuing to appear for him.

SC Rule No. 01/2021 RULING Page 12 of 12

25. Thereafter, Court allowed the accused to withdraw his earlier plea of not guilty and to

plead guilty and sentenced him to eight (8) years rigorous imprisonment. In addition, a

fine of Rs. 5000/= was imposed, in lieu of which six (6) months simple imprisonment

imposed. Compensation of Rs. 300,000/= was awarded to the victim in lieu of which five

(5) years rigorous imprisonment was imposed.

26. Hence it is clear that at the end of the day, the High Court acted on the contentious

affidavit of the victim and determined that the victim was also desirous of concluding the

matter in an expeditious manner and acted accordingly. The victim had gone and met

the Respondent on her own volition in order to bring an early end to the issue.

27. For these, and the reasons given by my brother Justice Gooneratne, I am of the view that

in the light of the objective circumstances of this matter, suspending the Respondent for

a period of 5 years from the date of this ruling is justified to be an appropriate and

proportionate sentence. The Registrar is directed to act accordingly.

Judge of the Supreme Court