1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal in terms of Article 127 of the Constitution to be read with Section 5(C) of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No 10 of 1996 as amended by High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) (Amendment) Act No 54 of 2006.

SC / Appeal / 151/2013

SC/ HCCA/LA/ 502/2012 Thambachchi Ramiah Mallikanu Letchchumi, WP/HCCA/LA/143/2005(F) No. 51, Kotahena Weediya,

DC Colombo/18378/L Colombo 13.

Plaintiff Vs.

Bambarendage Jimoris Jinadasa,

No. 255, Vihara Mavatha,

(Assessment No 17)

Hunupitiya Road, Wattala.

AND BETWEEN

Bambarendage Jimoris Jinadasa,

No. 255, Vihara Mavatha,

(Assessment No 17)

Hunupitiya Road, Wattala. Defendant Appellant

2

Vs.

Thambachchi Ramiah Mallikanu Letchchumi, No. 51, Kotahena Weediya,

Colombo 13. Plaintiff Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

Thambachchi Ramiah Mallikanu Letchchumi, No. 51, Kotahena Weediya,

Colombo 13.

Plaintiff Respondent Appellant

Vs.

Bambarendage Jimoris Jinadasa,

No. 255, Vihara Mavatha,

(Assessment No 17) Hunupitiya Road, Wattala.

Defendant Appellant Respondent

BEFORE : B. P. ALUWIHARE, PC, J.

PRIYANTHA JAYAWARDENA, PC, J.

UPALY ABEYRATHNE, J.

3

COUNSEL : Athula Perera with Nayomi Kularatne for the Plaintiff Respondent Appellant

Dr. Sunil Cooray with Ms. Sudarshani Cooray and K. de Mel for the Defendant Appellant Respondent

WRITTEN SUBMISSION ON: 05.12.2013 & 30.05.2017 (Plaintiff Respondent Appellant)

20.01.2014 (Defendant Appellant Respondent)

ARGUED ON : 17.05.2017

DECIDED ON : 04.08.2017

UPALY ABEYRATHNE, J.

The Plaintiff Respondent Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) instituted an action in the District Court of Colombo against the

Defendant Appellant Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the Respondent)

seeking inter alia a declaration of title to the land described in the schedule to the

plaint and to eject the Respondents from the said land and to hand over the vacant

possession of the same to the Appellant. The Appellant has further sought an order

declaring the deed of transfer bearing No 804 dated 23.02.1987 attested by R. C. B.

Joseph, Notary Public, null and void.

The Respondent has filed an answer denying the averments contained

in the plaint and praying for a dismissal of the Appellant’s action. The Respondent

4

has not claimed title to the land in dispute nevertheless has claimed compensation

for the improvements, in a sum of Rs 1,200,000/-.

The case has proceeded to trial on 22 issues. After trial, the learned

Additional District Judge has delivered the judgment dated 26.05.2005 in favour of

the Appellant. Being aggrieved by the said judgment the Respondent has appealed

to the Provincial High Court of Civil Appeal holden at Colombo. The High Court,

by judgment dated 05.10.2012, has allowed the appeal and has dismissed the

Appellant’s action. The Appellant sought leave to appeal to this court and leave

has been granted on the questions of law set out in paragraph 20 (a) to (g) in the

petition dated 15.11.2012.

According to the Appellant, she had derived the title to the land in suit

by virtue of deed of transfer bearing No 4288 dated 22.12.1971. Thereafter she had

commenced constructing a house on the said land in 1973 and had concluded the

same in 1979. On or around 16.07.1982 she had gone to Middle East for an

employment. For the said purpose, she had borrowed a sum of Rs. 5,000/- from

one Sivagnanam Subramanium, entering into an agreement before an Attorney at

Law and Notary Public V. Pushpadevi Joseph who was not known to the Appellant

and leaving the original copy of the said deed 4288 in the custody of the said

Attorney at Law. She had sent money to settle the said loan. Subsequent to her

arrival from Middle East in 17.03.1983, she had requested said Attorney at Law to

hand over the original copy of the said deed 4288, but the Attorney at Law had

failed to do so. Since the said house had been damaged and the Appellant had been

displaced during the 1983 July insurgency, she had been placed in a refugee camps

located at St. Benedict College and Central College, Kotahena. Subsequently, as

per directive of the government, the said land together with the house had been

handed over to REPIA. In November 1983, when she returned to the said house

5

with permission to repair it, said Subramanium had forcibly entered into

possession of the premises. At that time, she had learnt that said Subramanium, by

using her signature had fraudulently executed a deed of transfer bearing No. 1809

dated 20.11.1981 in respect of the property in suit.

Thereafter, the Appellant had instituted an action against said

Subramanium in the District Court of Colombo seeking a judgment declaring the

said deed 1809 null and void and to eject said Subramanium from the land in

dispute and a judgment had been entered in favour of the appellant and a writ of

possession had been issued. Thereafter, the Respondent of the instant appeal had

made an application in terms of Section 325 of the Civil Procedure Code and after

inquiry he had been placed in possession on the basis that he had derived title to

the land in dispute by virtue of a deed of transfer bearing No 804 dated 23.02,1987

and hence he was a bona fide possessor.

In the aforesaid premise, the learned counsel for the Appellant

submitted that while the said case 4843/ZL was pending before court and also,

whilst a caveat was in operation, said Subramanium, who was the defendant in the

said case bearing No 4843/ZL, had fraudulently executed the said deed No 804.

Since the deed bearing No 1809 had been declared null and void in the said case

4843/ZL, the subsequent deed No 804 is inevitably null and void since it had been

executed on the strength of deed No. 1809.

On the other hand, the Respondent contended that the judgment of the

said case No 4843/ZL was delivered on 27.10.1992. The sole Defendant in the said

case bearing No 4843/ZL was said Subramanium. He had died on 29.04.1991,

prior to the delivery of the judgment of the said case. Since the judgment of the

said case 4843/ZL had been delivered without effecting substitution in place of the

6

deceased Subremanium, said judgment of the District Court is a nullity. In proof

the said death, the Respondent has produced a death certificate marked V 6.

The Appellant has further contended that there was no evidence to

establish the fact that S. Subramanium referred to in the death certificate marked

V 6 was the same Sivagnanam Subramanium who was the 1st Defendant in case No

DC/Colombo/4843/ZL and he died prior to the delivery of the judgment of the said

case.

On this point the Respondent has raised the issue No 14 to wit; “has

the defendant of the case bearing No 4843/ZL died on 28.04.1991?” As I

mentioned above, the Respondent had produced a death certificate marked V 6.

However, V 6 refers to a death of a person called S. Subramanium. Since, the death

certificate does not bear the name of Sivagnanam Subramanium, evidence should

have been adduced to prove that said Sivagnanam Subramanium, the Defendant of

the case bearing No 4843/ZL, and S. Subramanium, the person referred to in the

said death certificate marked V 6, is one and the same person.

In order to prove the said death, the Respondent had led the evidence

of the Registrar of the District Court, Colombo. The Registrar, producing the said

death certificate marked V 6 subject to proof, has stated that it was the death

certificate of one S. Subramanium. As per the evidence of the Registrar, the death

certificate V 6 was in Tamil language and the Registrar could not understand the

contents of the said death certificate. It has been brought to the notice of this court

that the said death certificate which was in Tamil language is not in the brief and

instead a death certificate in sinhala language is available in the brief marked V 6,

without bearing the signature of the learned District Judge.

7

Udawatthage Don Premalal Kumarasiri, Clerk, Divisional Secretariat,

Thimbirigasyaya, has been called to produce the original death certificate of V 6.

Said Officer, in evidence, has stated that according to the original death certificate

a person named S. Subramanium had died on 29.04.1991. Particulars, such as the

deceased’s residence and parent’s names were not available in the said death

certificate. It is apparent from the said death certificate that the death had been

informed to the Registrar of Births and Deaths by a Medical Officer of the

Colombo General Hospital, in terms of Section 29(3) to be read with Section 30(1)

of the Births and Deaths Registration Act No 17 of 1951. In terms of Section 30(1)

of the said Act, a declaration has to be sent when a person required under Section

29 of the said Act to give particulars of a death occurring in the division cannot

conveniently attend the office of the Registrar of that division. Accordingly, the

said death certificate manifests that when the post mortem was held on the

deceased body the relatives of the deceased were not present and there had been no

claim for the dead body.

The Respondent has not led evidence of any relative or a friend or a

known person of said Sivagnanam Subramanium in order to prove that the said S.

Subramanium and said Sivagnanam Subramanium is one and the same person.

In the said circumstances, I hold that the Respondent has failed to

prove the death of the said Defendant Sivagnanam Subramanium had occurred

prior to the delivery of the judgment of the said case bearing No 4843/ZL.

Therefore, the Respondent’s contention that the said judgment of the case No

4843/ZL is a nullity stands to fail.

The Respondent further contended that the Appellant has failed to

register lis pendens in terms of Section 11(5) of the Registration of Documents

8

Ordinance No 23 of 1927. Said Section 11(5) stipulates that “A lis pendens may be

registered at any time after the plaint has been accepted by the court in accordance

with the provisions of the Civil Procedure Code.”

At the trial, the Respondent has not raised any issue on the matter of

registration of lis pendens. Also, he has not raised this matter before the High

Court of Civil Appeal. The Respondent has raised this matter for the first time in

appeal before this court. The learned counsel for the Respondent submitted that

this matter being a pure question of law could be raised for the first in appeal

before this court.

The learned counsel for the Appellant submitted that if the question of

lis pendens has been raised at the trial and if the lis pendens has not been registered

in the said case 4843/ZL, the Appellant could have taken the position that even

though the lis pendens has not been registered, there was a caveat filed in the

correct folio. He further submitted that, if there was a “search dispensed with”

before the date of the execution of the said deed bearing No 804 the Respondent

could have seen that there is a dispute with regard to the ownership of Sivagnanam

Subramanium. Having noted such circumstances if this court decides to entertain

such a contention for the first time in appeal, then, the Appellant would lose the

opportunity of adequately meeting this contention in appeal.

I am reluctant to agree with the said submission of the learned counsel

for the Respondent. Whether the lis pendens had been registered is not a pure

question of law, but a question mixed of law and fact. If the matter of lis pendens

had been raised as an issue at the trial, the Appellant would certainly have defences

open to him which he is now debarred from setting up. For example, the counsel

for the Appellant submitted that there was a caveat filed in the correct folio. If

9

there was a “search dispensed with” before the date of the execution of the said

deed bearing No 804 it could have been seen that there is a dispute with regard to

the ownership of Sivagnanam Subramanium. If the matter was raised at the trial

the Appellant could prove such fact by evidence.

In the case of Setha vs. Weerakoon [1948] 49 NLR 225 Dias J.

(Howard C.J. agreeing) observed that “It is a question of fact in each case as to

when litis contestatio arose so as to give rise to the doctrine of lis pendens. That

fact has not been proved here. I am of opinion that the point sought to be raised on

appeal for the first time is not a pure question of law but is a mixed question of law

and fact. It is uncovered by any of the issues framed, and the defendant respondent

has no opportunity of adequately meeting this contention in appeal. I am, therefore,

of opinion that this is not a matter which can be raised for the first time in appeal.

This being the only substantial question raised, the appeal fails and must be

dismissed with costs.”

The Respondent has claimed compensation for the improvements

made on the house which was in the land in dispute. It was an admitted fact that

the said house was there when the title was passed on to the Respondent.

According to the schedule of the said deed No 804, the Respondent has got title to

the land together with the trees, plantations and building thereon bearing

assessment No 255, Vihara Mawatha. Issue No 14 has been raised on the claim for

the improvements. The learned District Judge has concluded that the Respondent

has failed to prove the improvements. Other than the Respondent’s mere statement

that he spent about ten lakhs on the improvements to the house standing on the

land in dispute, there was no iota of evidence in order to compute the quantum of

the compensation. Even the learned counsel for the Respondent, in the written

submission, has admitted that the Respondent had failed to state the exact amount

10

he had spent on the above repairs. When I take in to consideration the said

evidence of the Respondent’s case, I cannot find fault with the findings of the

learned District Judge. It is well established and settled by our courts that findings

of primary facts by a trial Judge who hears and sees witnesses are not to be lightly

disturbed on appeal. (Alwis vs. Piyasena Fernando (1993) 1 SLR 119)

In the aforesaid circumstances, I am of the view that the learned High

Court Judges have failed to consider the merit of the case in a correct perspective.

Therefore, I hold that the Respondent is not entitled to raise the issue on

registration of lis pendens for the first time in appeal, as, it is a mixed question of

law and facts. Therefore, I set aside the said judgment of the High Court of Civil

Appeal dated 05.10.2012 and uphold the judgment of the learned Additional

District Judge dated 26.05.2005. I allow the appeal of the Appellant with costs.

Appeal allowed.

Judge of the Supreme Court

B. P. ALUWIHARE, PC, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

PRIYANTHA JAYAWARDENA, PC, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court