SC Appeal 117/2016 JUDGMENT Page 1 of 37

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Sarosha Mandika Wijeratne,

No. 11, Esther Avenue,

Park Road, Colombo 05.

PLAINTIFF

Vs.

Colombo Municipal Council,

Town Hall,

Colombo 07.

DEFENDANT

AND BETWEEN

Colombo Municipal Council,

Town Hall,

Colombo 07.

DEFENDANT-APPELLANT

Vs.

Sarosha Mandika Wijeratne,

No. 11, Esther Avenue,

Park Road, Colombo 05.

PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT

SC Appeal 117/2016

WP/HCCA/COL/06/2009(F)

DC Colombo Case No.

23926/MR

SC Appeal 117/2016 JUDGMENT Page 2 of 37

BEFORE: S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

A. L. SHIRAN GOONERATNE, J. AND

JANAK DE SILVA, J

COUNSEL: Priyal Wijayaweera, PC with Senani Dayaratne and Anushka

Hewapathirana for the Defendant-Appellant-Appellant.

Ikram Mohamed, PC with Charitha Jayawickrema for the Plaintiff-

Respondent-Respondent instructed by Mallawarachchi Associates.

AND NOW BETWEEN

Colombo Municipal Council,

No. 11, Esther Avenue,

Park Road, Colombo 05.

DEFENDANT-APPELLANT-APPELLANT

J.M. Bhadranie Jayawardhana,

Municipal Commissioner,

Colombo Municipal Council,

Town Hall, Colombo 07.

Vs.

Sarosha Mandika Wijeratne,

No. 11, Esther Avenue,

Park Road, Colombo 05.

PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT-

RESPONDENT

S. Thurairaja, PC, J

SC Appeal 117/2016 JUDGMENT Page 3 of 37

WRITTEN

SUBMISSIONS:

Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent on 22nd June 2017 and 30th April

2024

Defendant-Appellant-Petitioner on 24th July 2017 and 29th April 2024

ARGUED ON: 11th March 2024

DECIDED ON: 21st February 2025

THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

1. The case stems from the misfortune the Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter

the Plaintiff) had to endure in the wee hours of the 23rd morning of August 1999, when

he, a vascular surgeon and a professor of Surgery at the Colombo Medical Faculty, had

set off to the General Hospital of Colombo in a rush having been summoned for

emergency surgery at around 3 a.m.

2. As he drove down the familiar Havelock Road, he had collided with an island in the centre

of that road newly constructed by the Defendant-Appellant-Appellant (hereinafter the

Defendant), Colombo Municipal Council. In a twisted turn of fate, the Plaintiff was then

rushed to the General Hospital for treatment, having suffered serious injuries, particularly

to his spine. The injury to his spine was described as permanentand such would

naturally be a great hindrance to any surgeon in their profession.

3. The permanence of the injury is well established by the medical reports presented before

the District Court as well as by the testimony of Dr. Vasantha Perera, Consultant

Orthopaedic, who treated the Plaintiff when he was admitted to the Hospital.

4. The Plaintiff states that he was warded for treatment at the Hospital for five days. He

states that thereafter he was with a POP cast for a period of two months and a removable

brace for a further period of two months. He had then gone to England for two years on

S. Thurairaja, PC, J

SC Appeal 117/2016 JUDGMENT Page 4 of 37

sabbatical leave and had done research work as he could not stand and do surgeries for

a long period at a stretch.

5. Following the accident, the Plaintiff had instituted action before the District Court of

Colombo by plaint dated 19th November 1999 against the Colombo Municipal Council

for the negligence on their part claiming, inter alia, Rs. 10 million in compensation. He

states that the injuries caused to him are such that they would affect him throughout his

life. He claims the damage so caused to be incalculable in financial terms, and that Rs. 10

million would not begin to remedy the permanent injury caused to him.

6. The Plaintiff further claims that he conducted surgeries in several private hospitals and

that he could not do such surgeries for a period of two years, resulting in a loss of income.

He further states that he had to spend Rs. 150,000/- to repair his vehicle. While he has

provided documentary proof of the expenses incurred to repair the vehicle, no evidence

has been submitted as to his income.

7. By Judgment dated 26th January 2009, the District Court of Colombo, having found in

favour of the Plaintiff, has granted all relief prayed for by the Plaintiff. Aggrieved by this

judgment, the Defendant Municipal Council had appealed to the High Court of Civil

Appeal.

8. The case before this Court is an Appeal preferred by the Defendant-Appellant-Appellant

seeking to set aside the Judgment of the High Court of Civil Appeal holden in Colombo

dated 30th March 2016, which upheld the aforementioned Judgment of the District Court

of Colombo.

S. Thurairaja, PC, J

SC Appeal 117/2016 JUDGMENT Page 5 of 37

QUESTIONS OF LAW

9. Leave to appeal has been granted on the following questions of law:

i. Has the Civil Appellate High Court of Colombo erred in law in failing to follow and/or

apply the legal principles and/or the relevant case law cited by the Defendant with

regard to the applicability of the rule of Res Ipsa Loquitur?

ii. Has the Civil Appellate High Court of Colombo erred in law by awarding damages

to the Plaintiff whereas the Plaintiff has failed to give proper details of income and

expense incurred in a systemic way to enable a court of law to grant damages?

iii. Has the Civil Appellate High Court of Colombo erred in law by holding that the

defendant was negligent because of the plaintiff's version was that he did not know

as to how the accident took place? [sic]

iv. Has the Civil Appellate High Court of Colombo erred in law by awarding damage to

the vehicle of the plaintiff, whereas he had been compensated more than his claim

sought in the plaint by the Insurance Company?

FIRST QUESTION OF LAW

10. The Defendant Council avers, under the first question of law, that the learned judges of

the High Court of Civil Appeal have erred in failing to follow the principles and precedent

submitted by them with regard to the principle of res ipsa loquitur.

11. The judgment of the District Court makes no mention of res ipsa loquitur. In this context,

it is perplexing as to why a defendant-appellant would make any submissions regarding

the same in the first place.

S. Thurairaja, PC, J

SC Appeal 117/2016 JUDGMENT Page 6 of 37

12. Moreover, as the Plaintiff points out, both the initial written submissions of the

Defendant-Appellant dated 11th July 20131 and the additional written submissions of the

Defendant-Appellant dated 17th February 20162 before the High Court of Civil Appeal, in

fact, make no reference to the principle of res ipsa loquitur and do not contain any

authorities in that regard.

13. For this reason alone, the first question of law has to be answered in the negative, as

there has been no material on res ipsa loquitur placed before the High Court of Civil

Appeal to consider in this regard. Despite this, I see it pertinent to consider the operation

of res ipsa loquitur succinctly, as the term appears in the judgment of the High Court of

Civil Appealalbeit briefly.

14. Perusal of the judgment of the High Court of Civil Appeal indicates a single reference to

res ipsa loquitur wherein the learned judge of the High Court of Civil Appeal reasons as

follows:

It is the duty of the defendant to take steps to provide adequate warning of the

said construction especially at night and as bringing something of that nature itself

is dangerous, the defendant had the burden of proving that it was not negligent in

leaving the said construction in the middle of the road without a proper system of

warning to drivers. The reason is that the plaintiffs version that he did not

know how the accident took place itself is res ipsa loquitur of the fact that the

construction laid there causing danger3

1 Produced marked P10

2 Produced marked P13

3 Judgment of the High Court of Civil Appeal dated 30th March 2016 in Case No. WP/HCCA/COL/06/2009/F, p. 4 (emphasis added)

S. Thurairaja, PC, J

SC Appeal 117/2016 JUDGMENT Page 7 of 37

15. The first question of law as well as the third question appear to arise out of the part of

the judgment emphasised above.

16. This reasoning of the learned High Court Judge is erroneous for several reasons. Firstly,

it appears that the learned Judge has used the term res ipsa loquitur rather casually and

informally, without due regard to how the principle should apply. Needless to say, such

nonchalant usage of legal nomenclature, especially such terms that carry with it broad

meanings, is far from ideal.

17. Res ipsa loquitur posits that where a thing is shown to be under the management and

control of a defendant, directly or indirectly, and the accident is such that it would not

have occurred but for want of care, it leads to a reasonable inference of negligence on

the part of a defendant, unless such defendant affords a reasonable explanation.4

18. Where the principle is successfully invoked by proof of an occurrence capable of giving

rise to the inference, it is no longer practically necessary for a plaintiff to lead evidence

proving negligence, for there is no need to prove that which is self-evident. However,

where the defendant is able to provide a reasonable explanation to displace the

inference, the law once again places emphasis on the proof of negligence.

19. This burden of the defendant, where res ipsa loquitur is successfully invoked, to provide

a reasonable explanation must not be misperceived as a burden to prove positively that

they had not been negligentThis, in my view, is the second error committed by the

learned High Court Judge of Civil Appeal.

20. Admittedly, many authorities can be found to advance the position that res ipsa loquitur

amounts to a presumption or, stronger yet, a rule that shifts the ultimate burden of proof

4 See Scott v. London Dock Co. (1865) 3 H. & C. 596

S. Thurairaja, PC, J

SC Appeal 117/2016 JUDGMENT Page 8 of 37

to the defendant. As a result, much confusion surrounds the question as to how res ipsa

loquitur affects the burden of proof.

21. Be that as it may, the notion that it amounts to nothing more than a permissible

inferenceand not a presumption or a shifting of the ultimate burdenfinds greater

judicial support in early jurisprudence.5 Such is the better view, in my assessment.

22. E. B. Wickramanayake in The Law of Delict in Ceylon has the following to say in this

regard,

The operation of this rule [res ipsa loquitur] is not to cast upon the defendant the

burden of proving that the damage was not due to his negligence. [See Winnipeg

Electric Co. vs. Geel 1932 A. C. 690 where, however, the burden is cast on the

defendant by statute.] The burden remains on the plaintiff throughout the case. [Van

Wyk vs. Lewis 1924 A.D. at 444; Nande vs. Transvaal Boot and Shoe Manufacturing

Co. 1938 A.D. 379] It does however call for a reasonable explanation from the

defendants. [Abeyapala vs. Rajapakse 44 N.L.R. 289] What the defendants have to

do here, said Langhton J. [The Kite 1933 P. 154 at 170], is not to prove that their

negligence did not cause the accident. What they have to do is to give a reasonable

explanation which, if it be accepted, is an explanation showing that it happened

without their negligence. They need not go even so far as that because if they give a

reasonable explanation which is equally consistent with the accident happening

without their negligence or with their negligence they have again shifted the burden

of the proof to the plaintiffas they always have to show from the beginningthat

it was the negligence of the defendants that caused the accident. [If the defenders

can show a way in which the accident may have occurred without negligence, the

5 See William L. Prosser, The Procedural Effect of Res Ipsa Loquitur (1936) XX:3 Minnesota Law Review 241, at 244-253

S. Thurairaja, PC, J

SC Appeal 117/2016 JUDGMENT Page 9 of 37

cogency of the fact of the accident by itself disappears and the pursuer Is left where

he began, namely, that he has to show negligence. Per Lord Dunedin in Ballard v.

North British Railway Co. 1923 S.C.H.L. 43. But the explanation to be of any avail

must be based on fact, not fancy. There must be some substantial foundation in fact

for the explanation. Per Curlewis J.A. in Hamilton vs. McKinnon 1935 A.D. appendix.

See Kuranda vs. Sinclair 1932 W.L.D.I.; Gordon vs. Mathies estate 1933 C.P.D. 353;

Hunter vs. Wright (1938) 2 A.E.R. 621].6

23. While I take the view that the learned Judge of the High Court of Civil Appeal has erred

to this extent, the first question of law has to be answered in the negative, for the record

indicates no material placed by the Defendant before the High Court of Civil Appeal on

res ipsa loquitur for consideration.

THIRD QUESTION OF LAW

24. The third question of law reads Has the Civil Appellate High Court of Colombo erred in

law by holding that the defendant was negligent because of the plaintiff's version was that

he did not know as to how the accident took place? [sic]

25. As adverted to earlier, the learned High Court Judge of Civil Appeal has, in fact, reasoned

the very fact that the Plaintiff was unaware of how the accident took place to be indicative

of the dangerous nature of the construction. While I am of the view that this constitutes

a somewhat unwarranted leap in reasoning, it is not the sole reason the High Court of

Civil Appeal has set out in concluding that the Defendant Council had been negligent.

26. The Court has also referred to certain parts of the evidence available on record, which

amply establishes that there had not been a proper system of warning in place for the

6 E.B. Wickramanayake, The Law of Delict in Ceylon (Frewin & Co. 1949) at 18-19

S. Thurairaja, PC, J

SC Appeal 117/2016 JUDGMENT Page 10 of 37

safety of drivers. It is on this basis, inter alia, that the Court has come to its conclusion.

27. However, several arguments were made on behalf of the Defendant Council made before

this Court as well as the High Court of Civil Appeal and the District Court suggesting

contributory negligence on the part of the Plaintiff, although the defence of contributory

negligence was not specifically raised by the Defendant during the trial.

Contributory Negligence

28. Section 3(1) of the Law Reform (Contributory Negligence and Joint Wrongdoers) Act, No.

12 of 1968 provides that,

(a) Where any person suffers damage which is caused partly by his own fault and

partly by the fault of any other person, a claim in respect of that damage shall

not be defeated by reason only of the fault of the claimant, but the damages

recoverable in respect thereof shall be reduced by the court to such extent

as the court may deem just and equitable having regard to the degree in

which the claimant was at fault in relation to the damage.

(b) Damage shall, for the purpose of paragraph (a) of this subsection, be regarded as

having been caused by a persons fault, notwithstanding the fact that any other

person had an opportunity of avoiding the consequences thereof and negligently

failed to do so.

29. This Section, clearly influenced by Section 1 of the Law Reform (Contributory Negligence)

Act 1945 of England, Wales and Scotland, enables courts of law to exercise just and

equitable jurisdiction in the apportionment of responsibility and computation of

damages. In this just and equitable apportionment of liability, English Courts have

conventionally taken cognisance of two factors: relative blameworthiness and the causal

S. Thurairaja, PC, J

SC Appeal 117/2016 JUDGMENT Page 11 of 37

potency of the conduct in question.7 What is to be followed is a commonsense approach.

As Lord Reid opined in Jackson v. Murray [2015],8 commenting on the

incommensurability of the above factors,

It follows that the apportionment of responsibility is inevitably a somewhat rough

and ready exercise (a feature reflected in the judicial preference for round figures),

and that a variety of possible answers can legitimately be given. That is consistent

with the requirement under section 1(1) to arrive at a result which the court considers

just and equitable...

30. Be that as it may, for my qualms in this case are not with the question of apportionment

but with the finding of contributory negligence itself. Before a judge may venture into

such assessment, the judge must come to a finding of contributory negligence, for this

provision relates not to the law of liability but the law of remedies.9 Authorities indicate

the necessity of contributory negligence being pleaded before it can be considered by a

judge.10 At no point did the Defendant raise the question of contributory negligence in

the instant case.

31. Although the Defendant did not so raise contributory negligence, much of their pleading

related to the various forms of negligent conduct on the part of the Plaintiff. The

Defendant mainly averred that the Plaintiff had driven beyond the speed limit and that

the Plaintiff was familiar with the road as well as with the construction of the island. The

District Court record indicates that the Plaintiff has been heavily cross-examined in this

regard.

7 Jackson v Murray [2015] UKSC 5 [15] and [26]

8 ibid [28]

9 See James Goudkamp, Tort Law Defences (2013 Hart Publishing) 71

10 See UBC Bank Plc v. David J Pinder Plc [1998] CLC 1262 (QBD) [17]

S. Thurairaja, PC, J

SC Appeal 117/2016 JUDGMENT Page 12 of 37

32. According to the Plaintiffs own admission, the accident had occurred on a road very

familiar to him. This is apparent from the District Court Proceedings which records as

follows:

: ?

: .

...

: ?

: 6

. .

: ?

: .

.

[Q: As a citizen living in Colombo, are you familiar with Colombo roads?

A: I only use one road.

I travel the havelock road.

Q: How times per day do you use that road?

A: At least twice a day I use that road at most 6 times. I travel back and forth

Q: About the place where the collision happened, how about that place?

A: That road divides two ways. I had no idea that there was an island in the

middle.]11

11 Proceedings of the District Court Case No. 23926/MR dated 31st August 2004, at pp. 3-4; Appeal Brief, at pp. 69-70 (Approximate translation added)

S. Thurairaja, PC, J

SC Appeal 117/2016 JUDGMENT Page 13 of 37

33. During cross-examination, the Plaintiff has further stated as follows:

: ?

: .

: ?

: .

: ?

: .

: ?

: .

[Q: Did you go anywhere before this incident?

A: Yes.

Q: Did you see the obstruction at this?

A: Yes.

Q: You travel back and forth through this place, right?

A: Yes.

Q: In the middle of the road, there is an island, right?

A: This is not a place where there is an island.]12

34. Evidence of the Defendant Councils District Engineer clearly states that the construction

of the centre island took thirteen days, from 01st August to 13th August 1999.13 Clearly,

the Plaintiff would have driven past the construction site as well as the completed centre

12 Proceedings of the District Court Case No. 23926/MR dated 31st March 2005, at pp. 1; Appeal Brief, at pp. 82 (Approximate translation added)

13 Proceedings of the District Court Case No. 23926/MR dated 14th January 2008, at pp. 6; Appeal Brief, at pp. 146

S. Thurairaja, PC, J

SC Appeal 117/2016 JUDGMENT Page 14 of 37

island many times. While this itself is not sufficient to draw an inference of negligence

on the part of the Plaintiff, it is also clear from his evidence that the Plaintiff had driven

above the speed limit under such conditions he himself claimed to be poorly lit.

35. Moreover, the road in question is fourteen meters wide and has four lanes, with two lanes

each going in each direction. Had the Plaintiff driven on the left lane, as he ought to,

without moving well into the middle lane, he would not have hit the centre islandfor

the centre island only covered the inward parts of the middle lanes.

36. When all such is said but the term contributory negligent itself, I do not think a judge

must necessarily close his mind to any and all fault on the part of those who make the

claim. I take the view that, where negligent elements in a Plaintiffs conduct are

established by evidence and a defendant has brought the same to the notice of the court,

such court may activate the machinery in the 1968 Act and proceed to reduce the

damages recoverable as it deems just and equitable.

37. In the case at hand, the part the Plaintiff himself has played in the accident is hardly

negligible. A motorist has a duty to observe reasonable care, especially when conditions

are such that they could induce mistakes. This, however, does not abrogate the duty of

the Defendant Council to take all such measures as may be necessary to give due notice

of the structure to those who use the road.

38. As such, I am of the view that, while the conclusions of the learned Judges of the High

Court of Civil Appeal and the District that the Defendant had been negligent is not

erroneous, they have erred in holding that the Defendant had been solely negligent.

39. Issues Nos. 20 (), () and 21() in the District Court judgment are as follows, and they

have all been answered in the negative by the District Judge:

S. Thurairaja, PC, J

SC Appeal 117/2016 JUDGMENT Page 15 of 37

20.. ? [Did the

Plaintiff have the last opportunity prevent the said collision?]

. ? [Did the Plaintiff fail to prevent

the said collision?]

21. 5() () [If

aforementioned issues 5() and () are answered in favour of the Defendant]14

. ? [Is the Plaintiff responsible for the

collision?]

40. Accordingly, I am of the view that Issues Nos. 20 () and () in the District Court

judgment must accordingly be answered in the affirmative, and Issue No. 21() must be

answered as partially in the following manner to reflect the above findings.

41. I answer the third question of law in the affirmative, as the reasoning of the High Court

of Civil Appeal does not logically warrant the conclusion.

SECOND QUESTION OF LAW

42. The second question of law is whether the High Court of Civil Appeal erred in law by

awarding damages when the Plaintiff has failed to give proper details of income and

expenses incurred to facilitate the computation of damages.

43. In the instant case, the injuries caused to the Plaintiff and the causal nexus thereof to the

Defendants negligence are established by cogent evidence. However, as the Defendant

Council contends, the Plaintiff has not given any evidence as to his income or expenses

incurred as a result of the accident.

14 Issues Nos. 20 () and () are submitted as Issues Nos. 5 (), () in the D

S. Thurairaja, PC, J

SC Appeal 117/2016 JUDGMENT Page 16 of 37

44. He merely claims that he had been working as a consultant surgeon and a lecturer and

that he has not been able to stand and perform surgeries, as he used to, since the

accident. These facts were not contradicted by the Defendant.

45. The question we are confronted with, then, is whether it is open for a court to award

damages where a plaintiff fails to precisely establish his income and expenses in a

systematic manner.

46. The Defendant Council fervently contended before this Court that the plaintiff in an

aquilian action has to prove the pecuniary loss and should give proper details of income

and expenses. While this had long been the understanding, many exceptions to this

conventional position have been recognised in the Roman-Dutch law of today.

47. Yasantha Kodagoda, PC, J. has given a detailed exposition on this in C. Karunanayake

and Others v. Mannapperuma Mohotti Appuhamilage Thushari Ranga

Mannapperuma.15 As held therein,

it is evident that in the original and conventional sense of the Lex Aquilia,

damages can be awarded only if the loss suffered by the plaintiff occasioned as a

result of the breach of a duty of case by the defendant, had resulted in damnum

that is patrimonial loss and is capable of pecuniary (financial) assessment. It thus

seems that the award damages claimable in an Aquilian action is generally confined

only to situations where there is a calculable pecuniary loss. The pecuniary loss

should be proved by the Plaintiff.

15 SC Appeal No. 130/15, SC Minutes of 21st February 2022

S. Thurairaja, PC, J

SC Appeal 117/2016 JUDGMENT Page 17 of 37

However, it is important to noted that, in the Roman-Dutch as it stands today, there

are certain well recognized exceptions to the norm that ensuing patrimonial loss

must be proved to enable a Court to grant damages. These exceptions are as follows:

(i) Situations where actionable negligence has caused physical injury to the

victim resulting in psychological trauma. (See The Law of Delict by R.G.

McKerron, at page 51) In this situation, notwithstanding the Plaintiff being

unable to establish patrimonial loss, he is entitled to general damages due to

both the physical injury as well as psychological trauma16

48. R. G. McKerron refers, in his treatise, to three types of damages recoverable in an

aquilian action for personal injuries: (1) actual expenditure and pecuniary loss; (2)

disfigurement, pain and suffering, and loss of health and amenities of life; and (3) future

expenses and loss of earning capacity.17 He observes therein, with regard to these second

and third types, as follows:

"Under the second head, the plaintiff can recover compensation not only for

the pain and inconvenience he has already suffered, but also for the pain and

inconvenience he will suffer in the future. [Brown v. Bloemfontein Municipality, 1924

O.P.D. 226.] Under this head, too, he is entitled to compensation for shortened

expectation of life; for loss of expectation of life is clearly one of the subjective factors

to be taken into account in awarding damages for pain and suffering. [See Goldie v.

City Council of Johannesburg, 1948 (2) S.A. 913, 923.]

The damages recoverable under second head cannot be assessed on any

arithmetical or logical basis. There are no scales by which pain and suffering can be

measured, and there is no relationship between pain and money which makes it

16 (emphasis omitted)

17 McKerron, The Law of Delict (7th edn, Juta & Co. Limited, 1971) at 117-118

S. Thurairaja, PC, J

SC Appeal 117/2016 JUDGMENT Page 18 of 37

possible to express one in terms of the other with any approach to certainty. [Sandler

v. Wholesale Coal Suppliers, Ltd., supra, at 199, per Watermeyer C.J.] The usual

method adopted is to take all the circumstances into consideration and award

substantially an arbitrary sum. [Oosthuizen v. Thompson, 1919 T.P.D 124, 131. As to

the circumstances which may be taken into account, see Radebe v. Hough, 1949 (1)

S.A. 380 (A.D.), 385-6.]

Under the third head, the plaintiff is entitled to compensation for future

expenses in connection with the injuries, and, in the case of permanent injury, for loss

of future income and prospects. [See Brown v. Bloemfontein Municipality, 1924 O.P.D.

226.] In assessing the amount to be awarded in respect of permanent injury, the court

must not attempt to give an absolutely perfect compensation; for many contingencies

must be taken into account, rendering exact mathematical calculation impossible.

[Rowley v. London & N.W. Ry. (1873) L.R. 8 Ex. 221 at 230, per Brett J. See Sigournay

v. Gillbanks, supra.]18

49. This question has also been very recently addressed by Obeyesekere, J. in Konni

Arachchige Sriyanthi Samanmali v. Suraweera Arachchige Milton Suraweera.19

Having referred to Mahipala and Others v. Martin Singho20 and Gaffoor v. Wilson.21

Obeyesekere, J. held that the Court is not justified in refusing to award the plaintiff

damages merely because the quantum is difficult of assessment.22

18 ibid at 114

19 SC Appeal No. 107/2019, SC Minutes of 02nd August 2024. See also Jayakody v. Jayasuriya 2005 (1) Sri L.R. 216; Fracshida Charlotte v. Jannet Costa v. Others (2012) B.L.R. (2) 334

20 [2006] 2 Sri L.R. 272

21 [1990] 1 Sri L.R. 142

22 Konni Arachchige Sriyanthi Samanmali v. Suraweera Arachchige Milton Suraweera SC Appeal No. 107/2019, SC Minutes of 02nd August 2024, at 15

S. Thurairaja, PC, J

SC Appeal 117/2016 JUDGMENT Page 19 of 37

50. Mahipala and Others v. Martin Singho23 involved a case where the plaintiff who was

riding a bicycle was run over by a vehicle of the Sri Lanka Army, causing lifelong injuries.

With regard to the calculation of damages for such physical injuries, Wimalachandra, J.

for the Court of Appeal, referring to McKerron, opined that,

By their very nature various forms of non- patrimonial loss such as pain and

suffering or loss of the amenities of life are difficult to translate into monetary terms

with precision. So it is not unusual to assess together as one sum the computation of

damages for pain and suffering and loss of amenities of life. In awarding a lump sum

as damages when the wrong complained of constitutes personal injuries, it is difficult

to assess damages on a logical basis

51. In Gaffoor v. Wilson, a case where a mother claimed damages for the loss of financial

support arising out of the death of her son in a motor vehicle accident, Amerasinghe, J.

held with regard to the absence of actuarial evidence that,24

For although the formulation of a successful claim for prospective damages or the

rebuttal of an extravagantly large one is never a simple exercise in actuarial

mathematics such evidence would have been invaluable especially in assessing

how much capital should be paid to the plaintiff to enable her to have a fixed sum

per month for life. The absence of actuarial evidence does not absolve me from the

duty of assessing damages. I must do the best I can.25

52. The case of De Silva v. Gunawardena,26 involved, much like the instant case, a surgeon

who suffered permanent injuries from a motor accident. The plaintiff had suffered various

23 [2006] 2 Sri L.R. 272

24 [1990] 1 Sri L.R. 142

25 (Notes omitted)

26 66 NLR 385

S. Thurairaja, PC, J

SC Appeal 117/2016 JUDGMENT Page 20 of 37

injuries to his hand, which impaired his ability to conduct surgeries. With regard to the

factors which must be taken into account, Sansoni, J. (as His Lordship then was) opined

as follows:

The plaintiff is a doctor in Government Service who has practised his profession from

1943, and was 39 years old when this accident occurred. He has carried out different

kinds of operations as a Surgeon, although he has not specialised in any branch. He

stated in evidence that it was his intention to retire from Government Service and

start a private practice in his home town of Kalutara. As a result of the permanent

disability he now suffers from, he will be handicapped and his practice is bound to

suffer, because his patients will know about his disability.

The only question is the quantum of damages that should be awarded

I do not see why the Plaintiff should not be compensated for the loss of his freedom

to choose a new way of exercising his profession. He is handicapped to the extent

that he cannot do all the work a Surgeon should be able to do. His power to earn is,

to this extent, impaired. He is not bound to continue in Government Service: If he had

been, of course, the quantum of damages would be almost trivial. He has lost the

right, which he formally had, of earning his living in the best way possible.27

53. As can be seen, while actuarial evidence is most certainly helpful, the absence of which

should not absolve the Court from arriving at a reasonable assessment.28 Therefore, I am

of the view that learned Judges of the High Court of Civil Appeal have not erred in

awarding damages in the absence of evidence as to the Plaintiffs income and expenses

27 ibid 388

28 See UL Abdul Majeed, A Modern Treatise on The Law of Delict (Tort) (2017) 391

S. Thurairaja, PC, J

SC Appeal 117/2016 JUDGMENT Page 21 of 37

he incurred as a result of the accident. The second question of law is answered in the

negative.

54. Moreover, given the Plaintiffs age at the time of the accident40 years

approximately29the fact that he was a consultant surgeon, career prospects which

would have been hindered as a result of his injuries, and the loss of potential income as

well as the pain and suffering that would result therefrom, the amount of Rs. 10 million

as compensation is not excessive. However, this must be adjusted in line with the finding

of contributory negligence.

FOURTH QUESTION OF LAW

55. The fourth question is whether the High Court of Civil Appeal erred in granting Rs.

150,000/- to the Plaintiff for the damage to his vehicle when he has recovered Rs. 350,000

from his insurer.

56. The contention of the learned Presidents Counsel on behalf of the Plaintiff was that the

Defendants liability does not cease in law by any payment received by the Plaintiff on

any insurance policy he has obtained.

57. In support of this, he submitted the case of Thavathurai v. Rochai30 where Sansoni, J.

(as His Lordship then was) held as follows:

Now the law has always been that a defendant cannot diminish the damages by

showing that the plaintiff has obtained compensation for the injury under a policy of

insurance-see 23 Halsbury (2nd edition) page 726. This rule has stood for nearly 200

years and has never been doubted. But it is submitted that a different view should

29 Proceedings before the District Court of Colombo dated 31st August 2004 indicates his age as 45

30 60 NLR 488

S. Thurairaja, PC, J

SC Appeal 117/2016 JUDGMENT Page 22 of 37

now be taken in view of the decision of the House of Lords in British Transport

Commissions v. Gourley [(1956) A.C. 185.]

It was decided there that in assessing damages, in an action for personal injuries. For

the loss of actual or prospective earnings, the Court must take account of the

plaintiffs net earnings after deduction of tax, and not his gross earnings. The

principle applied was that the plaintiff in such a case should be awarded such a sum

of money as will put him in the same position as he would have been if he had not

sustained the injuries, and it would therefore be wrong to award the plaintiff a sum

without regard to the amount of tax for which would be liable.

The case had nothing to do with the other principle that I referred to, that the

defendant cannot claim any benefit from the circumstance that a plaintiff has been

insured. There seems to be some uncertainty as to the true basis upon which that

principle rests. Pigott B. in Bradburn v. Great Western Railway [(1874) L.R. 10 Ex. 1.]

said: There is no reason or justice in setting off what the plaintiff has entitled himself

to under a contract with third persons, by which he has bargained for the payment

of a sum of money in the event of an accident happening to him. He does not received

that sum of money because of the accident, but because he has made contract

providing for this contingency; an accident mist occur to entitled him to it, but it is

not the accident but his contract which is the cause of his receiving it.

Another view is that a wrongdoer should not get the benefit of the fortuitous

circumstance that the plaintiff was insured, and appropriate to himself the benefit of

the premiums paid by the plaintiff to cover accident risks. An editorial note in the

Law Quarterly Review, Vol. 72, page 154 says: The rule concerning insurance is a

peculiar one, based on consideration of public policy, and this is also the view of Mr.

Mckerron in his book The Law of Delict (5th edition) page 107 where he says: The

S. Thurairaja, PC, J

SC Appeal 117/2016 JUDGMENT Page 23 of 37

result of the decision is that the plaintiff may sometimes receive double

compensation. They are therefore anomalous in that they involve a departure from

the rule that damages in the Aquilian action are essentially compensatory. The truth

would appear to be that it is impossible to justify the anomaly on purely logical

grounds, and that it must be regarded as based on considerations of social policy.

The interests of society are sometimes better served by allowing the injured party to

recover damages beyond the compensatory measure than by allowing the

wrongdoer to benefit by the fact that some other person has discharged his liability.

Moreover, the effect of refusing to allow recovery in full would be to deprive

the third party of any right he might have to claim reimbursement from the

injured party by subrogation or cession of action.31

58. Moreover, in Mason v. Sainsbury32the seminal case on the doctrine of subrogation

where an insured claimed from the insurance policy as well as the local authority for the

resultant losses from a civic disorder, it was not open for the local authority to resist the

plaintiffs claim on the basis that their losses had already been indemnified by the insurer.

59. As such, I am of the view that the Defendant Council in the instant case is not entitled to

avoid paying compensation for the damage to the motor vehicle on the basis that such

losses have already been indemnified by the Plaintiffs insurance.

60. Accordingly, the fourth and final question of law is answered in the negative.

31 ibid 489.

32 (1782) 3 Dougl KB 61

S. Thurairaja, PC, J

SC Appeal 117/2016 JUDGMENT Page 24 of 37

CONCLUSION

61. In line with the answers to the questions of law, the appeal is partially allowed. Had the

Defendant been solely negligent, the Plaintiff would have been entitled to damages in

the sum of Rs. 10 million as set out in his Plaint.

62. However, as both parties were found to have been negligent to varying degrees, the

amount of compensation must be discounted accordingly.

63. The Defendant-Appellant-Appellant is directed to pay the Plaintiff-Respondent-

Respondent compensation in the amount of Rs. 06 million for personal injuries and Rs.

150,000/- for damages to the vehicle, together with legal interests thereon.

64. No order as to costs.

Appeal Partially Allowed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

JANAK DE SILVA, J.

I have had the benefit of reading in draft the judgment proposed to be delivered by my

learned brother Thurairaja, PC, J., where he finds that both the Plaintiff-Respondent-

Respondent (Plaintiff) and Defendant-Appellant-Appellant (Appellant) were negligent. I

respectfully disagree on two grounds.

Firstly, it is trite law that trial proceeds on the issues. In Hanaffi v. Nallamma [(1998) 1

Sri.L.R. 73] it was held that once issues are framed, the case which the court has to hear

Janak De Silva, J

SC Appeal 117/2016 JUDGMENT Page 25 of 37

and determine becomes crystallised in the issues and the pleadings recede to the

background. Contributory negligence is not an issue on which trial proceeded.

In this context, it is apposite to observe that Section 75(d) of the Civil Procedure Code

requires every answer to contain a statement admitting or denying the several averments

of the plaint, and setting out in detail plainly and concisely the matters of fact and law,

and the circumstances of the case upon which the defendant means to rely for his

defence.

In Uvais v. Punyawathie [(1993) 2 Sri.L.R. 46] it was held that Section 75 not only

requires a defendant to admit or deny the several averments of the plaint, but also to set

out in detail, plainly and concisely the matters of fact and law, and the circumstances of

the case upon which he means to rely for his defence. It was held that the alleged absence

of an agreement to pay an increased rent was not a fact or circumstance on which the

defendant relied for his defence; nor a proposition on which the trial Court found the

parties at variance; evidence on that matter was prohibited to the defendant, and

superfluous for the plaintiff.

Contributory negligence is a specific defence to an Aquilian action. It must be specifically

pleaded and raised as an issue at the trial. There was no plea of contributory negligence

in the pleadings and was not an issue on which trial proceeded in this action.

In The British Petroleum Co. Ltd v. AG (26 N.L.R. 1 at pages 9-10) while contributory

negligence was briefly entertained, the court regarded it irrelevant as an issue had not

been framed and held:

It is suggested, therefore, that he ought to have taken measures to shift; his position,

and that by failing to take these measures he was guilty of contributory negligence.

I think too much has been made of this point. Even if the Captain did run this risk, it

was not his doing so that was the cause of the substantial damage, but, as I have

Janak De Silva, J

SC Appeal 117/2016 JUDGMENT Page 26 of 37

shown above, the real cause of this damage was the ignorance of the pilots of the

existence of the rock. In any case, there was no issue framed alleging

contributory negligence on the part of the Captain. (emphasis added)

I must make some reference to the Law Reform (Contributory Negligence and Joint

Wrongdoers) Act No. 12 of 1968 (Act) as my learned brother Thurairaja, PC, J. refers to

Section 3(1) of the Act.

The contribution of the injured partys own conduct to the damage suffered has been a

bar to the recovery of damages for centuries, in the tradition of civil as well as in common

law.

In classical Roman law, it was not possible to balance the culpable behaviour of the two

parties, but only to asses of the culpable behaviour of the wrongdoer. This important

characteristic, the all-or-nothing approach, was retained in Justinian law and enforced

until the Lex Aquilia lost its penal character, only in early modern times.

In medieval Roman legal scholarship, the contributory negligence of the injured party

seems to have been regarded as reproachable misconduct to be sanctioned by a refusal

of any claim for damages.

The early position in England and South Africa on the effect of contributory negligence

was the same. A plaintiff was barred from recovering damages if the harm they suffered

was caused, in whole or in part, by his own negligence.

Both South African and English courts attempted to soften the severity of this rule in cases

of slight negligence, using principles such as the 'last opportunity' rule, the 'proximate

cause' rule, and the 'moral blameworthiness' rule. However, in both South Africa and

England, there was a growing belief that contemporary notions of fairness and justice

Janak De Silva, J

SC Appeal 117/2016 JUDGMENT Page 27 of 37

called for the removal of these outdated legal provisions, as they no longer aligned with

the demands of modern life.

The principle that an injured party who was partly responsible for his own harm could not

recover damages in tort would remain the official doctrine in England until the Law

Reform (Contributory Negligence) Act of 1945. Section 1 (1) provided the rule that in such

cases the claim does not fail but the defence of contributory negligence may apply and if

it applies it may lead to a reduction of the amount of damages to be paid. This reduction

is based on the respective degrees of the responsibility of the parties. The question to be

answered is not only to what extent the behaviour involved was likely to cause the event,

but above all what is needed is a balancing of the respective faults by the judge. Ultimately

what is decisive is what the court/judge considers to be just and equitable. With the Law

Reform (Contributory Negligence) Act of 1945, the contributory negligence rule, with its

all-or-nothing approach, and the last opportunity rule became inoperative.

The legislature in South Africa enacted the Apportionment of Damages Act, No. 34 of

1956, which altered the law both in respect of joint liability as well as contributory

negligence, and as a result, the law in these two countries is more or less the same, on

contributory negligence.

In Ceylon (as it was then known), the position was the same as in England and South

Africa. Thus, in Ahnolis Hamy v. Alagan (44 N.L.R. 303) Court held that in an action to

recover damages for injury caused to a workman, which was based on the negligence of

his employer, the plaintiff is not entitled to succeed, where has himself been guilty of

contributory negligence. The take all or leave all approach is also clear from Perera v.

Charles (49 N.L.R. 39) where the DC judge had dismissed the action on the ground that

the plaintiff had, by sitting with his arm protruding from the bus, being guilty of

contributory negligence.

Janak De Silva, J

SC Appeal 117/2016 JUDGMENT Page 28 of 37

The courts sought to mitigate the harshness of the rule, as was done in England and in

South Africa, by the application of such rules as last opportunity and proximate cause.

In several cases the last opportunity rule has been specifically referred to. Under this rule,

even if there is negligence on the part of the defendant, in the event the plaintiff has the

last opportunity to prevent the damage, the case would be dismissed with no damages

granted to the plaintiff. This can be seen in Daniel v. Cooray (42 N.L.R. 422) where the

court referred to the last opportunity rule and stated that in cases where the defendant

pleads contributory negligence the inquiry resolves itself in an elucidation of the question

as to which party, by the exercise of ordinary care, had the last opportunity of preventing

the occurrence.

The Act was enacted to address two specific issues, apportionment of damages in cases

of joint liability and contributory negligence.

The Act provided inter alia that an action shall not be defeated by reason only of the fault

of the claimant. The court has the power to apportion the damages as it may deem just

and equitable.

Therefore, the Act was aimed at addressing the substantive rules governing action for

damages arising from a negligent act of the defendant. It was not aimed at amending any

procedural rules governing such actions. The procedural rules governing all actions,

including the need to specifically plead contributory negligence and raise it as an issue,

applies to such actions as well.

In this context, it is apposite to observe that Section 1(1) of the Contributory Negligence

Act 1945 is the basis of all pleas of contributory negligence in England & Wales and reads

as follows:

Janak De Silva, J

SC Appeal 117/2016 JUDGMENT Page 29 of 37

"Where any person suffers damage as a result partly of his own fault and partly of

the fault of any other person or persons a claim in respect of that damage shall not

be defeated by reason of the fault of the person suffering the damage, but the

damages recoverable in respect thereof shall be reduced to such extent as the Court

thinks just and equitable having regard to the claimant's share in responsibility for

the damage ...".

This provision is substantially the same as Section 3(1) of the Act. Nevertheless, it is trite

law in England as well that contributory negligence must be pleaded.

Winfield & Jolowicz on Tort [20th Ed. (23-040)] states that [t]he defendant bears the

burden of pleading and proving that the doctrine of contributory negligence applies.

In Maes Finance Ltd and another v. A L Phillips & Co.,[1997 WL 1104736] it was held

as follows:

In principle, in my judgment, there is no reason of law why a contributory negligence

plea should not be raised on an assessment of damages. The fact that it operates as

a partial defence on quantum is, in my view, no bar. Indeed it is a reason why it is

suitable to be raised at the assessment stage. It must, of course, be specially

pleaded. (emphasis added)

For the foregoing reasons, I hold that Section 3(1) of the Act does not empower the trial

judge to apportion damages unless contributory negligence is specifically pleaded and

raised as an issue.

Before parting with this issue, I observe that in any event contributory negligence it is not

a question of law on which leave was granted. Neither is it a pure question of law.

In the aforesaid circumstances, I hold that contributory negligence cannot be considered

in this appeal.

Janak De Silva, J

SC Appeal 117/2016 JUDGMENT Page 30 of 37

Secondly and in any event, the evidence does not establish negligence on the part of the

Defendant. The Plaintiff had the burden of proving negligence on the part of the

Defendant. He testified that he did not know how the accident occurred. No other

witnesses were called to testify on his behalf to establish the negligence on the part of

the Defendant.

Nevertheless, the High Court of Civil Appeal held that the Plaintiffs version that he did

not know how the accident took place itself is res ipsa loquitor of the fact that the

construction laid there causing danger (sic). In view of this conclusion, I must examine the

application of that maxim in some detail.

According to Trayners Latin Maxims, 4th edition, page 553 (Universal Law Publishing Co.

Pvt. Ltd., Indian Economy Reprint 2006), the Latin phrase res ipsa loquitur means the thing

itself speaks or the things done, or the transaction, speaks for itself.

It appears that from ancient times, certain legal systems presumed negligence in

particular circumstances. For example, the Roman Law presumed negligence on the part

of the defendant in some instances which cast a burden of disproving it on the defendant.

See for example Digest 19 2 13 6: Si fullo vestimenta polienda acceparit, eaque mures

roserint, ex loco tenetur: quia debuit ab hoc re cavere.

The term res ipsa loquitur is said to have been first employed by Cicero in 52 BC in his

defence of Milo. (Pro Milone 20.53: Res loquitur ipsa, iudices, quae semper valet plurimum.

Si haec non gesta audiretis, sed picta videretis, tamen appareret uter esset insidiator, uter

nihil cogitaret mali) (The matter speaks for itself, judges, such always having the

greatest validity. If you were not listening to an account of that which has been done, but

were looking at a picture thereof, it would nevertheless be clear which of the two was the

waylayer and which was considering no evil).

Janak De Silva, J

SC Appeal 117/2016 JUDGMENT Page 31 of 37

There is a debate as to whether this maxim is a doctrine or principle. It is referred to as a

doctrine in Perera v. Amarasinghe (Sub Inspector of Police, Ratnapura) (41 CLW 92

at 93) and in Ravi Kapur v. State of Rajasthan [(2012) 10 SCR 229; 2012 INSC 333].

However, Shaw L.J. in Ballard v. N.B. Ry. [1923 S.C. 43 (H.L.) at 56] opined that nobody

would have called it a principle if the phrase had not been in Latin. In Macleod v. Rens

[(1997) 3 SA 1039 (F) at 1048] it was held that this maxim is neither a doctrine nor a

principle.

Notwithstanding this academic debate, it can be safely said that the maxim does not

relieve the plaintiff of the burden of proving negligence. Neither does it raise any legal

presumption in his favour. It applies to the method by which a plaintiff can advance an

argument for purposes of establishing a prima facie case to the effect that in the particular

circumstances the mere fact that an accident has occurred raises a prima facie factual

inference that the defendant was negligent. How cogently those facts speak for

themselves will depend on the facts and circumstances of each case [See Macintosh and

Norman-Scoble, Negligence in Delict (1970) 496; McKerron, The Law of Delict (1971) 43;

Boberg, The Law of Delict (1989) 378ff; Neethling Potgieter and Visser, Law of Delict (1994)

141 307].

The fundamental conditions in which the maxim applies is aptly described by Erie C.J. in

Scott v. London & St. Katherine Dock Co. [(1865) 3 H &C. 596 at 601] as follows:

There must be reasonable evidence of negligence, but where the things is shown to

be under the management of the defendant or his servants, and the accident is such

as in the ordinary course of things does not happen if those who have the

management use proper care, it affords reasonable evidence in the absence of

explanation by the defendant, that the accident arose from want of care.

Janak De Silva, J

SC Appeal 117/2016 JUDGMENT Page 32 of 37

The earliest reference to the maxim res ipsa loquitur in South African case law seems to

be that of Gifford v. Table Bay Dock and Breakwater Management Commission

[(1874) 4 Buch 96]. The relevant facts indicate that the plaintiff in his capacity as Master

and Captain in command of a vessel known as The China instituted proceedings against

the defendants for the recovery of damages after The China had been wrecked when it

fell off a cradle of a patent slip which had been under the management and control of the

defendants at the time. De Villiers C.J. held that as there was evidence in this case of actual

negligence, the court did not consider it necessary to deal in detail with the question as

to whether the accident which befell The China was of such a nature as to raise a

presumption of negligence which would result in the casting of the burden of proof on

the defendants to repel the presumption.

The court nevertheless answered the question as to the defendants negligence in the

affirmative and after briefly referring to the Roman Law proceeded to discuss the legal

position in England and approved of the formulation of the doctrine by Erie C.J., in Scott

(supra).

Subsequently, this locus classicus has been approved and applied in South Africa [See

Packman v. Gibson Bros. (1887) 4 HCG 410; Cowell v. Friedman and Co. (1888) 5 HGC 22;

Block v. Pepys (1918) WLD 18; Miller v. Durban Corporation (1926) NPD 254; Katz v. Webb

(1930) TPD 700; Mitchell v. Maison Lisbon (1937) TPD 13; Salmons v. Jacoby (1939) AD 589;

Da Silva v. Frack (1947) 2 PH O 44 (W); SAR & H v. General Motors (SA) Ltd. (1949) 1 PH J

3 (C); De Bruyn v. Natal Oil Products Ltd (1952) 1 PH J 1 (N); Paola v. Hughes (Pty) Ltd.

(1956) 2 SA 587 (E); Osborne Panama SA v. Shell & BP South African Petroleum Refineries

(Pty) Ltd (1982) 4 SA 890 (G); Bayer South Africa (Pty) Ltd v. Viljoen (1990) 2 SA 647 (A);

Monteoli v. Woolworths (Pty) Ltd. (2000) 4 SA 735 (W); Webb v. Isaac (1915) EDL 273;

Coppen v. Impey (1916) CPD 309; Allott v. Patterson and Jackson (1936) SR 221; S v. Kramer

(1987) 1 SA 887 (W)].

Janak De Silva, J

SC Appeal 117/2016 JUDGMENT Page 33 of 37

I find much merit in the following principles expounded by Kroon, J. in Stacey v. Kent

[(1995) 3 SA 344 at 352] on the application of the maxim res ipsa loquitur:

(1) The rule gives rise to an inference, not a presumption, of negligence.

(2) The court is not compelled to draw the inference. At the end of the case, the

enquiry is where, on all the evidence, the balance of probabilities lies.

(3) If it is substantially in favour of the party bearing the onus on the pleadings, he

succeeds; if not he fails.

(4) Once the plaintiff proves the occurrence giving rise to the inference of negligence

on the part of the defendant, the latter must adduce evidence to the contrary. He

must tell the remainder of the story, or take the risk of judgment being given

against him.

(5) How far the defendants evidence needs to go to displace the inference of

negligence arising from proof of the occurrence depends upon the facts of the

particular case.

(6) Mere theories, or hypothetical suggestions will not avail the defendant. His

explanation must have some substantial foundation in fact and the evidence

produced must be sufficient to destroy the probability of negligence inferred to be

present prior to the testimony adduced by him. There is, however, no onus on the

defendant to establish the correctness of his explanation on a balance of

probabilities.

(7) The enquiry at the conclusion of the case remains whether the plaintiff has, on a

balance of probabilities, discharged the onus of establishing that the collision was

caused by negligence attributable to the defendant. In that enquiry the explanation

tendered by the defendant will be tested by considerations such as probability and

credibility.

Janak De Silva, J

SC Appeal 117/2016 JUDGMENT Page 34 of 37

Our courts have also applied this maxim. [See Safenaumma v. Siddick (37 N.L.R. 25); Perera

v. Amarasinghe (Sub Inspector of Police, Ratnapura) (supra); Kalansuriya v. Johoran (48

N.L.R. 400); The Trustees of Fraser Memorial Nursing Home v. Olney (45 N.L.R. 73); Wije Bus

Co. Ltd. v. Soysa (50 N.L.R. 350); Cabral v. Alberatne (57 N.L.R. 368); Subawickrema v.

Samaranayake (1992) 1 Sri.L.R. 142; Punchi Singho v. Bogala Graphite Co. Ltd. (73 N.L.R.

66), Dhammika Perera v. Nalinda Priyadharshana [(2013) 1 Sri.L.R. 155].

For example, in Kalansuriya v. Johoran (supra) the accused was driving a lorry, and the

evidence showed that the lorry left the road, went a distance of fifty feet and injured a

person standing eight feet away from the edge of the road. It was held that there was

prima facie evidence of negligence casting upon the accused the onus of proving that

there was no negligence.

This maxim clearly has no application where the cause of the accident is known. As was

held in Barkway v. South Wales Transport Co. Ltd. [(1950) 1 All E.R. 392 (HL) at 394-

5] where the facts are sufficiently known, the question ceases to be one where the facts

speak for themselves, and the solution is to be found by determining whether, on the

facts as established, negligence is to be inferred or not [See Administrator Natal v. Stanley

Motors (1960) 1 SA 690 (A) at 700].

In this context, I note that one of the admissions recorded at the trial is that parties admit

the accident mentioned in the plaint. According to the plaint, the cause of the accident

was an island that had been constructed on the middle of the Havelock Road. It appears

that this island had been constructed as there had been a fatal accident at the place about

one week prior to the date of the incident.

The evidence led on behalf of the Defendant establishes that the width of the Havelock

Road at the place of the accident was 46 feet. It was divided into four lanes, two lanes

each way. The construction which was on the middle of the road was about 3 feet in width,

Janak De Silva, J

SC Appeal 117/2016 JUDGMENT Page 35 of 37

with about 1 feet jutting out onto each side. Thus, the road was around 21 feet wide

each way.

In these circumstances, I have no hesitation in rejecting application of the maxim res ipsa

loquitur to the facts and circumstances of this case. The High Court of Civil Appeal appears

to have ventured on a speculative exercise in holding that this maxim applies to the facts

and circumstances of this action. It is of vital importance to appreciate the difference

between an inference and conjecture or speculation in the application of this maxim. In

Caswell v. Powell Duffryn Associated Collieries [(1940) AC 152 at 169] Lord Wright

provides the following instructive exposition of the difference between an inference and

speculation or conjecture:

Inference must be carefully distinguished from conjecture or speculation. There can

be no inference unless there are objective facts from which to infer the other facts

which it is sought to establish. In some cases the other facts can be inferred with as

much practical certainty as if they had been actually observed. In other cases the

inference does not go beyond reasonable probability. But if there are no positive,

proved facts from which the inference can be made, the method of inference fails

and what is left is mere speculation or conjecture.

On the contrary, the Plaintiff must explain how the Defendant can be held to be negligent

when the Plaintiff had clearly driven the car close to the middle of the road where an

island had been constructed when he had about a 21 feet wide road to drive his car on a

road which was empty of any vehicular traffic at about 3 a.m. in the morning. The Plaintiff

admitted that the road was wide at the place of the accident.

This by itself will not establish the negligence of the Plaintiff. However, as my learned

brother Thurairaja, J. observes, the Plaintiff was admittedly driving over the speed limit.

The very fact that the Plaintiff was driving his vehicle above the speed limit close to the

Janak De Silva, J

SC Appeal 117/2016 JUDGMENT Page 36 of 37

middle of the road coupled with the fact that there was a single white line in the middle

of the road near the place of the accident justifies an inference of negligence on his part.

The island was constructed in the middle of a pedestrian crossing. The Plaintiff admitted

that he drives very often on this road and had observed the construction prior to the day

of the accident.

The Plaintiff contended that the yellow beacon lights near the construction were not

operating and that the area should have been illuminated for the users of the road to

know of the existence of the said island which is an obstruction to the users of the road.

However, this overlooks the fact that the Defendant had the benefit of the lights of the

car driven by him. Unlike a hole in the middle of the road which may cause difficulty in

identifying in the absence of any warning, an island constructed on the middle of a road

providing motorists about 21 feet wide road to travel on coupled with the admission of

the Plaintiff that he had observed the construction prior to the day of the accident imputes

negligence on the part of the Plaintiff.

For the foregoing reasons, I answer question of law No. iii in the affirmative and hold that

the accident took place due to the negligence on the part of the Plaintiff for having driven

his vehicle over the speed limit without a proper lookout.

I part with this judgment with some anguish. The Plaintiff was responding to an urgent

call to attend to a patient in a critical condition. He was undoubtedly seeking to give effect

to the Hippocratic oath he was obliged to act upon. Unfortunately, he met with an

accident in the process and suffered serious injury.

Nevertheless, court is not exercising just and equitable jurisdiction. It must determine the

case by applying the law according to the facts and circumstances of the case.

Janak De Silva, J

SC Appeal 117/2016 JUDGMENT Page 37 of 37

Appeal allowed. The judgments of the District Court of Colombo dated 26.01.2008 and

the High Court of Civil Appeal dated 30.03.2016 are hereby set aside. The action is

dismissed.

Parties shall bear their costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

A. L. SHIRAN GOONERATNE, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT