==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal against under Section 5C of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) (Amendment) Act No.54 of 2006. 1. Jayalath Arachchige Premawathi, No.522, Weboda North, Weboda. 2. Mudunkotuwage Preethi Janaki, 3. Mudunkotuwage Jagath Ravindra, 4. Mudunkotuwage Sithara Himali, All of No. 522, Weboda North, Weboda.

Plaintiffs Vs. S.C. Appeal No.40/2012 SCHCCA LA No. 173/2011 Civil Appeelate High Court No. WP/HCCA/GPH 07/2004 DC Gampaha Case No. 29293/L

Samabandeperuma Mohotti Appuhamilage Alice Nona (deceased) Defendant 1. Mudunkotuwage Don Karunawathi 2. Mudunkotuwage Don Piyatissa 3. Mudunkotuwage Don Lal Jayatissa 4. Mudunkotuwage Don Seelawathi 5. Mudunkotuwage Don Siriyawathi 6. Mudunkotuwage Don Yasawathi 7. Mudunkotuwage Don Karunawathi All of Weboda South, Weboda. Substituted-Defendants AND BETWEEN 1. Jayalath Arachchige Premawathi, 2. Mudunkotuwage Preethi Janaki,

S.C. Appeal No. 40/2012

2

3. Mudunkotuwage Jagath Ravindra 4. Mudunkotuwage Sithara Himali, All of No. 522, Weboda North, Weboda.

Plaintiff-Appellants Vs. 1. Mudunkotuwage Don Karunawathi 2. Mudunkotuwage Don Piyatissa 3. Mudunkotuwage Don Lal Jayatissa 4. Mudunkotuwage Don Seelawathi 5. Mudunkotuwage Don Siriyawathi 6. Mudunkatuwage Don Yasawathi 7. Mudunkotuwage Don Karunawathi All of Weboda South, Weboda. Substituted-Defendant-Respondents

And Now Between 1. Jayalath Arachchige Premawathi, 2. Mudunkotuwage Preethi Janaki, 3. Mudunkotuwage Jagath Ravindra 4. Mudunkotuwage Sithara Himali, All of No. 522, Weboda North, Weboda.

Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellants Vs. 1. Mudunkotuwage Don Karunawathi No.498, Weboda West, Weboda. 2. Mudunkotuwage Don Piyatissa No.498/2,Weboda West, Weboda. 3. Mudunkotuwage Don Lal Jayatissa No.492/A, Weboda West, Weboda.

S.C. Appeal No. 40/2012

3

4. Mudunkotuwage Don Seelawathi No.498/B/2,Weboda West, Weboda. 5. Mudunkotuwage Don Siriyawathi No.138/1, Mahena. Mandawala. 6. Mudunkotuwage Don Yasawathi No.372/C, Mandawala Road, Radawana. 7. Mudunkotuwage Don Karunawathi Dangollagoda, Waduwawa, Yatigoluwa, Polgahawela Substituted-Defendant-Respondent- Respondents BEFORE : K. KUMUDINI WICKREMASINGHE, J. ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J. MENAKA WIJESUNDERA, J. COUNSEL : Manohara de Silva, PC with Hirosha Munasinghe, Kaveesha Gamage, and Harithriya Kumarage instructed by Anusha Perusinghe for the Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellants. Harshana Ananda with Lahiru Widushanka instructed by Suranga Zoysa for the Defendant-Respondent- Respondents ARGUED ON : 19th February,2025 DECIDED ON : 27th March, 2026

S.C. Appeal No. 40/2012

4

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

The Plaintiffs have instituted the instant action in the District Court of

Gampaha, by their amended Plaint, seeking to define the Southern boundary to

their land depicted in Plan No. 892A drawn by licensed surveyor S.A.D. Perera

on 27.09.1972. The same allotment of land is depicted as Lot No. 37, in partition

action No. 9009/P, which had already been determined by the same Court. The

Plaintiffs have inherited the title to that land from Mudunkotuwage Marthelis

Singho, who in turn received same from Rajapakse Brahmanage Seelawathie

Rajapakse, on a Deed of Transfer No. 942 (P4). The Defendant owns and occupies

the adjoining Lot No. 38, which has its Northern boundary, which also is the

Southern boundary of Lot No. 37. It is alleged by the Plaintiffs that the Defendant

has destroyed the fence (me, bks jeg) they have put up on their Southern boundary

on 10.07.1986 and thereafter prevented them from installing a new fence along

that boundary. The Plaintiffs accordingly prayed from Court for inter alia a

demarcation of the said common boundary in terms of Plan No. 892A.

In her answer, the Defendant has taken up the position that even though

Lot No. 37 was given to the predecessor in title of the Plaintiffs, Rajapakse

Brahmanage Seelawathie Rajapakse, by a decree of the said partition action, it is the

Defendant who in fact possessed that land for over a 10-year period annexing

same to her own Lot No. 38, and thereby acquired prescriptive title over the

same. On that account, she moves Court for the dismissal of the Plaint.

S.C. Appeal No. 40/2012

5

With the commencement of the trial on 03.01.1989, the parties framed a

total of six issues in line with their respective pleadings and proceeded to trial on

them. But on 29.03.1989, the Defendant raised another issue, this time a question

of law, to the effect (issue No. 7) that whether the Plaintiffs could have and

maintain an action for definition of boundaries, when the Defendant deny their

title to the land over which they claim ownership. The Plaintiffs had no objection

to that issue being raised. At the conclusion of the trial, the District Court held

with the Defendant and dismissed the action of the Plaintiffs.

The Plaintiffs preferred an appeal to the High Court of Civil Appeal

challenging the dismissal of the Plaint. Their appeal was also dismissed by that

Court. The Plaintiffs thereupon sought Leave to Appeal from this Court against

the judgment of the High Court of Civil Appeal.

On 23.02.2012 this Court granted Leave to Appeal to the Plaintiffs on the

following seven questions of law, as set out in sub paragraphs (b), (c), (d), (e), (f),

(g), and (h) of paragraph 9 of their petition dated 31.05.2012, addressed to this

Court.

1. Did the High Court misdirect itself in holding that the Plaintiffs

not being in possession of the land in suit is the real crux of the

dispute and not a definition of boundaries?

2. Did the High Court err in failing to consider that having

possession of the land is not a requirement in an action for

definition of boundaries?

S.C. Appeal No. 40/2012

6

3. Did the High Court err in holding that the Plaintiffs have

admitted the position of the Defendant that Lot 37 and 38 were

possessed together and they have prescribed to the land referred

to in schedule “ w” to the Plaint?

4. Did the High Court err in agreeing with the findings of the

learned District Judge in relation to the maintainability of this

case as an issue of definition of boundary for the reason that

Plaintiffs were not occupiers of the land and the Defendant

challenged their title?

5. Did the High Court misdirect itself in applying the decisions of

Jacolis Appu v David Perera 69 NLR 548, Leelawathie Hamine v

Gunasiri (1989) 1 Sri LR 322 and Maria v Fernando 17 NLR 65 to

the instant case and by failing to distinguish the said cases on the

ground that they involved a situation where both parties claimed

ownership to both lots?

6. Did the High Court err in law by failing to consider that the

Licensed Surveyor Hubert Perera in his report has stated that the

plantation standing on the Plaintiffs’ land Lot 37, was claimed

only by them?

7. Did the High Court fail to consider that the Defendants failed to

establish prescriptive title?

Of these seven questions of law, I am of the view that the determination of

the third question; whether the High Court erred in holding that the Plaintiffs

admitted the position of the Defendant that Lot 37 and 38 were possessed

S.C. Appeal No. 40/2012

7

together by her and therefore prescribed to the land referred to in schedule “w” to

the Plaint, would determine the core dispute between the parties.

Before proceeding to consider the said question of law, it is necessary to

make a brief reference to the evidence presented before the trial Court by the

contesting parties.

The 1st Plaintiff’s husband acquired the title to Lot No. 37 upon the Deed of

Transfer No. 942 (P4) executed by Rajapakse Brahmanage Seelawathie on 12.10.1982.

She is supported in her action by other Plaintiffs who are their children. It is

undisputed that Seelawathie has received her title to that parcel of land, in terms

of a Final Decree of Partition issued by District Court of Gampaha on 13.10.1975

(P5) in the partition action No. 9009/P. That partition action was in respect of a

larger land within which the Lot Nos. 37 and 38 too are located. Similarly, the

Defendant too received her title to Lot No. 38 from the said Final Decree, being

the widowed wife of Mudunkotuwage Don Julis Appu, who was the 24th defendant

in the said partition action. The Defendant was substituted in that partition

action, in the room and place of her deceased husband Mudunkotuwage Don Julis

Appu.

The Plaintiffs have strongly relied on the 76 years old Seelawathie’s

evidence in support of their case. Her evidence was recorded upon issuance of a

commission, as she was not in a position to physically attend Court, due to

certain health issues.

S.C. Appeal No. 40/2012

8

In her evidence Seelawathie described the manner in which the handing

over of possession of Lot No. 37 by the Court officials, has taken place. She

remembered that the surveyor has marked the boundaries of Lot No. 37 by

installing stakes on the common boundary between the two lots. Her husband

has followed up that demarcation by putting up a barbed wire fence on that

common boundary after the surveyor marked and identified that boundary. She

also stated that when transferring her title to the Plaintiffs, she merely signed on

the deeds and did not physically hand over the possession of the parcel of land

identified as Lot No. 37 to the husband of the 1st Plaintiff, in whose favour the

deed was executed.

During cross-examination, Seelawathie admitted that one Mudunkotuwage

Don Julis has “mortgaged” his share off the land (lot No. 37) which was to be

partitioned in the partition action No. 9009/P in her favour for a sum of Rs.

350.00. This has taken place prior to the institution of that partition action. This

was the reason that she was allocated a share in the corpus to that partition

action. She also admitted that, it was Julis who possessed both Lots 37 and 38 as

one contiguous land during this time, before it was bisected by the partition

decree. She also admitted in cross-examination that she has mistakenly said in

Examination-in-Chief that there was in fact a barbed wire fence erected by her

husband, soon after she was placed in possession of Lot No. 37 by the Court

officials.

The High Court of Civil Appeal, in affirming the judgment of the trial

Court, considered the evidence of the 1st Plaintiff, during which she admitted

S.C. Appeal No. 40/2012

9

that despite the execution of Deed P4 in 1982, they never possessed Lot No. 37 at

any point in time. The attempt made by the late husband of Seelawathie to erect a

fence, separating her land from the said two allotments, was thwarted by the

Defendant. With the resistance offered by the Defendant, Seelawathie’s husband

has decided to put off the task of fencing the property for some time. He has died

in the following year and as a result, there was no fence put up separating the

two lands by the predecessors in title to the Plaintiff’s land.

The appellate Court, acting on that evidence, arrived at the finding that the

real dispute between the parties is not the undefined boundary that existed

between the two allotments of land, but in fact about the right to possess Lot No.

37. That Court relied on the judgment in Jacolis Appu v David Perera (1967) 69

NLR 548 to support the said finding it has arrived at. The appeal of the Plaintiffs

was dismissed by the High Court of Civil Appeal as it was of the view “…

maintainability of this case as an issue of definition of boundaries” is not warranted. Of

course, in the process, the appellate Court also considered the factors that the

Plaintiffs were not the occupiers of the land and the Defendant also has

challenged their title to the land.

The challenge posed by the Defendant to the Plaintiffs’ title to the land, as

referred to in the judgment of the High Court of Civil Appeal, was based on a

conditional transfer made by Mudunkotuwage Don Julis in favour of the original

owner of Lot No. 37, namely Rajapakse Brahmanage Seelawathie by execution of the

Deed of Transfer No. 2470 on 26.04.1960 (V1). It is stated in the recital of V1, Julis

has obtained a sum of Rs. 350.00 from Seelawathie, and permitted her to have the

S.C. Appeal No. 40/2012

10

ownership of the property, but reserving him a period of six year to redeem that

debt and reclaim the property. That six-year period ended in 1966, but on

03.09.1969, Seelawathie accepted a sum of Rs. 250.00 from the Defendant as part

payment of that debt. There appears to have been an attempt made by the

Defendant to present a contention before Court therefore no rights were accrued

on Seelawathie over the conditional transfer V1. However, it is important to note

in this respect that these alleged encumbrances that may have existed over the

rights, title and interest the respective parties over the corpus cannot exist or

given effect to, after the final decree was pronounced by the trial Court in the

partition action No. 9009/P on 13.10.1975, in terms of Section 48(1) of the

Partition Law No. 21 of 1977.

In relation to the issue of “occupation” of Lot No. 37 by the Plaintiffs, the

High Court of Civil Appeal considered the claim laid by the Defendant to the

effect “ … that Lot Nos. 37 and 38 were possessed together and have prescribed to the

land referred to in the schedule w to the Plaint.”

Turning to consider the question of law; whether the High Court of Civil

Appeal erred in failing to consider that having possession of the land is not a

requirement in an action for definition of boundaries (even though this question

was accepted by this Court for consideration), it must be noted at this juncture

that the reasoning of the High Court appears to indicate that it adopted

altogether a different position to the question of possession in arriving at the

conclusion that the appeal should be dismissed.

S.C. Appeal No. 40/2012

11

The High Court of Civil Appeal, while dealing with the point of contest

No. 7, raised and suggested by the Defendant, stated that the “ … learned District

Judge answered to this issue in favour of the defendant. The 1st Plaintiff again admitted

in evidence that the defendant possessed the two lands amalgamated as one after the

partition action was concluded”. The appellate Court relied on the admission made

by the 1st Plaintiff in her evidence to that effect.

Thereupon, that Court concludes, in the penultimate paragraph of its

judgment, as follows;

“[U]nder those circumstances, it is clear that the plaintiffs were not

occupiers of the land and the defendants had challenged their title.

Therefore, this Court agrees with the findings of the learned District Judge

in relation to the maintainability of this case as an issue of definition of

boundary.”

Since the High Court of Civil Appeal concurred with the view adopted by

the trial Court in determining the point of contest No. 7 and with its answer, it is

of importance to consider the reasoning adopted by the trial Court in answering

the said point in favour of the Defendant.

Perusal of the judgement of the District Court reveals that it has answered

the point of contest No. 7 on the premise that the Defendant has prescribed to the

land and, on that basis, now disputes the title of the Plaintiff over same. It

proceeded on the basis that since the Defendant has prescribed to Lot No. 37, the

S.C. Appeal No. 40/2012

12

Plaintiffs cannot maintain an action against her for demarcation of boundaries.

Both these Courts have primarily relied on the undisputed fact that, when the

instant action was instituted or, and for that matter, at any point of time since the

pronouncement of the final decree in partition action No. 9009/P, there was no

boundary that ever existed, by which Lot Nos. 37 and 38 were separated into two

allotments of land. The 1st Plaintiff candidly admitted that they never had

physical possession of the land and it was the Defendant who enjoyed its

produce throughout.

Thus, the point of contest No. 6 raised by the Defendant whether she

acquired prescriptive title by adverse and uninterrupted possession for over a

period of ten years was answered in the affirmative by the trial Court and the

said finding was affirmed by the High Court of Civil Appeal. The evidence

clearly points to the reasonable conclusion that, except for the brief interruption

due to execution of the partition decree, it was the Defendant’s predecessors in

title who were throughout in possession of Lot Nos. 37 and 38, as a one

continuous land.

Clearly, neither the District Court nor the High Court of Civil Appeal

made any clear pronouncement in the respective judgments indicating the

position that, in an action for demarcation of boundaries, and the plaintiff, in

order to succeed in such an action, must have possession of the land, in addition

to the paper title. It is very evident from the examination of the reasoning

adopted by the Judges of the Courts below that they have decided to hold in

favour of the Defendant, primarily due to the admitted fact that the Lot Nos. 37

S.C. Appeal No. 40/2012

13

and 38 were possessed by the Defendant as one contiguous land since the

conclusion of the partition action and not because the Plaintiffs were unable to

establish that they ever had possession of that particular parcel of land with an

obliterated boundary.

There is no dispute that the Plaintiffs have instituted the instant action to

have the Southern boundary of Lot No. 37 be re-demarcated by an order of

Court. In that respect it was incumbent upon the Plaintiffs to establish, in

addition to ownership of the land, that the Southern boundary of Lot No. 37, that

existed between that land and Lot No. 38, became obscure either due to actions

of Defendant, as alleged in their Plaint. It is inbuilt in that requirement that the

Plaintiffs must first establish that in fact there was a boundary between the two

allotments of land that existed and second, that it became obscure either due to

action by someone or due to mere passage of time.

In Somawathie and Others v Illangakoon (2013) 1 Sri L.R. 94, this Court

has held (at p.99) that “[I]n an action for the definition of the boundaries plaintiff has to

aver (i) that an ascertainable common boundary previously existed physically on the

ground and (ii) that such common boundary had been obliterated subsequently”. In the

instant appeal, not only the Plaintiffs did aver that there was a common

boundary that existed between the two allotments of land, they also averred that

it has been removed by the Defendant on a specific date. The Plaintiffs have

thereupon framed an issue (issue No. 3) to the effect whether the “me, bks jeg”

forming the Southern boundary of their land was obliterated. This particular

issue was answered by the trial Court in the negative as the evidence indicated

S.C. Appeal No. 40/2012

14

there was no such “me, bks jeg” that ever existed on the boundary, prior to

institution of the instant action.

This primary fact is confirmed by the surveyor who surveyed the land on

commission issued by Court. Thus, based on this vital factor alone, the Plaintiffs’

action should fail. This is because the Plaintiffs’ own evidence established that

the first component of their action for definition of boundary could not be

established when themselves admitted that the Defendant possessed the two

lands as one contiguous land without a boundary in between them.

The appellate Court affirmed the finding made by the trial Court that the

Defendant established her acquisition of a prescriptive title over the Lot No. 37,

although interrupted by the execution of the partition decree for a brief period,

had otherwise uninterrupted possession, adverse to that of the Plaintiffs, since

the year 1975. The instant action was instituted by the Plaintiffs only in 1986 and

therefore the required ten-year period, in terms of Section 3 of the Prescription

Ordinance, was complete by then. This Court accordingly concurs with the

affirmation of the High Court of Civil Appeal made on that finding made by the

trial Court.

Lastly, the question of law whether the Courts below erred in failing to

distinguish the facts of Jacolis Appu v David Perera (supra), Leelawathie Hamine

v Gunasiri (supra) and Maria v Fernando (supra), the facts of the instant matter

should be considered.

S.C. Appeal No. 40/2012

15

It would suffice to refer to the facts of Jacolis Appu v David Perera (ibid )

since the trial Court as well as the High Court of Civil Appeal acted on the

reasoning of that judgment in arriving at the impugned decisions.

Perusal of the said judgment revealed that the dispute presented before

that Court had arisen between the owners of Lot Nos. 4A and 4B, which were

demarcated as separate allotments of land, following a partition decree. The

plaintiffs of that action owned Lot No. 4B while the defendants owned Lot No.

4A. It was alleged by the plaintiffs that the live fence forming the Western

boundary of their lot, forming the common boundary between the two

allotments of land, has been pulled out by the defendant and thus obliterated the

boundary that existed until then. The defendant denied existence of any fence

prior to institution of action and claimed acquisition of prescriptive title over Lot

No. 4B.

It need not emphasise here that the facts of Jacolis Appu v David Perera

(supra) are almost identical to the facts of the instant appeal. After reviewing the

evidence and the judgment of the trial Court, Siva Supramaniam J was of view (at

p.551), “[I]n seeking a definition of boundaries between lots 4A and 4B the respondent

[the plaintiff] was in reality seeking a declaration of title to lot 4B” and proceeded to

dismiss the appeal of the plaintiff. This finding, in my opinion is applicable to the

instant appeal with equal, if not more, force. This is exactly what the High Court

of Civil Appeal observed in its judgment on the appeal preferred by the

Plaintiffs.

S.C. Appeal No. 40/2012

16

In view of the reasoning contained in the preceding paragraphs of this

judgment I proceed to answer the questions of law in the following manner;

1. Did the High Court misdirect itself in holding that the Plaintiffs

not being in possession of the land in suit is the real crux of the

dispute and not a definition of boundaries ?

Does not arise for consideration in view of the above reasoning.

2. Did the High Court err in failing to consider that having

possession of the land is not a requirement in an action for

definition of boundaries?

Does not arise for consideration in view of the above reasoning.

3. Did the High Court err in holding that the Plaintiffs admitted the

position of the Defendant that Lot 37 and 38 were possessed

together and they have prescribed to the land referred to in

schedule “w” to the Plaint ?

No.

4. Did the High Court err in agreeing with the findings of the

learned District Judge in relation to the maintainability of this

case as an issue of definition of boundary for the reason that

Plaintiffs were not occupiers of the land and the Defendant

challenged their title?

The High Court of Civil Appeal did not procced on this line of

reasoning.

5. Did the High Court misdirect itself in applying the decisions of

Jacolis Appu v David Perera 69 NLR 548, Leelawathie Hamine v

Gunasiri (1989) 1 Sri LR 322 and Maria v Fernando 17 NLR 65 to

the instant case and by failing to distinguish the said cases on the

S.C. Appeal No. 40/2012

17

ground that they involved a situation where both parties claimed

ownership to both lots ?

No.

6. Did the High Court err in law by failing to consider that the

Licensed Surveyor Hubert Perera in his report has stated that the

plantation standing on the Plaintiffs’ land Lot 37, was claimed

only by them ?

No.

7. Did the High Court fail to consider that the Defendant failed to

establish prescriptive title ?

High Court of Civil Appeal affirmed the finding of the District Court

that she did.

The judgments of the District Court and the High Court of Civil Appeal

are hereby affirmed and the appeal of the Plaintiffs is accordingly dismissed with

costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

K. KUMUDINI WICKREMASINGHE, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

MENAKA WIJESUNDERA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT