==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application made

under Article 17 read with Article 126 of

the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

01. A.A. Asoka Ananda,

Chilaw Plantations Limited,

165, Puttalam Road, Chilaw.

SC/FR No.364/2014

02. M.G.C. Dias,

Chilaw Plantations Limited,

Divulapitiya Area Estates,

Katukenda No.3 Estate, Badalgama.

03. D.M.G. Dissanayake,

Chilaw Plantations Limited,

Bingiriya Area Estates,

Kiniyama Estate, Weerapokuna.

04. W.K. Pradeep,

Chilaw Plantations Limited,

165, Puttalam Road, Chilaw

Petitioners

Vs.

2

01. Chilaw Plantations Limited,

165, Puttalam Road, Chilaw.

02. Gamini Rajakarune,

Chairman,

Chilaw Plantations Limited,

165, Puttalam Road, Chilaw;

And Secretary to the Ministry of

Coconut Development and Janatha

Estate Development

03. Panduka Jayasinghe,

Former Executive Chairman,

Chilaw Plantations Limited,

No.27, 1st Lane, Rampart Road,

Ethulkotte.

04. A.M. Chandrapala,

Executive Director,

Chilaw Plantations Limited,

165/1A, Dutugamunu Street,

Kohuwala.

05. O.P.P. Pathiranage,

Working Director,

Chilaw Plantations Limited,

CDA Building, Ground Floor,

No.11, Duke Street, Colombo 01.

3

06. Mrs.Priyangani Liyanage

Member of Board of Directors,

Chilaw Plantations Limited & Treasury

Representative, PED, Treasury, Colombo 01.

07. Chandra Fernando,

Member of Board of Directors,

Chilaw Plantations Limited,

No.3, Shrubbery Gardens,Colombo 04.

08. K.B. Ratnayake,

Member of Board of Directors,

Chilaw Plantations Limited,

No.22, Dikyaya, Buththla.

09. R.R.M. Amerathunga,

Member of Board of Directors,

Chilaw Plantations Limited,

No.7/44, School Lane,

Gangodawila, Nugegoda.

10. I.M.R. Widanagama,

Member of Board of Directors,

Chilaw Plantations Limited,

“Tharindu”, Buddiyagama, Weeraketiya.

4

11. B. Hettiarachchi,

“Nishadi”, Bauddhaloka Mawatha,

Gampaha.

12. The Attorney General

The Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondents

13. Ravindra Herath

(Chairman,

Chilaw Plantations Limited)

No.87, Gettuwana Road, Kurunegala.

14. K.G. Ananda Pushpakumara,

(Working Director and Member of

Board of Directors,

Chilaw Plantations Limited)

“Pushpawila”, Ambawa, Kuliyapitiya.

15. D.M.L. Bandaranayake

(Member of Board of Directors,

Chilaw Plantations Limited)

Additional Secretary,

Ministry of Plantation Industries,

11th Floor, Sethsiripaya, Stage II,

Battaramulla.

5

16. H.M.N.C. Herath,

(Member of Board of Directors,

Chilaw Plantations Limited)

Ediwenne Watta, Welpalle(North West)

17. M.R.V.R. Meepura,

(Member of Board of Directors/

Treasury Representative, Chilaw

Plantations Limited)

Department of Public Enterprises(PED)

General Treasury, Colombo 01.

18. Victor Kumara Charels Herath,

(Chairman,

Chilaw Plantations Limited)

No.87, Gettuwana Road, Kurunegala.

19. Jude Perera,

(Chairman,

Chilaw Plantations Limited)

No.87, Gettuwana Road, Kurunegala.

20. H.G.Samarasinghe

21. Aruni S.Ranasinghe

22. Keerthi Pathirange

23. Nalinda Kasun Rajasinghe

24. Ajantha Moonamalle

25. W.W.A.N.T.A. Fernando

26. I.S.J.P. Gunawardena

6

(20th to 26th all of, Member of the

Board of Directors, Chilaw Plantations

Limited)

165, Puttalam Road, Chilaw.

Added Respondents

Before : Jayantha Jayasuriya, PC. CJ.

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J.

Counsel : Manohara De Silva, PC with Hirosha

Munasinghe and Senal Kariyawasam for the

Petitioner.

Shantha Jayawardena with Chamara

Nanayakkara for the 11th Respondent.

Ms. Ganga Wakishta Arachchi, DSG for all the

Respondents except the 11th Respondent.

Written submissions : 09.08. 2019 and 21.05.2024 by Petitioner

22.01.2020 by 1st and 12th Respondents

03.05.2024 by 1st to 12th Respondents and 19th to

26th Added Respondents.

08.10.2021 and 16.05.2024 by 11th Respondent

Argued on : 25.03.2024

Decided on : 08.08.2024

7

Jayantha Jayasuriya, PC. CJ.

Four petitioners have invoked the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 126 of the

Constitution. They allege that the Right to Equality guaranteed by Article 12(1) of the

Constitution was violated due to the wrongful conduct of the first to the tenth

respondents. The first respondent is Chilaw Plantations Limited and second to the

tenth respondents are the chairman and members of the board of directors of the first

respondent company.

Petitioners contend that they submitted applications for the post of Assistant General

Manager – (Plantations) of the first respondent company but were not called for the

interview. They further contend that their right to equality guaranteed under Article

12(1) was infringed due to the fact that the eleventh respondent had been appointed to

the said position after being called for an interview having denied an equal

opportunity for the petitioners to present themselves at the structured interview. They

further contend that they possessed all basic qualifications as opposed to the eleventh

respondent who lacked minimum qualifications as set out in the advertisement calling

for applications. It is their contention that through this process the eleventh

respondent was accorded with preferential treatment and the conduct of the

respondents lacked reasonableness and lawfulness and thereby breached the rule of

law. Petitioners further contended that they were denied procedural fairness. However,

the learned President’s Counsel for the petitioners at the outset submitted that he

would not be pursuing the case of the fourth petitioner as the said petitioner did not

possess required experience by the time the applications were closed.

The first respondent together with the respondents who are members of the Board of

Directors and others holding positions in the first respondent company deny that the

impugned process breached any rights guaranteed to the petitioners. They further

contend that the petitioners were not called for the interview as they failed to satisfy

8

that they possessed the minimum qualifications to be considered for the position that

was advertised. It was reasonable for the respondents to have short listed the

applicants for the structured interview and the decision not to call the petitioners for

the interview was neither arbitrary nor unlawful. They contend that the whole process

was lawful and was in accordance with the procedure stipulated in the applicable

scheme of recruitment. They further contended that the eleventh respondent and the

other person who were called for the structured interview did possess minimum

qualifications and the eleventh respondent obtained highest marks at the interview.

Hence, the petitioner’s challenge on the appointment of the eleventh respondent to the

post of Assistant General Manager – (Plantations) at the first respondent company

should fail. The eleventh respondent contend that he possessed all necessary

qualifications to be appointed the Assistant General Manager – (Plantations) at the

first respondent company, hence, the case of the petitioners lacks merit and their case

should fail. It is also pertinent to note that all respondents submitted that the fact that

the other person who was called for the interview but not selected for the post has not

challenged the appointment of the eleventh respondent stands testimony to the

lawfulness of the whole process that ended with the appointment of the eleventh

respondent.

According to the advertisement produced marked P12, the minimum qualifications for

an internal candidate for the post concerned are Diploma in Agriculture/Plantation

Management/ Commerce from a recognised institute with minimum twelve years

managerial level experience with good communication skills in Sinhala and English

and good skills in interpersonal relations. With the assistance of extensive material

submitted in these proceedings by all parties and submissions of counsel, I will first

proceed to consider whether the eleventh respondent possessed required minimum

qualifications to be appointed as Assistant General Manager – Plantations of the

Chilaw Plantations Limited. It is common ground that the eleventh respondent

9

possessed the required minimum academic qualification. However, petitioners

contend that the material revealed in the application the eleventh respondent

submitted, fails to satisfy that he had twelve years managerial level experience.

Eleventh respondent as well as the other respondents dispute this contention.

In this regard it is pertinent to note that the closing date for the applications as

advertised was 03rd April 2014. Therefore, any applicant should have commenced

holding a suitable position at least by 02nd April 2002 and should have been

continuing to hold by 03rd April 2014 if he is to satisfy the requirement of holding a

managerial level experience of twelve years.

On behalf of the petitioners, it was further contended that the first to the tenth

respondents rushed through the impugned appointment to avoid the direction of the

Commissioner of Elections on restrictions regarding new appointments due to the

scheduled presidential election. It is pertinent to observe that the gazette notification

calling for nominations had been published on 21st November 2014 and on 22nd

November 2014 the Commissioner of Elections had issued the direction on

appointments and transfers during the election period. Respondents contended that the

impugned appointment was made after completing the entire process and did not

breach the direction of the commissioner of elections. All material available to this

Court including the Audit report dated 11th August 2014 that is attached to the letter

marked P 15 and the notice of the elections department dated 22nd November 2014

marked P28 stand testimony to the fact that the impugned appointment has been made

after completing the process including the internal audit carried out by the Ministry

and prior to the restrictions imposed due to the presidential election. The eleventh

respondent was appointed to the post of “Assistant General Manager (plantations) of

the first respondent company with effect from 18th November 2014. (vide R9 letter of

third respondent dated 17th November 2014)

10

Petitioners in their pleadings before this Court contend that the eleventh respondent

had only eleven years of managerial experience by the closing date of the applications

and did not satisfy the twelve-year requirement. Respondents dispute this assertion.

On behalf of the petitioners, Court’s attention was drawn to the documents produced

marked R8 (application submitted by the eleventh respondent). They contended that

the eleventh respondent had been employed at the first respondent company in the

capacity of Estate Superintendent with effect from 01st April 2003. Hence, he had

only eleven years of managerial level experience at the time of submitting the

application.

It is pertinent to note that the eleventh respondent had been employed at the first

respondent company and had been performing managerial level duties for a period of

eleven years continuously. Furthermore, as per the curriculum vitae he had submitted

reflects that he had gained additional four years of managerial level experience at

Cashew Corporation while he was serving as Factory Manager / Training Officer at

the factory situated at Makevita from 1st December 1998 to 20th December 2002.

However, petitioners contend that the eleventh respondent lacks twelve years of

managerial experience. Their contention revolves on the experience the eleventh

respondent gained while serving at the Cashew Corporation. The eleventh respondent

along with his affidavit dated 01st August 2016 produced a service certificate dated

30th May 2014 issued by the General Manager of the Sri Lanka Cashew Corporation

(11R15). According to the said certificate the eleventh respondent has been promoted

as the officer in charge of the Nedagamuwa Cashew Processing Centre on 01st

December 1998. The author of this certificate classifies this position as “a junior

executive position” and confirms that during the period of service the eleventh

respondent has been able to “gain experience at managerial level in plantation

management, cashew processing and value addition techniques”. In contrast, the third

11

petitioner by his affidavit dated 12th October 2016, while vehemently denying the

contention of the eleventh respondent demands strict proof. Furthermore, he has

attached a document to substantiate the petitioner’s claim that the eleventh respondent

did not acquire managerial experience at Cashew Corporation. The last-mentioned

document is produced marked P59.

Prima facie, the document P59 has been signed by the same person who has signed

the document 11R15 - the service certificate of the eleventh respondent dated 30th

May 2014 – and is dated 08th May 2014. In this document P59, it is said that “all

these positions held by him (reference to the eleventh respondent) are Non-Executive

level positions and equal to Management Assistant (Technical) Grade – MA 2-1

Grade I and Grade II”. This is the sole basis on which the petitioners are challenging

the qualifications of the eleventh respondent.

The learned counsel for the eleventh respondent as well as the learned Deputy

Solicitor-General strenuously contested the veracity of the document P59. In support

of their contention learned counsel drew the attention of the Court to several features

reflected in this contested document. Firstly, even though, the letter is addressed to the

Chairman / CEO of the first respondent company – the third respondent – and makes

reference to a letter dated 30th April 2014, there is no “your number” given in the

questioned document. More importantly learned counsel drew the attention of the

Court to the last sentence of the letter namely, “I have gathered these information

from reliable sources confidentially as his personal file could not be located”. They

submit that the sentence referred to above itself raises serious doubts on the

authorship and the content of this letter. The same author in the service certificate

(11R 15) issued three weeks thereafter (on 30th May 2014) to the eleventh respondent

on his request where he certified that the eleventh respondent did in fact gain

“managerial level” experience does not claim that the personal file of the eleventh

12

respondent is not available. To the contrary, the “My No” of 11R 15 –

“ld/idmd/1/mq,s/516 – II” stands proof of the availability of the personal file of the

eleventh respondent with the relevant authorities and the certification was in

accordance with the material available in the personal file. In their submission “mq,s”

connotes “mqoa.,sl ,smsf.dkqj” (personal file). Furthermore, they contended that the

third petitioner who took the liberty to produce letter P59 bears the responsibility to

aver as to the manner in which the said letter came into his possession. Letter P59

which is addressed to the third respondent bears the endorsement “Strictly Private &

Confidential”. Furthermore, there is no record with the first respondent company to

prove the receipt of such letter or dispatching of the purported letter of the third

respondent dated 30th April 2014. Absence of any record relating to both these

documents at the first respondent company further aggravates the concerns raised on

the veracity of document P59 tendered by the third petitioner in support of their claim.

The stark silence of the petitioners on the manner in which they gained access to this

document taken together with the salient features of the said letter that raises grave

doubts on its veracity, raises the question whether the petitioners have withheld

necessary facts from this Court and / or deliberately presented material of which

serious doubts exist on its veracity to influence and mislead the Court to hold in

favour of their contention or presented such material with the knowledge that the

court would be misled.

Be that as it may, it is also pertinent to observe that a service certificate dated 01st

October 1993 issued by the Chairman, Sri Lanka Cashew Corporation certifies that

the eleventh respondent “has acquired considerable experience in managing

plantations while working at the Head Office of the Sri Lanka Cashew Corporation”.

When all these matters are taken into account and considered together, I am of the

view that the contention of the petitioners that the eleventh respondent did not possess

13

necessary minimum qualifications to be appointed to the post of Assistant General

Manager (Plantations) at the first respondent company is devoid of merit. Furthermore,

in my view the decision to call the eleventh respondent for the interview is rational

and lawful.

Now I will proceed to consider the submission of the learned President’s Counsel for

the petitioners that the failure to call first to the third petitioners for the interview

denied procedural fairness to them and hence the Right to Equality guaranteed to

them under Article 12(1) was infringed.

This Court in Palihawadana v Attorney-General and Others [1978-79-80] 1 SLR

65 whilst examining the process where Members of Parliament were given the

discretion to distribute applications to register for employment among one thousand

persons of their choice who satisfy minimum requirements observed that ;

“Article 12 nullifies sophisticated as well as simple-minded modes of

discrimination. The Job Bank Scheme enables the M.P to confer a privilege

upon the one thousand persons arbitrarily selected by him from a large class

of persons, all of whom stand in the same relation to the privilege granted,

and between whom and the person not so favoured, no reasonable distinction

or substantial difference can be found justifying the inclusion of one and the

exclusion of the other from such privilege…” [ at p 77]

and held that the part of the scheme that conferred power on the M.P to select the one

thousand persons to whom the application forms would be distributed “destroys or

makes illusory the Fundamental Right guaranteed by Article 12”.

It is common ground that all parties concerned (first to the third petitioners and the

eleventh respondent) submitted the applications in response to the advertisement as

14

internal candidates. It is also undisputed that in calculating the required managerial

level experience of twelve years, their services in institutions other than the first

respondent company are also considered.

Therefore, an opportunity to explain the type of work that they performed in other

institutions at the structured interview would give them the benefit to present all

material to demonstrate their eligibility. In my view, even though, the scheme of

recruitment provides for short listing of applicants who would be called for the

structured interview, the denial of such an opportunity to an applicant who could

satisfy, prima facie, that he possesses such work experience to present himself for the

structured interview would deprive him a fair opportunity to compete with another

person of similar standing. Such deprivation would lead to a breach of the Right to

Equality guaranteed under Article 12(1).

The thirteenth respondent tendered to this Court the applications and other material

the four petitioners and the eleventh respondent submitted in response to the

advertisement calling for applications for the post of assistant general manager

(plantations). According to the thirteenth respondent, the four petitioners were not

called for the interview as they failed to satisfy that they possessed one of the

minimum qualifications, mainly twelve years of managerial level experience at the

time the applications were called.

According to the thirteenth respondent the first petitioner had been employed at the

first respondent company. In 1984 the first petitioner had joined the first respondent

company as an office trainee and had thereafter held posts of clerk, data operator and

analyst / programmer till 1st November 2008. On 1st November 2008 he had been

appointed to the post of Manager Estates and has continued to hold that position at the

time the application was submitted. Therefore, on behalf of the respondents it is

15

contended that the first petitioner did not satisfy the requirement of twelve years

managerial level experience.

However, the first petitioner disputes this position and contends that the experience he

gained in the capacity of analyst / programmer should also be counted for the period

of experience in managerial level. It is on this basis he claims that the decision not to

call him for the interview was irrational and arbitrary.

He further contends that if he was called for the interview, he would have got the

opportunity to explain why this period of service as analyst / programmer also should

be counted in his favour. In considering these competing claims of the parties it is

pertinent to note that the first respondent company is the best person to assess the

nature of experience the petitioner gained while performing duties in different

capacities during the total period of service from 1984. Examination of the application,

curriculum vitae and other certificates the first petitioner submitted in response to the

advertisement (R2 and P12A(i)) does not reveal the basis on which the first petitioner

could claim gaining managerial experience while serving as analyst / programmer.

Furthermore, a communication he addressed to the Managing Director of the first

respondent company on 9th September 2002, sheds light to the nature of work that the

first petitioner performed in this capacity and the difficulty he encounters in fulfilling

his ambition of becoming a manager of the first respondent company. In his words it

is said that “…the Computer Division, being a separate division, has a limited scope

of work and thus the opportunities are very rare in the said division to go up to the

managerial level. As such, I appeal to your good self to promote / re-designate me to

a suitable position which arrangement would paves the way for me to fulfil my

ambition of becoming a Manager of Chilaw Plantations Limited….” (R9). There is no

material to suggest that the status of the first petitioner within the first respondent

16

company changed until he was appointed Manager Estates on 01st November 2008.

In my view, these facts as discussed above stand in support of the contention that the

first petitioner did not possess the twelve years managerial experience, when he

submitted the application in March 2014. Therefore, I am of the view that the first

petitioner fails to establish a violation of his right to equality guaranteed under Article

12(1) of the Constitution.

It is common ground that the second petitioner having joined the first respondent

company in December 2004 as an Estate Superintendent has resigned after seven

months of service in July 2005. Thereafter he had rejoined the first respondent

company in July 2008 in the same capacity and has been continuing to serve at the

time he submitted the application. Therefore, altogether he has had six years and three

months of managerial level experience at the first respondent company, when he

submitted the application. The thirteenth respondent contends that the second

petitioner did not submit any proof of employment through which he gained

managerial level experience, other than the aforesaid period of six years and three

months. He contends the second petitioner was therefore not shortlisted to call for the

interview.

However, the resume the second petitioner submitted along with the letter dated 24th

March 2014 [R5, P12A(ii)] reveal that he commenced his career as a trainee Estate

Assistant Superintendent in July 1994 and after one year he had commenced

functioning as an Estate Assistant Superintendent in March 1995. He had functioned

in this capacity for four years before he was appointed an Estate Senior Assistant

Superintendent in May 1999 in which capacity he had functioned until he joined the

first respondent company in December 2004. Therefore, even if one leaves aside the

period of four years during which he had functioned as Estate Assistant

Superintendent, he had served for a total period of eleven years and nine months as an

17

Estate Senior Assistant Superintendent and an Estate Superintendent. Furthermore, he

has served in the managerial capacity in the Agri Machinery Department of a business

establishment for a period of one year after leaving the first respondent company in

July 2005. In this regard, it is also pertinent to note that the advertisement calling for

applications for the relevant post specifies the required experience as “minimum

twelve years managerial level experience”. Therefore, the second petitioner’s career

as revealed in the resume he submitted to the first respondent company itself provides

sufficient material which could have been further verified at the structured interview

that was to be held prior to the final selection of the suitable candidate. Even if the

first respondent company reserved the right to short-list the application, it was

irrational and arbitrary to have not called the second petitioner for the structured

interview on the sole basis that he did not possess the required twelve years of

managerial level experience. The requirement on the applicants was to submit

certified copies of certificates and testimonials together with the curriculum vitae that

contains “relevant information in detail”. In my view the “resume” the second

petitioner submitted contains sufficient details in relation to his work experience

which casts a burden on the selectors to further probe and examine whether the work

experience he gained at establishments other than the first respondent company

satisfies the minimum qualification required for the post he applied for. Failure to

engage in such process is arbitrary and irrational.

The third petitioner had joined the first respondent company in 1996 as a Divisional

Superintendent and in 1997 he had been appointed an acting Area Superintendent. In

the following year, on 01st January 1998, he had been appointed an Estate

Superintendent and had continued to serve in that capacity until he was interdicted on

1st November 2004. Thereafter he has been reinstated in the same position on 05th

April 2010 and has been in continued service at the first respondent company at the

time he submitted the application. Therefore, he has completed approximately eleven

18

years (ten years and ten months) of service as Estate Superintendent at the first

respondent company. Furthermore, the thirteenth respondent has admitted that the

third petitioner submitted a letter of employment from Pelawatta Sugar where he has

served as a Superintendent for a period of one year. Examination of the “Bio Data”

this petitioner submitted with the application reveal that he has joined Kurunegala

Plantations in the capacity of a manager in 2005 and has worked at the Head Office

till 15th February 2007. The thirteenth respondent does not say whether they

considered this period of two years where the petitioner has worked at Pelawatta

Sugar and Kurunegala Plantations in favour of this petitioner. However, the thirteenth

respondent confirms that the period of two years and nine months the petitioner has

served as a Purchasing Manager for a road construction project was not considered as

it had no connection with the agricultural or plantation industry. The thirteenth

respondent does not explain as to the reason for not considering the two year period

where the petitioner has served at Pelawatta Sugar and Kurunegala Plantations. If this

two year period is counted in favour of the petitioner there is no basis not to call the

third petitioner for the interview. According to the thirteenth respondent this petitioner

was not shortlisted on the sole basis that he did not possess the minimum period of

experience at managerial level. The stark silence the thirteenth respondent maintains

in relation to the period of two years as discussed hereinbefore reflects, that the

decision not to call this petitioner has been reached without due consideration to all

necessary facts. Therefore, it is reasonable to infer that this decision is based on

irrelevant grounds or there had been a failure to consider relevant facts. Such decision

is arbitrary and irrational.

In view of my findings on the decisions relating to the second and the third petitioners

as enumerated hereinbefore, I am of the view that the right to equality of these two

petitioners as guaranteed by Article 12(1) of the Constitution has been infringed.

Impugned decisions had been reached by one or several of the second to the tenth

19

respondents while they were performing their duties and discharging their

responsibilities for and on behalf of the first respondent company. It is common

ground that the first respondent company is a government owned company

established under the Companies Act No 17 of 1982. It has been established in

accordance with the provisions of the Conversion of Public Corporations or

Government Owned Business Undertakings into Public Companies Act No 23 of

1987. Full shares and the golden shareholder status of this company are allotted to the

Treasury, on behalf of the State. The petitioners are therefore entitled to receive relief

granted by this Court under Article 126(4) of the Constitution.

Two main reliefs the petitioners seek from this Court are;

(i) A declaration that their rights enshrined under Article 12(1) have been

infringed, and

(ii) Cancellation of the appointment of 11th respondent as the “Assistant

General Manager” and or a declaration that the appointment of eleventh

respondent as the Assistant General Manager is arbitrary and therefore null

and void.

In view of the findings that I have reached hereinbefore, I declare that the Right to

equality of the second and third petitioners as guaranteed under Article 12(1) of the

Constitution had been infringed due to the acts of one or more of the second to the

tenth respondents who were performing duties and responsibilities in the course of

their employment at the 1st respondent company.

In view of my findings that the eleventh respondent did in fact possess necessary

minimum qualifications to be appointed to the post of Assistant General Manager at

the first respondent company, I am of the view that the cancellation of the

20

appointment after a period of ten years would cause prejudice to the eleventh

respondent to whom no fault could be attributed. Therefore, I am not inclined to make

any order affecting the appointment of the eleventh respondent and the continuation

of his tenure of office. Nonetheless, taking into account the fact that the second and

the third petitioners had been arbitrarily deprived the opportunity to compete with the

eleventh respondent at the structured interview, I am of the view that it is just and

equitable to award damages to the second and the third petitioners and costs in

addition to the declaration of the violation of their rights. Accordingly, the first

respondent is ordered to pay Rupees one hundred thousand and costs of litigation in

the Supreme Court to each of the second and third petitioners.

Chief Justice A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J. I agree Judge of the Supreme Court Arjuna Obeyesekere, J. I agree Judge of the Supreme Court