1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

In the matter of an application for leave to

appeal in terms of Section 5 of the High

Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions)

Act No. 10 of 1996 read with the provisions

of the Civil Procedure Code

Mahawaduge Priyanga Lakshitha Prasad

Perera

No. 60, Kandawala,

Katana.

Carrying on business as a sole proprietor under the name and style of Trading Engineering and Manufacturing Company

Plaintiff

Vs.

China National Technical Import and

Export Corporation

No. 90,

Xi San Huan Zhong Lu Genertec Plaza

Beijing, China

Having its local representative office at

No. 445A, 3rd Floor, Galle Road,

Colombo 03.

Defendant

AND NOW BETWEEN

SC Appeal No: 25/2021

H.C. (Civil) Case No: CHC/745/2018/MR

2

Mahawaduge Priyanga Lakshitha Prasad

Perera

No. 60, Kandawala,

Katana.

Carrying on business as a sole proprietor under the name and Trading Engineering Manufacturing Company

Plaintiff-Petitioner

Vs.

China National Technical Import and

Export Corporation

No. 90,

Xi San Huan Zhong Lu Genertec Plaza

Beijing, China

Having its local representative office at

No. 445A, 3rd Floor, Galle Road,

Colombo 03.

Defendant-Respondent

Before : Priyantha Jayawardena PC, J

Yasantha Kodagoda PC, J

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

Counsel : Sanjeewa Jayawardena PC with Ruwantha Cooray and Rukshan Senadeera

for the Plaintiff-Appellant

Chandaka Jayasundera PC with Shivan Kanag-Ishvaran and Rukmal

Cooray for the Defendant-Respondent

Argued on : 13th February, 2024

3

Decided on : 29th February, 2024

Priyantha Jayawardena PC, J

The instant appeal was filed by the plaintiff-appellant (hereinafter referred to as the appellant)

seeking to set aside the judgment of the Commercial High Court dated 7th of December, 2020,

where the plaint was dismissed consequent to a preliminary objection raised by the defendant-

respondent (hereinafter referred to as the respondent).

The Plaint

The appellant instituted action in the Commercial High Court on the 19th of October, 2018 against

the respondent, claiming, inter alia, a sum of Rs. 602,298,639/10 with legal interest.

The appellant stated that he is a Sole Proprietor carrying on business as a Civil Engineering

Contractor, under the name and style of Trading Engineering and Manufacturing Company, and

the respondent is a company duly incorporated under the laws of the Peoples Republic of China.

In his plaint, the appellant stated that the respondent has its local representative office, the contract

sought to be enforced was entered into, and/or the cause and/or causes of action set forth in

the plaint arose within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Commercial High Court. It was

further stated that the Commercial High Court has jurisdiction to hear and determine the matter

under and in terms of the provisions of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act

No. 10 of 1996.

The appellant further stated that on the 11th of June, 2010 the respondent entered into a contract

with the Road Development Authority for the construction of the Southern Transport Development

Project bearing reference No. RDA/STDP/CEXIM/P-K4. Thereafter, on the 3rd of November,

2011 the respondent entered into a Sub-contract with the appellant bearing No.

STDP/CNTIC/TEAM/2011/10/3 (hereinafter referred to as the Sub-Contract), which was

produced as part and parcel of the plaint marked as P2. The appellant stated that, as per the terms

in the said Sub-Contract, he completed the work and handed it over to the respondent on the 22nd

of September, 2013.

4

The appellant further stated that later, certain disputes arose from the said Sub-Contract with the

respondent. However, as they were unable to settle the said disputes amicably, the said disputes

were referred to arbitration in terms of Clause 17 of the said Sub-Contract by Notice of Arbitration

dated 2nd of April, 2014. (The said Notice of Arbitration was signed by the appellant as the

Managing Director of Trading Engineering Manufacturing Company.) However, the respondent

denied the claim by reply dated 30th of April, 2014 and included a counterclaim in the said reply.

The appellant stated that it was later found out that, by mistake, his business was named as a

company incorporated under the Companies Act of Sri Lanka in the said Sub-Contract and

in the Notice of Arbitration, whereas it was in fact a Sole Proprietor and not an incorporated

company under the Companies Act No. 7 of 2007. Further, the Registration No. (AA) 4726,

referred to as the company registration number in the said Sub-Contract, is the business registration

number given to the Sole Proprietorship registered by him.

Hence, a new Notice of Arbitration was sent to the respondent by the appellants Attorney-at-Law

on the 20th of June, 2014 informing the respondent that the initial Notice of Arbitration dated 2nd

of April, 2014 is withdrawn and that the new Notice of Arbitration should be considered as the

correct Notice of Arbitration. In the said Notice of Arbitration, the appellant was named as the

claimant to the dispute referred to arbitration. Furthermore, the appellant included additional

claims in the second Notice of Arbitration.

The appellant further stated that the respondent objected to the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal

on the basis that the Notice of Arbitration dated 20th of June, 2014 refers to the appellant as a Sole

Proprietor, whereas the said Sub-Contract was entered into between the respondent and a company

said to be duly incorporated in Sri Lanka, namely Trading Engineering Manufacturing Company.

Thus, there was no agreement between the appellant and the respondent to arbitrate the disputes

referred to in the Notice of Arbitration.

After hearing the submissions of the parties, the Arbitral Tribunal delivered its Order on the said

objection raised by the respondent and terminated the proceedings of the said Arbitration on the

basis, inter alia, that the said Sub-Contract is not a valid contract and therefore there is no valid

arbitration agreement between the parties to refer the alleged disputes to arbitration. Further, it was

held that, as the Arbitral Tribunal derives its jurisdiction from the Notice of Arbitration issued

under the arbitration clause and as the said Sub-Contract is void ab initio, both Notices of

Arbitration have no force or effect in law.

5

Being aggrieved by the said Order of the Arbitral Tribunal, the appellant filed an application on

the 20th of November, 2014 in the High Court in terms of section 11 of the Arbitration Act No. 11

of 1995 praying, inter alia, to set aside the said Order and seeking a declaration that there is a valid

and binding arbitration agreement between the parties to refer the disputes to arbitration under and

in terms of the said Sub-Contract.

After hearing the parties, the said application was dismissed by the learned High Court Judge by

his judgment dated 5th of June, 2017 on the basis that the High Court has no jurisdiction to entertain

the said application as there is no provision in the Arbitration Act to appeal against an Order where

an Arbitral Tribunal has ruled on its jurisdiction. The appellants, instead of appealing against the

said judgment, instituted the action under reference in the Commercial High Court on the 19th of

October, 2018 praying inter alia;

(a) Judgment and Decree be entered in favour of the Plaintiff in a sum of Rs.

88,794,135/74 together with legal interest from 05th November 2013 up to the

date of Decree and thereafter further interest on the aggregate amount of the

Decree until payment in full in respect of the First Cause of Action;

(b) Judgment and Decree be entered in favour of the Plaintiff in a sum of Rs.

30,110, 210/88 together with legal interest from 03rd April 2014 up to the date

of Decree and thereafter further interest on the aggregate amount of the Decree

until payment in full in respect of the Second Cause of Action;

(c) Judgment and Decree be entered in favour of the Plaintiff in a sum of Rs.

142,666,236/86 together with legal interest from 03rd April 2014 up to the date

of Decree and thereafter further interest on the aggregate amount of the Decree

until payment in full in respect of the Third Cause of Action;

(d) Judgment and Decree be entered in favour of the Plaintiff in a sum of Rs. 272,

088, 384/97 together with legal interest from 18th October 2014 up to the date

of Decree and thereafter further interest on the aggregate amount of the Decree

until payment in full in respect of the Fourth Cause of Action;

(e) Judgment and Decree be entered in favour of the Plaintiff in a sum of Rs. 15,

824, 792/89 together with legal interest from 18th October 2014 up to the date

6

of Decree and thereafter further interest on the aggregate amount of the Decree

until payment in full in respect of the Sixth Cause of Action;

(g) A Declaration that the Plaintiff has duly completed the works under the

Sub-Contract on 23rd September 2013 and notified the same to the

Defendant;

(h) A Declaration that the Plaintiff is entitled to the issue of a Completion

Certificate/Acceptance Certificate under and in terms of Clause 13.4 of

the said Sub-Contract;

(i) Costs; and

(j) Such other and further relief as this Court may seem meet to be granted.

[emphasis added]

Answer

The respondent filed its answer and prayed inter alia for a dismissal of the plaint on the basis that

the appellant cannot maintain the said action as the appellant is not a contracting party to the

contract (P2) sought to be enforced.

Proceedings before the Commercial High Court

The trial commenced before the Commercial High Court by marking admissions and raising

issues. Thereafter, the respondent had moved court to have the following issues tried as

preliminary issues of law in terms of section 146 of the Civil Procedure Code as amended;

23

(a) Is the Plaintiff a party to the Sub-contract Agreement marked P2 to the Plaint?

(b) If the above issue is Answered in the negative, does the Plaintiff have no locus standi

to institute this action?

(c) If the above issues are answered in favour of the Defendant has a cause of action

accrued to the Plaintiff against the Defendant?

7

(d) Is the action of the Plaintiff misconceived in law and contrary to the provisions of the

of section 43 of Civil Procedure Code?

24. if one or more of the above issues (a), (b), (c) and (d) are answered in favour of the

Defendant, should this action be dismissed in limine?

25. Does any purported relationship between the Plaintiff and the Defendant necessarily

arise from any purported work and labour done on behalf of the Defendant by the

Plaintiff?

26. Is any cause of action for work or labour done prescribed in term of Section 08 of the

Prescription Ordinance?

Thereafter, the learned High Court judge heard the parties on the said issues and directed them to

file written submissions in respect of the same.

Judgment of the Commercial High Court

The learned Commercial High Court Judge delivered his judgment dated 7th of December, 2020

and held that the contract produced marked as P2 is not a valid contract. Accordingly, he

dismissed the plaint filed by the plaintiff.

Appeal to the Supreme Court

Being aggrieved by the said judgment of the Commercial High Court, the appellant filed an appeal

in the Supreme Court, and the court granted leave to appeal on the following questions of law;

b. At all times during the execution of P2 has the Defendant duly acted on the

basis of the plaintiff being a person engaged in the business as a sole proprietor?

d. In all the circumstances, is the Defendant effectively estopped from denying

substantive status and character of the Plaintiff?

f. If the Plaintiff is left without a remedy on the basis of the purported objection,

will the plaintiff be grievously prejudiced as a result of being non suited?

8

g. Did the commercial high court place an undue and rigorous reliance on a patently

erroneous issue of nomenclature and failed to see the true nature, character and

status of the Plaintiff?

h. Given the inherent and intrinsic character of the plaintiff as an individual or as a

person engaged in business as a sole proprietor; is he entitled to have and

maintain the action maintained in the Commercial High Court?

k. Did the High Court err by concluding that the issues which were taken as

preliminary issues were pure questions of law that could dispose of the action in

its entirety?

l. Did the High Court err by holding that the sub contract P2 was void and/or was

entered into by an entity or person known to law?

Did the High Court err by holding that the Sub-Contract P2 was void and/or was entered

into by an entity or person known to law?

The main issues that need to be considered in this appeal are whether;

(i) the appellant had the capacity to enter into the said Sub-Contract produced marked as

P2,

(ii) there was an agreement between the parties to enter into the said contract (meeting of

minds), and

(iii) the appellant is entitled in law to institute the action under reference in the Commercial

High Court after the Arbitral Tribunal held that the sub-contract (P2) is void ab initio.

Moreover, it is pertinent to note that the issues raised by appellant, inter alia; stated;

1. Does the Plaintiff have Locus Standi to institute, have and maintain the above

styled action?

Thus, it appears that both parties have raised the jurisdictional issue before the High Court. Hence,

it is necessary to consider the jurisdictional issue in the first instance, as it goes to the root of the

case.

9

The law of contract requires at least two parties to form a contract. Further, the parties to a contract

must, inter alia, have the capacity to enter into a contract. It is pertinent to note that the incapacity

of one or more of the contracting parties will result in a contract being void or voidable.

The said Sub-Contract was entered into between China National Technical Import & Export

Corporation and Trading Engineering and Manufacturing Company a company duly incorporated

under the laws of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka and registered under Company

Registration No. AA4726 in terms of the provisions of the Companies Act No. 07 of 2007, and

having is registered office at No. 317/A, Thelwatta Junction, Colombo Road, Negombo, Sri

Lanka. In the said Sub-Contract the parties are named as follows;

CHINA NATIONAL TECHNICAL IMPORT & EXPORT

CORPORATION, a company duly incorporated in the Peoples Republic of China

having its principle office at No. 90 Xi San Huan Zhong Lu Genertec Plaza, Beijing,

China (hereinafter referred to as CNTIC which terms and expression shall mean

and include the said China National Technical Import & Export Corporation and

its successors, assigns, administrators and liquidators) of the ONE PART

AND

TRADING ENGINEERING AND MANUFACTURING COMPANY, a

company duly incorporated under the laws of the Democratic Socialist Republic of

Sri Lanka and registered under Company Registration No. AA4726 in terms of the

provisions of the Companies Act No. 07 of 2007, and having is registered office at

No. 317/A, Thelwatta Junction, Colombo Road, Negombo, Sri Lanka, (hereinafter

referred to as TEAM which term and expression shall mean and include the said

TEAM and its successors, administrators and liquidators) of the OTHER PART

[emphasis added]

It was submitted by the learned Presidents Counsel for the appellant that the appellant was

mistakenly referred to as a company duly incorporated under and in terms of the Companies Act

in the said Sub-Contract. This position is also stated in averment 12 of the plaint.

However, it was submitted by the learned Presidents Counsel for the respondent that the appellant

attempted to correct the said mistake only when the second Notice of Arbitration was given on the

20th of June, 2014, i.e., 3 years after entering into the said Sub-Contract in the year 2011.

10

The elements required to form a valid contract is set out in The Law of Contracts, Volume 1 at

page 84 by C.G. Weeramantry which states as follows;

(a) agreement between the parties

(b) actual or presumed intention to create a legal obligation

(c) due observance of prescribed forms or modes of agreement, if any

(d) legality and possibility of the object of the agreement

(e) capacity of parties to contract

[emphasis added]

Capacity to enter into a contract

The law only recognises natural persons and juristic persons as having the capacity to enter into

contracts. A juristic person is considered as having a separate legal personality in law. Thus, it is

necessary to consider whether the appellant can be considered as a juristic person.

Section 3 of the Companies Act No. 7 of 2007 specifies the types of companies that can be

incorporated under the said Act;

(1) A company incorporated under this Act may be either

(a) a company that issues shares, the holders of which have the liability to

contribute to the assets of the company, if any, specified in the companys

articles as attaching to those shares (in this Act referred to as a limited

company); or

(b) a company that issues shares, the holders of which have an unlimited

liability to contribute to the assets of the company under its articles (in this

Act referred to as an unlimited company); or

(c) a company that does not issue shares, the members of which undertake to

contribute to the assets of the company in the event of its being put into

liquidation, in an amount specified in the companys articles (in this Act

referred to as a company limited by guarantee).

11

(2) Where a limited company is incorporated as a private company or as an off-

shore company, the provisions of Part II or Part XI shall apply respectively, to

such a company.

However, in his plaint filed in the Commercial High Court, the appellant referred to his business

as a sole proprietorship. A sole proprietorship is the simplest form of business that is owned and

managed by one person. On the other hand, a company incorporated under the Companies Act No.

7 of 2007 is owned by the shareholder/s of the company, while the directors manage the operations

of the company. Further, a sole proprietorship has no separate legal personality of its own, and

thus, in law, the business and its owner are viewed as a single entity. Hence, it is not possible for

a sole proprietor to sue and to be sued by his business registration name. Thus, all actions filed by

or against a sole proprietorship should be in the personal name of the sole proprietor carrying on

business under the name of the sole proprietorship. In contrast, a registered company is a person

in the eyes of the law, distinct from its shareholders. Further, as a company has a separate legal

personality, it can, inter alia, enter into contracts, sue, and be sued in the name of the company.

A similar view was held in Solomon v Solomon & Co. Ltd. [1897] AC 22, where it was held that

the proceedings were not contrary to the true intent and meaning of the Companies Act 1962; that

the company was duly formed and registered and was not the mere alias" or agent of or trustee

for the vendor; and that he was not liable to indemnify the company against the creditors claims.

Further, it was common ground that there was no company incorporated under the Companies Act

No. 7 of 2007 by the name of Trading Engineering and Manufacturing Company. Moreover, the

number referred to as the company registration number in the said Sub-Contract is incorrect, as

there is no such company in existence. Further, a Sole Proprietorship does not have a registered

office, as stated in the said Sub-Contract.

Moreover, the said Sub-Contract was entered into by Chinese National Technical Import & Export

Corporation and Trading Engineering and Manufacturing Company, which is said to be

incapacitated under the provisions of the Companies Act. As the said Trading Engineering and

Manufacturing Company was not a company incorporated under the Companies Act, it did not

have the capacity to enter into a valid contract. Moreover, the aforementioned description given to

the Trading Engineering and Manufacturing Company is incorrect and misleading.

12

In The Law of Contracts, Volume I at page 532 by C.G. Weeramantry, it states;

There must in general be two parties to a contract. If one of the parties to the

contract be dead or non-existent no contract can come into being.

In the circumstances, I am of the opinion that the said Sub-Contract is void ab initio as one of the

parties to the said contract lacked the capacity to enter into the said contract, which is a core

element in forming a valid contract. A similar view was expressed in The Law of Contracts,

Volume I at page 95 by C.G. Weeramantry which is as follows;

The absence in a contract of any of the essentials of a valid contract would render

it null and void ab initio.

Meeting of the Minds

The plaint filed in the Commercial High Court contains 6 causes of action based on the said Sub-

Contract filed along with the plaint marked as P2. It is apparent that the said causes of action are

founded upon the said Sub-Contract.

In fact, following the proper procedure and accepted drafting skills of plaints, the appellant has

averred the following in respect of each cause of action preferred to in the plaint filed in the

Commercial High Court;

The Plaintiff re-iterates the averments contained in paragraph 1 to 21 above.

Hence, a careful consideration of the plaint shows that all the claims are based on the said Sub-

Contract. Moreover, in a contract, the parties consent to perform certain obligations arising from

the contract. Thus, it is necessary to have a meeting of the minds of the parties to perform the

contractual rights/obligations under the contract. However, in the said Sub-Contract as one party

is not an entity, it is not possible to have the meeting of the minds of the parties in order to form a

contract. This aspect also renders the said Sub-Contract void ab initio.

13

Mistake in naming a party in the Sub-Contract

In the instant appeal, the appellant withdrew the initial Notice of Arbitration dated 2nd of April,

2014 and served the new Notice of Arbitration dated 20th of June, 2014 naming himself as the

claimant. Further, in averment 12 of the plaint, the appellant stated that the said Trading

Engineering and Manufacturing Company was named as a company duly incorporated under the

Companies Act by mistake.

A careful consideration of the aforementioned two Notices of Arbitration shows that the appellant

realised the error/mistake in the Sub-Contract where Trading Engineering and Manufacturing

Company was not a company incorporated under the Companies Act only after the first Notice of

Arbitration dated 2nd of April, 2014 was sent to the respondent. It is pertinent to note that a mistake

in entering into a contract itself makes such a contract ab initio void. Moreover, it is pertinent to

note that the appellant has been sending correspondences as the Managing Director of Trading

Engineering and Manufacturing Company. However, there are no directors in Sole

Proprietorships.

Therefore, I hold that the Commercial High Court was correct in holding that the said Sub-Contract

marked P2 was void as one of the parties to the contract was neither a natural person nor a legal

person known to law.

Given the inherent and intrinsic character of the plaintiff as an individual or as a person

engaged in business as a sole proprietor; is he entitled to have and maintain the action

maintained in the Commercial High Court?

In his plaint, the appellant sought to enforce the Sub-Contract marked and produced as P2 along

with the plaint, which was declared void ab initio by the Arbitral Tribunal as the said Trading

Engineering and Manufacturing Company, being a sole proprietor, did not have the capacity to

enter into the said contract.

It is pertinent to note that the said Sub-Contract was not entered into between China National

Technical Import and Export Corporation and the appellant, namely, Mahawaduge Priyanga

Lakshitha Prasad Perera. Thus, as the Sub-Contract was void ab initio, the said contract is non-

existent in the eyes of the law. Hence, it renders the said contract unenforceable, with no legal

14

rights or obligations arising from it. Therefore, the alleged parties to the Sub-Contract cannot seek

to enforce any rights or remedies under the said contract.

As stated above, Trading Engineering and Manufacturing Company was described as a company

duly incorporated under the laws of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka and registered

under the Company Registration No. AA4726 in terms of the Companies Act No. 7 of 2007, and

having its registered office at No. 317/A, Thelwatta Junction, Colombo Road, Negombo, Sri

Lanka, (hereinafter referred to as TEAM which term and expression shall mean and include the

said TEAM and its successors, administrators and liquidators). The aforementioned description

contains all the features of a company incorporated under the Companies Act No. 7 of 2007.

Further, a Sole Proprietorship cannot have successors and liquidators. Such matters are unique to

an incorporated company.

Moreover, as stated above, in the plaint filed in the Commercial High Court, the appellant admitted

that the Sole Proprietorship was named as a company by mistake. Hence, a person engaged in a

business as a Sole Proprietor cannot be replaced as a party to the said Sub-Contract, particularly

when the Sub-Contract is void ab initio and is non-existent before the law.

Applicability of the Doctrine of Res Judicata

It is pertinent to note that, if the court holds that the Sub-Contract produced marked as P2 is a

valid contract between the parties, the arbitration agreement in Clause 17 of the said contract will

become operative between the parties to the said action, and thereby, any dispute, controversy or

difference of any kind arising between the appellant and respondent in connection with or arising

out of the said Sub-Contract is required to be referred to arbitration.

Hence, if the respondent objects to the jurisdiction of the Commercial High Court under section 5

of the Arbitration Act No. 11 of 1995, the Commercial High Court will not have jurisdiction to

entertain the plaint filed by the appellant and hear the case. Such an event will leave the appellant

to go back to arbitration. However, as the arbitral tribunal has already ruled on its jurisdiction as

the said Sub-Contract is void ab initio and come to the conclusion that it has no jurisdiction, the

said Order of the Arbitral Tribunal acts as res judicata between the parties. Thus, no purpose would

be served in continuing with the case pending before the Commercial High Court.

15

In any event, as the arbitral tribunal has already decided that the said Sub-Contract is void ab initio

the doctrine of res judicata also acts as a bar to the institution of the plaint filed by the appellant.

Further, section 26 of the Arbitration Act No. 11 of 1995 reads as follows;

Subject to the provisions of Part VII of this Act, the award made by the arbitral

tribunal shall be final and binding on the parties to the arbitration

agreement.

[emphasis added]

Hence, the aforementioned decision of the Arbitral Tribunal shall be final and binding on the

parties to the Sub-Contract marked and produced as P2 along with the plaint filed in the

Commercial High Court. Moreover, a careful consideration of section 26 of the Arbitration Act

shows that the Doctrine of Res Judicata has been introduced to arbitrations conducted under the

said Act.

In Fidelitas Shipping Co Ltd v V/o Exportchleb [1965] 1 Lloyds Rep. 223 at 229 and 230, Lord

Denning MR held:

Within one issue, there may be several points available which go to aid one

party or the other in his efforts to secure a determination of the issue in his

favour. The rule then is that each party must use reasonable diligence to bring

forward every point which he thinks would help him. If he omits to raise any

particular point, from negligence, inadvertence, or even accident (which would

or might have decided the issue in his favour) he may find himself shut out from

raising that point again, at any rate in any case where the self-same issue arises

in the same or subsequent proceedings.

It is in the interest of commerce that issues, once decided, should not be

reopened because one side or the other thinks of another point. If we were to

allow the issue of waiver to be raised now it might well mean another journey

up this Court on another special case. That would never do. There must be an

end of litigation some time.

16

Further, in International Commercial Arbitration 2021, 3rd Edition, Vol. 3, page 4145 by Gary B.

Born, inter alia, discusses the preclusive effect and/or finality of jurisdictional awards in arbitral

proceedings when there is no contractual relationship between the parties.

Jurisdictional awards

Particular issues of preclusion are raised by an arbitral tribunals jurisdictional

award. Such awards can be either positive (either upholding the existence, validity,

or applicability of an arbitration agreement) or negative (holding that no valid

arbitration agreement exist or applies). In either case, the question arises to the

preclusive effects of the award in subsequent judicial or arbitral proceedings . this

question can arise in different contexts, which require different analysis.

Second, the preclusive effect of a jurisdictional award can arise in subsequent

arbitral or judicial proceedings (i.e., other than actions to annul or recognize an

award). In these proceedings, there is no reason that both positive and negative

jurisdictional decisions should not be entitled to the same preclusive effects as those

of other types of arbitral awards (not addressing issue of jurisdiction).

For example, if an arbitral tribunal decides that there was no contractual

relationship between the parties, or that the asserted arbitration clause was never

concluded, then the substantive decision should be preclusive with regard to that

issue in subsequent efforts by one of the parties to commence a second arbitration

based upon the putative arbitration clause or to rely on that clause in defence to

a litigation. Equally, a positive determination of this jurisdictional issue should be

dispositive if, in a subsequent arbitration, one of the parties objected to jurisdiction

or denied the existence of a contract, or if a party seeks to pursue claims covered

under the arbitration agreement in a litigation.

[emphasis added]

Conclusion

In light of the above, the following questions of law are answered as follows;

17

(l) Did the High Court err by holding that the subcontract P2 was void and/or was entered into by

an entity or person known to law?

No

(h) Given the inherent and intrinsic character of the plaintiff as an individual or as a person engaged

in business as a sole proprietor; is he entitled to have and maintain the action maintained in the

Commercial High Court?

No

In view of the answers given to the aforementioned questions of law, the other questions of law

are not answered.

Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed. No costs

Judge of the Supreme Court

Yasantha Kodagoda PC, J

I Agree Judge of the Supreme Court

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

I Agree Judge of the Supreme Court