==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application under Articles 17 and 126 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

SC (FR) Application No: 417/2016

Hettiarachchige Gemunu Tissa, No. 361/18H, Nagalingam Street, Colombo 14. PETITIONER

Vs. 1. W. Lionel Jayaratne, Sub Inspector of Police, Police Narcotics Bureau, Colombo 01. 2. B.P. Sanjeewa, Police Constable (60728) Police Narcotics Bureau, Colombo 01. 3. R.A.I. Rathugamage, Police Constable (74811), Police Narcotics Bureau, Colombo 01. 4. M.N. Rangajeeva, Inspector of Police, Enforcement and Raids, Police Narcotics Bureau, Colombo 01. 5. T. Ludowyke, Chief Inspector of Police, Officer-in-Charge, Police Narcotics Bureau, Colombo 01.

2

6. L.K.W. Kamal Silva, Senior Superintendent of Police, Director, Police Narcotics Bureau, Colombo 01. 7. Pujith Jayasundara, Inspector General of Police. Police Headquarters, Colombo 01. 8. Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12. RESPONDENTS Before: S. Thurairaja, PC, J Mahinda Samayawardhena, J Arjuna Obeyesekere, J Counsel: Senany Dayaratne with Nishadhi Wickremasinghe for the Petitioner

Varuna De Saram for the 1st – 3rd Respondents Varunika Hettige, Senior Deputy Solicitor General for the 8th Respondent Argued on: 7th March 2024 Written Tendered on behalf of the Petitioner on 5th April 2024 Submissions: Tendered on behalf of the 1st – 3rd Respondents on 27th March 2024 Tendered on behalf of the 8th Respondent on 12th September 2022 Decided on: 28th May 2024

3

Obeyesekere, J

The Petitioner filed this application on 11th November 2016 alleging that his fundamental

rights guaranteed by Articles 11, 12(1), 13(1) and 13(2) of the Constitution have been

infringed by the 1st – 6th Respondents, all of whom are Police Officers and who were

attached to the Police Narcotics Bureau during the relevant time, and by the 7th

Respondent, the Inspector General of Police. On 30th November 2016, this Court granted

leave to proceed only against the 1st – 3rd Respondents [the Respondents] for the alleged

violation of Articles 11 and 12(1).

Arrest of the Petitioner

The Petitioner was 47 years of age at the time of the impugned incident. He claims that

he was employed as a driver of a three wheel taxi. Prior to the impugned incident, the

Petitioner had been arrested on several occasions for being in possession of heroin. The

Petitioner had been indicted in the High Court of Colombo in Case No. 841/2002 for

possession of 66.9g of heroin and had been acquitted on 9th March 2012. The Petitioner

stands indicted before the High Court of Gampaha in Case No. 337/19 for being in

possession of and trafficking 12.08g of heroin on 26th June 2011. Even on the date of the

alleged incident, the Petitioner was on bail ordered by the High Court of Colombo, after

having been arrested for possession of heroin.

The Petitioner states that the bail conditions imposed by the High Court required him to

report to the Grandpass Police Station on the last Sunday of every month. The Petitioner

had accordingly reported to the said Police Station at around 10am on 28th August 2016.

He states that he left the Grandpass Police Station soon thereafter in a three wheel taxi

driven by one Dhammith Kumara, and proceeded towards Maradana. Somewhere in

Orugodawatte, the Petitioner had noticed that the vehicle he was travelling in was being

followed by two motor bicycles. When their vehicle stopped at a traffic light, the 1st and

2nd Respondents who were in civilian clothing had alighted from their motor bicycles and

got inside the taxi that the Petitioner was travelling in, forcing the Petitioner to sit

between them.

4

The Petitioner claims that once inside the vehicle, the 1st and 2nd Respondents had

slapped the Petitioner and demanded that the Petitioner hand over a weapon which the

said Respondents claimed was in the possession of the Petitioner. Having identified

themselves thereafter as Police Officers and handcuffed the Petitioner, the 1st and 2nd

Respondents had directed Dhammith Kumara to proceed towards a road off D. R.

Wijewardena Mawatha, Colombo 10.

Alleged cruel and inhuman treatment meted out to the Petitioner

Having arrived at the said by-road, the 1st and 2nd Respondents had been met by the 3rd

Respondent, who too was in civilian clothing and seated in a double cab vehicle. The

Petitioner states that he was pulled out of the vehicle and made to lie down on the rear

portion of the double cab vehicle with his legs protruding towards the rear of the said

vehicle. The 1st and 2nd Respondents had thereafter demanded that the Petitioner

produce drugs and weapons that he was in possession of. As he had none in his

possession, it is alleged that the 1st, 2nd and 3rd Respondents had taken turns in assaulting

the Petitioner on his soles and heels with an iron rod, causing him excruciating pain.

The Petitioner had thereafter been taken in the same double cab vehicle to a playground

in Ganemulla where having closed his head with a plastic bag, the 1st and 2nd Respondents

are alleged to have continued to assault the Petitioner with an iron rod on his legs. The

Petitioner had thereafter been taken to a small township in Peliyagoda where he claims

he was subjected to further assault as before by the 1st – 3rd Respondents.

The Respondents had thereafter proceeded to Kelaniya with the Petitioner in the three

wheel taxi driven by Dhammith Kumara, then to the Maradana Police Station and finally

arrived at the Police Narcotics Bureau in Colombo 1 at about 9pm. The Petitioner states

that by this time, his feet were swollen and he was finding it difficult to walk, and he had

to be carried up the stairs at the Police Narcotics Bureau. The Petitioner states further

that although he was given Siddhalepa ointment to apply on his feet, the said treatment

was not effective as the assault was so severe and that he could not even rest his feet on

the ground.

5

Produced before the Magistrate’s Court and the Judicial Medical Officer

Around 3pm on the next day – i.e. 29th August 2016 – the Petitioner had been produced

at the Colombo Magistrate’s Court on an allegation that he was in possession of 25g of

heroin at the time of his arrest at Orugodawatte. The Petitioner has subsequently been

indicted by the Attorney General before the High Court of Colombo in Case No. HC

1586/20 for possession and trafficking of 5.31g of heroin which is the pure quantity of

heroin as determined by the Government Analyst. The trial is presently proceeding before

the High Court.

The Petitioner states that while he was at the Magistrate’s Court, a lawyer by the name

of Inoka had noticed that the Petitioner could barely walk and inquired from the

Petitioner the reason for the swelling of his feet. Having been informed of the assault, the

said lawyer had accompanied the Petitioner to the chambers of the learned Magistrate

and had drawn the attention of the learned Magistrate to the injuries sustained by the

Petitioner. The learned Magistrate had thereafter directed the producing officers to leave

his chambers and questioned the Petitioner the reasons for his injuries. The Petitioner

states that he disclosed to the learned Magistrate what transpired since leaving the

Grandpass Police Station on 28th August 2016. Having denied the issuance of the

detention order sought by the producing officer and instead having remanded the

Petitioner, the learned Magistrate had directed that the Petitioner be produced before

the Judicial Medical Officer for a medical examination.

On 30th August 2016, the Petitioner had been examined by a Medical Officer at the

Institute of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology. The examination and the results thereof,

to which I shall advert to later in this judgment, revealed several injuries on the feet of

the Petitioner. In the meantime, the mother of the Petitioner had lodged complaints with

the Grandpass Police, the National Police Commission and the Human Rights Commission

over the above incident and brought to their attention that the Petitioner is receiving in

house treatment at the National Hospital in Colombo. Copies of these statements

however have not been tendered to this Court.

6

On 27th September 2016, the Chief Magistrate of Colombo had directed that the 1st – 3rd

Respondents as well as anyone else involved in the assault on the Petitioner be arrested

and produced before the Magistrate’s Court. A ‘B’ report had accordingly been filed in the

Magistrate’s Court of Colombo in Case No. 63125/4/2016 by the 5th Respondent and the

progress of the investigation has been reported to Court on several occasions. Together

with a motion filed on 1st April 2024, the learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General has

tendered a copy of the indictment forwarded by the Attorney General to the High Court

of Colombo on 28th March 2024 against six Police officers including the Respondents on

four charges inclusive of a charge under Section 2(4) of the Convention against Torture

and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment Act, No. 22 of 1994.

It is in the above circumstances that the Petitioner complained to this Court that his

fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 11, 12(1), 13(1) and 13(2) have been infringed.

As leave to proceed has been granted only with regard to the alleged violation of Articles

11 and 12(1), I shall limit my discussion to the alleged violation of the said Articles by the

Respondents.

The version of the Respondents

The Respondents state that the Petitioner had been arrested on numerous occasions for

possession and trafficking of illegal substances including heroin. It is the position of the

Respondents that in spite of having been indicted for such offences before the High Court,

the Petitioner had continued to engage in the trafficking of heroin. The Respondents state

that the activities of the Petitioner including his financial transactions were under

investigation at the time of his arrest. This is borne out by the several confidential reports

filed before the Magistrate’s Court, Maligakanda in January 2016, seeking the assistance

of the Magistrate’s Court to probe the phone and bank account details of the Petitioner.

In the ‘B’ report filed under the Money Laundering Act, No. 5 of 2016, it has been alleged

that the Petitioner and his ‘wife’ have accumulated wealth beyond their known income,

and that they own several properties in Colombo 15. It has been further alleged that the

Petitioner has a deposit of Rs. 10m at Sampath Bank, a claim which has not been

specifically denied by the Petitioner.

7

It is the position of the 1st Respondent that acting on information received from a private

informant that the Petitioner was meeting one of his suppliers in Wellampitiya to carry

out a drug transaction that morning, the Respondents together with other officers of the

Police Narcotics Bureau had carried out a surveillance of the area surrounding the

Orugodawatte flyover. Around 12noon, the private informant had directed the said

officers to the three wheel taxi that the Petitioner was travelling in. The 1st and 2nd

Respondents claim that they stopped the said three wheel taxi under the said flyover. At

that time, the Petitioner ‘had jumped out of the three wheeler and run along the railway

tracks’ for a distance of about 40-50 metres which compelled the said Officers to pursue

and apprehend the Petitioner. Having searched the Petitioner, the Respondents state that

they had found in the possession of the Petitioner a polythene bag containing a brown

powder which they suspected to be heroin. The Petitioner and Dhammith Kumara had

thereafter been arrested for possession and trafficking of heroin and produced before the

learned Magistrate the next day.

The Respondents deny that they assaulted the Petitioner but do concede that reasonable

force had to be used to arrest the Petitioner as he was attempting to resist arrest and flee.

While the injuries of the Petitioner are admitted, the learned Counsel for the Respondents

in the course of his oral submissions explained that the injuries on the feet of the

Petitioner were caused as a result of the Petitioner running on the railway track trying to

evade arrest.

Thus, two incidents have taken place on 28th August 2016. The first is the arrest of the

Petitioner who is said to have been in possession of heroin at the time of his arrest and

which has resulted in the aforementioned indictment filed by the Attorney General

against the Petitioner in the High Court of Colombo for possession and trafficking of 5.31g

of heroin. The second is the alleged assault of the Petitioner pursuant to such arrest,

which has given rise to this application, and the indictment filed by the Attorney General

against the Respondents under the provisions of Act No. 22 of 1994.

8

Having previously been arrested for similar offences, and being under investigation for

such offences, the Petitioner could not have been unaware that an allegation of assault

at the time of arrest or soon thereafter may have an adverse impact on the credibility of

the prosecution version once he is charged before a Court of law for such offence. It would

therefore be important for the High Court to evaluate the material and evidence relating

to the charges in the indictment relating to possession and trafficking independent of the

allegation that the Petitioner was assaulted subsequent to being found in possession of

heroin at the time of arrest.

This being the two versions before me with regard to the cause for the injuries, I shall now consider the alleged violation of Article 11. Article 11 of the Constitution

Article 11 provides that, “No person shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or

degrading treatment or punishment.”

In Velmurugu v Attorney General and Another [(1981) 1 Sri LR 406 at page 453]

Wanasundera, J stated as follows:

“Article 11 which gives protection from torture and ill-treatment has a number of

features which distinguish it from the other fundamental rights. Its singularity lies in

the fact that it is the only fundamental right that is entrenched in the Constitution in

the sense that an amendment of this clause would need not only a two-thirds

majority but also a Referendum. It is also the only right in the catalogue of rights set

out in Chapter III that is of equal application to everybody and which in no way can

be restricted or diminished. Whatever one may say of the other rights, this right

undoubtedly occupies a preferred position.

Having regard to its importance, its effect and consequences to society, it should

rightly be singled out for special treatment. It is therefore the duty of this Court to

give it full play and see that its provisions enjoy the maximum application.”

[emphasis added]

9

In Amal Sudath Silva v Kodituwakku, Inspector of Police and Others [(1987) 2 Sri LR 119;

at page 126], Atukorale, J held that, “Article 11 of our Constitution mandates that no

person shall be subjected to torture, or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or

punishment. It prohibits every person from inflicting torturesome, cruel or inhuman

treatment on another. It is an absolute fundamental right subject to no restrictions or

limitations whatsoever.” [emphasis added]

The following passage by Atukorale, J [at page 126] is equally applicable to this

application:

“Constitutional safeguards are generally directed against the State and its organs.

The Police force, being an organ of the State, is enjoined by the Constitution to

secure and advance this right and not to deny, abridge or restrict the same in any

manner and under any circumstances. Just as much as this right is enjoyed by every

member of the Police force, so is he prohibited from denying the same to others,

irrespective of their standing, their beliefs or antecedents. It is therefore the duty

of this Court to protect and defend this right jealously to its fullest measure with a

view to ensuring that this right which is declared and intended to be fundamental is

always kept fundamental and that the executive by its action does not reduce it to a

mere illusion.” [emphasis added]

In Mrs W M K De Silva v Chairman, Ceylon Fertilizer Corporation [(1989) 2 Sri LR 393 at

page 403], Amerasinghe, J stated at page 405 that:

“In my view Article 11 of the Constitution prohibits any act by which severe pain or

suffering, whether physical or mental is, without lawful sanction in accordance with

a procedure established by law, intentionally inflicted on a person (whom I

shall refer to as 'the victim’) by a public official acting in the discharge of his

executive or administrative duties or under colour of office, for such purposes as

obtaining from the victim or a third person a confession or information, such

information being actually or supposedly required for official purposes, imposing

a penalty upon the victim for an offence or breach of a rule he or a third person

has committed or is suspected of having committed, or intimidating or coercing the

10

victim or a third person to do or refrain from doing something which the official

concerned believes the victim or the third person ought to do or refrain from doing,

as the case may be.”

Every human being is entitled to live in dignity and not be subject to any torture or cruel,

inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. It is the duty of this Court, as the

guardian of the fundamental rights of our People, to foster and protect these rights.

Whenever a complaint alleging the infringement of Article 11 is made to this Court, our

duty is to examine carefully the facts relating to such complaint, the corroborative

evidence, if any, tendered by the petitioner in support of such complaint, the version of

the respondent/s and arrive at a considered decision.

The fact that the Petitioner, (a) has been arrested on previous occasions for possession

and trafficking of heroin, (b) was under surveillance for trafficking of heroin and money

laundering and that the Police Narcotics Bureau had reported facts in that regard to the

Magistrate’s Court, (c) is said to have amassed through the trafficking of heroin and other

illegal activity a large amount of money, (d) stood indicted for possession of heroin at the

time of his arrest on 28th August 2016 are not relevant considerations in deciding upon

the allegations of assault made by the Petitioner against the Respondents.

In Amal Sudath Silva v Kodituwakku, Inspector of Police and Others [supra], it was held

that:

“Every person in this country, be he a criminal or not, is entitled to this right to the

fullest content of its guarantee.” [page 126; emphasis added]

“The petitioner may be a hard-core criminal whose tribe deserve no sympathy. But if

constitutional guarantees are to have any meaning or value in our democratic set-

up, it is essential that he be not denied the protection guaranteed by our

Constitution.” [page 127]

11

Severity of the act complained of

Amerasinghe, J in Channa Pieris and Others v Attorney General and Others (Ratawesi

Peramuna Case) [(1994) 1 Sri LR 1 at page 105] stated that, “… the acts or conduct

complained of must be qualitatively of a kind that the Court can take cognizance of.” At

page 106, it was further noted that where physical harm is concerned, a long line of cases

had adopted the criteria set out in Mrs W M K De Silva v Chairman, Ceylon Fertilizer

Corporation [supra; at page 401], that for there to be an Article 11 infringement, the

degree of mental or physical coerciveness or viciousness must be such as to occasion not

mere ill-treatment, but maltreatment of a very high degree.

This has been emphasised in Our Fundamental Rights of Personal Security and Physical

Liberty [[(1995) Sarvodaya; at page 29], where Justice Amerasinghe has stated that,

“'Torture' implies that the suffering occasioned must be of a particular intensity or cruelty.

In order that ill-treatment may be regarded as inhuman or degrading it must be 'severe'.

There must be the attainment of a 'minimum level of severity'. There must (be) the

crossing of the 'threshold' set by the prohibition. There must be an attainment of the

seriousness of treatment envisaged by the prohibition in order to sustain a case based on

torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.”

Accordingly, in determining whether Article 11 has been infringed in this application, I

shall consider whether the level of ‘cruelty’ and ‘severity’ of suffering implied by and

inherent to the notion of ‘torture’ and ‘inhuman’, and ‘degrading’ treatment have been

satisfied.

Standard of proof that must be satisfied

The standard of proof that a Petitioner who alleges an infringement of Article 11 should

discharge was considered in Goonewardene v Perera [(1983) 1 Sri LR 305 at page 313],

where Soza, J observed thus:

“Before I deal with the facts a word about the burden of proof. There can be no doubt

that the burden is on the petitioner to establish the facts on which she invites the

court to grant her the relief she seeks. This leads to the next question. What is the

12

standard of proof expected of her? Wanasundera, J. considered the question in the

case of Velmurugu v. The Attorney-General and another and held that the standard

of proof that is required in cases filed under Article 126 of the Constitution for

infringement of fundamental rights is proof by a preponderance of probabilities as

in a civil case and not proof beyond reasonable doubt. I agree with Wanasundera, J.

that the standard of proof should be preponderance of probabilities as in a civil case.

It is generally accepted that within this standard there could be varying degrees of

probability. The degree of probability required should be commensurate with the

gravity of the allegation sought to be proved. This court when called upon to

determine questions of infringement of fundamental rights will insist on a high

degree of probability as for instance a court having to decide a question of fraud in

a civil suit would. The conscience of the court must be satisfied that there has been

an infringement.” [emphasis added]

This test had been followed in Kapugeekiyana v Hettiarachchi and Others [(1984) 2 Sri

LR 153 at page 165] where Wimalaratne, J stated that, “In deciding whether any particular

fundamental right has been infringed I would apply the test laid down in Velmurugu that

the civil, and not the criminal standard of persuasion applies, with this observation, that

the nature and gravity of an issue must necessarily determine the manner of attaining

reasonable satisfaction of the truth of that issue.”

In Channa Pieris and Others v Attorney General and Others (Ratawesi Peramuna Case)

[supra; at page 107] Amerasinghe, J stated as follows:

“… having regard to the nature and gravity of the issue, a high degree of certainty

is required before the balance of probability might be said to tilt in favour of a

Petitioner endeavouring to discharge his burden of proving that he was subjected

to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment; and unless

the Petitioner has adduced sufficient evidence to satisfy the Court that an act in

violation of Article 11 took place, it will not make a declaration that (a violation of)

Article 11 of the Constitution did take place.” [emphasis added]

( … )

13

“Would ‘the guarded discretion of a reasonable and just man lead him to the

conclusion’? is the test I would apply in deciding the matter. If I am in real and

substantial doubt, that is if there is a degree of doubt that would prevent a

reasonable and just man from coming to the conclusion, I would hold that the

allegation has not been established.” [emphasis added]

Similar sentiments have been expressed by Murdu N. B. Fernando, PC, J in Ratnayaka

Weerakoonge Sandya Kumari v Weerasinghe, Sub Inspector of Police [SC (FR)

Application No. 75/2012; SC minutes of 18th December 2019 at page 10] where, having

considered the above cases, it was concluded that, “The foregoing judicial decisions of

this Court has clearly identified and laid down that a high degree of certainty is required

before the balance of probability would tilt in favour of a petitioner endeavoring to

discharge the burden of proof with regard to an allegation of torture or cruel, inhuman or

degrading treatment.”

In Edward Sivalingam v Sub Inspector Jayasekara & Others (SC (FR) Application No.

326/2008; SC minutes of 10th November 2010), referred to in Kumarihami v Officer-in-

Charge, Mahiyanganaya Police Station and Others [(2021) 2 Sri LR 464; at page 469],

Tilakawardane, J held that, “When considering the allegations made by the Petitioner

against officers of the CID it is important to bear in mind that the burden of proving these

allegations lies with the Petitioner. This court has held repeatedly that the standard

required is not proof beyond reasonable doubt but must be of a higher threshold than

mere satisfaction. The standard of proof employed is on a balance of probabilities test and

as such must have a high degree of probability and where corroborative evidence is not

available it would depend on the testimonial creditworthiness of the Petitioner.”

[emphasis added]

Thus, while the burden of establishing allegations of torture or cruel, inhuman or

degrading treatment or punishment shall remain with a petitioner to be satisfied on a

balance of probability with a high degree of certainty, the Court must be guided by the

facts of the particular case, being mindful however of the difficulties and disadvantages

that a petitioner could face in proving such allegations.

14

Two conflicting versions This brings me back to the two conflicting versions of the Petitioner and the Respondents.

On the one hand, I have the version of the Petitioner who claims he was assaulted by the

Respondents. On the other, I have the version of the Respondents who have denied

assaulting the Petitioner but have claimed that they used reasonable force to apprehend

the Petitioner who resisted arrest and tried to escape. The Respondents have not

however elaborated on the minimum force they claim to have used, and I am therefore

not in a position to consider if the injuries on the Petitioner are reflective of the use of

such force. I have already stated that the learned Counsel for the Respondents attribute

the injuries on the soles of the Petitioner’s feet to him running on the railway track in a

bid to evade arrest.

There are two factors that weigh heavily in favour of the Petitioner. The first is that the

Petitioner complained of assault to the learned Magistrate at the first available

opportunity when he was produced before the learned Magistrate on 29th August 2016.

In fact, the reference to the Judicial Medical Officer was made by the learned Magistrate

having seen the condition of the Petitioner. The second is the medical evidence.

Medical evidence

I must perhaps state that although medical evidence is available in this case, there may

be instances where medical evidence is not available and therefore it would not be

reasonable for this Court to insist upon medical evidence in every case where a violation

of Article 11 is alleged. In fact, in Ansalin Fernando v Sarath Perera, Officer-in-Charge,

Police Station, Chilaw [(1992) 1 Sri LR 411 at page 419], Kulatunga, J pointed out that,

“Whilst I shall not accept each and every allegation of assault/ill-treatment against the

police unless it is supported by cogent evidence I do not consider it proper to reject such

an allegation merely because the Police deny it or because the aggrieved party cannot

produce medical evidence of injuries. Whether any particular treatment is violative of

Article 11 of the Constitution would depend on the facts of each case. The allegation can

be established even in the absence of medically supported injuries.”

15

The Petitioner was examined by the Assistant Judicial Medical Officer on 30th August 2016

at 11.45am. The Medico-Legal Report issued pursuant to the said examination has been

produced by the Petitioner marked P3. The short history recorded in P3 as narrated by

the Petitioner is similar to the narration made by the Petitioner to this Court. The general

examination had revealed the following injuries:

(a) Contusion and swelling of the right foot with severe tenderness; and

(b) Contusion and swelling of left foot below the ankle joint with tenderness.

The Petitioner had thereafter been referred to the General Surgeon at the National

Hospital, Colombo where he was diagnosed with a right side 5th Metatarsal head fracture,

and cellulitis of both legs.

The opinion of the Assistant Judicial Medical Officer is as follows:

(1) Injuries on both legs were caused by blunt force trauma and are grievous in nature;

(2) Cellulitis is a complication of severe soft tissue injury;

(3) Injury pattern was compatible with the history given by the Petitioner.

The Petitioner had also been produced by the Prison authorities before the Consultant

Judicial Medical Officer, Colombo South Teaching Hospital, on 8th September 2016.

Although a copy of this report had not been tendered with the pleadings, the parties were

directed to tender a copy thereof as it formed part of the record of the Magistrate’s Court

Case No. 59105/4/16 under which facts had been reported relating to the impugned

arrest of the Petitioner.

The following matters are evident from the said report dated 7th October 2016:

(a) The Petitioner had a dark resolving haematoma 0.5cm x 0.3cm over the sole of the

left foot placed 5cm below the base of the big toe and another dark resolving

16

haematoma 0.2cm x 0.3cm over the sole of the left foot placed 2cm lateral to the

previous haematoma;

(b) The Petitioners’ right leg was covered with a below knee plaster of paris extending

upto the base of the toes. The toes were swollen even though there was no

tenderness. The X-ray taken on 2nd September 2016 confirmed a fracture of the

proximal end of the 5th metatarsal of right foot;

(c) The injuries are compatible with that caused by blunt force. The haematomas

detected on the sole of the left foot are more likely to be due to an assault with a

blunt weapon, as alleged by the Petitioner.

Thus, the fact that the Petitioner has suffered injuries, that they are severe, and that such

injuries are reflective of the version of the Petitioner is clearly borne out by the medical

evidence, thereby making the version of the Petitioner creditworthy.

The version of the Respondents – revisited

It is in the above background that I must consider the version of the Respondents. There

are two explanations offered by the Respondents with regard to the injuries. The first is

that minimal force was used to apprehend the Petitioner and that the said injuries are

reflective of such force. I have already observed that the Respondents have not disclosed

the kind of force they used and the injuries that may have been caused as a result of using

such force. The second explanation is the submission of the learned Counsel for the

Respondents that the Petitioner suffered injuries to his feet as a result of running 40-50

metres on the rail track. This position has not been suggested either to the Judicial

Medical Officer or to the medical specialists who examined the Petitioner, with the

explanation for this lacuna being that the Respondents had no opportunity of conveying

to the medical specialists their position as to how the Petitioner came about his injuries.

I cannot accept this explanation for the reason that a special investigation was carried out

by the 5th Respondent, who was the Officer-in-Charge of the Police Narcotics Bureau at

that time, into the complaint of the Petitioner that he was assaulted by the Respondents.

The Respondents therefore had the opportunity of explaining their position to the 5th

17

Respondent which would have enabled the 5th Respondent to ascertain the veracity of

the position of the Respondents. I have examined the ‘B’ reports tendered by the 5th

Respondent in Magistrate’s Court, Colombo Case No. 63125/4/16 and it does not appear

that the Respondents have taken up such a position.

If the Petitioner in fact suffered injuries while trying to escape, the Respondents should

have afforded medical treatment to the Petitioner which admittedly has not been done.

The most obvious course of action should have been to bring the injuries to the attention

of the Magistrate in the ‘B’ report filed on 29th August 2016. I have examined the said ‘B’

report, as well as the further ‘B’ reports filed thereafter and find that there is no mention

of any such incident or injuries in the said reports, except to state that minimum force

was used when the Petitioner attempted to avoid arrest and flee [mrslaId lsrSug W;aidy lsrSfusoS iellre m,d hdug W;aiy l, nj;a tu wjia:dfjsos wjYH n,h fhdod iellre kj;df.k …].

Furthermore, the learned Counsel for the Petitioner submitted that during the course of

his evidence before the High Court, the 1st Respondent, in response to a question posed

by Court, had stated that although the Petitioner suffered an injury as a result of knocking

his leg on a railway sleeper there were no other visible injuries on the Petitioner. The

proceedings before the High Court tendered together with the written submissions

confirms this fact, and contradicts the version that the Respondents sought to present

before this Court.

Taking into consideration the cumulative effect of the above matters, I am of the opinion

that:

(a) The Petitioner has satisfied this Court with a high degree of certainty that he was

subjected to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment by the Respondents; and

(b) The assault on the Petitioner has been severe and has been carried out with an

intensity that satisfies the test laid down in Channa Peiris [supra].

18

Having said so, I am mindful that the Petitioner would be subjected to cross examination

at the trial that the Respondents would face pursuant to the indictment filed under Act

No. 22 of 1994, where the prosecution must establish its case beyond reasonable doubt.

In the above circumstances, I hold that the Respondents have infringed the fundamental

rights of the Petitioner guaranteed by Article 11 of the Constitution.

Article 12(1)

I shall now consider whether the acts of the Respondents amount to a violation of Article

12(1) of the Constitution, which provides that, “All persons are equal before the law and

are entitled to the equal protection of the law”.

In W.P.S. Wijeratne v Sri Lanka Ports Authority and Others [SC (FR) Application No.

256/2017; SC minutes 11th December 2020], Kodagoda, PC, J stated that, “It is well settled

law that, at the core of Article 12 of the Constitution is a key concept, namely the concept

of ‘equality’. The concept of equality is founded upon the premise that, all human beings

are born as equals and are free. … The right to equality is a fundamental feature of the

Rule of Law, which is a cornerstone of the Constitution of Sri Lanka, and hence the bounded

duty of the judiciary to uphold.”

Human dignity underpins the application of all fundamental rights, and is the fundamental

virtue sought to be protected through the securement of fundamental rights and the Rule

of Law, as demonstrated by the Svasti to our Constitution. In Ajith C. S. Perera v. Minister

of Social Services and Social Welfare and Others [(2019) 3 Sri LR 275 at page 300],

Prasanna Jayawardena, PC, J stated “ … that it seems to me that the concept of human

dignity, which is the entitlement of every human being, is at the core of the fundamental

rights enshrined in our Constitution. It is a fountainhead from which these fundamental

rights spring forth and array themselves in the Constitution, for the protection of all the

people of the country. As Aharon Barak, former Chief Justice of Israel has commented

[Human Dignity – The Constitutional Value and the Constitutional Right (2015)]:

19

‘Human dignity is the central argument for the existence of human rights. It is the

rationale for them all. It is the justification for the existence of rights.’ ‘The

constitutional value of human dignity has a central normative role. Human dignity

as a constitutional value is the factor that united the human rights into one whole.

It ensures the normative unity of human rights.’’ [emphasis added]

Human dignity and the rule of law demands that the entitlement of each person to the

equal protection of the law must be respected at all times. Be it a hard core criminal or a

person who has been charged for trafficking of heroin, that entitlement is paramount and

must at all times be respected. It is clear to me that in this instance, the Respondents have

by their conduct deprived the Petitioner of his entitlement to the equal protection of the

law. I therefore hold that the fundamental rights of the Petitioner guaranteed by Article

12(1) have been infringed by the Respondents.

Conclusion

In the above circumstances, I grant a declaration as prayed for in paragraph (c) of the

prayer to the petition that the fundamental rights of the Petitioner guaranteed by Articles

11 and 12(1) have been infringed by the Respondents.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT S Thurairaja, PC, J I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT Mahinda Samayawardhena, J I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT