==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 25

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Leave to Appeal under Section 5C of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provision) Act No.19 of 1990 as amended by Act No.54 of 2006.

Samarasinghe Gamachchige Senani Piumika Samarasinghe,

No.71, Gajabapura,

Kolonnawa.

PLAINTIFF

Vs.

1. Ganegoda Haputhanthrige Sujith Asanka, No. 152/2/1/, Panchikawatta Road, Colombo 10. Presently at, No 09, Bevill Squire, Salford, England. 2. Anna Jones,

No, 405, Quedec Building Burry Street, Manchester, M37 DX, England.

DEFENDANTS

AND BETWEEN

Samarasinghe Gamachchige Senani Piumika Samarasinghe,

No.71, Gajabapura,

Kolonnawa.

Presently at,

S.C. Appeal No. 11/2018 S.C. (H.C.C.A) L.A. Application No. 390/2016 WP/HCCA/COL/21/2015/LA DDV/00921/12

Page 2 of 25

No.09, Baggotts Place,

New Castle, Under Lyme,

Staffordshire,

England.

Appearing by her Attorney,

M.J. Samarasinghe,

No 71, Gajabapura,

Kolonnawa.

PLAINTIFF – PETITIONER

Vs.

1. Ganegoda Haputhanthrige Sujith

Asanka, No. 152/2/1/, Panchikawatta Road, Colombo 10. Presently at, No 09, Bevill Squire, Salford, England. 2. Anna Jones,

No, 405, Quedec Building Burry Street, Manchester, M37 DX, England.

DEFENDANT – RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Ganegoda Haputhanthrige Sujith Asanka, No. 152/2/1/, Panchikawatta Road, Colombo 10. And at, No 09, Bevill Squire, Salford, England. Presently at, No. 02. Melrose Place,

Page 3 of 25

Bristol, Bs8 2NQ, U.K. Now presently at, C/O: N.A.J.S.S. Perera, 64 Blackmoor, CourtLeedsLS17, 7RTUK. Appearing by his Attorney, Ganegoda Haputhanthrige Rupasinghe, No. 152/2/1, Panchikawatta Road, Colombo 10.

DEFENDANT – RESPONDENT –

PETITIONER

Vs.

Samarasinghe Gamachchige Senani Piumika Samarasinghe,

No.71, Gajabapura,

Kolonnawa.

Presently at,

No.09, Baggotts Place,

New Castle, Under Lyme,

Staffordshire,

England.

Now presently at,

C/O Mrs. Chandrika Arulanathan,

94 Kingsbury Road,

London,

NW90AX.

Page 4 of 25

Appearing by her Attorney,

M.J. Samarasinghe,

No 71, Gajabapura,

Kolonnawa.

PLAINTIFF – PETITIONER –

RESPONDENT

Anna Jones,

No, 405, Quedec Building Burry Street,

Manchester, M37 DX,

England.

DEFENDANT – RESPONDENT –

RESPONDENT

Before : Hon. Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J.

Hon. Janak De Silva, J.

Hon. Menaka Wijesundera, J.

Counsel : Saliya Peris, P.C. with Yohan Peiris and Andrea Wijewansha for

the Defendant – Respondent – Appellant

Chandana Dias with K. Chathurika Govinnage and Maheesha

Dushyanthi for the Plaintiff – Petitioner – Respondent

Written Submissions : 27.03.2018 and 15.09.2025 by the Defendant –

Respondent – Appellant

04.10.2018 by the Plaintiff – Petitioner – Respondent

Argued on : 25.08.2025

Decided on : 13.03.2026

Page 5 of 25

Janak De Silva, J.

The Defendant-Respondent-Appellant (Defendant) and Plaintiff-Petitioner-Respondent

(Plaintiff) got married on 30.10.2008 in Colombo. Thereafter they proceeded to the United

Kingdom.

On or about 03.12.2012, the Plaintiff instituted this action to obtain divorce a vinculo

matrimonii on the grounds of adultery and constructive malicious desertion.

The Defendant filed answer and inter alia claimed that there was no valid marriage

between the parties as the marriage had already been dissolved by the County Court of

Manchester in the United Kingdom. He moved for the plaint to be dismissed in limine.

The trial began with the recording of several admissions including the following:

“07. නඩුවේ විත්තිකරු විසින් එංගලන්තවේදී පැමිණිලිකාරියගන් දික්කසාද වීම සදහා

අංක එම්.ඒ. 120821 දරණ නඩුව පවරා ඇි බව පිළිගනි.

08. එම නඩුව ඒකපාර්ශිකව විභාග කර තීන්ු කර ඇි බව පිළිගනී.”

Once the issues were settled, the Defendant moved that issue Nos. 15-20 be decided as

preliminary issues. They read as follows:

“15. උත්තතරවාද මත ඉදිරිපත්ත කරන ලද 7, 8 එකඟතා මත වමම නඩුව පවරන විට පැමිණිලිකාරිය හා විත්තිකරු අතර වලංගු විවාහයක් නැත්තවත්තද?

16. වමම නඩුවේදි ප්‍රාවයෝගික වශවයන් වමම අධිකරණයට සිවිල් නඩු විධාන සංග්‍රහවේ 602 හා 604, 605 වගන්ි යටවත්ත ින්ු ප්‍රකාශ කිරීමට ප්‍රාවයෝගිකව හැකියාවක් වනාමැිද?

17. උත්තතරවේ 5 වන වේදවේ සදහන් පරිදි පැමිණිලිකරුට 1 වන විත්තිකරුට එවරහිව වලංගු නඩු නිමිත්තතක් හට වගන වනාමැත්තවත්තද?

18. උත්තතරවේ 6 වන වේදවේ සඳහන් කරුණු මත පැමිණිලිකාරිය ක්‍රියා කර වමම නඩුව පවරා ඇත්තවත්තද?

19. වමම නඩුව සිවිල් නඩු විධාන සංග්‍රහවේ 207 වගන්ිය හා වරසයුඩිකාටා නීිය අනුව වමම නඩුව අධිකරණවේ පවරා පවත්තවාවගන යාමට හැකියාවක් වනාමැිද?

20. (i) පැමිණිල්වල් සදහන් කරුණු එකිවනකට පරසය විවරෝධී වන්වන්ද?

Page 6 of 25

(ii) පැමිණිල්ල මගින් වලංගු නඩු නිමිත්තතක් කර වනාමැත්තවත්තද?

(iii) පැමිණිල්ල සිවිල් නඩු විධාන සංග්‍රහවේ 40 වන වගන්ිවේ ප්‍රිපාදන වලට අනුකුළ

වනාවන්වන්ද?

(iv) පැමිණිල්වල් ශීර්ශෂවේ සම විත්තිකාරියක වනාමැි බැවින් සිවිල් නඩු විධාන සංග්‍රහවේ ප්‍රිපාදන වලට පටහැනි වන්වන්ද?”

Parties were granted an opportunity of filing written submissions on this application.

Thereafter, the learned trial judge delivered judgment holding that there was no valid

marriage between the parties as it was dissolved and dismissed the action of the Plaintiff

as well as the cross-claim of the Defendant. However, the cross-claim made by the

Defendant-Respondent-Respondent was allowed to proceed. Issue Nos. 15-20 were

answered as follows:

“15) වලංගු විවාහයක් නැත.

16) වනාමැත.

17) වලංගු නඩු නිමිත්තතක් හටවගන වනාමැත.

18) ඔේ.

19) බලයක් වනාමැත.

20) (i) අදාළ වනාවේ.

(ii) වනාමැත.

(iii) අදාළ වනාවේ.

(iv) නැත.”

The Plaintiff appealed to the High Court of Civil Appeal of the Western Province holden in

Colombo (High Court). The High Court held that the Manchester County Court did not

have jurisdiction to enter decree dissolving the marriage between the parties as the wife

(Plaintiff) takes the domicile of the husband (Defendant) which in this case is Sri Lanka.

Page 7 of 25

The High Court set aside the judgment of the District Court and answered issue Nos. 15-

20 as follows:

“15. There is a valid marriage.

16. The District Court has the power to enter decree.

17. A cause of action has accrued to the Plaintiff which is to be investigated by the

District Court.

18. No. There is no suppression by the Plaintiff too.

19. There is no impediment from the provisions of section 207 of the Civil Procedure

Code or on the principle of res judicata.

20. (1) No.

(II) A valid cause of action has been disclosed.

(III) The plaint is in conformity with the requirements of Section 40 of the

Code.

(IV) There is no obstacle to proceeding with the action of the Plaintiff.”

The action of the Plaintiff was restored to the roll of calling cases and the learned District

Judge was directed to proceed with the trial of the remaining issues according to law.

Aggrieved, the Defendant sought leave to appeal which was granted on the following

questions of law:

1. Did the High Court err in law in holding that the marriage between the Plaintiff and

Defendant continues to subsist notwithstanding the dissolution of marriage

granted by the Manchester County Court in England?

2. Did the High Court err in law when it failed to take cognizance that the Plaintiff had

submitted to the jurisdiction of the Manchester County Court in England and

Page 8 of 25

acquiesced in the proceedings and hence is estopped from claiming that the said

Court had no jurisdiction?

3. Did the High Court err in law in setting aside the judgment of the District Court

which dismissed the Plaintiff’s action?

Marriage Registration Ordinance No. 19 of 1907 as amended (Ordinance)

Admittedly the marriage between the parties was registered in terms of the Ordinance.

Section 19 of the Ordinance reads as follows:

“(1) No marriage shall be dissolved during the lifetime of the parties except by

judgment of divorce a vinculo matrimonii pronounced in some competent court.

(2) Such judgment shall be founded either on the ground of adultery subsequent to

marriage, or of malicious desertion, or of incurable impotence at the time of such

marriage.

(3) Every court in Sri Lanka having matrimonial jurisdiction is hereby declared

competent to dissolve a marriage on any such ground.”

The Defendant relies upon a judgment given by the Manchester County Court to establish

that these requirements have been satisfied and claim the matter is res judicta.

This brings a foreign element into the action. The Defendant seeks to obtain recognition

for a foreign judgment. In Adams v. Cape Industries plc [(1990) Ch 433 at 513] it was held

that the recognition of a foreign judgment must be determined in accordance with “our

own rules of private international law.” The same legal principle applies in Sri Lanka.

Hence, there is a need to examine the applicable Private International Law or Conflict of

Law rules applicable in Sri Lanka. I had the opportunity to examine one aspect of it, namely

governing law, in Strabag AG v. The Commissioner of Labour and Others [(2020) 1 Sri.L.R.

76]. Nevertheless, the issue before us encompasses two other aspects of the applicable

Page 9 of 25

Private International Law or Conflict of Law rules, namely jurisdiction and recognition and

enforcement of foreign judgments. I wish to delve into these areas in some detail as there

is a dearth of judicial pronouncement.

Private International Law

This area of law can broadly be compartmentalised into jurisdiction, governing law and

recognition and enforcement of foreign judgments. It becomes relevant when a domestic

court is confronted with a claim containing a foreign element.

Jurisdiction sets out the conditions under which the court is competent to entertain such

a claim.

Governing law determines the particular municipal law that the court must apply to

determine the rights of the parties.

Recognition and enforcement set out (i) the conditions under which a foreign judgment

can be considered as decisive on the question before the domestic court and (ii) the right

of the judgment creditor of the foreign judgment to have it enforced.

Recognition vs. Enforcement

Although the terms ‘recognition’ and ‘enforcement’ are often used in conjunction, there

is a clear distinction between them. Broadly speaking recognition serves as the legal

acceptance of the foreign judgment whilst enforcement allows for its practical

implementation.

Recognition arises where a party to an action relies on a foreign judgment as a defence,

such as res judicata, to establish that the dispute between the parties has been finally

decided by a foreign judgment. Here a domestic court need only recognise the validity of

the foreign judgment without having to enforce it.

Page 10 of 25

Enforcement on the other hand requires a domestic court to execute the foreign judgment

by measures such as asset seizure or injunctions to satisfy the judgment.

As Forsyth [Private International Law, 4th ed., Juta, 2003, pages 390-391] explains,

recognition implies only that the domestic court declares that the foreign judgment has:

“the legal effect which the foreign court intended it to have (e.g. decree of divorce),

whilst enforcement requires that the local Court will, in addition, compel the

judgment debtor to comply with the foreign judgment”.

Thus a domestic court must always recognise a foreign judgment before enforcing it,

whereas the question of enforcement does not arise where the only question is whether

the foreign judgment must be recognised. The defence of res judicata is one such

example.

In fact there are some judgments such as a foreign judgment for the dissolution or

annulment of a marriage or separation of the parties which need only be recognised by a

domestic court without the need for its enforcement.

The Private International Law rules of any country may have international treaties,

domestic legislation or common law as its sources.

Reciprocal Recognition, Registration and Enforcement of Foreign Judgments Act No. 49

of 2024 (Act)

The Act in its Bill form was challenged on its constitutionality. The Supreme Court in S.C.

(SD) No. 80/2024 and S.C. (SD) 81/2024 held that it was constitutional subject to certain

amendments been made to it as specified in the determination of the Court.

The provisions of the Act came into operation on 26.03.2025 [Gazette Extraordinary No.

2429/51 dated 28.03.2025]. Application of the provisions of Part I of the Act has been

extended to the judgments of courts of 53 countries including the United Kingdom [ibid.].

Page 11 of 25

Sections 6 to 11 has specifically provided for the recognition of a foreign judgment for the

dissolution or annulment of a marriage or separation of the parties to a marriage in Sri

Lanka. It makes no reference to its enforcement. Thus the distinction between recognition

on one hand and enforcement on the other has been recognised in the Act.

Section 3(1)(b) specifies special conditions which must be satisfied before the Act

becomes applicable to a foreign judgment for the dissolution or annulment of or

separation of the parties to a marriage under the Marriage Registration Ordinance. The

foreign court will be considered as having jurisdiction only where it is founded on

domicile, habitual residence, nationality or submission to jurisdiction.

Section 14 mandates that from and after the date on which an Order under subsection (1)

of section 2 is published in the Gazette, i.e. 26.03.2025, any proceedings for the

recognition, registration and enforcement of a judgment of a court of such foreign country

shall not be entertained by any court in Sri Lanka, except in accordance with the provisions

of the Act.

This action was filed in 2012. It is trite law that generally the rights of the parties must be

determined by reference to the law as at the date of action [Ponnamma v. Arumogam (8

N.L.R. 223 at 226), Silva v. Nona Hamine (10 N.L.R. 44 at 51), Ponnamma v. Weerasuriya

(11 N.L.R. 217), Silva v. Fernando et al (15 N.L.R. 499 at 500), Jamal Mohideen & Co. v.

Meera Saibo et al (22 N.L.R. 268 at 272), Shariff et al v. Marikkar et al (27 N.L.R. 349 at

350), Eminona v. Mohideen (32 N.L.R. 145)), De Silva et al v. Goonetilleke et al (32 N.L.R.

217 at 219), De Silva v. Edirisuriya (41 N.L.R. 457 at 458), Lenorahamy v. Abraham (43

N.L.R. 68 at 69), Kader Mohideen & Co. Ltd., v. Gany ( 60 N.L.R. 16 at 19), Abayadeera

and 162 others v. Dr. Stanley Wijesundera, Vice Chancellor, University of Colombo and

another (1983) 2 Sri. L. R. 267 at 278 and 280), Talagune v. De Livera (1997) 1 Sri. L. R.

253 at 254, Kalamazoo Industries Ltd. and others v. Minister of Labour and Vocational

Training and others (1998) 1 Sri. L. R. 235 at 248, Lalwani v. Indian Overseas Bank (1998)

Page 12 of 25

3 Sri. L. R. 197 at 198, Jayaratna v. Jayaratne and another (2002) 3 Sri. L. R. 331 at 332,

Sithy Makeena and others v. Kuraisha and others (2006) 2 Sri. L. R. 341 at 345].

However, it is not an immutable principle and courts have recognized certain exceptions

to the general rule [Sabapathipillai et al v. Vaithialingam (40 N.L.R. 107 at 108),

Appusinno v. Balasuriya (16 N.L.R. 385), Thangavadivel v. Inthiravathy (53 N.L.R. 369 at

371), Mariam Nurban Hussain Teyabally v. Hon. R. Premadasa and two others (S.C. No.

69/92, S.C.M. 05.11.1993), Master Drivers (Pvt) Ltd. v. Karunaratne and others (CA (PHC)

APN 140/2012, C.A.M. 09.08.2018)]. Nevertheless, this action does not fall within any

such exception.

The general rule of determining the rights of the parties as at the date of action can be

displaced where there is a clear legislative statement that a law will apply retrospectively.

For example, Section 3 of the Civil Procedure Code (Amendment) Act No. 17 of 2022

specifically states that the provisions therein apply to any case or appeal pending on the

date of coming into operation of that amendment.

However, the provisions of Section 22(b) of the Act indicates that it clearly has no

retrospective application to pending proceedings.

Moreover, Section 4(a) permits the recognition, registration and enforcement of a foreign

judgment only where such an application is made within ten years from the date of the

final judgment although the proviso proves an exception to this principle. I make no

finding on the applicability of the proviso to the judgment of the County Court of

Manchester as it is a moot point.

The issues before this court must then be determined by the law in force as at 2012.

Page 13 of 25

Judgment in Harendra Silva

In Harendra Silva v. Weerasekera and Others [C.A. Writ 266/2021, C.A.M. 01.12.2023],

Rajakaruna, J. (as he was then) held (at page 9) that a valid decree of dissolution of

marriage entered into in a foreign country can be given effect, when necessary, within Sri

Lanka, subject to other laws of Sri Lanka and the following three guidelines:

(i) Ascertain whether the law of such country has bestowed the jurisdiction to the

respective court to dissolve marriages entered into in a foreign territory.

(ii) Both parties who entered into the contract of marriage in Sri Lanka must have

been residing in the respective country, for a reasonable period of time when

applying for a divorce.

(iii) Both husband and wife should actively participate in such divorce proceedings

in the foreign court while being subjected to the procedure adopted in such

court concerning matrimonial actions.

However, this decision has no application now in view of Section 14 of the Act which

mandates that any proceedings for the recognition, registration and enforcement of a

judgment of a court of a specified foreign country shall not be entertained except in

accordance with the provisions of the Act.

Reciprocal Enforcement of Judgments Ordinance No. 41 of 1921

This makes provision for the enforcement in Sri Lanka of judgments obtained in the

Superior Courts of the United Kingdom and of other parts of her majesty's realms and

territories. However, its scope is limited to enforcing any judgment, decree, or order given

or made by a court in any civil proceedings, whether before or after the passing of it,

whereby any sum of money is made payable, and includes an award in proceedings in an

arbitration if the award has, in pursuance of the law in force in the place where it was

made, become enforceable in the same manner as a judgment given by a court in that

Page 14 of 25

place. The foreign judgment sought to be recognised by the Defendant does not fall within

this scope.

Moreover, it deals with enforcement rather than recognition. Hence it is of no assistance

in ascertaining the conditions under which the judgment of the County Court of

Manchester should be recognised.

I must hasten to add that although it deals with only enforcement, that does not in my

view reflect any legislative intention to exclude the recognition of foreign judgments by

reference to other sources of Private International Law.

Enforcement of Foreign Judgments Ordinance No. 4 of 1937

The Legislative Enactments 1956 Revised Edition, which is the last official version, states

that this enactment was not in operation on 30th June, 1956. The 1980 Revised Edition

(Unofficial) lists this as an enactment in force on 31st December 1980. Probably this is a

reference to its enactment rather than being made operational. Coomaraswamy [The Law

of Evidence, Vol. 1 (2nd Ed., Stamford Lake Publication, 2018), page 540 note 183] states

that it was not proclaimed. My best endeavours did not yield any order making it

operational.

Section 21(a) of the Act states that it this is repealed with effect from the appointed date

i.e. 26.03.2025. In my view this is to formally repeal it from the legislative framework

rather than an acknowledgment of it having been made operational.

Common Law

Notwithstanding the absence of any legislative framework for the recognition and

enforcement of a foreign judgment, the common law of many jurisdictions recognises the

ability of a judgment-creditor of a foreign judgment to sue on the foreign judgment using

it as a cause of action and thereby seek to enforce it.

Page 15 of 25

Initially English law recognised the ability to sue on a foreign judgment solely on the

ground of comity [Geyer v. Aguilar (1798) 7 Term Rep 681 at 97]. However, later the

theoretical justification was changed to the “doctrine of obligation”.

In Owens Bank Ltd v. Bracco [(1992) 2 AC 443 at 457] Parker LJ expounded the basis of

the enforcement of a foreign judgment under English common law as follows:

“The first method of enforcement here of a foreign judgment was by an action upon

the judgment. The foreign judgment, in the absence of statute, could have no direct

operation in England and Wales because of the principle of the territoriality of a

court's jurisdiction. At first, the basis for enforcing the foreign judgment by action

in this country was thought to be the doctrine of comity but that was later replaced

by the doctrine of obligation, namely, that the judgment of a court having

competent jurisdiction over the defendant imposed on him an obligation to pay the

sum for which judgment had been given: see Russell v. Smyth (1842) 9 M. & W. 810,

819; Schibsby v. Westenholz (1870) LR 6 QB 155 and the cases cited in Dicey &

Morris, The Conflict of Laws, 11th ed. (1987), vol. 1, p. 420. It followed that anything

which may properly be held to negative that obligation was a defence to the action

upon the judgment. It is pointed out by the editors of Dicey & Morris, The Conflict

of Laws, at p. 421, that the right, which the plaintiff seeks to enforce in such

proceedings, is a right created and defined by English law and not by foreign law.

Thus, in order for the foreign judgment to be enforced in this country, it is essential

that the foreign court should have had jurisdiction over the defendant, not in the

sense of the foreign law but according to the rules of our law: see Adams v. Cape

Industries Plc. [1990] Ch. 433, 513H; and the defences which may be pleaded by the

defendant in an action upon a foreign judgment, such as that the judgment was

obtained by fraud, are themselves creatures exclusively of English law."

Page 16 of 25

In Rubin v. Eurofinance SA [(2012) UKSC 46, (2013) 1 AC 236] the UK Supreme Court

adopted this view. Lord Collins went on to expound that:

“The theoretical basis for the enforcement of foreign judgments at common law is

that they are enforced on the basis of a principle that where a court of competent

jurisdiction has adjudicated a certain sum to be due from one person to another, a

legal obligation arises to pay that sum, on which an action of debt to enforce the

judgment may be maintained: Williams v Jones (1845) 13 M & W 628, 633 per

Parke B; Godard v Gray (1870) LR 6 QB 139, 147, per Blackburn J; Adams v Cape

Industries plc [1990] Ch 433, 513; Owens Bank Ltd v Bracco [1992] 2 AC 443, 484,

per Lord Bridge of Harwich. As Blackburn J said in Godard v Gray, this was based on

the mode of pleading an action on a foreign judgment in debt, and not merely as

evidence of the obligation to pay the underlying liability: LR 6 QB 139, 150. … this

is a purely theoretical and historical basis for the enforcement of foreign judgments

at common law.”

Adopting a similar approach, South African courts have held that under common law,

which in this case is Roman-Dutch law, a foreign judgment constitutes a cause of action

that can be enforced by a regular action under the civil procedure rules [Jones v. Krog

(1995) 1 SA 677 (A) at 685B].

This principle has been judicially recognised in Sri Lanka. In Meerapullailebbe v.

Noohoolebbe [3 C.L.R. 32 at 34] Withers, J. held that a foreign judgment raises no more

than an implied simple contract for the sum adjudged to be due. However, Court went on

to hold that an action on a foreign judgment cannot be brought under the provisions of

Chapter LIII of the Civil Procedure Code, entitled “Summary Procedure on Liquid Claims”.

In Narayanaswami v. Marimuthupillai [41 C.L.W. 112], Gratiaen, J. held that the

judgment of a Foreign Court of competent jurisdiction is, in accordance with the principles

of private international law, regarded in other countries as prima facie evidence of a debt

Page 17 of 25

at common law and that this rule has long been recognised in Ceylon, and that an action

lies for the recovery of the debt so adjudged subject to such defences as may be raised by

the debtor at the trial.

In Shamji Gordhandas & Co. v. Ramanathan & Co. [20 N.L.R. 129 at 131] Wood-Renton,

CJ., held as follows:

“In an action on a foreign judgment it is not necessary for the plaintiff to aver that

the foreign Court had jurisdiction over the parties or the cause; Jurisdiction . is

presumed, and, where that presumption has not Been rebutted, the Court in which,

the action on the foreign judgment is brought will not review the competency of, or

an irregularity of the proceedings in, the foreign Court, or even the correctness of

the foreign judgment itself, unless there has been something in the nature of a

violation of the rules of natural justice.”

The jurisdiction of the foreign court was raised in Worman & Co. v. Noorbhai [15 N.L.R.

355] where plaintiffs obtained judgment against the defendant in the Court of Small

Causes of Calcutta, but the defendant was not domiciled within the jurisdiction of the

Indian Courts, and was not resident there at the time of the action against him, and did

not appear to the process or agree to submit to the jurisdiction of the Court of Small

Causes. The plaintiffs subsequently sued the defendant in the District Court of Colombo

on the judgment of the Calcutta High Court. It was held that the defendant was not bound

by the decree of the Calcutta Court.

Whether this common law principle is still valid after the enactment of the Act has to be

considered in the context of Section 14 of the Act which mandates that any proceedings

for the recognition, registration and enforcement of a judgment of a court of such foreign

country shall not be entertained by any court in Sri Lanka, except in accordance with the

provisions of the Act. It is a moot point on which I reserve my position.

Page 18 of 25

However, this is not an action where the Defendant seeks recognition or enforcement of

a foreign judgment based on any one of the above sources. He seeks to obtain recognition

for an English judgment he has obtained to establish that (i) the marriage between the

parties have been dissolved, (ii) the matter is res judicata as a defence to the action

brought by the Plaintiff.

This must be considered in the context of the provisions in Section 19 of the Ordinance

and the criteria relevant to establishing the defence of res judicata.

Section 19 of the Ordinance

In terms of this provision, the following requirements must be fulfilled for the dissolution

of the marriage between the Plaintiff and Defendant:

1. There must be a judgment of divorce a vinculo matrimonii.

2. That judgment must have been pronounced by some competent court.

3. Such judgment shall be founded on the ground of adultery subsequent to marriage,

or of malicious desertion, or of incurable impotence at the time of such marriage.

Res Judicata

According to Coomaraswamy [supra., page 528], the following elements must be

established to succeed in a plea of res judicata:

(a) The former action must have been a regular action.

(b) The two actions must be between the same parties or their representatives in

interest (privies).

(c) The previous decision must be what in law is deemed such.

(d) The particular judicial decision must have been in fact pronounced as alleged.

(e) The previous judgment must be a final judgment.

Page 19 of 25

(f) The same question or identical causes of action must have been involved in both

actions.

(g) The judicial tribunal pronouncing the decision must have had competent

jurisdiction in that behalf.

(h) The judgment should not have been obtained by fraud or collusion.

(h) If it is a foreign judgment, it should have been passed in accordance with the

principles of natural justice.

(i) The correctness of the decision is not a relevant consideration.

Both the defences raised by the Defendant require inter alia the establishment of the

competence of the foreign court and that the same question or identical causes of action

were involved in both actions, namely ground of adultery subsequent to marriage, or of

malicious desertion, or of incurable impotence at the time of such marriage.

Competent Court

We must examine whether the County Court of Manchester had jurisdiction to grant a

divorce a vinculo matrimonii.

In terms of Section 19(3) of the Ordinance, every court in Sri Lanka having matrimonial

jurisdiction has been declared competent to dissolve a marriage on any such ground.

Section 24(1) read with Section 5 of the Judicature Act as amended has vested

matrimonial jurisdiction in the District Court [Act No. 16 of 1989 has not been brought

into force as yet. See Huseira v. Samaranayake (1998) 1 Sri. LR 141].

Nevertheless, the Plaintiff submits that the District Court is not the only competent court

to dissolve a marriage registered under the Ordinance. Relying on the words “some

competent court” in Section 19(1), it is submitted that a court where the family is

domiciled would have jurisdiction to grant a divorce.

Page 20 of 25

There is merit in this contention as this action involves a foreign element. Private

International Law recognises certain grounds upon which a court may be held to have

jurisdiction over an action having a foreign element. The issue is what are the grounds we

must recognise as giving the County Court of Manchester jurisdiction.

There is universal acceptance that questions affecting the personal status of any person

should be governed constantly by one and the same law irrespective of where he may be

or where the facts constituting the question may have befallen. However, there is debate

on whether this law is determined by reference to domicile or nationality.

Domicile generally means the place or country in which a person has established his

permanent home.

According to Walter Pereira [The Laws of Ceylon, Vol. II, page 151], home has been defined

as follows:

“A person’s home is that place or country (1) in which he, in fact, resides with the

intention of residence (animus manendi), or (2) in which he having so resided, he

continues actually to reside, though no longer retaining the intention of residence,

or (3) with regard to which, having so resided, he retains the intention of residence,

though in fact he no longer resides there. More briefly, a person’s home is that place

or country in which he resides with the intention of residence (animus manendi) or

in which he has so resided, and with regard to which he retains either residence or

the intention of residence [Dic. 81]”

The choice of domicile can be justified as it is the most natural and appropriate law to

determine his personal status. In places where there are political units as in the USA, UK,

Canada and Australia where the same nationality embraces a number of disparate legal

systems, domicile provides the only real test. However, while it may be appropriate, its

application may lead to an unpredictable law.

Page 21 of 25

Applying the test of nationality over domicile has the advantage of been readily

ascertainable and yielding predictable results. Nevertheless, it brings about some

unsatisfactory results. It may result in applying the law of a country with which the person

has lost all connections. Moreover, there are persons who have dual citizenship which

makes the application of this test challenging.

According to Voet (5.1.95,96), the wife by her marriage, even before she leaves her

residence, acquires the domicile of her husband. She retains it, even after the relationship

is dissolved by the death of her husband, until she makes choice, and establishes another

domicile or remarries In Varuna Jayasuriya v. Krishanjini Jayasuriya [(2005) 2 Sri LR 382]

the Court of Appeal held that according to the common law, the only court which has

jurisdiction to entertain an action for divorce is the court in whose area the parties are

domiciled at the time of institution of proceedings and that the wife acquires the domicile

of the husband up to date of decree in a matrimonial action.

In the context of the facts of this appeal, two important differences between English law

and our law must be pointed out.

In England the rule until 1974 was that the domicile of a husband was communicated to

his wife immediately on marriage and it was necessarily and inevitably retained by her for

the duration of the marriage. However, this rule was abolished by Section 1 of the

Domicile and Matrimonial Proceedings Act 1973. Now the domicile of a wife in English

law must be determined by reference to the same factors as in the case of any other

individual capable of having an independent domicile. However, according to our law, the

wife acquires the domicile of the husband up to date of decree in a matrimonial action.

Moreover, English courts have jurisdiction to entertain proceedings for divorce, nullity and

judicial separation if either of the parties to the marriage is domiciled in England at the

time when proceedings are begun [Section 5(2)(a) of the Domicile and Matrimonial

Proceedings Act 1973] whereas Section 607(1) of the Civil Procedure Code permits any

Page 22 of 25

husband or wife to present a plaint to the District Court within the local limits of the

jurisdiction of which he or she (as the case may be) resides.

There is a presumption that domicile of origin continues. However, it is now accepted that

the presumption may be displaced by a domicile of choice. There are two requisites for

the acquisition of a fresh domicile. They are residence and intention. Any person can

acquire a domicile of choice by the combination of residence (factum) and intention of

permanent or indefinite residence (animus manendi). Residence in a country for the

purposes of the law of domicile is physical presence in that country as an inhabitant of it

[IRC v. Duchess of Portland (1982) Ch 314 at 318-319].

The decision in Thevagnanasekaram v. Kuppammal [36 NLR 337] confirms that our law

recognises both domicile of origin as well as domicile of choice. There an Indian Tamil, M,

came to Ceylon in 1850 and joined two of his brothers in a partnership business in

Colombo, where he married. He married in Ceylon, owned property, carried on business

and continued to live at Colombo, save for occasional visits to India till his death in 1896.

His children, among whom was S, born in 1886, were all born in Ceylon. S married his

niece (sister's daughter) in India in 1906, and after his marriage lived continuously in

Ceylon till his death in 1931. Court held that M had acquired a domicile of choice in Ceylon

and that the domicile of origin of his son S was also in Ceylon.

According to Voet (5.1.93), the burden of proving such displacement is on the party who

alleges of displacement [See Winans v. A-G (1904) AC 287 at 289; Re Lloyd Evans (1947)

Ch 695; Messina v. Smith (1971) P 322 at 330; Puttick v A-G (1980) Fam 1 at 17; Spence

v. Spence (1995) SLT 335]. However, it must be emphasised that the acquisition of a

domicile of choice is a serious matter not to be lightly inferred from slight indications or

casual words [Re Fulds Estate (No. 3) (1968) P 675 at 686; Brown v. Brown (1982) 3 FLR

212 at 218, 220].

Page 23 of 25

The High Court in this case proceeded on the basis that the domicile of the husband

(Defendant) is Sri Lanka and the wife (Plaintiff) takes on the domicile of the husband. The

High Court was correct in its approach. However, it erred in failing to consider whether

the domicile of origin was displaced by domicile of choice which could have been done

only after hearing evidence.

Moreover, I do not think that restricting the competence of the foreign court to domicile

is justified given that Section 607(1) of the Civil Procedure Code permits any husband or

wife to present a plaint to the District Court within the local limits of the jurisdiction of

which he or she (as the case may be) resides, praying that his or her marriage may be

declared null and void. There can be no objection to recognising the jurisdiction of a

foreign court where it has assumed jurisdiction on the same basis as would a District Court

in Sri Lanka.

Besides, given that Section 3(1)(b) of the Act accepts habitual residence as a basis for a

foreign court to assume jurisdiction, there is no injustice in recognising that a foreign court

within whose jurisdiction either party is habitually resident as at the date of action to be

a competent court.

I am further of the view that where a party has submitted to the jurisdiction of the foreign

court, It can be said to have jurisdiction over the subject matter.

For the foregoing reasons, I hold that the County Court of Manchester can be held to be

a competent court where:

(a) At the time the proceedings were begun,

a. the Defendant was domiciled within its jurisdiction (as the Plaintiff takes

on the domicile of the Defendant); or b. Either party was habitually resident within its jurisdiction.

or

(b) The Plaintiff has submitted to its jurisdiction.

Page 24 of 25

Cause of Action

Section 19(2) of the Ordinance mandates that the cause of action on which the divorce

was granted shall be either adultery subsequent to marriage, or of malicious desertion, or

of incurable impotence at the time of such marriage.

In my view, a foreign judgment granting a divorce must comply with this provision. The

positive rule in Section 19 leaves no room for any other interpretation.

For the foregoing reasons, in order for the Defendant to succeed in both his defences,

namely that the marriage has been dissolved or that the matter is res judicata, the

following requirements must be satisfied:

(a) At the time the proceedings were begun,

a. the Defendant was domiciled within its jurisdiction (as the Plaintiff takes

on the domicile of the Defendant); or

b. Either party was habitually resident within its jurisdiction.

OR

(b) The Plaintiff has submitted to its jurisdiction

AND

(c) the cause of action in the County Court of Manchester should have been

adultery subsequent to marriage, or of malicious desertion, or of incurable

impotence at the time of such marriage.

However, I find that neither the District Court or the High Court or for that matter this

Court is in a position to apply these tests. The reason is that the judgment of the County

Court of Manchester has not been admitted by the Plaintiff. No doubt it was marked as

part and parcel of the answer. However, that does not allow the District Court to consider

it as evidence.

Page 25 of 25

Section 154 of the Civil Procedure Code regulates the tender and admission of documents

in evidence. Both the District Court and the High Court have overlooked this basic

provision in proceeding to answer issues Nos. 15-20 as preliminary issues.

Moreover, there are certain facts which needs to be examined before answering issues

Nos. 15-20.

Consequently, I am compelled to answer the three questions of law as follows:

Both the District Court and the High Court erred in proceeding to answer issue Nos. 15-

20 as preliminary issues. The judgment of the County Court of Manchester was not duly

admitted in evidence. Moreover, there are certain facts which needs to be examined

before answering issues Nos. 15-20.

For all the foregoing reasons, I set aside the judgment of the High Court dated 30.06.2016

and the judgment of the District Court dated 14.10.2014.

I direct the District Judge of Colombo to proceed to trial forthwith and answer all issues

raised in this action at the end of the trial taking into consideration the legal position set

out above.

Appeal partly allowed. Parties shall bear their costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Menaka Wijesundera, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT