Page 1 of 21

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Leave to Appeal under section 5C of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provision) Act No. 19 of 1990 as amended by Act No. 54 of 2006. Multiform Chemicals Limited, No. 659, Elwitigala Mawatha, Colombo 05.

Plaintiff S.C. Appeal No. 183/2011 SC/HCCA/LA No. 334/2010 WP/HCCA/COL/75/10 (LA) D.C. Colombo Case No. 48202/MR

Vs. Adrian Machado, Rianda Paint and Chemical Industries, No. 131/14, Thimbirigasyaya Road, Colombo 05.

Defendant AND BETWEEN Adrian Machado, Rianda Paint and Chemical Industries, No. 131/14, Thimbirigasyaya Road, Colombo 05.

Defendant-Petitioner Vs. Multiform Chemicals Limited, No. 659, Elwitigala Mawatha, Colombo 05. Plaintiff-Respondent

Page 2 of 21

AND NOW BETWEEN Multiform Chemicals Limited, No. 659, Alwitigala Mawatha, Colombo 05. And Presently, Multiform Chemicals (Private) Limited, No. 659, Alwitigala Mawatha, Colombo 05.

Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant Vs.

Adrian Machado, Rianda Paint and Chemical Industries, No. 131/14, Thimbirigasyaya Road, Colombo 05.

Defendant-Petitioner-Respondent

Before: Hon. Vijith K. Malalgoda, P.C., J.

Hon. Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J.

Hon. Janak De Silva, J.

Counsel:

Manohara De Silva, P.C. with Sasiri Chandrasiri for the Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant

Dr. Sunil F. A. Coorey with Nilanga Perera for the Defendant-Petitioner-Respondent

Written Submissions tendered on:

23.12.2011 by the Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant

20.04.2012 by the Defendant-Petitioner-Respondent

Argued on: 19.02.2024

Page 3 of 21

Decided on: 18.07.2024

Janak De Silva, J.

The Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant (Appellant) instituted the above styled action to

recover a sum of Rs. 1,722,724/19 and interest thereon from the Defendant-Petitioner-

Respondent (Respondent). According to the plaint, the Appellant sold raw material

to the Respondent which was utilised to manufacture paint. The Appellant permitted

the Respondent to make purchases on two (02) separate credit facilities payable within

30 and 60 days respectively. This action was filed as the Respondent failed and

neglected to pay the amounts due and owing to the Appellant.

During the trial, originals of the purchase orders and the corresponding invoices were

marked as P15 to P50(a) by the Appellant during the evidence-in-chief of the Chief

Accountant of the Appellant. The Respondent objected to all these documents and

moved that they be marked subject to proof.

The learned Additional District Judge overruled the objections and allowed these

documents to be admitted in evidence without being subject to proof. The invoices

were allowed to be marked without being subject to proof as they were documents

prepared by the Appellant. The purchase orders were allowed to be marked without

being subject to proof as they were prepared by the Respondent.

The Respondent appealed to the High Court of Civil Appeal of the Western Province

Holden in Colombo (High Court). During the hearing, the Respondent informed that

only the objection in relation to the purchase orders are maintained.

The High Court held that since the Respondent had denied the alleged transactions, it

was possible for the Respondent, in view of Section 67 of the Evidence Ordinance, to

move that the documents relevant to the transaction be marked subject to proof.

Page 4 of 21

In addressing the contention of the Appellant that it was not possible for the Appellant

to call the Respondent to testify, the High Court held that this issue does not arise since

the Respondent had informed Court that the Respondent will testify. The High Court

went on to state that in the event the Respondent failed to testify, it is possible for the

trial judge to draw adverse inferences according to law.

The High Court held that the purchase orders must be marked subject to proof and

varied the order of the learned Additional District judge to that extent.

The Appellant sought leave to appeal which was granted on the following questions of

law:

(1) The High Court erred by failing to properly consider the provisions of Section 61

and 62 of the Evidence Ordinance;

(2) The High Court misdirected itself by applying the provisions of Section 67 of the

Evidence Ordinance;

(3) The High Court erred by not considering that the Plaintiff is unable to produce

further evidence other than the best and/or primary evidence of a document

authored by the Defendant which was delivered to the Plaintiff by the

Defendant;

(4) The High Court also failed to consider that in the event the Defendant denies

the authenticity of documents P15 to P50(a) when giving evidence, it would be

open to the Plaintiff to lead evidence in rebuttal. In the absence of a denial of

the Defendant of the authenticity of these documents raised through the

Pleadings or Issues, the High Court misdirected itself in calling upon the Plaintiff

to furnish further proof of the said documents;

(5) The High Court erred by allowing the documents P15-P50(a) to be marked

subject to proof.

Page 5 of 21

Before examining these questions of law, it must be said that the record does not bear

out the basis on which the Respondent moved that the invoices and purchase orders

be marked subject to proof. It is probable it was done on the basis of impugning the

authenticity of those documents since in his answer the Respondent claimed that all

dues to the Appellant have been paid. The High Court proceeded on this basis.

There is an inveterate practice amongst civil trial counsel to move that Court allows

certain documents to be marked subject to proof. This practice is not per se

objectionable as it has a legal basis. Section 136 of the Evidence Ordinance reads as

follows:

136 (1) When either party proposes to give evidence of any fact, the Judge may

ask the party proposing to give the evidence in what manner the alleged fact,

if proved, would be relevant; and the Judge shall admit the evidence if he thinks

that the fact, if proved, would be relevant and not otherwise.

(2) If the fact proposed to be proved is one of which evidence is admissible only

upon proof of some other fact, such last mentioned fact must be proved before

evidence is given of the fact first mentioned, unless the party undertakes to

give proof of such fact, and the court is satisfied with such undertaking.

(3) If the relevancy of one alleged fact depends upon another alleged fact being

first proved, the Judge may in his discretion either permit evidence of the first

fact to be given before the second fact is proved, or require evidence to be given

of the second fact before evidence is given of the first fact. (emphasis added)

What is objectionable is the practice of moving that a document be marked subject to

proof without specifying the matters on which proof is required. Judges have become

passive observers of such practice. This is not a healthy practice and more often than

not, leads to additional issues as in this case. Moreover, it signifies a poor grasp of the

relevant evidentiary principles. A trial judge must not condone such practices. There is

Page 6 of 21

a duty on a trial judge to inquire from the party moving that a document be marked

subject to proof, what is required to be proved in the document.

In Prasanth and Another v. Devarajan and Another [(2021) 2 Sri.L.R. 419 at 428],

Samayawardhena, J., enriched by his wealth of experience as a trial judge, perceptively

observed that:

There is a practice among some lawyers to get up and say "subject to proof'

whenever a document is marked in evidence by the other party. This they do as

a matter of course or as a matter of routine and not with any particular objective

in mind, except perhaps to prolong the trial. It is regrettable that most of the

time the party who produces the document obliges to this without a murmur. If

we are serious about law's delays, we must put an end to this bad practice.

When a counsel routinely says "subject to proof', the Judge must ask what he

wants the other party to prove in the document. If this simple question is asked,

I am certain the objection would be withdrawn or at least the issue to be

addressed would be narrowed down.

In view of my observations and exhortations to trial judges, I deem it necessary to

expound the procedure and evidentiary principles involving the tender of

documentary evidence at civil trials before addressing the questions of law in this

matter.

I shall do so without reference to Section 3(a) of Act No. 17 of 2022 since the

Respondent objected to the purchase orders being received in evidence and the

Appellant is yet to close its case. The application of Section 3(b) of Act No. 17 of 2022

will be considered later.

Page 7 of 21

Civil Procedure Code

According to Section 154 of the Civil Procedure Code, every document or writing which

a party intends to use as evidence against his opponent must be formally tendered by

him in the course of proving his case at the time when its contents or purport are first

immediately spoken to by a witness.

At this point, if the opposing party does not, on the document being tendered in

evidence, object to its being received, and if the document is not such as is forbidden

by law to be received in evidence, the court should admit it.

Where no objection is taken when the document is sought to be tendered in evidence,

and the document is not forbidden by law to be received in evidence, any objection to

its receipt as evidence is deemed to have been waived. [See Kenakal v. Velupillai (2

N.L.R. 80); Muttuya Chetty v. Appu (4 N.L.R. 184); Silva v. Kindersly (18 N.L.R. 85);

Siyadoris v. Danoris (42 N.L.R. 311)].

However, if the opposing party objects to a document being admitted in evidence

when it is first tendered, commonly two questions arise for determination.

Firstly, whether the document is authentic, in other words, if it is what the party

tendering it represents it to be, and Secondly, whether, supposing it to be authentic, it

constitutes legally admissible evidence as against the party who is sought to be

affected by it.

It is pertinent to observe that more than 65 years ago, Basnayake, C.J. in Mendis v.

Paramaswami [62 N.L.R. 302 at 307] commended Section 154 and more especially its

explanation to all Judges of first instance in civil proceedings. Regrettably, the trial

judge in this matter failed to do so.

Page 8 of 21

In my view, there is a third, which in fact is the most fundamental, question which

arises in terms of Section 136 of the Evidence Ordinance. That is whether the

document proposed to be tendered in evidence is relevant in terms of the Evidence

Ordinance.

Therefore, three issues arise for consideration by the trial judge when a document is

sought to be tendered in evidence. They are; relevancy, admissibility and authenticity.

All three must be determined by reference to the evidentiary rules in the Evidence

Ordinance.

Relevancy

Relevancy is a question of fact. In terms of Section 5 of the Evidence Ordinance,

evidence may be given in any suit or proceeding of the existence or non-existence of

every fact in issue, and relevant facts and of no others.

According to Section 3 of the Evidence Ordinance, facts in issue means and includes

any fact from which, either by itself or in connection with other facts, the existence,

non-existence, nature or extent of any right, liability or disability , asserted or denied

in any suit or proceeding, necessarily follows. Section 3 explains that one fact is said to

be relevant to another when the one is connected with the other in any of the ways

referred to in the provisions of the Evidence Ordinance relating to the relevancy of

facts. Thereafter, Sections 6 to 55 enumerate several relevant facts.

Facts in issue and relevant facts in a civil trial must be understood in the context of the

issues raised by the parties as the trial proceeds on the issues and not on the pleadings.

As Prasanna Jayawardena, P.C., J. held in Seylan Bank Limited v. Clement Charles

Epasinghe and Another [S. C. Appeal 39/2006, S. C. M. 01.08.2017 at page 8], []

the scope and ambit of the trial had been defined by the admissions and issues which

were framed at the commencement of the trial, in terms of section 146 of the Civil

Procedure Code.

Page 9 of 21

Accordingly, the first matter that a trial judge must address when a document is sought

to be marked in evidence is whether it provides evidence of the existence or non-

existence of any fact in issue or a relevant fact. Where the answer is in the negative,

the document cannot be allowed to be marked in evidence, even subject to proof, and

the questions of authenticity or admissibility does not arise for consideration.

Where the answer is in the affirmative, the next question is its admissibility.

Admissibility

Admissibility is a question of law. Although the word admissibility is not defined in the

Evidence Ordinance, it is referred to in at least two sections. Sections 65 and 91

identifies certain categories of documentary evidence which are admissible.

According to Coomaraswamy [E. R. S. R. Coomaraswamy, The Law of Evidence, Vol. I

(Stamford Lake Publication, 2022), page 64] admissibility is a negative concept and is

exclusively legal. It implies that the law has laid down rules of exclusion according to

which evidence cannot be received even though it is both material and relevant.

Evidence is inadmissible if it is rejected for some reason other than immateriality or

irrelevance. It is admissible if there is no rule for its rejection other than a rule dealing

with materiality or relevance. Admissibility here means the concept of the absence of

an applicable rule for exclusion.

There is a distinction between admissibility and relevancy. In terms of Section 5 of the

Evidence Ordinance, evidence may be given in any suit or proceeding of the existence

or non-existence of every fact in issue, and of relevant facts and of no others. Sections

6 to 55 of the Evidence Ordinance identifies different categories of relevant facts.

Nevertheless, there may be rules of exclusion which exclude evidence of such facts in

issue or relevant facts. Thus, the terms relevancy and admissibility are not co-

extensive.

Page 10 of 21

Where a party seeks to produce a document which is objected to by the other party

on the basis of admissibility, as a general rule the trial judge must decide upon the

objection then and there as the question of admissibility is not one of fact but one of

law. Having done so, it is possible for the document that satisfies the test of

admissibility to be admitted in evidence, subject to proof of its authenticity provided

it provides evidence of the existence or non-existence of any fact in issue or a relevant

fact.

Authenticity

According to Coomaraswamy [E. R. S. R. Coomaraswamy, The Law of Evidence, Vol. II,

Book I (Stamford Lake Publication, 2022), page 70], authenticity usually means proof

that the document was written or executed by the person who purports to have done

so.

According to Section 67 of the Evidence Ordinance, if a document is alleged to have

been signed or to have been written wholly or in part by any person, the signature or

the handwriting of so much of the document as is alleged to be in that persons

handwriting must be proved to be in his handwriting.

In Robins v. Grogan [43 N.L.R. 269 at 270] it was held that a document cannot be used

in evidence until its genuineness has been either admitted or established by proof

which should be given before the document is accepted by the Court. Where there has

been no admission as to the execution of a document which has been produced, it

becomes necessary to prove the handwriting.

However, the question of authenticity must now be examined by trial judges keeping

in mind the provisions of Section 154A. (1) of the Civil Procedure Code which reads as

follows:

154A. (1) Notwithstanding the provisions of the Evidence Ordinance (Chapter 14), in any proceedings under this Code, it shall not be necessary to adduce formal proof of the execution or genuineness of any deed, or document which

Page 11 of 21

is required by law to be attested, other than a will executed under the Wills Ordinance (Chapter 60), and on the face of it purports to have been duly executed, unless

(a) in the pleadings or further pleadings in an action filed under regular procedure in terms of this Code, the execution or genuineness of such deed or document is impeached and raised as an issue; or

(b) the court requires such proof:

Provided that, the provisions of this section shall not be applicable in an event, a party to an action seeks to produce any deed or document not included in the pleadings of that party at any proceedings under this Code.

(2) The provisions of subsection (1), shall mutatis mutandis apply in the actions on summary procedure under this Code.. (emphasis added)

Where evidence of the due execution of a document is led in relation to a document

and the trial judge is satisfied upon a consideration of the probative value of the

evidence led, that the impugned document was in fact drawn up by the party alleged

to be its author, it can be said that the authenticity of such document has been proved.

Probative value of evidence means the weight to be attached to the evidence tendered

and is different from admissibility of evidence. It is a question of fact that cannot be

regulated by a set of precise rules. As Birch J in R v Madhub Chunder [(1874) 21 WRL

13] held, For weighing evidence and drawing inferences from it there can be no canon.

Each case presents its own peculiarities and in each common sense and shrewdness

must be brought to bear upon the facts elicited. Where the party producing the

document fails to prove its authenticity as required in a particular case, the document

cannot be used in evidence.

Invariably, there may be situations where a document is produced at the trial from the

custody of the person who received it. When such document is produced in evidence

and is objected to by the other party on the basis of authenticity, the trial judge may

allow the document to be marked subject to its authenticity being proved by the party

Page 12 of 21

producing it in evidence provided that the document is relevant and admissible. This

is one situation where a document can be allowed to be marked subject to proof which

in this instance means proof of its authenticity.

Another instance is where a document purporting to have been sent to the other party

is sought to be marked and that party asserts that it was never received. There the

document may be allowed to be marked subject to proof of having been sent and

received by the other party. Here the issue is mode of proof and not authenticity.

There are some instances when a document cannot be allowed to be marked even

subject to proof without first proving certain facts. For example, as explained in

illustration (b) to Section 136 of the Evidence Ordinance, where it is proposed to prove

by a copy the contents of a document said to be lost, the fact that the original is lost

must be proved by the person proposing to produce the copy before the copy is

produced. Here again, the question is mode of proof of secondary evidence.

According to Coomaraswamy [E. R. S. R. Coomaraswamy, The Law of Evidence, Vol. I,

2nd ed., (Lakehouse Investments Limited, 1989), pages 647-648], the authenticity of a

document may be proved in any one or more of the following ways:

(a) The evidence of the party who signed or wrote the document;

(b) The evidence of a person who saw him sign or write it;

(c) The evidence of someone who is acquainted with his handwriting. This can be

in one of the three ways set out in the explanation to Section 47 of the Evidence

Ordinance;

(d) By the evidence of an expert who compares the writing with some other writing

known to be that of the signatory;

(e) By proof of the admission by the writer;

(f) By comparison by the court under Section 73 of the Evidence Ordinance;

(g) Circumstantial evidence arising from the intrinsic evidence of the contents or by

presumptions.

Page 13 of 21

Where a document is relevant and admissible and its authenticity is admitted by the

other party the document can be marked without subject to proof. However, where

the authenticity of such document is challenged by the opposing party, the document

can be allowed to be marked subject to its authenticity being proved by the party

seeking to tender it in evidence. However, the trial judge must inquire from the party

that is moving that the document be marked subject to proof, as to whether it is the

authenticity or mode of proof that is in issue and record it.

Having set out the applicable evidentiary principles, let me examine their application

to the facts and circumstances of this case under each of the questions of law on which

leave was granted.

Question of Law No. 1

The question is whether the High Court erred by failing to properly consider the

provisions of Sections 61 and 62 of the Evidence Ordinance. The contention is that the

best evidence has been produced in terms of Section 62 of the Evidence Ordinance

since the Appellant has produced the originals of the purchase orders forwarded by

the Respondent. Therefore, these documents cannot be marked subject to proof as

there is no possibility on the part of the Appellant to adduce further evidence of the

said documents.

This contention is based on a misconception of the applicable evidentiary principles.

According to Section 61 of the Evidence Ordinance, the contents of documents may be

proved either by primary or secondary evidence. Section 62 explains that primary

evidence means the document itself produced for the inspection of the court.

These provisions deal with the mode of proof of the contents of documents. However,

the issue before the trial judge was whether the purchase orders should be marked

subject to proof. Although the record is silent on the basis for this request, it is clear

that it was based on the need to prove authenticity.

Page 14 of 21

There is, in my view, a difference between the proof of the contents of a document and

the proof of its authenticity. Proof of the contents of a document attracts the rules in

Sections 61 and 62 of the Evidence Ordinance. The authenticity of a document cannot

be proved by the mere production of the original of the document. It must be proved

by any one or more of the ways in which the authenticity of a document may be proved

which have been explained more fully above under Authenticity.

The High Court has clearly appreciated this distinction between mode of proof of the

contents of a document and its authenticity and held that the purchase orders must

be marked subject to proof in order to ensure that its authenticity is proved in terms

of Section 67 of the Evidence Ordinance before it is admitted in evidence.

Accordingly, the question of law No. 1 is answered in the negative.

Question of Law No. 2

The issue is whether the High Court misdirected itself by applying the provisions of

Section 67 of the Evidence Ordinance which reads as follows:

67. If a document is alleged to be signed or to have been written wholly or in

part by any person, the signature or the handwriting of so much of the document

as is alleged to be in that person's handwriting must be proved to be in his

handwriting.

The Appellant contends that if the purchase orders are marked subject to proof, the

burden will be on the Appellant to prove it. Our attention was drawn to the decision in

P. B. Umbichy Limited v. MV Mosceince and Jugolinija Rijek Yugoslavia [(1998) 2

Sri.L.R. 291 at 297] according to which the burden of proving a document marked

subject to proof according to law is on the party who produces it.

According to the Appellant, this results in the Appellant being compelled to take out

summons on the Respondent compelling him to give evidence on behalf of the

Appellant. It is contended that such a course of action is not open. The Appellant relies

Page 15 of 21

on the decisions in Gunatilaka and Others v. Ratnayake [(1908) 2 Matara Cases 19]

and Dalton Wijeratne v. Harmine Wijeratne [(1993) 1 Sri.L.R. 313 at 314 and 317].

I agree that once the purchase orders are marked subject to proof, the burden is on

the Appellant to prove its authenticity. Section 102 of the Evidence Ordinance states

that the burden of proof in a suit or proceeding lies on that person who would fail if

no evidence at all were given on either side. The Respondent has denied the

transactions on which the Appellant bases its cause of action. The purchase orders are

an essential component of the cause of action pleaded by the Appellant. If no evidence

is led, the Appellant fails.

Moreover, the Respondent cannot be asked to prove the negative, namely that the

purchase orders were not issued by him. In Laxmibai (Dead) Thru Lr'S. and Another v.

Bhagwanthbuva (Dead) Thru Lr'S. and Others [Civil Appeal No. 2058 of 2003, Decided

on 29.01.2013] the Indian Supreme held (at para. 15) that a negative fact cannot be

proved by adducing positive evidence.

Nanda Senanayake in Legal Maxims and Phrases [1st ed. (Printed by author, 2023),

pages 434-436] states that a negative is usually incapable of proof. The decision in New

Indian Assurance Company Ltd. v. Nusli Neville Wadiya and Another [Case No. Appeal

(Civil) 5879 of 2007, Decided on 13.12.2007] is cited in support. There, the Supreme

Court of India referred (at para. 54) to the legal maxim, ei incumbit probation qui dicit,

non qui negat (The burden of proving a fact rest on the party who substantially asserts

the affirmative of the issue and not upon the party who denies it; for a negative is

usually incapable or proof).

I am in agreement with this proposition of law and hold that the High Court was correct

in determining that the purchase orders should be marked subject to proof and the

burden of proving their authenticity is on the Appellant. It is justified even upon an

application of Section 3(b) of Act No. 17 of 2022 since the Respondent denied the

Page 16 of 21

transaction and the purchase orders were not included in the pleadings of the

Appellant.

It is possible that parties to civil actions may seek to exploit this proposition of law to

delay proceedings by requiring the other party to prove documents without a

justifiable basis.

This mischief in my view has now been adequately addressed by the Section 154A. (1)

of the Civil Procedure Code which lays down the rule that the execution or genuineness

of any deed or document which is required by law to be attested cannot be impugned

unless, the execution or genuineness of such deed or document is impeached and

raised as an issue or the court requires such proof. The Proviso states that this rule will

not apply to a deed or document a party seeks to produce which is not included in the

pleadings of that party.

Section 3(b) of Act No. 17 of 2022 further seeks to prevent a party from moving without

reasonable cause to get documents marked subject to proof by requiring the Court to

decide whether it is necessary to adduce formal proof of the execution or genuineness

of such deed or document considering the merits of the objections taken with regard

to the execution or genuineness of such deed or document.

The trial judge can also impose high costs where at the end of the trial it is found that

impugned documents were in fact executed by the party moving that they be marked

subject to proof.

I have no hesitation in rejecting the contention of the Appellant that allowing the

purchase orders to be marked subject to proof results in compelling the Appellant to

call the Respondent as one of its witnesses. In Goonewardene v. De Saram [64 N.L.R.

145 at 147] H. N. G. Fernando, J. held that there is no requirement of law that it is only

by the evidence of the person who has made a report that its authenticity can be

proved [See also Rex v. Jinadasa (51 N.L.R. 529 at 538)].

Page 17 of 21

According to Coomaraswamy [supra., Vol. II, Book I, page 105C]:

Section 67 does not render it necessary that direct evidence of the handwriting

of the person who is alleged to have executed the deed must be given by some

person who saw the signature affixed. It merely states with reference to deeds

the universal rule that he who makes an allegation must prove it. No new rule is

laid down as to the mode of proof. The nature of proof will depend to a large

extent on the nature of the document. The section does not require the writer

of a document to be examined as a witness nor does it require the subscribing

witness to be produced.1 (emphasis added)

Moreover, the objection of the Appellant overlooks the ways by which the authenticity

of a document may be proved. There are other ways of proving the authenticity of a

document other than by calling the maker of the document.

The authenticity can be proved by the evidence of a person who saw the maker sign or

write it, the evidence of someone who is acquainted with his handwriting, by the

evidence of an expert who compares the writing with some other writing known to be

that of the signatory, by comparison by the court under Section 73 of the Evidence

Ordinance and by circumstantial evidence arising from the intrinsic evidence of the

contents or by presumption.

I am also not inclined to uphold the contention of the Appellant that the Respondent

cannot be called as a witness by the Appellant.

In Gunatilaka [supra., pages 20-21] Wendt, J. held as follows:

It is quite time that the practitioners understood that neither the law nor

commonsense sanctions your calling your opponent as your witness and

impliedly saying to the Court; Whatever this man may say in support of my case

1 Ali v. Ruhman (21 W.R. 429)

Page 18 of 21

will be true. Whatever he may say against it will be false. A party who calls his

adversary as his witness must expect him to be treated like any other witness.

This is far from saying you cannot call the other party as a witness. It only states that if

you do so, one cannot ask for special treatment. The other party will be treated like

any other witness and nothing more nothing less.

In Dalton Wijeratne [supra.], it was held that although Section 120 (1) of the Evidence

Ordinance makes parties to the suit competent witnesses, it certainly does not

expressly make them compellable witnesses. It was further held that Section 120

appears to imply that one party cannot compel the other party to give evidence in a

civil suit and that the second proviso to Section 175 (1) of the Civil Procedure Code

does not go beyond conferring a discretion on the court to permit a party to be called

as a witness despite his name not being included in the list of witnesses required to be

filed in terms of Section 121 of the Civil Procedure Code.

This statement must be understood on the facts and circumstances of that case. The

plaintiff in a partition action was absent on the day fixed for trial but was represented

by his counsel who sought the permission of court to call either the 2nd or the 6th

defendant, as a witness. He stated that he was seeking to prove the pedigree by calling

either one of them. This was opposed by the counsel appearing for the 6th defendant.

Thus, the question that arose for determination is whether a party to an action can be

compelled to testify against his will by another party to the action as his witness.

In the present matter, the Respondent informed the High Court that he will testify. The

High Court has stated that if the Respondent does not testify contrary to this

undertaking, permissible presumptions may be made in terms of the law.

I answer question of law No. 2 in the negative.

Page 19 of 21

Question of Law No. 3

The issue is whether the High Court erred by not considering that the Appellant is

unable to produce further evidence other than the best and/or primary evidence of a

document authored by the Respondent which was delivered to the Appellant by the

Respondent.

This issue deals with the mode of proving the contents of the purchase orders. It does

not deal with the question of the authenticity of the purchase orders. As explained

earlier, there are different ways of proving the authenticity of a document other than

by calling the author of the document. Hence, for the same reasons adumbrated in

Question of Law No. 1, Question of Law No. 3 is answered in the negative.

Question of Law No. 4

The Appellant contends that the High Court failed to consider that in the event the

Respondent denies the authenticity of documents P15 to P50(a) when giving evidence,

it would be open to the Appellant to lead evidence in rebuttal. In the absence of a

denial by the Respondent of the authenticity of these documents raised through the

pleadings or issues, the High Court misdirected itself in calling upon the Appellant to

furnish further proof of the said documents.

This question is premised on certain factual and legal inaccuracies. The High Court did

not call upon the Appellant to furnish further proof of the documents. It called upon

the Appellant to prove the authenticity of the purchase orders as required by Section

67 of the Evidence Ordinance. The High Court arrived at this conclusion after observing

that the Respondent had denied the impugned transaction.

The Appellant did not by reference to individual purchase orders specify in the plaint,

the details of the transactions on which the sum claimed in the plaint is due and owing.

In these circumstances, it was not possible for the Respondent to have impugned the

authenticity of each and every purchase order. The Respondent in his answer denied

Page 20 of 21

that any sum was due and owing to the Appellant. Hence, it was sufficient that the

Respondent objected to the marking of the purchase orders when it was first tendered

in evidence and moved that it be marked subject to proof.

As explained more fully in Kulasiriwardena v. Jayasinghe and Others [(2016) 1 Sri.L.R.

93 at 101], when [a] statement [] was sought to be adduced as an Admission the

court was required to give its mind to two aspects before proceeding to admit the

statement. (a) As the impugned statement is one reduced to writing the court is

required to consider whether admitting the document is obnoxious to the provisions

governing admission of documents (mode of proof)[;] (b) Secondly, court is required to

give its mind as to whether the impugned statement suggests any inference as to any

fact in issue or relevant fact and if so, whether the statement is relevant under [S]ection

17 read with Section 21 of the Evidence Ordinance. (Relevancy).

The learned Additional District Judge did not do so. The High Court having appreciated

the difference between the mode of proof and authenticity, correctly made order

directing that the purchase orders should be marked subject to proof of their

authenticity. The Appellant should now prove their authenticity in any one or more of

the ways adumbrated above.

Question of law No. 4 is answered in the negative.

Question of Law No. 5

The issue is whether the High Court erred by allowing the documents P15-P50(a) to be

marked subject to proof. For the reasons more fully set out above, the High Court was

correct in directing that the purchase orders included in documents P15-P50(a) should

be marked subject to proof.

Question of law No. 5 is answered in the negative.

Page 21 of 21

The judgement of the High Court dated 09.09.2010 is affirmed.

For all the forgoing reasons, the appeal is dismissed. Parties shall bear their costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Vijith K. Malalgoda, P.C., J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT