Page 1 of 11

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Subadhra Irene Mangalika Wijewickrama, No. 61/41 A, Manel Avenue, Old Kesbawa Road, Delkanda, Nugegoda. S.C. Appeal No. 177/2016 Plaintiff SC/HCCA/LA 105/2016 Vs. WP/HCCA/COL 166/2013 (LA) DC Colombo 35953/MS D.S.B.S. Chandrawathi, Kegalle Road, Alawathura.

Defendant AND BETWEEN D.S.B.S. Chandrawathi, Kegalle Road, Alawathura.

Defendant-Appellant Vs.

Subadhra Irene Mangalika Wijewickrama, No. 61/41 A, Manel Avenue, Old Kesbawa Road, Delkanda, Nugegoda.

Plaintiff-Respondent

AND BETWEEN

Subadhra Irene Mangalika Wijewickrama, No. 61/41 A, Manel Avenue, Old Kesbawa Road, Delkanda, Nugegoda.

Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant Vs. D.S.B.S. Chandrawathi, Kegalle Road, Alawathura.

Defendant-Appellant-Respondent

Page 2 of 11

AND NOW BETWEEN

D.S.B.S. Chandrawathi, Kegalle Road, Alawathura.

Defendant-Appellant-Respondent-Appellant Vs. Subadhra Irene Mangalika Wijewickrama, No. 61/41 A, Manel Avenue, Old Kesbawa Road, Delkanda, Nugegoda.

Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant-Respondent Before: E.A.G.R. Amarasekara, J.

Janak De Silva, J. Arjuna Obeyesekere, J. Counsel: P.P. Gunasena for the Defendant-Appellant-Respondent-Appellant Uchitha Wickremesinghe with Saumya Hettiarachchi for the Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant-Respondent Written Submissions tendered on: 25.05.2017 by the Defendant-Appellant-Respondent-Appellant 23.01.2018 by the Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant-Respondent Argued on: 22.10.2021 Decided on: 28.07.2022

Page 3 of 11

Janak De Silva, J. The Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the

“Respondent”) filed this action in the District Court of Colombo under Section 703 of the

Civil Procedure Code to recover a sum of Rupees 1,050,000/- from the Defendant-

Appellant-Respondent-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the “Appellant”) who was at

that time a public officer. Judgment and decree had been entered in favour of the

Respondent and in order to satisfy the decree, the salary of the Appellant had been seized

in terms of the Civil Procedure Code.

Sometime later, the Appellant had retired from public service and since the amount of

the decree had not been recovered fully, the Respondent had taken steps to seize the

pension of the Appellant and her commuted gratuity in order to satisfy the decree. The

Appellant then made an application to the District Court of Colombo seeking to prevent

the seizure of her pension on the basis that her pension is exempt from seizure in terms

of section 218(g) of the Civil Procedure Code.

The Learned Additional District Judge by order dated 20.11.2013 allowed the application

of the Appellant and her pension was declared free from seizure. In doing so the learned

Judge held that the term ‘stipend’ in section 218(g) of the Civil Procedure Code means and

refers to the entire pension and hence the entire pension of the Appellant is exempt from

seizure.

Aggrieved by the said order, the Respondent appealed to the High Court of Civil Appeal of

the Western Province holden in Colombo.

The High Court of Civil Appeal by order dated 27.01.2016 allowed the appeal and declared

that the Respondent is entitled to seize the pension of the Appellant including her

commuted gratuity. It was held that the pension of the Appellant is not exempt from

seizure under section 218(g) as “the term used in section 218(g) is ‘stipend’ and not

‘pension’ and therefore it should mean something additional and distinct from the

pension.” Further it was held that in Sri Lanka public servants have no absolute right to

any pension or allowance and that Sri Lankan law does not recognize a public policy of the

Page 4 of 11

State to protect the pension of a public officer from seizure in the execution of a decree.

In conclusion, the High Court of Civil Appeal applied the maxim Noscitur a sociis and held

that ‘stipend’ is an additional or supplementary payment (although it could be a regular

and fixed payment) and as the Appellant had not shown the existence of such a

component in her emolument her pension can be seized.

This Court has granted leave to appeal on the following questions of law:

1. Has the High Court of Civil Appeal erred in Law in allowing the seizure of the

Defendant’s pension including her commuted gratuity?

2. If the entirety of the Petitioner’s pension is exempted from seizure would the

Petitioner be unjustly enriched at the expense of the Respondent?

3. If the answer to the aforesaid issue is in the affirmative ought the Petitioner’s

appeal be dismissed?

The main contention of the Appellant is that in terms of section 218(g) of the Civil

Procedure Code, the pension of the Appellant cannot be seized during the execution of a

decree. The learned counsel for the Appellant submitted that the term ‘stipend’ used in

section 218(g) of the Civil Procedure Code refers to the entirety of the pension and not to

a portion of the pension drawn by a pensioner. He submitted that therefore, the entirety

of the Appellant’s pension cannot be seized under and in terms of section 218(g) of the

Civil Procedure Code.

In response the learned counsel for the Respondent submitted that the term ‘stipend’

used in section 218(g) does not refer to the entire pension. He submitted that it only refers

to a component of the pension and that the terms stipend, the cost-of-living allowance

and the special living allowance, refers to ‘three components’ of a pension. He submitted

that through section 218(g) of the Civil Procedure Code, the legislature intended to

exclude from seizure only the said ‘three components’ of a pension, and that the balance

portion of the pension is liable to being seized to satisfy a money decree issued against a

pensioner. The learned counsel for the Respondent further submitted that as the

Page 5 of 11

Appellant had failed to provide a breakdown of her pension to prove that the above three

components are included in her pension, the entirety of her pension is liable to be seized.

The main issue for determination is the meaning to be given to the word ‘stipend’ in

section 218(g) of the Civil Procedure Code.

In this endeavour, it is important to examine the evolution of the wording in section 218(g)

of the Civil Procedure Code since when the meaning of words or phrases used in a statute

are unclear and has not been judicially interpreted, according to well established legal

principles and principles of common sense, reference can be made to the historical

evolution of the statute to understand its meaning. [Per Lord Coleridge, J. in Queen v.

Most (1881) 7 QBD 244 at 251]. Moreover, when interpreting legislation, it is a necessary

requirement to always give effect to the intention of the legislature. Where there is

ambiguity with regard to a meaning of a word or where a word is capable of having two

meanings, reference can be made to the history of the statue to determine the intention

of the legislature [NS Bindra’s Interpretation of Statutes, 10th ed., page 945]

The Civil Procedure Code was enacted in 1889 as Ordinance No. 2 of 1889. Although there

are several provisions which have been added to it later, section 218(g) was enacted in

the English language. Article 23(1) of the Constitution states that all laws and subordinate

legislation shall be enacted or made and published in Sinhala and Tamil, together with a

translation thereof in English. The Second Proviso to Article 23 of the Constitution

mandates that in respect of all other written laws the text in which such written laws were

enacted or adopted or made, shall prevail in the event of any inconsistency between such

texts. In The Attorney-General v. Herath Mudiyanselage Hamyge Herath Banda [(1983)

Bar Association Law Journal Reports Vol. I Part III 108] it was held that Bribery Act was

enacted in English language and for the purposes of legal work it could not be considered

in any other language.

As originally enacted Section 218(g) read as follows;

“Stipends allowed to naval, military and civil pensioners of Government and

political pensions”

Page 6 of 11

Subsequently the section was amended by Civil Procedure Code (Amendment) Acts No.

43 of 1949 and by No. 24 of 1961. Thereby the words ‘the cost-of-living allowance’ and

‘the special allowances’ were added respectively to the list of items that are excluded

from liability of being seized during execution of a money decree.

Hence it is clear that as originally enacted, ‘Stipends’ meant something different and

distinctive to ‘the cost-of-living allowance’ and ‘the special allowances and the High Court

of Civil Appeal erred in applying the maxim Noscitur a sociis to section 218(g) of the Civil

Procedure Code to ascertain the meaning of the word ‘Stipend’.

The important question is whether ‘stipend’ means the pension a public officer receives

upon retirement.

The High Court of Civil Appeal went on the basis that section 218(g) of the Civil Procedure

Code uses the word ‘stipend’ and not ‘pension’ and therefore it should mean something

additional and distinct from the pension. However, it was not examined whether the

words ‘stipend’ and ‘pension’ are synonyms. In fact, the High Court of Civil Appeal

proceeded on the basis that they are not.

One of the basic rules in interpretation of statutes is to assume that words and phrases of

legislature are used in their ordinary meaning. It is an equally well-established technique

of statutory interpretation as held by Lord Coleridge in R v. Peters [1886] 16 QBD 636, for

Courts of law to refer to dictionary in order to ascertain the ordinary relevant meaning of

words.

Lord Coleridge held (at page 641)

“I am quite aware that dictionaries are not to be taken as authoritative exponents

of the meanings of words used in Acts of Parliament, but it is a well-known rule of

courts of law that words should be taken to be used in their ordinary sense, and we

are therefore sent for instruction to these books.”

Page 7 of 11

Dictionary usage is particularly important in textualist analysis, which seeks to find “a sort

of ‘objectified’ intent—the intent that a reasonable person would gather from the text of

the law” and places foremost priority on the text itself, as opposed to utilizing external

sources of understanding. This method has its proclaimed roots in democratic principles:

if the nebulous intent of the legislature controls over the plain meaning of its published

text, how could citizens be on notice about the law which they are to follow? [WAR OF

THE WORDS: HOW COURTS CAN USE DICTIONARIES IN ACCORDANCE WITH TEXTUALIST

PRINCIPLES, Phillip A. Rubin, Duke Law Journal Vol 60, page 167 at 168]

The word ‘stipend’ has not been defined in the Civil Procedure Code and its exact meaning

has not been judicially interpreted. In Ibrahim Saibo et al. v. Philips (39 N.L.R. 551) all

what was held is that the word is inseparable from the notion of periodical payments and

cannot therefore embrace a lump sum. The decisions in Ambalavanar v. Kandappar (31

N.L.R. 85) and Goul v. Concecion (36 N.L.R. 73) are of little assistance on this issue.

When any word is statutorily defined or judicially interpreted, there is no scope for looking

at the dictionary meaning; however, in the absence of such definition or interpretation,

the court may seek aid of dictionaries to ascertain the meaning of a word in common

parlance [N.S. Bindra’s Interpretation of Statutes, 10th ed., (2007) Lexis Nexis

Butterworths page 927].

Nevertheless, Court should not have recourse to any dictionary. If the court is concerned

with the contemporary meaning of a word at the time the Act was passed, it should

consult a dictionary of that period (Hardwick Game Farm v. Suffolk Agricultural and

Poultry Producers Association Ltd. [1966] 1 WLR 287, 324: R v. Bouch [1982] 3 WLR 673,

677) [Bennion on Statute Law, 3rd ed., (1990) page 194].

The Civil Procedure Code was enacted in 1889. The dictionary closest in time to this period

found after much effort is the “The Oxford English Dictionary” published in Oxford at the

Clarendon Press in 1933, where the word ‘stipend’ is defined as a “a fixed periodical

payment of any kind, e.g., a pension or allowance”.

Hence, I hold that the word ‘stipend’ as used originally in 1889 in section 218(g) of the

Civil Procedure Code is synonymous with the words ‘pension’ or ‘allowance’.

Page 8 of 11

There is no impact on this conclusion by the amendment made in 1949. Prior to it, the

word used was “stipends”. By the Civil Procedure Code (Amendment) Act No. 43 of 1949,

with the addition of the phrase “the cost-of-living allowance”, the word “stipends” was

amended to read as “The stipend”. This remained unaltered by the Civil Procedure Code

(Amendment) Act No. 24 of 1961 and the section now reads as “the stipend, the cost-of-

living allowance and the special living allowance of a naval, military, air force, civil or

political pensioner of the Government;”.

The fact that there are other allowances paid to a public servant upon retirement in

addition to the pension is clear upon an examination of the Minutes on Pension which

regulates the payment of pension to public officers. Section 2 of Ordinance No. 2 of 1947

makes the Minutes on Pensions part of the “written law “of Sri Lanka from 1901 and hence

Court can take judicial notice of it although it was not produced in the lower court. Clause

2 refers to the award of a pension to specified public servants. Clause 8(1) specifies that

the pension or gratuity awarded to a public servant shall be computed upon the salary

drawn by him at the time of his retirement. Clause 12 (1) permits the withholding or

reduction of certain sums from any pension, gratuity or other allowance payable to a

public servant. Clause 15 refers to situations where a public officer is paid a pension,

gratuity or other allowance. Clause 19 refers to the pension or retiring allowance.

‘The’ is the word used before nouns, with a specifying or particularizing effect as opposed

to the indefinite or generalizing force of ‘a’ or ‘an’. It determines what a particular thing

is meant, that is, what particular thing we are to assume to be meant. ‘The’ is always

mentioned to denote a particular thing or a person [N.S. Bindra’s Interpretation of

Statutes, 10th ed., (2007) Lexis Nexis Butterworth, page 1724].

Accordingly, the term ‘the stipend’ refers to a particular payment. This conclusion is

supported by the Minutes on Pension which regulates the payment of pension to public

officers. Clause 8(1) specifies that the pension or gratuity awarded to a public servant shall

be computed upon the salary drawn by him at the time of his retirement.

Page 9 of 11

I hold that the amendment of the word ‘stipends’ as ‘The stipend’ and the inclusion of the

words ‘the cost-of-living allowance’ and ‘the special allowances’ reveals the intention of

the legislature to distinctly identify the pension, ‘the cost-of-living allowance’ and ‘the

special allowances’ from other allowances that are paid to government pensioners and

clearly exempt the pension, ‘the cost-of-living allowance’ and ‘the special allowances’

from seizure.

This becomes clearer when one considers section 218(h) of the Civil Procedure Code. It

originally exempted the salary of a public officer or servant from seizure. By the

amendment made in 1949, even the cost-of-living allowance paid to a public officer was

also excluded.

Moreover, the context in which public servants in Sri Lanka (Ceylon as it was then) were

awarded a pension justifies the legislative intent of excluding the pension of a public

servant from seizure in terms of section 218(g) of the Civil Procedure Code.

P.D. Kannangara in “The History of the Ceylon Civil Service 1802-1833, A Study of

Administrative Change in Ceylon” [Tisara Prakasakayo, 1966, page 169] explains the

historical reasons as follows:

“At the time of the formation of the Civil Service, the gift of the Colonial Office to

what it considered inadequate salaries was a favourable retirement and pension

scheme. Dundas, who originated the idea, specifically stated that considering the

small scale on which it was proposed to regulate the salaries of Civil Servants, some

arrangement ought to be made with a view to making a provision for their retreat.

He also thought that to induce Civil Servants to look forward to a ‘certain and

competent independence’ after a given number of years of service, was the best

security against abuse. Pensions were to be proportionate to the duration and

importance of the services rendered.”

Page 10 of 11

This rationale for the grant of a pension to a public servant may well have been the reason

for Moseley J. to concede in Ibrahim Saibo et al. v. Philips (Supra. page 552) that the

object of paragraph 218(g) of the Civil Procedure Code is to protect pensions payable to

Government officers. Indeed, that intention is clear upon a reading of the paragraph.

Government servants are not compensated at the same level as in the private sector. One

of the main incentives to join the public service is the pension a public servant receives

upon retirement. The object behind the exemption of the pension from seizure is that a

public servant pensioner should not be left high and dry and should have some financial

means to carry on in old age when the need of the pensioners is greatest.

The learned counsel for the Respondent submitted that the Appellant will be unjustly

enriched if her pension is exempted from seizure. However, as held in Ibrahim Saibo et

al. v. Philips (Supra.), the commuted gratuity payable to the Appellant is liable for seizure

towards satisfaction of the money decree the Respondent has obtained against the

Appellant. It is observed that there is no evidence on record to show that there are no

other assets of the Respondent which can be seized. In any event, where the legislature

has specified that certain amounts are exempt from seizure, the question of unjust

enrichment does not arise.

For all the foregoing reasons, I hold that the pension of the Appellant cannot be seized

under section 218(g) of the Civil Procedure Code for the purpose of satisfying the money

decree. However, her commuted gratuity is liable to be seized for the satisfaction of the

money decree obtained by the Respondent.

Accordingly, I answer the questions of law as follows:

1. Has the High Court of Civil Appeal erred in Law in allowing the seizure of the

Defendant’s pension including her commuted gratuity?

The High Court of Civil Appeal erred in law in allowing the seizure of the

Defendant’s pension. Her Commuted Gratuity is liable for seizure.

Page 11 of 11

2. If the entirety of the Petitioner’s pension is exempted from seizure would the

Petitioner be unjustly enriched at the expense of the Respondent?

No.

3. If the answer to the aforesaid issue is in the affirmative ought the Petitioner’s

appeal be dismissed?

Does not arise.

Accordingly, I set aside the order of the High Court of Civil Appeal of the Western Province

holden in Colombo dated 27.01.2016 and affirm the order of the learned Additional

District Judge of Colombo dated 20.11.2013.

Parties shall bear their costs.

Appeal partly allowed.

Judge of the Supreme Court E.A.G.R. Amarasekara, J. I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court Arjuna Obeyesekere, J. I agree. Judge of the Supreme Court