==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application in terms of

Articles 17 and 126 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Mudugamuwe Arachchilage

Milan Chamara,

Salgahawatta, Molagoda, Kegalle.

Petitioner

SC FR Application No. 344/2016

V.

1. Head Quarters Inspector

Levangama,

Officer-in-Charge, Police Station,

Kegalle.

2. Pradeep Kalupahana,

Assistant Superintendent of

Police, ASP’s Office, Kegalle.

3. Lionel Gunathileka,

Senior Superintendent of Police,

SSP’s Office, Kegalle.

4. Inspector General of Police,

Police Head Quarters, Colombo

01.

2

5. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondents

Before: ARJUNA OBEYESEKERE, J.

K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J.

M. SAMPATH K. B. WIJERATNE, J.

Counsel: A. R. Ginige for the Petitioner.

Asela Serasinghe for 1st Respondent instructed by

Nadeeka Senanayake.

Gamini Perera with Manoj Kumar de Silva and T. P. S.

Kanchana for 2nd Respondent instructed by T. K. P.

Arampath.

Prabath S. Amerasinghe with Nadeeka Jayasinghe for

3rd Respondent instructed by Nilanka Nanayakkara.

Chrisanga Fernando, SC for 4th and 5th Respondents.

Argued on: 28.10.2025

Decided on: 13.01.2026

3

K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J

1. The Petitioner in this application is a resident at the above-captioned

address. The Petitioner alleges that the 1st Respondent, who is a Head

Quarters Inspector (HQI) of Police and the Officer-in-Charge of the Kegalle

Police Station, violated the fundamental rights guaranteed to him under

Articles 11, 12(1), 13(1), and 13(2) of the Constitution.

2. At the stage of granting leave, this Court granted leave to proceed with the

alleged violations of Articles 11 and 13(1) and 13(2) of the Constitution.

Petitioner’s Version

3. On 01.06.2016 at 10.00 a.m. the Petitioner has received a phone call from

the Kegalle Police Station requesting him to report to the Police Station to

investigate a complaint made by one fuel pumper (hereinafter referred to as

“complainant”).

4. The Petitioner states that he reported to the Kegalle Police Station at the given

time and remained until around 1.00 p.m. However, the said complainant

has been absent and unrepresented. Therefore, he has sought permission to

leave and come back when the complainant is present. He claims that the

Miscellaneous Complainant Branch of the Kegalle Police Station approved

this and gave him permission to leave.

5. On 07.06.2016 the Petitioner has once again received a call from the Kegalle

Police Station with regards to the same complaint. He has been asked to

report to the Kegalle Police Station at 10.00 a.m. on 09.06.2016. The

Petitioner has complied and has reported to the Kegalle Police Station at the

said date and time. However, the said complainant has once again been

absent and unrepresented.

6. Upon the Petitioner seeking permission to leave the Police Station due to the

absence of the said complainant, a Police Constable has called the said

complainant in front of the Petitioner and has requested him to report to the

Kegalle Police Station. However, the complainant has informed the Police

4

Constable over the phone that he does not want to continue with the

complaint and asked for the case to be closed.

7. Thereafter, on the instructions of a Police Inspector, the Police Constable who

contacted the complainant was requested to record this information on the

logbook and to produce the Petitioner to HQI Levangama, who is the 1st

Respondent.

8. According to the Petitioner, he was asked to enter the 1st Respondent’s Office.

The Petitioner claims that after a few minutes, the 1st Respondent started to

shout at him in obscene language and grabbed him by the belt and assaulted

him. The 1st Respondent has blamed the Petitioner of making death threats

to the complainant.

9. The Petitioner claims that he told the 1st Respondent that he did not make

any death threats and that he only asked the complaint “Are you working”.

According to the Petitioner the 1st Respondent assaulted him again on his

left ear and ordered for the Petitioner to be detained in the Police Station.

10. The Petitioner stated that the said arrest occurred around 10.40 a.m. and

that he was released on Police bail around 6.00 p.m. on the same day, and

the Petitioner was ordered to produce two sureties on 11.06.2016. He further

claims that he was not given any food or water during the period in which he

was detained.

11. The Petitioner states that upon being released from Police custody, he

admitted himself to the Kegalle Hospital on the same day. As per the Medico

Legal Report (MLR) dated 09.06.2016 there had been four injuries, all of

which were non-grievous. Further, the comments in the Medical Report from

the “Department of ENT Head and Neck Audiology Unit” of the Kegalle

General Hospital marked “P1-B”, states “Normal hearing sensitivity”.

12. In these circumstances, the Petitioner alleges that on the totality of the facts

and circumstances as herein described, the 1st Respondent in this case, has

violated the Petitioner’s fundamental rights guaranteed under Article 11,

12(1), 13(1) and 13(2) of the Constitution.

5

13. However, as mentioned in paragraph 2 of this judgment, at the stage of

granting leave this Court was inclined to grant leave to consider the violations

of only Articles 11 and 13(1) and 13(2) of the Constitution against the 1st

Respondent.

Respondent’s Version

14. The 1st Respondent in his Statement of Objections states that the complaint

that the Petitioner has referenced in his Petition was related to a previous

complaint against the Petitioner by the same complainant.

15. Accordingly the related complaint is as follows. On 15.05.2016, the Kegalle

Police Station has received information that the said complainant, who is an

employee of the Molagoda Filing Station, has sustained injuries as a result

of an assault by the Petitioner and was hospitalized at the Kegalle Hospital.

16. The following has been recorded in the Police Information Book on

15.05.2016, extracts of which is marked as “R2”, in relation to the CCTV

footage of the said incident:

“...ෙලා$ රථයට ඉ+ධන ලබා/ෙම+ අන23ව ෙස්වකයා 89+ ෙලා$ රථෙ: ඉ+ධන

ටැං=ෙ: >?ය නැවත වසන දBශනයD ඇත. ඊට පI $යJ3 ෙලා$ රථෙය+ බැස නැවත

ඉ+ධන ටැං=ෙ: >?ය බලා එය වසා නැවත ෙලා$ රථයට ෙගාඩ Nමට තැO කරන

අතර2ර එම ෙලා$ රථෙ: $යJ3 සහ ෙස්වකයා අතර යQ කථා බහD ඇR වන අතර ඉ+

අන23ව ෙලා$ රථෙ: $යJ3 එම ස්ථානෙය+ පැSණ ඉ+ධන හෙU ෙස්වකයා තUV

කරෙගන යන දBශනයD ඇත...

...දBශන පතෙය+ Wටතට ෙමාX+ යන අතර ඉ+ධන හෙU ස8කර ඇR NJ3 2Y+

ෙස්වකයාට පහර ෙදන ආකාරය ය+තමට [ස් ෙ\. ඔ^ _ම වැ` නැවත නැabන අතර එම

අවස්ථාෙ\ $යJ3 හැbයට කටc2 කල (ෙලා$ රථෙ:) fUපාට [ග කYසමD හා

කSසයD ඇඳ 9b hiගලයා ෙස්වකයාට තBජනය කරන දI+ ඇත…”

17. As per the B-Report of the Case Number B 126PC dated 18.05.2016, marked

“R6”, the Petitioner was released on bail on the allegation of the offence of

hurt under Section 314 read with Section 32 of the Penal Code.

6

18. According to the 1st Respondent, while the Petitioner was on bail in relation

to Case Number B 126PC, the Kegalle Police Station has received another

complaint on 30.05.2016. As per the second complaint, the Petitioner has

threatened the same complainant again while he was employed at the

Molagoda Filling Station. According to the Police Information Book extract

from 30.05.2016, marked “R7”, the Petitioner has visited the Molagoda Fuel

Station where the complainant was working at around 8.30 a.m. on

30.05.2016 and has asked him “වැඩද...ආ වැඩද බලාගl”.

19. Being alerted by the threatening tone of the Petitioner, the Manager of the

Fuel Station has advised the complainant to lodge the second complaint at

the Kegalle Police Station.

20. Thereafter, both parties were informed to be present at the Kegalle Police

Station on 09.06.2016 for an inquiry in relation to the said second complaint.

However, the complainant was absent while the Petitioner was present at the

said date and time.

21. According to the 1st Respondent, the Petitioner has denied all the allegations

made against him. At this juncture the 1st Respondent has undertaken to

obtain copies of the CCTV footage to ascertain the truth of the allegations.

Upon hearing this the Petitioner has become enraged and has started

verbally abusing the Respondent using obscene language. The Petitioner has

also threatened the 1st Respondent that he will take steps against the 1st

Respondent through his contacts within the Police.

22. The 1st Respondent claims that the Petitioner’s behaviour was extremely

aggressive and unruly and was disrupting the official functions within the

Police Station. He further claims that the Petitioner attempted to flee the

Police Station. The 1st Respondent also states that he was concerned that the

Petitioner would attempt to grab a fireman and cause serious harm as well

and that he would immediately go to the Molagoda Filling Station and cause

harm to the complainant as well.

23. Accordingly, the 1st Respondent claims that he was compelled to use

minimum force to restrain and arrest the Petitioner. The extracts of the Police

7

Information Book on 09.06.2016, of which the extract is marked as “R8”,

reads as follows:

“ඔ^ එම අවස්ථාෙ\ දැ? ෙකmපය=+ 9bn Jo අතර ඔ^ෙp qයාකලාපය අnව

පැSrYක3ට යQ අන2රD 9J=sෙQ හැ=යාවD ඇR බව හා වග උOතරක3ෙp

හැ9sම අnව පැSrYක3 ෙසායා ෙගාස් ඔ^ට අන2රD 9Jෙ\යැu මා හට හැv aය

බැ8+ සාමය ආරDෂා =sෙQ qයාමාBගයD ෙලස හා වග උOතරක3ෙp ආරDෂාව

සඳහා ඔ^ෙp ගමන නැවත අOඅඩංxවට ගැyමට qයා කෙලS. එ8ට ඔ^ මාෙp

zහණෙය+ S/ පලායාමට උOසහ කල අතර නැවත මා ඔ^ෙp කSසෙය+ අUලාෙගන

ඔ^ ෙමUල =sමට කටc2 කෙලS. එ8ට ඔ^ෙp හැ9sම fසා ඔ^ ෙමUලකර ගැyමට

බලය පා8{| කල c2 } අතර ඔ^ෙp අතපයද මාෙp ශsරෙ: වැJf.”

24. Further, the following has been recorded in the statement given by the

Petitioner himself, which was recorded at 11.30 a.m. on the same day and

marked as “R9”:

“...මට ෙපාYස් lලස්ථාන ෙපාYස් පsDෂක ෙවත ඉ[$පO කල අවස්ථාෙ\ දැ?

ෙකmපයD ඇR Xනා. ඒ fසා මම තරෙහ+ කෑ ගසා පැSrYක3 ෙසායා යාමට හැJවා.

මට ඒ ෙවලාෙ\ ඇR } ෙකmපය fසා මාව පාලනය කරගැyමට ෙනාහැ= Xනා. එ8ට

lලස්ථාන ෙපාYස් පsDෂක 2මා මාව අUලා ගOතා. එ2මාෙp zහණෙය+ S/මට

උතසහ කලා…”

25. The 1st Respondent further states that the Petitioner was released on Police

bail around 5.35 p.m. on the same day.

26. The 1st Respondent further states that Petitioner has a history of violent

tendencies, including a charge of theft and complaints lodged by his wife on

getting assaulted by him.

27. Therefore, the 1st Respondent alleges that on the totality of the facts and

circumstances as herein described the 1st Respondent acted in good faith in

discharging his official duties and that as the HQI of the Kegalle Police

Station he had a primary duty to ensure that the Petitioner would not cause

any physical harm to himself, the other Police Officers or the civilians at the

Police Station.

28. Further, at the argument stage, the learned State Counsel appearing on

8

behalf of the 4th and 5th Respondents stated that an inquiry has been

conducted by the 4th Respondent on the 1st Respondent.

My Observations

29. Given the inconsistencies between the sequence of events presented to this

Court by the Petitioner and the 1st Respondent, I am compelled to, upon the

perusal of the material before me, note the following.

30. The Petitioner has not disclosed that he had any prior knowledge on the

cause for the inquiry which was to be held on 09.06.2016. He has also failed

to disclose the details of the related incident which took place on 15.05.2016

which concerns the same complainant.

31. However, upon considering the facts presented herein, I am convinced that

the Petitioner was well aware that the two complaints were connected.

Whereby I am inclined to believe the above non-disclosure was merely an

attempt to mislead the Court by the Petitioner.

32. Having resolved the inconsistency in the sequence of related events, I will

move to discuss any possible violation of fundamental rights.

Alleged Violation of Fundamental Rights

33. In the case of Velmurugu v. The Attorney General and Another [1981] 1

SLR 406, it was held that the standard of proof that is required in cases filed

under Article 126 of the Constitution for infringement of fundamental rights

is proof by a preponderance of probabilities as in a civil case and not proof

beyond reasonable doubt.

34. It was further held in Gunawardene v. Perera and Others [1983] 1 SLR

305 at 313 by Soza J. that:

“…It is generally accepted that within this standard there could be

varying degrees of probability. The degree of probability required

should be commensurate with the gravity of the allegation sought to

be proved. This court when called upon to determine questions of

infringement of fundamental rights will insist on a high degree of

9

probability as for instance a court having to decide a question of fraud

in a civil suit would. The conscience of the court must be satisfied that

there has been an infringement.”

Alleged violation of Article 11

35. Article 11 of the Constitution of Sri Lanka states:

“No person shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or

degrading treatment or punishment.”

36. Furthermore, Article 11 is an unqualified and non-derogable right as per

Athukorala J. in Sudath Silva v. Kodituakku Inspector of Police and

Others [1987] 2 SLR 119 at 126:

“…It prohibits every person from inflicting torturesome, cruel or

inhuman treatment on another. It is an absolute fundamental right

subject to no restrictions or limitations whatsoever. (…) The

police force, being an organ of the State, is enjoined by the

Constitution to secure and advance this right and not to deny, abridge

or restrict the same in any manner and under any circumstances (...)

It is therefore the duty of this court to protect and defend this right

jealously to its fullest measure with a view to ensuring that this right

which is declared and intended to be fundamental is always kept

fundamental (...) This court cannot, in the discharge of its

constitutional duty, countenance any attempt by any police officer

however high or low, to conceal or distort the truth induced, perhaps,

by a false sense of police solidarity.”

(Emphasis mine)

37. However, in assessing the claim of Article 11 violation in this instant case,

the use of minimum force by the 1st Respondent must be taken into

consideration. In the case of Kumara v Silva, Sub-Inspector of Police,

Welipenna and Others (2006) 2 Sri LR 236 at page 245 Bandaranayake,

J stated that:

10

“It is not disputed that use of minimum force will be justified in the

lawful exercise of police powers. However, the force used in

effecting an arrest should be proportionate to the mischief it

is intended to prevent. Notwithstanding the aforementioned it

would also be necessary to consider the injuries sustained by

the petitioner in comparison with the version given by the 1st

respondent.”

(Emphasis mine)

38. Section 23(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, No. 15 of 1979

reads as follows:

“If such person forcibly resists the endeavour to arrest him or attempts

to evade the arrest, the person matting the arrest may use such

means as are reasonably necessary to effect the arrest.”

(Emphasis mine)

39. When perusing the extracts of the Police Information Book, marked “R8”,

which I have reproduced at paragraph 23 of this judgment, it is evident that

the Petitioner has behaved in an unruly and violent manner at the Kegalle

Police Station when he was informed about the existence of the CCTV footage

in relation to the second complaint that was made on 30.05.2016. This is

further corroborated through the Police statement given by the Petitioner

himself, which is found at “R9”, which I have reproduced at paragraph 24 of

this judgment.

40. Further, as per the MLR dated 09.06.2016 it is evident that there are no

grievous injuries caused to the Petitioner either. It is possible that the non-

grievous injuries mentioned in the MLR may have been caused when the 1st

Respondent used force that was necessary to control the Petitioner, who was

behaving in the manner the 1st Respondent has stated.

41. Therefore, I am of the view that the force that was exerted by the 1st

Respondent was reasonable, necessary and proportionate to the behaviour

of the Petitioner.

11

42. In these circumstances, I declare that the fundamental rights guaranteed to

the Petitioner under Article 11 of the Constitution have not been violated by

the 1st Respondent of the instant case.

Alleged Violation of Article 13(1) and 13(2)

43. Articles 13(1) and 13(2) of the Constitution of Sri Lanka states:

"(1) No person shall be arrested except according to procedure

established by law. Any person arrested shall be informed of the

reason for his arrest.

(2) Every person held in custody, detained or otherwise deprived of

personal liberty shall be brought before the judge of the nearest

competent court according to procedure established by law and shall

not be further held in custody, detained or deprived of personal liberty

except upon and in terms of the order of such judge made in

accordance with procedure established by law"

44. Section 32 (1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, No. 15 of 1979

provides the categories of persons that may be arrested without an order

from a Magistrate or a warrant, which includes:

“(a) who in his presence commits any breach of the peace;

(b)…

(c)…

(d)…

(e)…

(f) who obstructs a peace officer while in the execution of his duty or

who has escaped or attempts to escape from lawful custody;

(g)…”

12

45. Further, Sections 36 and 37 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, No.

15 of 1979 govern the procedure to be followed when a person is arrested.

It states the following:

“(36) A peace officer making an arrest without warrant shall without

unnecessary delay and subject to the provisions herein contained as

to bail take or send the person arrested before a Magistrate having

jurisdiction in the case.

(37) Any peace officer shall not detain in custody or otherwise confine

a person arrested without a warrant for a longer period than under

all the circumstances of the case is reasonable, and such period shall

not exceed twenty-four hours exclusive of the time necessary for the

journey from the place of arrest to the Magistrate.”

46. In the instant case, as per the extracts of the Police Information Book,

marked “R9”, the Petitioner was arrested due to his violent behaviour at the

Kegalle Police Station and because he posed a threat to those around him.

This is evident in the Police statement given by the Petitioner himself.

47. Further, as per “R8” he was arrested at around 10.35 a.m. and was granted

Police bail around 5.35 p.m. as per “R9”. Thus, since the arrest did not

exceed the period of 24 hours, Section 37 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure is not applicable to the case at hand.

48. Therefore, I am of the opinion that due process was in fact followed by the

1st Respondent in making the arrest and that there are no violations of

Articles 13 (1) and 13 (2) of the Constitution.

13

Declarations

49. In the above premise, I declare that the fundamental rights that have been

guaranteed to the Petitioner under Articles 11, 13(1) and 13 (2) of the

Constitution were not violated by the Respondents.

Application is Dismissed

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

ARJUNA OBEYESEKERE, J

I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

M. SAMPATH K. B. WIJERATNE, J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT