1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for special leave to appeal from the Judgment dated 25.05.2010 of the Court of Appeal under and in terms of Article 128 of the Constitution and the Supreme Court Rules 1990. Prof. Desmond Mallikarachchi, No.118, Nivana, Kurundugahagoda, Pilimathalawa.

Petitioner SC Appeal No.120/2010 CA(Writ) Application No.25/2009 Vs 1. University of Peradeniya 2. Prof. H. Abeygunawardena, The Vice Chancellor, 3. Prof. A. Wickramasinghe, 4. Prof. P. W. M. B. B. Marambe, 5. Prof. K. Tuder Silva, 6. Prof. E. A. P. D. Amaratunge, 7. Prof. S. B. S. Abeyakoon, 8. Dr. W. I. Amarasinghe, 9. Prof. S. H. P. P. Karunaratne, 10. Prof. (Mrs.) P. Abeynayake, 11. Prof. K. N. O. Dharmadasa, 12. Prof. B. Hewavitharana, 13. Prof. (Mrs.) M. S. Chandrasekera, 14. Prof. A. D. P. Kalanasuriya, 15. Dr. S. D. Pathirana, 16. Dr. D. B. Wickramaratne, 17. Dr. P. Ramanujam, 18. Dr. Dushantha Madagedara,

2

19. Dr. Kapila Gunawardena, 20. Mr. D. Mathy Yogarajah, 21. Mr. W. L. L. Perera, 22. Mr. Mohan Samaranayake, 23. Dr. A. Kahandaliyanage, 24. Mr. Lionel Ekanayake, 25. Dr. S. B. Ekanayake, 26. Mr. L. B. Samarakoon,

1st to 26th Respondents of University of Peradeniya, Peradeniya. 27. S. K. Liyanage, 12/1A, Andarawatta, Polhengoda, Colombo 5.

Respondents AND NOW IN APPEAL BEFORE YOUR LORDSHIPS’ COURT 1. University of Peradeniya 2. Prof. H. Abeygunawardena, The Former Vice Chancellor, 3. Prof. A. Wickramasinghe, 4. Prof. P. W. M. B. B. Marambe, 5. Prof. K. Tuder Silva, 6. Prof. E. A. P. D. Amaratunge, 7. Prof. S. B. S. Abeyakoon, 8. Dr. W. I. Amarasinghe, 9. Prof. S. H. P. P. Karunaratne, 10. Prof. (Mrs.) P. Abeynayake, 11. Prof. K. N. O. Dharmadasa, 12. Prof. B. Hewavitharana, 13. Prof. (Mrs.) M. S. Chandrasekera, 14. Prof. A. D. P. Kalanasuriya, 15. Dr. S. D. Pathirana,

3

16. Dr. D. B. Wickramaratne, 17. Dr. P. Ramanujam, 18. Dr. Dushantha Madagedara, 19. Dr. Kapila Gunawardena, 20. Mr. D. Mathy Yogarajah, 21. Mr. W. L. L. Perera, 22. Mr. Mohan Samaranayake, 23. Dr. A. Kahandaliyanage, 24. Mr. Lionel Ekanayake, 25. Dr. S. B. Ekanayake, 26. Mr. L. B. Samarakoon, 1st to 26th Respondents-Petitioners of University of Peradeniya, Peradeniya.

Respondents-Petitioners Vs.

Prof. Desmond Mallikarachchi, No.118, Nivana, Kurundugahagoda, Pilimathalawa.

Petitioner-Respondent

27. S. K. Liyanage, 12/1A, Andarawatta,

Polhengoda, Colombo 5.

Respondent-Respondent BEFORE: Buwaneka Aluwihare, PC, J.

H. N. J. Perera, J. &

Vijith K. Malalgoda, PC, J.

4

COUNSEL: J. C. Weliamuna, PC with Pulasthi Hewamanna, Thilini

Vidanagamage and Khyati Wickramanayaka for the

Respondent-Appellant.

K. G. Jinasena with M. H. C. Mallawarachchi and Bowala

Harshani Lakmali for the Respondent-Respondent.

ARGUED ON: 21.03.2018

DECIDED ON: 25 .04. 2019

Aluwihare PC. J.,

The Respondents- Petitioners Appellants (hereinafter referred to as the

“Appellants” were granted Special Leave to Appeal against the judgment of the

Court of Appeal dated 25.05.2010. In the writ application, the Petitioner-

Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the “Respondent”) had sought inter alia a

writ of Certiorari to quash the decision of the Governing Council of the University

of Peradeniya to demote him from the post of Professor to that of Senior Lecturer-

Grade I. The Court of Appeal granted the said relief to the Respondent by issuing a

writ of Certiorari. Being aggrieved by this judgment, the Appellants—the

University of Peradeniya and Others—have come before this Court, stating that the

Court of Appeal had failed to consider and/or appreciate the question of

proportionality; had failed to distinguish between the demotion of the Respondent

to the grade of Associate Professor, and the revocation/annulment of the

Respondent’s promotion from the post of Senior Lecturer to Professor; had failed

to give any reasons for quashing the decision to demote the Respondent to the post

of Senior Lecturer-Grade I; had overstepped its lawful jurisdiction in not

dismissing the Respondent’s application inasmuch as the Governing Council of the

5

University had acted within its scope of disciplinary powers, had ignored the

submissions of the Petitioners on the relevance of the alternative statutory remedy

provided for by the Universities Act; had misdirected itself on the scope of the

doctrine of reasonableness/ unreasonableness; had misdirected itself on the

application of proportionality to the instant case.

Special Leave to Appeal was granted on the following questions of law: Sub-

paragraphs (a) and (b) of paragraph 12 of the Petition of the Appellants which are

reproduced below-

(a) Did the Court of Appeal err in granting prayer (c)- (by which the

Respondent sought a writ of certiorari quashing the University’s

Governing Council’s decision to demote the petitioner from the post of

Professor to the post of Senior Lecturer- Grade I)- to the Respondent’s

Petition (A1) filed in the Court of Appeal, inasmuch as the Governing

Council has acted within its disciplinary powers?

(b) Has the Court of Appeal misdirected itself on the application of

proportionality to the instant case?

Factual matrix

The Respondent was the Professor of Philosophy of the 1st Appellant University of

Peradeniya and an ex-officio member of the Senate, the University’s academic

authority. He had been appointed as the part time Director of the External

Examination Branch of the Faculty of Arts of the University of Peradeniya with

effect from 21st of January 2000. With effect from the 16th of August 2004 he had

been appointed, the Head of the Department of Philosophy and Psychology of the

Faculty of Arts of the same university. Around March 2004, one R. G. Piyasiri had

been appointed to investigate an internal audit query and the investigation report

6

submitted by R. G. Piyasiri had shown financial improprieties on the part of the

Respondent. Consequently, a charge sheet dated 09th November 2004 had been

issued, stating certain irregularities/ financial improprieties that had taken place

in the External Examination branch under the directorship of the Respondent. The

charge sheet had also stated that the Respondent had acted negligently and/or

fraudulently. An Inquiry Officer had been appointed to carry out an inquiry based

on the said charge sheet. While the disciplinary inquiry was in progress the Vice

Chancellor had requested the Respondent to step down from the post of the Head

of Department stating that as there was a disciplinary inquiry against him he

cannot hold the position of Head of Department. The Respondent had not complied

with this request. Regardless, a junior academic member had been appointed as

the Head of Department by the Vice Chancellor for a full period of three years

rather than on a temporary basis. The Respondent alleges that this appointment

was contrary to the Section 51 of the Universities Act and that this appointment

was made at the instigation of certain administrative officers who were unhappy

with steps he had taken to prevent the misuse of the facilities of the University and

the submission of fraudulent claims during his tenure as the Director of the

External Examinations Department. Consequently, the Respondent had filed Writ

Application No. 202/2007 dated 24th February 2007 (‘P5’) in the Court of Appeal

to obtain a writ of certiorari to quash the letter issued appointing one Dr. M. S. M.

Anes to the post of Head of the Department of Philosophy and psychology of the

University of Peradeniya and to obtain a writ of mandamus to appoint the

Respondent as the Head of the said department.

Meanwhile, the Respondent had also applied for the post of Professor of Philosophy

on 15th September 2005 and he had been awarded the position. On 31st January

of the following year, the disciplinary inquiry which commenced pursuant to the

aforesaid charge sheet (‘P3’) had been concluded. The Respondent however, had

asserted that he had not been informed of its findings. On the 5th of October 2006

the 2nd Appellant, the then Vice Chancellor of the University, had informed the

7

Respondent via a letter (‘P10’) that the Council had found him guilty of four of the

eight charges against him based on the investigation report and that he is warned

to refrain from committing any acts of negligence of duty in the future. The

Respondent states that he had requested the Vice Chancellor (2nd Appellant) to

inform him the reasons for the findings. He states that he further made an appeal/

application to the University Services Appeal Board on 13th November 2006 to set

aside the decision in ‘P10’.

On the 15th of March 2007 another charge sheet containing another set of charges

had been issued against the Respondent and he had denied all charges by his

response dated 15th June 2007. While an inquiry regarding the said second set of

charges was pending, he had been served with an amended statement of charges

(marked ‘P11’). At the inquiry the Respondent had inter alia raised two objections.

a) That even though the 1st Appellant University had issued both the charge sheets

marked ‘P6’ and ‘P11’ under the University Establishments Code it had not

conducted a preliminary inquiry as required by Paragraph 8 of Chapter xxii of the

same Code. Further, that approval had not been obtained from the Council under

Section 45(2)(xii) of the Universities Act and that the 2nd Respondent had acted

contrary to Section 34(4) of the same Act. b) That the appointment of the inquiry

officer had been contrary to the provisions of the Establishment Circular No.

UGC/HR/5/3/33(1) of 7th December 2004. He had also pointed out that whilst

the inquiry was pending, on 29th January 2008, he had been promoted as a

Professor, thereby becoming an ex-officio member of the Senate as well. The

University had requested him to withdraw the Court of Appeal writ application

202/2007 as he had been promoted to the post of Professor and he had acceded

to the request by withdrawing the said writ application on 20th August 2008.

On the 29th of October 2008, upon the report of the inquiring officer being tabled

at the 370th meeting of the Governing Council, a sub-committee comprising of the

25th and 26th Appellants had been appointed to consider the matter. One of their

8

recommendations had been to demote the Respondent from the post of Professor

to that of Senior Lecturer-Grade I. Based on that recommendation the Council at

its 371st Meeting on 1st of November 2008 had decided to demote the Respondent

to the grade of Associate Professor (per excerpts marked ‘P19’ and ‘P20’). The

Respondent had taken up the position that he had received reliable information

that thereafter, at the 372nd Meeting of the Council held on 13th December 2008,

the Council had, at the instigation of the 26th Appellant, decided to demote him to

the post of Senior Lecturer-Grade I. The Respondent states that the 26th Appellant

was not on good terms with him since he had, while he was the Director of External

Examinations Department, rejected a claim made by the 26th Appellant pretending

to be a consultant appointed by the UGC. He states that he had further learnt

through reliable means that the 26th Appellant had volunteered to be a member of

the Sub Committee which was appointed to examine the inquiry report submitted

by the 27th Appellant.

On 14th January 2009 the Respondent by the Writ Application CA/Writ/25/2009

(marked ‘A1’) had sought a Writ of Certiorari quashing both the decision of the

Governing Council to demote him to the post of Associate Professor and, the

subsequent decision of the same Council to demote him to the post of Senior

Lecturer-Grade I. The Respondent also sought an interim order (by paragraph (e’)

of the prayer to the writ application) preventing the 1st and 2nd Appellants to the

present Application (1st and 2nd Respondents Petitioners to the initial Writ

Application) from issuing the letter, demoting him from the post of Professor to

Senior Lecturer-Grade I, until the final determination of the same writ application.

The interim relief had not been granted but the Court of Appeal had issued notice

on the Respondents on 17th February 2009.

In the Statement of Objections in respect of the said writ application filed by the

Appellants dated 17 August 2009 (marked ‘A2’), they had taken up the position

that an audit query into the affairs of the External Examinations Branch had been

9

conducted with the assistance of the Auditor General’s Department and based on

the subsequent audit report of 26th June 2003 (marked ‘R2’) the Council had

appointed R. G. Piyasiri to investigate and report. The investigation report (marked

‘P7’) submitted by R. G. Piyasiri had been the basis for the Council at its 349th

meeting to decide to hold an inquiry against the Respondent. They have further

stated that the charge sheet marked ‘P3’ had been issued with the Council’s

approval and that the charge sheets marked ‘P6’ and ‘P11’ had been issued after

the findings of the audit report marked ‘R2’ had been approved by the Council

(excerpts from the minutes of the 361st and 363rd meetings of the Council ‘R4’ and

‘R5’). The Appellants had also stated that the inquiring officers had been appointed

under the relevant provisions of the University Establishment Code with the

approval of the Council and that the Council has the right to arrive at suitable

decisions regarding the Respondent, based on the findings of the disciplinary

inquiries. The Appellants had pointed out that issuing a letter of warning is not

considered a disciplinary action as set out in paragraph 4:4 of Chapter XXII of the

UGC Establishment Code. The Council had become aware that, as per the

Government Establishment Code, promotions cannot be given to officers against

whom formal charge sheets have been issued and that for that reason, the decision

to promote the Petitioner had been annulled, as evidenced by the minutes of the

372nd Council meeting (marked ‘R10’).

In his Counter objections (marked ‘A3’) the Respondent had stated that no decision

per ‘R4’ and ‘R5’ had been taken to issue the charge sheet (‘P6’ and ‘P11’) and

therefore no decision had been taken in terms of the UGC Establishment Code by

the Governing Council to conduct a disciplinary inquiry against the Petitioner. The

Respondent had also stated that the decision taken by the previous Council to

promote him to the post of Professor cannot be annulled on the recommendation

made by a sub-committee of the Senate and that the Petitioners had violated the

fundamental principles of Natural Justice by not issuing a ‘show cause’ letter to the

Respondent. He had averred that the applicable circular was the Public

10

Administration Circular 59/91 dated 13th December 1991 (marked ‘P23’) read

with UGC Communication Circular No. 69 (marked ‘P22’) and Establishments

Circular Letter No. 3/1992 (marked ‘P24’) and therefore the University had

deviated from the procedure of disciplinary actions approved by the UGC.

At the hearing of the case before the Court of Appeal, the Respondent had averred

that both the charge sheets (marked ‘P3’ and ‘P6’, ‘P11’) were contrary to the

Universities Act, the same having been issued without obtaining approval from the

Governing Council. The Respondent had further averred that the 1st Petitioner

University had failed to act in terms of the Government Establishments Code which

the University Grants Commission (UGC) had adopted by Public /Administration

Circular No. 59/91 dated 13th December 1991 (marked ‘P 26’) which provides

that “all public officers are required to comply with the provisions stipulated in

Part I and Part II of the Establishment/ Code.” Therefore, the Respondent had

argued that the two charge sheets were illegal, had no force in law and the inquiry

conducted and its report were bad in law and not binding on the Petitioner. He

had stated that the decisions to demote him are illegal, unreasonable and are in

contravention of the Universities Act and the disciplinary rules adopted by the UGC

and the principles relating to demotions.

The Appellants in turn had submitted that all steps were taken with the approval

of the disciplinary authority, i.e. the Governing Council, and that no illegality,

irrationality or procedural impropriety had taken place and that the Petitioner has

an alternative remedy provided by the Universities Act in as much as he was

entitled to appeal to the University Services Appeal Board. The Court of Appeal had

delivered its judgment issuing a Writ of Certiorari quashing the decision to demote

the Respondent to the position of Senior Lecturer Grade I but had not granted the

other relief sought by the Respondent, namely the quashing of the Council’s

decision to demote the Respondent to the Post of Associate Professor, the quashing

11

of the Council’s decision to impose an additional punishment to charge Rs. 53,

250.00 from the Respondent.

The decision of the Governing Council of the Appellant University

The first disciplinary inquiry on the charge sheet ‘P3’ should not be a concern for

this court since following the consideration of the inquiry report the Council had

decided that issuing a letter of warning to the Respondent was a sufficient measure

and no other disciplinary action had been taken.

Then it has to be considered whether the Council was correct in changing their

original decision to demote the Respondent to the post of Associate Professor. The

excerpt from the Minutes of the 372nd Meeting of the Council held on 13th

December 2008 (marked ‘R10’) reveals the basis for the Council’s decision to

annul the promotion of the Respondent to the position of Professor. It had been

noted by the Vice Chancellor that as confirmed by the letter No. UGC/HR/6/3/16

dated 24th November 2008 the provisions of the Government Establishments Code

are applicable to matters for which specific provisions have not been made in the

Establishments Code of the UGC and Higher Educational Institutions/Institutes.

Accordingly, Paragraph 14:12 of Chapter XLVIII of the Government

Establishments Code becomes applicable. The said provision stipulates that “when

a formal charge sheet has been issued against an officer for disciplinary action,

granting him/her salary increments, promotions, foreign trips and scholarships,

study leave with pay, loans and advances, no pay leave locally and abroad and

secondment should forthwith be suspended until the final outcome of the inquiry”

This means that the Council could not have granted the promotion to the

Respondent in the first place. Accordingly, the decision of the Council to annul the

promotion of the Respondent to the Post of Professor is not prima facie illegal.

However, the Appellants have not placed the said letter No. UGC/HR/6/3/16

dated 24th November 2008 before this Court. Instead Commission Circular No.

911 dated 14th May 2009 (marked ‘P34’) is produced. According to ‘P34’ the

12

decision that the Government Establishments Code should apply in all cases where

the UGC Establishments Code makes no provisions, has been made on 19th

February 2009 at the UGC’S 774th meeting. In that case, when the Respondent was

promoted on the 1st of February 2008 there was no such existing decision. The

Circular cannot be applied to the Respondent’s promotion retrospectively. Since

the Appellants have failed to produce a document that bears evidence that the

decision to apply the Government Establishments Code to situations of casus

ommissus was taken before the decision to promote the Respondent to

Professorship, their contention cannot stand. The Council has erroneously applied

the circular in that they applied it retrospectively.

To substantiate his contention that the University was in deviation from the

procedure of disciplinary actions approved by the UGC the Respondent refers to

the documents marked ‘R4’, ‘R5’, ‘P22’, ‘P23’ and ‘P24’. Out of them, ‘R4’ and ‘R5’

are extracts from the Minutes of the 361st Council Meeting held on 10th November

2007 and 363rd Council Meeting held on 17th August 2009 respectively. ‘R4’ states

inter alia that after considering the draft charge sheet the Council decided to give

authority to the Vice-Chancellor to issue the same after effecting necessary

amendments. Section 147 of the Universities Act defines a ‘Teacher’ as “a Professor,

Associate Professor, Senior Lecturer, Lecturer and Assistant Lecturer, and the

holder of any post declared by the Ordinance to be a post, the holder of which is a

teacher.” Section 45(2)(xii) of the Universities Act states that the Council shall

appoint persons to, suspend, dismiss or otherwise punish persons in the

employment of, the University, subject to the proviso that “except in the case of

Officers and teachers, these powers maybe delegated to the Vice Chancellor.”

Accordingly, the Respondent has correctly averred that he falls into the category

of ‘Teacher’ and therefore his disciplinary authority, the Council of the University

of Peradeniya, cannot delegate its powers regarding him, to the Vice Chancellor.

However, ‘R4’ and ‘R5’ records that the charge sheet ‘P6’ and the amended charge

sheet ‘P11’ had been perused by the Council at the 361st and 363rd Council

13

Meetings respectively and the Vice Chancellor had been given the authority to

issue ‘P6’ and the Registrar had been given instructions to issue ‘P11’ to the

Respondent. Therefore, the Respondent’s contention that as the Vice Chancellor

served the charge sheet on him while it is the Council that can issue a charge sheet

to him cannot hold ground. The Vice Chancellor was merely the means through

which the decision was communicated to him. The decision per se was taken by

the Council itself.

The Public Administration Circular 59/91 (marked ‘P23’) which made any

violation of any provisions of the Establishments Code and instructions in any

Public Administration Circular by any Public Officer a punishable offence under

Schedule A of Part II of the Establishments Code has been adopted by the UGC by

Establishments Circular Letter No. 3/1992 (marked ‘P24’). The UGC was

empowered to do so by UGC Communication Circular No. 69 of 3rd April 1980

(marked ‘P22’) which stated that the UGC and Higher Educational Institutions are

Public Corporations and that regarding Circulars and Circular Letters containing

decisions and instructions which deal with the management of internal affairs of

the UGC and the Higher Educational Institutions, the provisions of the Universities

Act No. 16 of 1978 would supersede those instructions. Where such instructions

are not inconsistent with the provisions of the Universities Act No. 16 of 1978 it is

open to the UGC and the Higher Educational Institutions to adopt and to act upon

any such instructions.

The charge sheets marked ‘P3’ and ‘P6’, ‘P11’ have been issued under Paragraphs

2:2:4 and 4:1:2 of Chapter XXII of the University Establishments Code. The

Respondent has drawn the attention of court to the documents marked ‘P22’ – ‘P24’

to demonstrate that the said University Establishments Code had not been approved

by the UGC at the time the charge sheets were issued. In addition, it has been

pointed out that in its Statement of Objections dated February 2006 (marked ‘P26’)

in the application no. CA 585/2005 the University of Peradeniya itself has taken

14

up the position that the UGC Establishments Code per its foreword “is only a guide

to the regulation of the administration of Higher Education Institutions”. The

Respondent argues that according to the decision made by UGC Communication

Circular No. 69 of 3rd April 1980 (marked ‘P22’) the provisions of the

Establishments Code are applicable to the Respondent and that the Appellants had

however framed the charges under the provisions of the UGC Establishments Code

which had not been in operation officially until the issuing of the UGC Circular

No. 911 dated 11th May 2009. The Respondent therefore argues that the failure to

frame charges in terms of the provisions of the Government Establishments Code

renders the charge sheet a nullity.

The Appellants state that the Respondent’s above submission- that the charge sheet

itself is a nullity on the basis that it was not issued under the Government

Establishments Code- cannot be relied on by the Respondent due to the fact that

the Respondent had participated at the inquiry held under the UGC Establishments

Code. The Respondent had however objected to the inquiry on the grounds of

improper procedure and inapplicability of the UGC Establishment Code as

recorded in page 1 of the Formal Inquiry Report marked ‘P27’. He had also stated

that he is appearing at the inquiry on the expectation of challenging this inquiry

before a court of law (vide page 5 of ‘P27’).

Furthermore, the Appellants point to the Minutes of the 371st Meeting of the

Council confirmed on 13th December 2008 (marked ‘R10’) where it was stated

that the Council decided to promote the Respondent on the basis that a person is

innocent until he or she is proven guilty by an appropriate administrative/legal

mechanism. The assumption had been that there was no specific provision

applicable regarding promotions pending disciplinary action. The minutes state

that a decision had been taken by the Council to approve the promotion subject to

initiation of appropriate action if he was found guilty in the case pending.

Countering this position, the Respondent points out that no such condition was

15

mentioned in the letter of promotion nor in the agreement between the petitioner

and the University. In the absence of any proof that it was in fact conveyed to the

Respondent that his promotion was approved subject to the condition that

appropriate action would be taken if he was subsequently found guilty in the

pending case, the Respondent’s version has to be accepted.

Preliminary Inquiry

The purpose of a preliminary inquiry under the Government Establishments Code

as set out in Paragraph13:1, Chapter XLVIII is “to find facts as are necessary to

ascertain the truth of a suspicion or information that an act of misconduct has been

committed by an officer or several officers, and to find out and report whether

there are, prima facie, sufficient material and evidence to prefer charges and take

disciplinary action against the officer or officers under suspicion.” It is further

stated that “The primary task of an officer or a Committee of Officers conducting

a preliminary investigation is the recording of statements of relevant persons,

examination of documents and records, obtaining of originals or certified copies

thereof…and making their observations and recommendations on matters found

out by them regarding the act of misconduct committed.” As per Chapter 13:12 of

Chapter XLVIII the officer conducting the preliminary investigation is expected to

prepare a draft charge sheet as per Appendix 5 of the Government Establishments

Code.

The Appellants reject the Respondent’s contention that no preliminary inquiry was

held, by force of the report විධිමත් විනය පරීක්‍ෂණය (marked ‘R6’) tendered by

Inquiring Officer one S. K. Liyanage, which includes an inquiry report, a summary

of the evidence given, notes of the inquiry and the documents tendered by the two

parties. This report goes over and above the scope of the purpose for which a

preliminary report is drawn. It presents an analysis of each of the seven charges

against the Respondent and gives a verdict that the Respondent is guilty of all the

charges except Charges 5 and 6. The conclusion that the report is more than a

16

preliminary report is further consolidated by the fact that the Council at its 370th

Meeting on 11th November 2008 appointed a Sub-Committee to study the report

and give their recommendations, which Sub-Committee later recommended that

the Respondent be demoted to the post of Senior Lecturer-Grade I.

The document dated 04. 06. 2004 and marked ‘P7’ is an inquiry conducted by R.

G. Piyasiri which can be considered a Preliminary Inquiry given that ‘P7’ gives

information on the errors and irregularities that were identified based entirely on

an examination of the documentation on payments regarding the series of

seminars held for the undergraduates on April 20, 21, 27, 28, May 11, 12 and

June 1 and 2. Further a recommendation had been made that disciplinary action

should be taken against the Respondent and several other members of the staff for

committing the errors and irregularities identified in ‘P7’. The Statement of

objections of the Appellants in the present case in the writ application before the

Court of Appeal at Paragraph 13 state that based on the Audit Query the Council

had appointed R. G. Piyasiri to carry out an investigation and report to the Council.

The Council had then decided to hold an inquiry against the Respondent based on

the charges recommended by R. G. Piyasiri. In addition, the inquiry had not been

conducted by S. K. Liyanage who conducted the Formal Inquiry.

Doctrine of Proportionality

The excerpt from the Minutes of the 370th Council Meeting held on 27th September

2008 (marked ‘R7’) indicate that the Vice Chancellor was of the opinion that as

the Director of External Examinations the Respondent “should not alone shoulder

the responsibility for these acts, as there were responsible officers down in the line

to assist and advise him in carrying out duties of this nature.” The

Recommendation of the Sub Committee appointed by the University Council

(marked ‘R8’) includes a finding by the Committee members that “although the

charge sheet indicates the charges as ‘grave offences’ we find that these were more

17

due to negligence and incompetence on the side of Dr. D. Mallikarachchi” and

“that this anomaly could have been avoided if the Senior Administrative Officers

and Senior Finance Officers … had advised Prof. D. Mallikarachchi regarding the

consequences of payments without following proper procedures.”

Notwithstanding these observations, the recommendation for the reversion of the

position of Prof. D. Mallikarachchi to the next lower post of Senior Lecturer-Grade

I was made based on considerations of “his position, maturity, level of

responsibility and all the circumstances surrounding the commission of offences.”

The punishment recommended by the Sub Committee was the demotion of the

Respondent to the level of Senior Lecturer-Grade I. The annulment was carried out

because it later came to the knowledge of the Council that the UGC Establishments

Code rather than the Government Establishments Code had been relied on

erroneously and that if not for that error, the promotion could not have been

awarded in the first place. In addition, an order barring the Respondent from

applying for a promotion again within the span of the next 2 years from the date

of the Council meeting i.e. 13th December 2008 was also made.

However, the letter dated 11th May 2009 titled ‘Promotion to the Grade of

Professor-The Council Decision on the Disciplinary Inquiry’ sent by the Vice

Chancellor to the Respondent states that the Council unanimously decided to debar

the Respondent from applying for the next promotion for two years with effect

from the date of the previous application for post of Professor i.e. 26th September

2005.

Whereas the recommendation to demote him to the Senior Lecturer grade would

have been disproportionate given the grounds the Sub- Committee itself has

mentioned in their recommendation ‘R8’, demotion to Associate Professor is the

punishment meted out and proportionate.

A 2-year bar from the date of the Council meeting would have been

disproportionate given that the Respondent was 64 years of age at the time of the

18

Council decision meaning that a 2-year bar would effectively prevent the

Respondent from applying for the post of Professor before his retirement.

This would not have been the least intrusive manner, especially in the context that

the Respondent had already been awarded the Professorship having obtained high

marks, he had held the post from 1st February 2008 onwards, had agreed to

withdraw the Writ application he had filed challenging his removal from the post

of Head of Department given that he was awarded the Professorship. However, it

appears that the final punishment that was meted out to the Respondent was

changed for the bar to run from 2 years from the initial application for the post of

Professor.

Wade and Forsyth in ‘Administrative Law’ explains that in challenging the

proportionality of a decision one aspect that has to be considered is the ‘necessity

question’ or whether the means used to impair the right or freedom are no more

than is necessary to accomplish the objective. “…the ‘necessity question’ is

interpreted as requiring only ‘whether a less intrusive measure could have been

used without unacceptably compromising the achievement of objective’ rather

than ‘no more than is necessary to accomplish the objective’.” (vide page 307 and

308, 11th Edition).

The Court of Appeal has held that the Respondent’s position about the non-holding

of an inquiry is not strictly correct and that disciplinary action could be taken

against the Respondent, but it has also held that “the punishment should not be

too harsh or excessive to make it disproportionate.” Given that the University

Council was fully aware of the Respondent’s capabilities and entitlement to be

appointed as Professor, the decision to deprive him of the Professorship was

considered by the Court of Appeal to be excessive and too harsh. For the reasons I

19

have set out earlier in the judgement I see no need to interfere with the above

decision of the Court of Appeal and further reiterate its position that “punishment

should in all cases be commensurate with the seriousness of the offence

committed.”

As such I answer both questions of law on which Leave to Proceed was granted in

the negative and being mindful of the just and equitable jurisdiction this court is

endowed with, hold that the quashing of the decision to annul the Respondent’s

promotion to Professorship by the Court of Appeal should not be overturned.

Appeal dismissed

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

JUSTICE H. N. J. PERERA

I agree

CHIEF JUSTICE

JUSTICE VIJITH K. MALALGODA, PC.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT