1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for Special Leave to Appeal under and in terms of Article 128 (2) of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

1. Wickremasinghage Francis Kulasooriya

2. Devamuni Lakshman De Silva

Presently remanded at; Remand Prison, Mahara. Petitioners SC Appeal 52/2021

SC (SPL) LA No. 410/2018 CA (Writ) Application No. 338/2011 Vs, 1. Officer-in-Charge,

Police Station, Kirindiwela. 2. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12. 3. W. Aravinda Perera,

The Magistrate of Pugoda, Magistrates Court of Pugoda, Pugoda. 3A. D. A. R. Pathirana,

The Magistrate of Pugoda, Magistrates Court of Pugoda, Pugoda. 4. Amaraginghe Arachchige Simon Amarasinghe,

172B, Siyabalagahawatta, Pepiliyawala. Respondents

2

And now Between 1. Wickremasinghage Francis Kulasooriya 49/1, Kathuruwatte, Mudungoda, Gampaha.

2. Devamuni Lakshman De Silva No. 246/A, Kudagoda, Horampella, Minuwangoda.

Petitioner- Petitioners Vs,

1. Officer-in-Charge,

Police Station, Kirindiwela.

2. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12. 3. W. Aravinda Perera,

The Magistrate of Pugoda, Magistrates Court of Pugoda, Pugoda. 3A. D. A. R. Pathirana,

The Magistrate of Pugoda, Magistrates Court of Pugoda, Pugoda. 4. Amaraginghe Arachchige Simon Amarasinghe,

172B, Siyabalagahawatta, Pepiliyawala. Respondents-Respondents

Before: Justice Vijith K. Malalgoda PC Justice E.A.G.R. Amarasekara Justice K.K. Wickremasinghe

3

Counsel: Shantha Jayawardena with Chamara Nanayakkarawasam instructed by S. Kaluarachchi for the Petitioner-Appellants

Rohantha Abeysuriya, PC, ASG, with Malik Azeez, SC, for the 1st and 2nd Respondent-Respondents

Pulasthi Hewamanna with Ms. Fadhila Fairoze for the 4th Respondent-Respondent

Argued on: 13.09.2022

Decided on: 14.07.2023

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J

The Petitioners to the instant application namely, Wickremasinghage Francis Kulasooriya and

Devamuni Lakshman De Silva had sought special leave to appeal against the Judgment by the Court

of Appeal in CA Writ Application 338/2011 dated 22.10.2018.

This Court after considering the material placed on behalf of all parties, decided to grant special leave

to appeal on the questions of law referred to in paragraph 10 (a) and (c) of the petition dated

03.12.2018 which reads as follows;

10 (a) Did the Court of Appeal err in law in failing to appreciate that in view of the

extraordinary circumstances, the Petitioners application was a fit and proper case for

the Court of Appeal to exercise its writ jurisdiction under Article 140 of the

Constitution?

(c) Did the Court of Appeal err in law in failing to appreciate that the mere availability of

an alternative remedy does not prevent the Court of Appeal from exercising Writ

Jurisdiction under Article 140 of the Constitution?

As revealed before us the 1st Petitioner was a Sub-Inspector of Police and the 2nd Petitioner was a

Police Constable serving at the Kirindiwela Police Station. According to the two Petitioners, while

they were on mobile duty on 13.08.2010, at about 20.55 hours they were informed by the Kirindiwela

4

Police Station that a person under the influence of liquor was behaving violently and causing a

nuisance to the public close to the Pepiliyawala Junction within the Police area of Kirindiwela. The

Petitioners who proceeded to the Pepiliyawala Junction in a single cab of Kirindiwela Police Station

arrested one Amarasinghe Arachchige David Amarasinghe for his unruly behavior under the

influence of liquor. When the cab proceeded towards Kirindiwela Police Station after getting him

into the rear portion of the cab, the suspect jumped out of the moving cab and was lying on the road

with bleeding injuries. With the assistance of the public, the injured were rushed to Radawana

Hospital. The injured who was transferred to Gampaha Hospital and thereafter to National Hospital

succumbed to his injuries in the early hours of 14th August 2010.

On the 14th itself, the Officer in Charge of the Police Station Kirindiwela had reported the facts before

the learned Magistrate Pugoda by way of a B Report. the Acting Magistrate before whom the B

Report was called, had made two orders, one was to the J.M.O Colombo to hold the Post Mortem

Examination and the other was a directive for the Police Officers who were on mobile duty on the

13th to be present before the Magistrate for inquest proceeding.

The inquest proceedings were commenced on 18.08.2010 before Magistrate Pugoda and the

evidence of several witnesses was recorded during the inquest proceedings. Some of the witnesses

who testified before the Magistrate gave versions different from what was reported to the

Magistrate in the B Report. After recording the evidence of several witnesses, the Magistrate made

an order remanding the two Police Officers who were engaged in the arrest of the deceased person

and discharged the Police Driver who drove the police cab at the time the deceased was said to have

jumped out from the police cab.

As revealed before us, on behalf of the two Police Officers (the two Petitioners before this Court) an

application was made for bail before the Magistrate on 23.08.2010 but the said application was

refused by the Magistrate as the investigations were incomplete at that time. The Revision

Application filed against the Order of the Magistrate too was rejected by the High Court Judge of

Gampaha on 24.11.2010. Magistrate Pugoda by order dated 28.04.2011 decided to commence a

non-Summary proceeding for the death of Amarasinghe Arachchige David Amarasinghe.

Whilst the non-summary proceedings were pending before the Magistrates Court of Pugoda, a fresh

bail application was filed on behalf of the two suspects before the High Court of Gampaha but the

5

said application too was rejected by the High Court on 25.02.2011 despite Hon. Attorney General

informing Court that there is no objection for granting bail.

In the meantime, the Hon. Attorney General had called for the original case record acting under

Section 398 (1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 (as amended).

As submitted before us, the Hon. Attorney General After considering the material available to him at

that time, formed an opinion that the said material was insufficient to establish a prima-facia case

against the two accused, (the two Petitioner-Petitioners before this Court) and has sent the following

instruction to the Officer in Charge of Police Station Kirindiwela by letter dated 28.02.2011 with a

copy to the Magistrate Pugoda.

mQf.dv ufyaia;%d;a wlrKh+ - kvq wxl 678$10

my; i|yka pQos;hskag reoaOj ;jrg;a kS;s uska lghq;= lsrSug woyia fkdlrk nj;a Tjqka

ksoyia l, yels nj;a ufyaia;%d;a fj; oekah hq;=h' f inkaOj ufyaia;%d;a wlrKh fj;

jd;d lsrSfuka miqj ta ms<sn|j wlrKh .;a l%shd ud.h f iu wuqKd we;s wdlD;sh uska

fuu ,smsh ,e osk ody;rla ^14& we;=<; oS ud fj; jd;d l, hq;=h'

1. W'fmd'm' l%uisxyf.a m%ekaisia l=,r;ak

2. fmd'fld' 47797 foajuqKs ,laIauka is,ajd

During the argument before us, the learned Additional Solicitor General who represented the Hon.

Attorney General took up the position that the Hon. Attorney General had made the above order

acting under section 398 (2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 (as amended) and

therefore the learned Magistrate was bound to act on the said directive.

However as submitted by the Petitioners, the learned Magistrate Pugoda had refused to act on the

above instructions, when the Officer in Charge of Kirindiwela Police Station had reported the above

position before the Magistrate on 03.03.2011. On a directive made by the Magistrate Pugoda, an

Officer from the Attorney Generals Department was present before the Magistrates Court of

Pugoda on 31.03.2011 and explained the reasons and the legality of the directive dated 28.02.2011

but the Magistrate had refused to act on the said directive. By his order dated 28.04.2011, he ordered

the non-summary inquiry to proceed against the two Petitioner-Petitioners.

As admitted by all parties before us the said order of the learned Magistrate was not a final order

but was amenable to the revisionary jurisdiction of the High Court. However, as it appears from the

6

material before us, neither the aggrieved party nor the Hon. Attorney General filed papers before

the High Court in order to revise the order of the Magistrate dated 28.04.2011.

However, the two Petitioners invoke the writ jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal and filed a Writ

Application seeking the following relief,

a) A Writ of Certiorari to quash the proceedings in case No. NS/577 in the Magistrates Court of

Pugoda;

b) A Writ of Certiorari to quash the order of the 3rd Respondent refusing to discharge the

Petitioners in Case No. NS/577 in the Magistrates Court of Pugoda;

c) A Writ of Prohibition prohibiting the 3rd Respondent from refusing to discharge the Petitioners

in Case No. NS/577 in the Magistrates Court of Pugoda;

d) A Writ of Mandamus directing the 3rd Respondent to discharge the Petitioners from the

proceedings in Case No. NS/577 in the Magistrates Court of Pugoda;

When the said matter was argued before the Court of Appeal, parties argued the jurisdiction of the

Court of Appeal to issue orders in the nature of writs against an order of the courts of first instance

and whether the Magistrate is bound to act on the directive issued by the Attorney General.

However, as a preliminary matter Court decided to consider, whether the Court should use its

discretion and issue orders in the nature of writs when the Petitioners had failed to make use of the

alternative remedies available to them. It was submitted that in the instant case, the Petitioners had

failed to make use of revisionary jurisdiction under Article 138 of the Constitution before invoking

writ jurisdiction under Article 140 of the Constitution.

Both remedies referred to above are remedies identified in the Constitution and the relevant Article

of the Constitution reads as follows;

Article 138 (1) The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise subject to the provisions of

the Constitution or of any law, an appellate jurisdiction for the correction of

all errors in fact or in the law which shall be [committed by the High Court, in

the exercise of its appellate or original jurisdiction or by any Court of First

Instance], tribunal or other institution and sole and exclusive cognizance, by

way of appeal, revision, and restitutio in integrum, of all causes, suits, actions,

7

prosecutions, matters, and things [of which such High Court, Court of First

Instance] tribunal or other institution any have taken cognizance;

Provided that no judgment, decree, or order of any Court shall be reversed or

varied on account of any error, defect, or irregularity, which has not prejudiced

the substantial rights of the parties or occasioned a failure of justice.

(2) The Court of Appeal shall also have and exercise all such powers and

jurisdiction, appellate and original, as Parliament may by law vest or ordain.

Article 140 Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, the Court of Appeal shall have

full power and authority to inspect and examine the records of any Court of

First Instance or tribunal or other institution and grant and issue, according to

law, orders in the nature of writs of certiorari, prohibition, procedendo,

mandamus and quo warranto against the judge of any Court of First Instance

or tribunal or other institution or any other person

The plain reading of any of the above constitutional provisions does not explain the characteristics

of each remedy but our Courts have decided/explained the parameters within which these remedies

will be available to an aggrieved party.

The revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal is further explained under Article 145 of the

Constitution as follows;

Article 145 The Court of Appeal may ex mere motu or on any application made, call for,

inspect and examine any record of any Court of First Instance and in the

exercise of its revisionary powers may make any order thereon as the interests

of justice may require.

When considering the above two provisions, it appears that the revisional power of the Court is very

wide but when implementing those powers our Courts were careful in discharging them.

8

In the case of Gnanapandithan and Another V. Balanayagam and Another (1998) 1 Sri LR 391 at

397 GPS de Silva CJ observed the following;

On consideration of the proceedings in this case, I hold that there had been a miscarriage of

justice, the object of the revision as stated by Sansoni CJ in Mariam Beebee V. Seyed

Mohomed. Is the due administration of justice. In the words of Soza J in Sommawathie

and Madawala and Others The Court will not hesitate to use its revisionary power to give

relief where a miscarriage of justice has occurred Indeed the facts of this case cry aloud for

the intervention of this Court to prevent what otherwise would be a miscarriage of justice

The words underline above are equally applicable to the present case.

I am accordingly of the view that the Court of Appeal was in serious error when it declined to

exercise its revisionary power having regard to very special and exceptional circumstance of

this partition case.

In the case, Don Chandra Maximan Elangakoon V. OIC Eppawala and another CA PHC APN 99 2006

CA Minute 04.10.2007 Sarath Abrew Judge of the Court of Appeal (as he then was) had observed the

tests that should be used in granting relief in a revision application. Whilst giving reference to a series

of cases decided by the Court of Appeal, his Lordship has identified some of the tests that should be

applied as follows;

The Petitioner should plead or establish exceptional circumstances warranting the exercise

of the revisionary power,

There should not be any unreasonable delay in filing the application

There should be full disclosure of material facts and show uberrima fide as non-disclosure is

fatal.

With regard to the powers vested with the Court of Appeal under Article 140 in issuing orders in the

nature of writs, it is well settled that when an alternative and equally efficacious remedy is available

to a party, the party should be required to pursue that remedy before invoking the writ jurisdiction.

9

This position was considered by Shirani Thilakawardena J in the case of Ishak V. Lakshman Perera

Director of Customs and Others (2003) 3 Sri LR 18 as follows;

Where there is an alternative procedure which will provide the applicant with a

satisfactory remedy the Courts will usually insist on an applicant exhausting that

remedy before seeking judicial review. In doing so the Court is coming to a

discretionary decision. Where there is a choice of another separate process outside

the Courts, a true question for the exercise of discretion exists. For the Court to

require the alternative procedure to be exhausted prior to resorting to judicial review

is in accord with the judicial review being properly regarded as being a remedy of

last resort. It is important that the process should not be clogged with unnecessary

cases, which are perfectly capable of being dealt with in another tribunal. It can also

be the situation that Parliament, by establishing an alternative procedure, indicated

either expressly or by implication that it intends that procedure to be used, in

exercising its discretion the Court will attach importance to the indication of

Parliament intention. (Emphasis by me)

Her ladyship had considered invoking the writ jurisdiction as the last resort. In the above

circumstances, it is necessary for the Petitioners in a writ application either to aver that the party

had exhausted the alternative remedy or explain why the party decided to invoke writ jurisdiction

without resorting to the alternative remedy available to them.

As observed by the Court of Appeal, the Petitioners before the Court of Appeal were silent regarding

their decision to invoke the writ jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal without resorting to the

revisionary jurisdiction of the High Court, which is an equally effective remedy available to them.

When responding to the above and whilst challenging the decision by the Court of Appeal, before

the Supreme Court, the Petitioners have submitted that;

a) Court of Appeal also conceded the non-availability of judgments where writ applications

were rejected for failure to exercise revisionary jurisdiction as an alternative remedy

b) The judgment in Halwan and Others V. Kaleelful Rahuman (2000) 3 Sri LR 50 relied upon

the Court of Appeal in the impugned judgment is also not a case where writ application

10

was dismissed on the basis that there was the possibility of instituting a revision

application

c) At the time the impugned order was made by the learned Magistrate refusing to comply

with the directive given by the Attorney General, the Petitioners were under continuous

remand custody and their bail application to the High Court had also been refused. In the

circumstances, the Appellants opted to come before the Court of Appeal by way of a Writ

Application as that would be the most efficacious remedy

d) Revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal under Article 138 of the Constitution or the

revisionary jurisdiction of the Provincial High Court in terms of Article 154 (3) of the

Constitution read with High Courts of Provinces (Special Provision Act No 19 of 1990) are

discretionary remedies

e) Litigant must establish exceptional circumstances to invoke Revisionary jurisdiction

and argued that there is no necessity for the Petitioners to give reasons before the Court of Appeal

when they invoke the writ jurisdiction since it was the most efficacious remedy available to them.

As already observed above, it appears that each remedy referred to above has its own characteristics

which need to be fulfilled when invoking the said jurisdiction. As further observed by this Court both,

revisionary jurisdiction and the writ jurisdiction are discretionary remedies and when granting such

relief, the Court will consider whether the party who invoke the relevant jurisdiction had fulfilled the

requirements to invoke the said jurisdiction.

A party who invokes the revisionary jurisdiction is required to satisfy Court that there are exceptional

circumstances for the party to invoke such jurisdiction and the Court will use its discretion when

deciding to grant such relief. Similarly, a party invoking the writ jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal is

necessary to satisfy Court that the said party had exhausted all equally efficacious remedies available

to them before invoking the writ jurisdiction. In other words, failure by a party to make use of equally

efficacious remedies available to them will become a ground for the Court to use its discretion and

refuse to grant such relief.

As further observed by this Court the party who does not wish to invoke the jurisdiction of an

alternative remedy available, the said party, should give reasons as to why the party had decided to

11

invoke the writ jurisdiction of such Court and the Court is free to make use of its discretion when

considering the reasons placed before Court.

The Petitioners argued, that the revisionary jurisdiction being a discretionary remedy where the

parties who invoke the revisionary jurisdiction need to establish exceptional circumstances, it cannot

be considered as an effective alternative remedy to oust the writ jurisdiction of the Court.

In this regard, the Petitioners tried to compare the appellate jurisdiction of the Court and argue that

the cases relied on by the Respondents before the Court of Appeal had been decided based on the

failure of Petitioners in those cases to make use of the appellate jurisdiction available to them by a

statute.

Unlike in a statutory appeal where the Appellant should act within a specific period and within the

framework identified in the statute, the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court has a wide range where

it will be available for litigants who do not have any other remedy to address them. It is well-settled

law that revisionary jurisdiction is available to a litigant when he failed to exercise his statutory

remedy within the stipulated period and also in a situation similar to the instant case where the order

challenged before Court is not a final order amenable to a final appeal.

As guided by the Court of Appeal in the instant case, I do agree and would be happy to be guided by

the decision in the case of Mariam Beebee V. Seyed Mohomed and Other 69 CLW 34 to the effect;

The power of revision is an extraordinary power which is quite independent of and

distinct from the appellate jurisdiction of this court. Its object is the due

administration of justice and the correction of the errors, sometimes committed by

this Court itself, in order to avoid a miscarriage of justice

In the above context when using the extraordinary power vested with the Court, the law requires

the Court to be vigilant on the wide discretion given to such Court and that is why our Courts expect

the parties who invoke the revisionary jurisdiction to establish exceptional circumstances under

which the party wishes to invoke the revisionary jurisdiction of the said Court.

12

Therefore, I cannot agree when the petitioners submitted that the revisionary jurisdiction is not an

effective alternative remedy since the party who invoke the revision jurisdiction need to establish

exceptional circumstances, whereas no such requirement is to be fulfilled when invoking writ

jurisdiction. The extraordinary nature of the revisionary jurisdiction as discussed above clearly

establishes that the revisionary jurisdiction is an equally efficacious jurisdiction when compared to

writ jurisdiction.

Even though the petitioners have failed to explain the reason for them to invoke the writ jurisdiction

of the Court of Appeal without resorting to the revisionary jurisdiction of the High Court, it was

submitted before us on behalf of the Petitioners that, the writ jurisdiction was the most effective

remedy compared to a revision application since the Petitioners moved the Court of Appeal to issue

a writ of certiorari quashing the decision of the Magistrate to proceed with the non-summary inquiry

ignoring the directive of the Hon. Attorney General and to issue a writ in the nature of a mandamus

directing the Magistrate to act on the directive of the Hon. Attorney General and discharge the

Petitioners.

As already referred to in this judgment, writ jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal too has its own

characteristics and the party who invokes writ jurisdiction must necessarily satisfy that the said party

had exhausted all equally efficacious remedies available to him.

Similarly, Courts are reluctant to grant orders in the nature of writs when the matters on which the

relief is claimed are in dispute or in other words when the facts are in dispute.

This was considered in the following terms by Ranasinghe J (as he then was) in a celebrated case of

Thajudeen V. Sri Lanka Tea Board [1981] 2 Sri LR 471;

A comparison of the respective positions taken up by the Respondents and the

Petitioner unmistakably shows that the claim of the Petitioner, that he is entitled to the

amount set out in his Petition, is denied by the Respondents and that such denial is not

based only upon questions of law alone. One of the main grounds of objections raised

in respect of the said claim is that the said sum of money is not, in fact, due. This

objection is one based upon questions of fact. The Respondents dispute the correctness

of the figures relating to the purchases of the green tea leaf. They deny that such

13

quantities of green tea leaf were in fact purchased as claimed by the Petitioner. The

very foundations of fact, which the Petitioner must establish to prove that he is, in fact,

entitled to claim the payment of the sum of money, which he seeks to compel the

Respondents to pay him, are therefore, not only not admitted by the Respondents but

are also very strenuously denied and disputed by the Respondents. The basic of

fundamental issues of fact the proof of which is essential, to the claim for the relief the

Petitioner seeks in these proceedings, have in the first instance to be established by the

Petitioner. In the absence of incontrovertible proof or an admission by the respondents

of such matters of fact, the petitioners claim to the payment of the said sum of money

cannot be maintained. All such disputed matters of fact must be resolved before a

mandatory order, such as is claimed by the Petitioner in these proceedings and goes

out from this court. The issuance of such an order carries with it the implication that

this Court is satisfied that the said amount is in fact due to the Petitioner and that there

is no question about the basic primary questions of fact upon which the Petitioners

claim is founded. When, however, such questions of fact are in dispute they can and

must only be settled by a regular action between the disputants before the appropriate

Court of First Instance. Such questions, the decision of which calls for the leading of

evidence, both oral and documentary, and the crossexamination of witnesses are all

questions that can be best decided by way of regular procedure falling within the

ordinary jurisdiction of the Courts of First Instance. (Emphasis added)

The Petitioners before the Court of Appeal had made the learned Magistrate Pugoda as the 3rd

Respondent in the said application and the 3rd Respondent in his affidavit submitted to the Court of

Appeal has taken up the position that there was no directive made by the Hon. Attorney General

directing the Magistrate to conduct and/or conclude and/or terminate the non-summary proceeding

under section 398 (2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979, as amended. Even though

the Officer in Charge of the Police Station Kirindiwela had filed a communication received by him from

the Attorney General, it was the position of the 3rd Respondent that the said communication cannot

be construed as a directive issued under section 398 (2)

As further observed in this judgment it was transpired at the inquest proceeding held before the

Magistrate Pugoda, that there were witnesses who contradicted the version given in the B Report

14

with regard to the incident that took place on 13.08.2010. These are factual matters that need to be

considered in a regular action but not in an application for judicial review.

When considering the matters already discussed in this judgment it appears to me that the Court of

Appeal was correct in refusing to entertain the application filed before the said Court, for the failure

by the Petitioners to invoke revisionary judicial of the High Court which is an equally effective remedy

available to them.

In the said circumstances, I answer the first question of law in negative. I will not be answering the 2nd

question of law under which the leave was granted since I cannot agree with the term used by the

Petitioners mere availability of an alternative remedy as against equally effective remedy.

As already discussed in this Judgment, the Court of Appeal was mindful of this fact and had correctly

decided the case.

The appeal is dismissed/ No Costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Justice K.K. Wickremasinghe,

I agree,

Judge of the Supreme Court

E. A. G. R. Amarasekara, J.

I had the privilege of reading the Judgment written by His Lordship Justice Vijith. K. Malalgoda in its

draft form. I am in agreement with his lordships final conclusion to dismiss the appeal without costs.

I intend to set down in writing following reasons to fortify my view that this appeal should be

dismissed.

1. The Petitioners case is based on the premise that the communication from the Honourable

Attorney General to the SSP Gampaha Dated 28.02.2011 is a directive issued in terms of

15

section 398(2) of the Criminal Procedure Code and the learned magistrate was bound to act

on the said directive. The Position of the Petitioners is that by refusing to discharge the

petitioners and proceeding with the non-summary inquiry made the proceedings before the

magistrate court ultra vires and hence the better remedy was to file a writ application when

compared with other available remedies.

2. For the reasons mentioned below, I do not see that the said communication can be

considered as a directive issued in terms of section 398(2) of the Criminal Procedure Code.

a) Firstly, it is addressed to the SSP, Gampaha Division and not the Magistrate. It directs

the said SSP to inform the magistrate that the magistrate may discharge the

petitioners since further legal proceedings are not intended against the petitioners.

This communication may be considered as a directive to the SSP to convey the

opinion contained therein to the relevant magistrate but it cannot be considered as

a directive issued to the magistrate as it is not addressed to the magistrate

concerned.

b) Secondly, the Contents of the said communication state that the magistrate may

discharge the Petitioners ( ). The use of the

word May indicates that it gives a discretion to the magistrate. The contents do

not compel the magistrate to discharge the petitioners. When the words used has

given a discretion to the magistrate, one cannot say that the proceedings became

ultra vires by not following the instructions. The character of the said communication

does not change merely because a state counsel appeared on a subsequent date and

confirmed the opinion expressed in the said communication.

Hence, the first question of law has to be answered in the negative and it is sufficient to dismiss the

appeal.

Appeal dismissed without costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court