1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

In the matter of a Rule in terms of Section

42(2) of the Judicature Act No. 2 of 1978,

against Alwapillai Gangatharan,

Attorney-at-Law

SC/Rule/03/2021

Edward Megarry

2nd Secretary-Migration

British High Commission

389, Bauddhaloka Mawatha

Colombo 7

Complainant

Alwapillai Gangatharan

No.361, Dam Streem,

Colombo -12.

Respondent

Before: Buwaneka Aluwihare, PC J

S. Thurairaja PC J

E.A.G. R Amarasekara J

Counsel: Anura Gunaratne for the Respondent.

Rohan Sahabandu PC with Chathurika Elvitigala Ms. Sachini Senanayake

and Ms. Nathasha Fernando for the BASL.

M. Gopallawa, SDSG for the Attorney General

Inquiry on: 02.06.22 and 26.01.2023

Decided on: 23 03. 2023

2

ALUWIHARE PC, J

A Rule was issued against the Respondent Attorney-at-Law, Alwapillai Gangatharan,

(hereinafter referred to as the Respondent) for the breach of Rule Nos. 60 and 61 of

the Supreme Court [Conduct and Etiquette of Attorneys-at-Law] Rules of 1998,

alleging that the Respondent, by the said breach, had committed deceit or malpractice

in terms of Section 42(2) of the Judicature Act, No. 02 of 1978.

The Rule was read out and a copy of the same was handed over to the Respondent on

23.05.2022, however no plea was recorded on that day and the matter was fixed for

the 02-06-2022. On the said date the Rule being read over for the second time, the

Respondent, at the first given opportunity, pleaded guilty to the same.

When the matter was taken up for further inquiry on 05-07-2022, the learned

counsel for the Respondent made submissions in mitigation on his behalf.

Before considering the matters pleaded in mitigation, we wish to place the facts

germane to the Rule.

A written complaint dated 12th February 2016 was made to the President of the Bar

Association of Sri Lanka by Edward Megarry, Second Secretary (Migration) of the

British High Commission in Sri Lanka (hereinafter referred to as the Complainant)

alleging deceit and malpractice on the part of the Respondent for furnishing a letter

dated 5th June 2015 falsely affirming the existence of a case bearing

No.28223/5/2008 in the Magistrate’s Court of Colombo, along with documents

purporting to be Summons to be served and a warrant of arrest issued by the Kotahena

Police station against one Machado, in order to mount support for a claim for asylum

in the United Kingdom for the said person. Upon receipt of this complaint, the

Administrative Secretary of the Bar Association, directed by the Chairman of the

Disciplinary Inquiry panel “11” of the Bar Association, by way of letter dated 26th

November 2016, required the Respondent to forward his observations regarding the

complaint, by way of an Affidavit. The Bar Association also informed the Respondent

that the inquiry into the matter would be held in camera., requesting his presence

along with witnesses (if any). On 6th December 2016, the Respondent filed an

Affidavit declaring inter alia, that he had not sent the fictitious documents so alleged

and that he had no knowledge of the ‘Kotahena Police Matter’.

Upon conclusion of the inquiry, the Report of the Special Panel of Inquiry of the Bar

Association on the matter was communicated to the Registrar of this Court by letter

3

dated 26th September 2018 by the Bar Association. The report detailed the following:

a. That the Respondent had admitted to issuing the letter dated 5th June 2015

regarding one Mr. Machado, who was unknown to him, affirming that Mr.

Machado was held at the Kotahena Police Station on suspicion of being

involved in the murder of Mr. Lakshman Kadirgamar, that the suspect was

produced in court and subsequently provided bail, that the matter was then

still under investigation, that there was a warrant of arrest issued on 17th

October 2008 against the suspect in Case No.28223/5/2008 in the Chief

Magistrate’s Court of Colombo.

b. That although the Respondent did not know the suspect, he had known the

suspect’s uncle, one Joe Fernando, both as a client and as a friend, and claimed

to have acted in the trust placed on Joe Fernando and one Raju (a private

secretary to former Minister Douglas Devananda) when issuing the said letter.

c. That a Law Firm, operating under the name and offices of ‘Nag law Associates’

based in the United Kingdom, operated by one Sakunthala, who was a cousin

of the Respondent and her husband one Naguleswaran, Attorney-at-law had

requested that he provide such details in a letter.

d. That an inquiring officer of the British High Commission had recorded a

statement from the Respondent on the matter, whereupon he had confirmed

that he issued such letter.

e. That upon inquiry by the officer of the British High Commission, the

Respondent had himself inquired into the matter and verified from the

Kotahena Police that there was no case registered under the number and no

warrant of arrest as mentioned was issued against Machado.

f. That the Respondent had not sent a letter of apology to the Complainant British

High Commission even after realizing that the representations he made on

behalf of Machado were false.

The Respondent had also admitted to the violation of the Oath of allegiance to the

4

Republic of Sri Lanka and the Oath he had undertaken as an Attorney-at-Law and

expressed his regret to the panel.

Proceedings were initiated against the Respondent before this court for the suspension

from practice or removal from the office of Attorney-at-law under Section 42(2) of

the Judicature Act, No. 02 of 1978 read with Supreme Court Rules (part VII) of 1978

made under Article 136 of the Constitution.

The learned counsel for the Respondent, making submissions in mitigation, drew the

attention of the court to the following matters:

a. That the Respondent had not previously been involved in any matter related to

discipline or professional misconduct.

b. That the incident would not have occurred if not for the trust the Respondent

placed in the Respondent’s cousin and his friends.

c. That the Respondent is 70 years of age, of good character, and has been in

practice since 1985.

d. That the Respondent now expresses regret and remorse over the matter and

offers an unqualified apology to the Court over his conduct.

The learned Deputy Solicitor General in his submissions invited the court to consider,

that the present complaint had been by the British High Commission, and had cast a

reflection on the legal profession. The learned Deputy Solicitor General also submitted

however that the Respondent had, from the onset, accepted responsibility for his

actions.

The Court observes that the representations made by the Respondent to the British

High Commission are matters of a serious nature and he would have known that the

material submitted by him, would in all probability be considered in deciding the

application for asylum by Machado and that the Respondent had the full knowledge

that the material supplied by him was likely to mislead the officials entrusted with the

task of processing the application for asylum referred to.

It is apt to recall the words of Justice Dr. A.R.B. Amerasinghe regarding the non-

exhaustive nature of the Supreme Court Rules, found in his book ‘Professional Ethics

and Responsibilities of Lawyers’

“The Sri Lankan Rules do not exhaust the legal, moral and ethical considerations that

should inform an attorney. No code of ethics is or is meant to be exhaustive. This is

5

generally accepted.” [Professional Ethics and Responsibilities of Lawyers, 2018,

Stamford Lake (Pvt) Ltd., Fifth Edition, p. 7]

Supreme Court Rules 60 and 61 of 1998 do not expressly address the situation

relating to the facts of the present case. They do, however, call attention to the

severity of the consequences when Attorneys-at-law do not accept personal

responsibility for their work or conduct. This court is entitled to examine and finds

instructive aid from the Codes of Conduct for Attorneys-at-law in comparative

common law jurisdictions. I have found that ‘Rule C20’ of the prescribed Code of

Conduct for Barristers in the United Kingdom, as it appears presently in Version 4.6

of the Bar Standards Board Handbook, comprehensively elucidates the parameters of

personal responsibility lawyers must exercise over their work. The Bar Standards

Board is the regulatory arm of the Bar Council of the United Kingdom, which is the

Approved Regulator under the Legal Services Act of 2007 in the United Kingdom. Rule

C20 of the Bar Standards Board Handbook states:

“…you are personally responsible for your own conduct and for your professional

work. You must use your own professional judgment in relation to those matters on

which you are instructed and be able to justify your decisions and actions. You must

do this notwithstanding the views of your client, professional client, employer or any

other person.”

As evident from the facts, the Respondent did not exercise personal responsibility over

his conduct and professional work. In fact, even after realising the grave error and

falsification he had been party to, he did not promptly notify the High Commission.

An Attorney-at-law cannot be excused from his duties and responsibilities upon the

mere trust and confidence that he had chosen to place upon his acquaintances over

his professional work, nor can he be excused for negligence in not bringing it the

notice of the British High Commission upon discovering subsequently, that the letter

he submitted was false in content.

The manner in which the Respondent has conducted himself in the instant case cannot

be treated lightly nor condoned. The only saving grace as far as the Respondent is

concerned is the fact that at the first given opportunity, he admitted his errant conduct

and expressed regret and remorse.

6

On his plea of guilt, the Rule issued against the Respondent, is affirmed.

Taking the totality of the facts and circumstances referred to above, this court is of the

view that the Respondent should be suspended from the practice as an Attorney-at-

Law and accordingly the Respondent is suspended from the practice as an Attorney-

at-law for a period of six months, commencing from today.

Rule affirmed in terms of Section 42(2) of the Judicature Act No2 of 1978

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

JUSTICE S. THURAIRAJA PC

I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

JUSTICE E.A.G.R AMARASEKARA

I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT