1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

S.C FR Application No. 608/2008

In the matter of an Application under and in terms of Article 126 read with Article 17 of the Constitution

Sarath Kumara Naidos 312/51, Moragodawatte Kesbewa, Piliyandala Presently at Remand Prison, Welikada. PETITIONER Vs.

1. Inspector Damith Police Station Moratuwa.

2. Police Constable Kavinda

Police Station Moratuwa. 3. Officer In Charge

Police Station Moratuwa. 4. Superintendent of Police

Moratuwa Division Office of the Superintendent of Police, Moratuwa. 5. The Inspector General of Police

Police Headquarters Colombo 1.

2

6. Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department Colombo 12. RESPONDENTS BEFORE: K. Sripavan C.J.

Priyantha Jayawardena P.C., J. &

Anil Gooneratne J.

COUNSEL: Ermizar Tegal for the Petitioner Asthika Devendra with Kameel Maddumage For the 1st to 3rd Respondents

Madhawa Tennakoon S.S.C for the 4th to 6th Respondents ARGUED ON: 01.11.2016 DECIDED ON: 19.01.2017 GOONERATNE J. This is an application filed on or about December 2008 under Article

126 read with Article 17 of the Constitution. Petitioner was a ‘Mason’ and a

married person with young children at the time this application was filed in this

court. In his petition, he admits that 3 to 4 years ago he was charged and

convicted of possession of ‘ganja’ to which charge he pleaded guilty. He also

3

asserts that he had no pending criminal cases, prior to the incidents described

in his petition. In the prayer to the petition, relief sought as per sub paragraphs

‘e’ & ‘d’ of the prayer, against 1st to 5th Respondents in terms of Articles 11, 12(1),

13(1) and 13(2) of the Constitution. Petitioner’s complaint is more particularly

focused on assault, torture, cruel and inhuman degrading treatment, by the

above Respondents. This court on or about 10.06.2010 granted leave to proceed

on alleged violations of Articles 11 and 13(2) of the Constitution.

The Petitioner in his petition filed in this court, refer to several acts

of assault on him by the 1st and 2nd Respondents along with some other police

officers (not named). It is pleaded that a woman who worked at a house where

the Petitioner had worked for about three to four months had met him and

inquired about house breaking and whether the Petitioner was involved. This

had led to a heated argument. On 5th July 2008 at about 2.00 p.m the Petitioner

was working at a site at Samagi Mawatha, Koralawella, 1st and 2nd Respondents

arrived in a three-wheeler with two other police officers, and directed the

Petitioner to accompany the police officers to the police station. When the

Petitioner asked the police as to why he is taken to the police the 2nd Respondent

assaulted him. Paragraph 4 of the petition describes several acts of assault on

the Petitioner. The several acts of assault by the police as pleaded and other acts

of the police are as follows:

4

(a) Petitioner was taken to the Crimes Division of the Moratuwa police

and he was beaten. Before moving him to a cell the 2nd Respondent

along with some other police officers lifted him and put him on the

ground twice, at about 7.30 p.m.

Petitioner’s sister and brother-in-law came to see him at the

police. Sister’s affidavit is annexed marked P1A.

(b) At 9.00 p.m Petitioner taken out of the cell and his fingers tied with a

lace, hung with the finger, while a chair was kept below his body. He

was kept in that position for about half an hour in the presence of the

1st and 2nd Respondents.

(c) On 06.07.2008 (as pleaded) Petitioner’s wife and sister came to the

police to see him. Petitioner informed both of them about the assault.

At 9.00 p.m. Petitioner was taken out of the cell and taken to the

Crimes Division. Petitioners hands were tied and put through the legs

and hung by a wicket which was kept between two tables (kept in this

position for 20 minutes by the 1st Respondent). The 2nd Respondent

and some other police officers had beaten the Petitioner on the legs

and feet whilst questioning of house breaking incident. Petitioner

denied such a house break-in incident. Petitioner’s brother-in-law also

came to see him and Petitioner informed his brother-in-law of the

above assault. Affidavit of brother-in-law marked and produced as

P1B.

(d) On 07.07.2008 Petitioner was again taken out of his cell by the 1st

Respondent and other police officers who took the Petitioner into

custody, threatened the Petitioner of assault. He was then beaten on

the hands and feet with clubs. On being beaten police asked about

5

some jewellery stolen from a house where the Petitioner had worked

previously.

(e) 1st Respondent also threatened the Petitioner and informed him that

a bomb would be introduced in order to keep the Petitioner in prison

for a longer period. Petitioner was unable to bear he being assaulted,

and informed the police he could return a gold chain. Petitioner told

his wife who visited him to hand over a gold chain which belongs to his

son, in order to obtain his release. On the same day Attorney-at-Law,

M/s. Shamila along with Petitioner’s sister, mother and a neighbour

visited him at the police station. Attorney-at-Law Shamila was

consulted by Petitioner’s party over his arrest. It is pleaded that due to

such assault Petitioner’s hands and legs were all swollen.

(f) On 8th or 9th July 2008 at 10.00 a.m the Superintendent of Police of the

area visited the Moratuwa Police Station. The Petitioner was hidden

inside the police mess. Petitioner verily believes that Superintendent’s

visit was as a result of a complaint lodged at the Superintendent’s

office, by his sister.

(g) On 10.07.2008 the house owner whose house was, alleged to be

broken-in visited the police. Petitioner was taken to Crimes Division

and was shown to them. Petitioner denied any involvement.

Thereafter the 1st Respondent on the same night assaulted the

petitioner with a cricket bat on his face, buttocks and legs.

(h) On 11th and 12th July Petitioner detained in the police station.

(i) On 12.07.2008 another Attorney-at-Law and Petitioner’s wife visited

the police. The 1st Respondent informed them that the Petitioner

would be produced before the Magistrate. Affidavit of Attorney Niluka

and wife produced marked P1C & P1D.

6

(j) On 13.07.2008 Petitioner was taken to the Lunawa Hospital as he

complained of a chest pain. But the Doctor did not examine his injuries

caused as a result of assault. Later Petitioner was produced before the

learned Magistrate. At that point Petitioner became aware that the

police had filed two cases against the Petitioner bearing Nos. 89984

(theft) and 90215 (possession of 2300 mg. of heroin) on 12.07.2008.

Petitioner was remanded by learned Magistrate. Court proceedings

annexed marked P2A & P2B. I also note the contents of the application

made to the Human Rights Commission by the Petitioner’s party.

On a perusal of the record I find that extensive written submissions

have been filed by parties on time bar. However on 29.07.2016, the Journal

Entry indicates that the learned counsel who appeared for the 1st to 3rd

Respondents informed court that the preliminary objections on time bar would

not be pursued.

The 1st to 3rd Respondents have filed objections, on 15th October

2010. The affidavits filed of record of each of the three Respondents appear to

be on the same lines. Allegations of assault and torture by the said Respondents

are denied. These police officers also maintain that the suspect Petitioner was

produced before the Magistrate within 24 hours of his arrest. The 1st

Respondent was an Inspector of Police and Officer-In-Charge of the Crimes

Bureau of the Moratuwa police at the relevant time and period. It is also denied

by these Respondents that the Petitioner has no pending cases. It is pleaded that

7

the Petitioner was charged for theft and possession of 30 mg. of heroin and

convicted by the Magistrate’s Court of Maligakanda and Colombo respectively.

Copies of the relevant M.C records are not produced since same had been

destroyed but certified copies of criminal records from the police station are

produced.

Moratuwa Police Station received a complaint of house breaking

and death threat on 11.06.2008. On 30.08.2008 facts were reported to the

Magistrate. ‘B’ Report No. 899 84 is produced as 1R5.

The 1st Respondent aver that he was on 12.07.2008 he was on a

tour duty in Moratuwa, Koralawella area with two police officers named in his

affidavit. He received information from an informant of transporting of heroin,

in the area. This was at about 20.00 hours. At 20.30 hours he arrested the

Petitioner at Koralawella having explained the reason for arrest. Petitioner was

thereafter handed over to the Moratuwa Police, Reserved Officer, and he left

for further petrol rounds. At the time of arrest the Petitioner had with him a

quantity of heroin, a gold chain and a pawning receipt.

It is the position of the 1st Respondent that having handed over the

Petitioner to the Reserved Officer he is unaware as to what happened

thereafter. It is further pleaded that the Reserved Officer, Gamini has testified

by an affidavit that there was no assault, torture or any harassment caused to

8

the Petitioner. On 13.07.2008 Petitioner was examined by District Medical

Officer, Moratuwa Hospital. Medico Legal Report does not indicate any injuries.

On the same day Petitioner was produced before the Magistrate, Moratuwa on

two charges. One was on theft and the other for possession of heroin. The 1st

Respondent produced marked 1R – 11 his investigation notes of arrest, etc. He

further pleads that the Petitioner never complained of any assault to the learned

Magistrate when he was produced in court on 13.07.2008.

The 2nd and 3rd Respondents by their affidavit support the position

of the 1st Respondent as stated above. The 2nd Respondent, was according his

affidavit on petrol duty along with the 1st Respondent at all relevant material

times.

The material furnished to this court, and submissions both oral and

documentary made by learned counsel on either side no doubt, are initiated on

two Magistrate’s Court cases bearing Nos. 89984 and 90215. The Judgments

delivered by the learned Magistrate in the said cases are also filed of record. (no

indication of an appeal). The said orders of the learned Magistrate throw more

light to the case in hand and assist the Apex Court to arrive at a decision

concerning Petitioner’s basic rights. On the side of the Petitioner the allegation

of assault, torture and degrading treatment are based and supported by

documents/affidavits marked and produced as P3, P1A, P1B, P1C and P1D. It

9

indicates that the Petitioner was very badly treated by the police from the point

of taking him to custody by the police up to the point of being produced before

the Magistrate. Police on the other hand seems to have been overenthusiastic

to fault the Petitioner at any cost.

The Judgments delivered by the learned Magistrate fortify the

position of the Petitioner. Medico Legal Report tendered to court on 10.03.2010

and the prisons hospital treatment sheets dated 13.07.2008 had been submitted

to court on 21.05.2009, they describe injuries consistent with the physical acts

of assault or torture complained by the Petitioner. I note the following points

considered by the learned Magistrate as follows.

Case No. 89984 (charged under Section 440 & 369 of the Penal Code)

Witness No. 1, in Examination-in-Chief describe the incident of a person being

found inside the house and causing her certain injuries to her mouth which

damaged her teeth in the lower jaw. Omission marked in this witness’ statement

to police regarding injuries caused to her teeth which has not been stated in the

original statement to police. Trial Judge disbelieve the witness and also observes

that the witness could not answer several questions posed by the defence, and

arrives at a conclusion that this witness never saw an incident of theft, and at a

certain point as admitted by the witness himself.

10

Occupier of the house also gave evidence, but the trial Judge

concludes that she was not able to identify any lost items. This witness admits

to making a belated statement to the police and deliberately conceal the correct

date of incident, and was unable to answer several questions in cross-

examination. This witness was shown the suspect at the police station, though

she could not identify the lost items. (This is a flaw for continuation of any

identification parade).

Trial Judge reject the evidence of the 1st Respondent (Police Officer)

who gave evidence before the Magistrate’s Court. Trial Judge holds that the 1st

Respondent has given false evidence before the Magistrate’s Court and express

the view that 1st Respondent be tried in terms of Section 188 of the Penal Code,

for giving false evidence. Trial Judge more particularly disbelieves the evidence

of this witness on the question of recovery of stolen items/goods, and the date

of arrest. Magistrate also refer to the contradictory nature of reports filed in

court and the evidence of the 1st Respondent which does not establish that

Petitioner was in possession of heroin. (particularly on 1st Respondent)

I would for purposes of clarity incorporate in my Judgment some

very relevant observations of the learned Magistrate, as follows.

11

fmd,sia mrslaIl ous; fmfrardf.a idlaIsh, fuu kvqfjS oS pqos;g tfrysj we;s

fpdaokd iusnkaOfhka i,ld ne,sh hq;=j ;snqKo Tyqf.a n,h whq;= f,i

mdjspsps lruska lghq;= lr we;s nj b;d meyeos,sh. tfiau Tyq wOslrKh

bosrsfha wi;H idlaIs os we;s nj Tyq jsiskau ms<sf.k we;. tfiau Tyq yria

m%YaK j,g W;a;r fouska fuu js;a;slref.a idlal=fjs ;snS fyfrdhska u;ao%jH

melgs 23 la fidhd .;a njg wi;H idlaIshla oS we;. ta wdldrhg wi;H idlaIs

oS we;s nj ks.ukh l< yelafla ta nj fuu kvqjg wod< wmrdOh

iusnkaOfhka fojk wjia:dfjs oS f;dr;=re bosrsm;a l, nS jdra:dfjs ta nj

ioyka fkdjsu ;=,skah. tfiau tu fpdaokd m%;slafIam lruska js;a;slre b;d

meyeos,s idlaIs oS we;. Uyq wOslrKh bosrsfha yria m%YaK j,g NdPkh fjuska

osjqreus msg meyeos,sj mjid we;af;a ous;a fmfrard hk fmd,sia ks<Odrshd oafjSY

iy.;j Tyqg tfrysj kvq mjrd we;s njh. tfy;a idlal=js ;snS lsisoq kvq

NdKavhla fidhd fkd.;a nj;a fyfrdhska melgs 23 u Tyq ika;lfha fkd;snqk

nj Tyq idlaIs oS we;. tfiau js;a;slre w;a wvx.=jg .;af;a 2008.07.05 jk

osk nj;a 2008.07.13 jk osk tkus brsod oskl js;a;slrej jsksiqre;=ud fj;

bosrsm;a l, nj;a Uyq wOslrKfha oS we;s idlaIs i;H idlaIs f,i ie,lsh

yelsh. th ;yjqre jkafka fmd,sish jsiska f;dr;=re jdra;d lsrsfus os js;a;slre

w;awvx.=jg .;af;a l=uk iA:dkfha oS fyda l=uk oskfha oS hkak wOslrKhg

jdra:d fkdlsrSu ;=,skah. thska ks.ukh l< yelafla fuu kvqfjs meusKs,a,

fjkqfjka idlaIs oqka fuu kvqfjs wmrdO iusnkaOfha mrSlaIKh isoq l< hehs

lshk ous; fmfrard hk fmd,sia ks,Odrshd kS;sjsfrdaOs f,i js;a;slre

12

2008.07.05 jk osk isg 2008.07.13 jk osk olajd fmd,sia isr ueosrsfha rojd

f.k tosk mqraj.dus jsksiqre;=ud fj; bosrsm;a lr we;s njh.

The learned Magistrate inter alia in his concluding remarks states

that the Petitioner was kept in illegal custody in the police station from

05.07.2008 to 13.07.2008 and had been during that period assaulted and

treated inhumanly. Magistrate also conclude that having considered the

evidence of the Medical Officer who gave evidence for the Petitioner from the

prison hospital, it is well established that injuries were caused to the Petitioner

and he was treated for same as an indoor patient at the prison hospital. The

learned trial Judge emphasize that during the period 05.07.2008 to 13.07.2008

the Petitioner was in police custody and within that period the Petitioner was

beaten and assaulted by the police.

Case No. 90215 (charge of possession of heroin)

It is not necessary to go into details in this case. Learned Magistrate

reject the prosecution case, and made observations detrimental to the police,

just like the case above (89984). Trial Judge refer to the 1st Respondent’s

conduct and fault him.

The learned Magistrate in no uncertain terms make it very clear

that the 1st Respondent’s evidence was false and it was a deliberate attempt by

him to conceal the truth. The police party seems to have made use of the court

13

to fabricate false charges against the Petitioner and bring the Administration of

Justice to disrepute, merely to achieve their purpose. Even a criminal and a

prisoner would be entitled to basic constitutional safe guards provided by the

Constitution. In Sudath Silva Vs. Kodituwakku (1987) 2 SLR 119 per Atukorala J.

“ Article 11 of our Constitution mandates that no person shall be subjected to

torture, or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment .... It is an

absolute fundamental right. ... Every person in this country, be he a criminal or

not is entitled to this right to the fullest content of its guarantee”.

I wish to observe that usually obtaining proof in this type of case is

no easy task due to reluctance on the part of witness to testify against law

enforcement authority. In Velmurugu Vs. A.G (1981) 1 SLR 406, Sharvananda J.

refer to the ‘Greek Case’ as described by the European Commission on Human

Rights. “There are certain inherent difficulties in the proof of allegations of

torture or ill-treatment. A victim or a witness able to corroborate his story might

hesitate to describe all what really happened. ...”However as regards the case in

hand there was no such difficulty due to good monitoring of all events by the

Petitioner’s party, notwithstanding the fact that the Petitioner himself had a

criminal record. A prisoner may be an outcast of society but he remains entitled

to all his civil rights in so far as they are not taken away by legislation. Raymond

14

Vs. Honey (1983) AC 1-10: Prisoner has a right of access to courts. Johnson vs.

Avery 393 US 483 (1969).

Evidence led before the learned Magistrate, reveal that the

Petitioner was not produced before court within the time frame permitted by

law. The Police made every effort to hide the truth. It is time for the law

enforcement authority to realise that a court of law cannot be misled so easily.

The material placed before this court by the Petitioner, establish

without any doubt that the police subjected the Petitioner to torture and cruel,

inhuman degrading treatment. I wish to observe, more particularly that the 1st

Respondent was responsible for such inhuman acts, but he alone cannot be held

responsible as there were other police officers who assisted and took part to

cause injuries to the Petitioner. Nor was the Petitioner produced before the

Magistrate according to law. As such I hold that both 1st and 2nd Respondents

have infringed the Petitioner’s fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 11

and 13(2) of the Constitution. I am also of the view that the state should be held

strictly liable as all inhuman acts of assault on the Petitioner occurred during the

period the Petitioner was in police custody. I direct and Order both the 1st and

2nd Respondents to pay personally a sum of Rs. 100,000/- each to the

15

Petitioner as compensation. I also Order the State to pay a sum of Rs. 100,000/-

as compensation, to the Petitioner. Thus the Petitioner will receive a total sum

of Rs. 300,000/- as compensation. All payments to be made within four weeks

from today.

Application allowed with costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

K. Sripavan C.J.

I agree.

CHIEF JUSTICE

Priyantha Jayawardena P.C., J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT