1

In the Supreme Court of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

In the matter of an Application under

and by virtue of Articles 17 and 126 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka

Malka Denethi

Attorney-at-Law

No. 305/11, Janatha Mawatha,

Werahera,

Boralasgamuwa.

Petitioner

SC FR Application No. 411/2021

Vs.

1. K.S.K. Rupasinghe

Senior Superintendent of Police,

Nugegoda Police Division,

Nugegoda.

2. Police Officer No. 48513

C/O Deputy Inspector General

(Western – South),

DIG Office – Western Province

(South),

Nugegoda.

3. K.G. Wijerathne

2

Inspector of Police,

Officer-in-Charge,

Police Station,

Boralesgamuwa.

4. Asiri Jayasooriya

Sub-Inspector,

Miscellaneous Complaints Unit (MO

Branch),

Police Station,

Boralesgamuwa.

5. C.D. Wickramarathna

Inspector General of Police,

Sri Lanka Police Headquarters,

Colombo 1.

6. Rajeev Amarasooriya

Attorney-at-Law,

Secretary,

Bar Association of Sri Lanka,

No. 153, Mihindu Mawatha,

Colombo 12.

7. Dona Anushka Dilani Kannangara

No. 192/3, 2nd Lane,

Egodawaththa,

Boralesgamuwa.

3

8. Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondents

Before: Hon. Yasantha Kodagoda, PC, J.

Hon. A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J.

Appearance: Naveen Mahaarachchi with Chanuka Ekanayake for the Petitioner.

Varunika Hettige, Senior Deputy Solicitor General for the 1st to 8th

Respondents, excluding the 7th Respondents.

7th Respondent absent and unrepresented.

Saliya Pieris, PC, President of the Bar Association of Sri Lanka

appeared as amicus.

Supported on: 3rd November, 2022

Order delivered on: 22nd, November, 2022

Order of Court

The Petitioner is an Attorney-at-Law, engaged primarily in criminal practice. In his

Petition to this Court, he complains that one or more of the Respondents have infringed

his Fundamental Rights guaranteed in terms of Articles 11, 12(1) and 14(1)(g) of the

Constitution.

4

Albeit brief, the Petitioner’s narrative is as follows:

On 13th November 2021, the 7th Respondent sought his professional services to represent

her at the Boralesgamuwa Police Station at an ‘inquiry’ (No. MCR 2237/21) into a ‘land

dispute’ among her family members scheduled for the same day. The Petitioner agreed

to provide his professional services. Accordingly, along with the 7th Respondent, the

Petitioner proceeded to the Boralesgamuwa Police Station for the purpose of representing

his client (7th Respondent) at the afore-stated ‘inquiry’. He had been dressed in a white

long-sleeves shirt, black trousers and had worn a black tie, which he has stated is the

usual attire an Attorney-at-Law wears when going to a Police Station to perform

professional services. At the Police Station, both of them had been directed to the office-

room of the Officer-in-Charge of the Police Station (3rd Respondent) in which the 1st

Respondent had been seated in the chair of the 3rd Respondent. The other disputant

(being the mother of the 7th Respondent) had also come into the room. The 1st Respondent

had inquired from the Petitioner who he was, and he had introduced himself and

explained that he was representing the 7th Respondent. The 1st Respondent had

immediately directed the Petitioner to move out and stay outside the room. The Petitioner

refused to do so. The Petitioner alleges that from this point onwards the 1st Respondent

acted in a hostile manner towards him. The Petitioner had insisted that he had a

professional entitlement to represent the 7th Respondent at the ‘inquiry’ that was to take

place. The Petitioner claims that during the ensuing interaction with the 1st Respondent,

the latter (i) threatened the Petitioner that action will be taken against him for obstruction

of the 1st Respondent’s duties, (ii) threatened that he will be put into the cell, (iii) informed

that the Police will object to his appearance in Court in related court proceedings, (iv)

instructed other Police Officers to take into their possession the Petitioner’s mobile phone,

and (v) was abusive and hostile towards the Petitioner.

A transcript of what happened inside the room with references to what was said by the

Petitioner, the 1st Respondent and some of the other Respondents, is attached to the

Petition. Learned counsel for the Petitioner drew the attention of the Court to excepts

5

from it. The transcript emanates out of an audio recording, which the Petitioner had

surreptitiously recorded using his mobile phone. When the Petition was Supported,

learned Counsel for the Petitioner submitted that he agreed with Court that an Attorney-

at-Law while discharging his professional services should not engage in the surreptitious

recording of a conversation, notwithstanding its possible evidential value.

Learned Counsel for the Petitioner submitted that the conduct of the 1st Respondent

Senior Superintendent of Police was in violation of the Petitioner’s professional

entitlements arising out of Rules made by the Inspector General of Police under section

55 of the Police Ordinance, published in Gazette No. 1758/36, of 18th May 2012. He further

submitted that the 1st Respondent had acted in a degrading manner towards the

Petitioner. He stressed that the 1st Respondent had infringed the Petitioner’s

Fundamental Right guaranteed in terms of Articles 11, 12 and 14(1)(g) of the Constitution.

In response to the submissions made by learned counsel for the Petitioner, learned Senior

Deputy Solicitor General submitted that what the Respondent Police Officers had

attempted to engage in, was an ‘inquiry’ into a dispute of civil nature between the 7th

Respondent and her mother. She further submitted that the Police had not conducted an

‘investigation’ into the committing of an offence or the occurrence of a breach of the

peace. She did not contest the authenticity of the transcript pertaining to the events that

are alleged to have taken place inside the office-room of the Officer-in-Charge of the

Boralesgamuwa Police Station. When inquired by Court, learned Senior DSG submitted

that as at now, the Police do not have any legal, regulatory or administrative framework

based upon which such ‘inquiries’ are to be conducted, though engaging in dispute

resolution was aimed at preventing disputes being aggravated and resulting in the

committing of offences and the occurrence of possible breach of the peace. She submitted

that therefore the conduct of such ‘inquiries’ was most desirable, as it was aimed at the

settlement of disputes.

6

When this matter was Supported, the President of the Bar Association of Sri Lanka was

present in Court with regard to another matter. As the core allegation submitted by the

Petitioner relates to the discharge of professional services by Attorneys-at-Law and the

conduct of Police Officers towards Attorneys-at-Law, and as it was felt that his

submissions would also be useful to enable the Court to decide on a suitable course of

action to be taken with regard to the Petition, Mr. Pieris was invited to assist Court as

amicus. He submitted that there were similar instances that had been brought to his

attention, where Attorneys-at-Law who went to Police Stations had to encounter various

forms of harassment and difficulties, which prevented or obstructed them from

discharging professional duties towards their clients. He said that such obstructions

resulted in the Fundamental Rights of suspects being infringed and Attorneys-at-Law

being prevented from discharging their professional services which also amounts to the

infringement of the Fundamental Right of such Attorneys-at-Law guaranteed under

Article 14(1)(g). He submitted that in August 2022, he had the occasion to write to the

Inspector General of Police calling upon him to ensure that the arrest of suspects is carried

out strictly in terms of the law, and that rights of suspects arrested to have access to

Attorneys-at-Law be respected and facilitated by Police Officers.

On a consideration of the submissions made by all three learned counsel and the material

placed before this Court, it is observable that the 1st Respondent has acted towards the

Petitioner in an offensive, improper and undignified manner and that his conduct has

hampered the Petitioner from discharging his professional services on behalf of his client

- the 7th Respondent.

When Court inquired from the learned counsel for the Petitioner whether his client would

be content if the Inspector General of Police were to be directed to conduct an inquiry

into the matter and also put in place a comprehensive, legally enforceable regulatory

framework (a) with regard to the conduct of ‘inquiries’ into disputes between parties, (b)

to ensure that persons who are called upon to participate at such ‘inquiries’ in the nature

7

of the ‘inquiry’ referred to in the Petition, have the entitlement to be represented by an

Attorney-at-Law of their choice, (c) that would enable Attorneys-at-Law receive an

appropriate opportunity of representing their clients at such ‘inquiry’, and (d) to ensure

that Attorneys-at-Law receive an effective opportunity to make representations to the

Police on behalf of suspects who are arrested and or interviewed by the Police, learned

Counsel responded in the affirmative. Both the learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General

and the President of the Bar Association of Sri Lanka submitted that it would be most

appropriate for the Inspector General of Police to be directed to issue such a legally

recognized comprehensive regulatory framework.

Court notes that the afore-mentioned Gazette notification bearing No. 1758/36

containing Rules, is also the outcome of an Order made by this Court relating to certain

proceedings similar to the present Application.

In view of the foregoing, without granting leave to proceed at this stage, in the form of

interim orders, the Inspector General is hereby directed to comply with the following:

(i) Conduct an independent, impartial and comprehensive inquiry into the

incident referred to in the Petition, and submit such inquiry proceedings

together with his findings and recommendations to the National Police

Commission, for necessary action.

(ii) Report to this Court on the action taken by him with regard to the above

directive and the subsequent action taken by the National Police Commission.

(iii) Establish a Committee comprising of senior Police Officers, nominees of the

Honourable Attorney General and nominees of the President of the Bar

Association of Sri Lanka, to formulate a regulatory framework regarding the

following:

8

a. Conduct of inquiries into disputes (disputes specified in such framework)

for the purpose of securing amicable settlement of such disputes through

fact finding mechanisms such as inquiry and dispute resolution

mechanisms such as mediation and conciliation, with the view to

preventing the escalation of such disputes into a breach of the peace or the

committing of offences.

b. Participation of Attorneys-at-Law representing disputant parties at such

inquiries.

c. Permitting a suspect who is under investigation by the Police for having

committed an offence and in the custody of the Police, to have access to an

Attorney-at-Law while such suspect is in Police custody.

d. Providing for the entitlement of an Attorney-at-Law to ascertain from the

Officer-in-Charge of a Police Station the following information pertaining

to his client who is suspected of having committed an offence, and to make

appropriate representations on behalf of such suspect:

i. The allegation against his client.

ii. If the suspect has been arrested and is in Police custody, the date,

approximate time and place at which the client of the Attorney-at-

Law (who is suspected of having committed an offence) is to be

produced before a Magistrate.

e. Providing specific opportunity to Attorneys-at-Law to make

representations on behalf of their clients to Officers-in-Charge of Police

Stations / Police Investigation Officers.

(iv) The Committee should be invited to consider receiving views of the general

Public and representations by concerned civil society organizations, so that

their views regarding the framework to be developed by the Committee could

be taken into consideration.

9

(v) Upon the finalization of the applicable legal and regulatory framework by the

Committee and presentation of their Report to the Inspector General of Police,

should the Inspector General of Police be agreeable with the recommended

framework, to take necessary steps to promulgate and publish them in the form

of Rules made in accordance with section 55 of the Police Ordinance.

(vi) On or before 31st March 2023, report to this Court on action taken in terms of

this Order.

The Registrar is directed to forthwith forward copies of this Order to the following:

(i) Honourable Attorney General

(ii) Inspector General of Police

(iii) President, Bar Association of Sri Lanka

(iv) Petitioner and to his Counsel

The Registrar is directed to have this matter Mentioned on 3rd April 2023, at 9.45am before

this bench.

Yasantha Kodagoda, PC

Judge of the Supreme Court

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne

Judge of the Supreme Court