1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

SC. Appeal 34/2015 SC (SPL) LA Application No. 59/2014 CA Appeal No. CA 33/2008 HC Hambantota Case No. 363/2006

In an Application for Special Leave to Appeal under Section 9 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990 as Amended read with Articles 128 & 154P 3(b) of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka COMPLAINANT Vs. Kattadige Amarasena ACCUSED AND BETWEEN Kattadige Amarasena ACCUSED-APPELLANT Vs. The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT AND NOW BETWEEN Kattadige Amarasena ACCUSED-APPELLANT-APPELLANT Vs.

2

The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT BEFORE: Priyasath Dep P.C., C.J.

Priyantha Jayawardena P.C., J. &

Anil Gooneratne J.

COUNSEL: R. Arsecularatne P.C. for Accused-Appellant-Petitioner Warantha Bandaa P.C., A.S.G. for Complainant-Respondent-Respondent ARGUED ON: 04.10.2017 DECIDED ON: 13.12.2017 GOONERATNE J. In this case the Accused is charged for having murdered his wife on

or about 20.11.2005 in very close proximity to the Tangalle Police Station.

Accused-Appellant is an Attorney-at-Law. In the course of the trial before the

High Court the Accused-Appellant had pleaded the mitigatory plea of grave and

sudden provocation, but the State Counsel refused to accept such a plea and the

trial proceeded and ultimately the accused was found guilty of murder and

sentenced to death. The accused being aggrieved of the conviction and sentence

appealed to the Court of Appeal. However as referred to in the submissions of

3

the State, in the Court of Appeal learned counsel for the accused confined the

case to the availability of a mitigating plea of continuing cumulative provocation.

The Court of Appeal rejected the plea and affirmed the conviction and sentence.

Supreme Court on 19.02.2015 granted Special Leave to Appeal on

questions (a) and (b) set out in paragraph 25 of the petition.

It reads thus:

(a) Whether their Lordships of the Court of Appeal erred in law by holding

that the entertainment of a murderous intention disentitles the Petitioner

to the mitigatory plea of grave and sudden provocation contained in

exception 1 of Section 294 of the Penal Code.

(b) Whether their Lordships of the Court of Appeal erred in law by holding

the fact that the Petitioner after being provoked by the words “WU

fldfydu yrs ysfrag hj,d miai n,kafka” (“I will only look behind after

sending you to jail”) the Petitioner going to purchase a knife disentitles

him to the mitigatory plea of grave and sudden provocation set out in

exception one (1) of Section 294 of the Penal Code.

Learned President’s Counsel for the accused raised another question of

law, as follows:

“Whether the accused was entitled to the plea of cumulative provocation

having regard to the facts that preceded the incident.

The learned President’s Counsel in his submissions states there is

no disagreement between the prosecution and the defence that the accused

4

caused the injuries to his deceased wife on the day of the incident on the

evidence of the eye witnesses.

The facts of this case, as gathered from the available material are

as follows. The Appellant was an Attorney-at-Law practising in Walasmulla

Courts. The Appellant married the deceased in the year 2001 and had a child by

that marriage. They resided at the parental house till about May 2003 and

thereafter the Appellant purchased a land and built a two storied house at

Middeniya in the name of his wife. There is evidence to the effect that a person

called Upul Shantha Wijesinghe alia ‘Sudha’ was employed as a driver by the

Appellant. The said Wijesinghe was a relative of the deceased. It is alleged that

the deceased had an affair with the said driver. By 2004 the Appellant gave up

his practice as a lawyer and got employed at an estate in Hiniduma as Assistant

Superintendent, leaving his wife and children at Hallmilla, Ketiya, in the parental

house of the deceased.

In or about May 2005 the Appellant had returned from the

workplace to find that the deceased wife and child was missing from the

parental house and the brother of the deceased had made a complaint to the

Middeniya Police. Appellant was informed that his wife had gone to Urubokka

and was living with the said driver and continued the illicit affair with him. Later

5

on the deceased wife returned to the parental house but there were altercations

between the two and continued to live at the parental house.

I will at this point of the Judgment get on to the incident. The

learned President’s Counsel for the Accused-Appellant states in the written

submissions that there is no disagreement between the prosecution and the

defence, as regards the injuries caused to the deceased.

In the dock statement the accused inter alia state that the deceased

informed over the telephone that a complaint would be lodged in the Middeniya

Police regarding the transfer of the house. Accused pleaded with the deceased

that he be left alone without harassing him. In order to give more clarity to this

I would incorporate the words stated therein as follows:

bkamiqj uu 2005.11.20 jk osk brsod weh oqrl;k weu;=ula ,dnd oqkakd

Bg fmr osk lSysmhlg u;af;ka wehg brsod oskh jk jsg usoafoksh fmd,sisfha

meusKs,a,la odkjd f.a mjrd .eKsu iusnkaOfhka lsh,d. bkamiq uu wehg

oekqus oqkakd ug lror lrkak tmd mdvqfjs ug bkak fokak ksh,d. weh ta

lsisu fohla wyk mdgla fmakak ;snqfka keye.

Thereafter the accused borrowed a motor cycle from a friend and

proceeded to the Middeniya police station. The police informed the accused

that she did not come to the Middeniya police but advised him that it is possible

that she had gone to the Tangalle police. Accused left for Tangalle and at the

Tangalle police he was told that a complaint would be lodged. As such the

6

accused pleaded with the deceased not to make any complaint and that he

would give anything to her provided the accused is left alone. Deceased replied

“WU fldfydu yrs ysfrag hj,d miai n,kafka” (as stated in the dock

statement).

It is also necessary to consider material evidence of the few

witnesses who gave evidence at the trial.

Witness Jayawickrema who runs a grocery shop stated that the

accused borrowed a motor cycle to go to the Middeniya Police Station.

Nimal Karunaratne Officer-In-Charge of the Middeniya Police states

maintenance case filed by the deceased was pending. There was a problem

regarding the deceased’s house, and such house was to be transferred to some

other person. Witness advised the deceased to file a civil suit. On the day of the

incident the deceased met him to lodge a complaint regarding a land dispute.

Witness advised the deceased to complain to the Tangalle Police relating to a

fraudulent deed.

Witness Samarasena a vendor of iron goods states accused went

pass the shop and turned the motor cycle towards the shop. Thereafter the

accused purchased a knife. Accused bargained with the witness to reduce the

price. The knife was priced at Rs. 275/- but sold to the accused for Rs. 250/-.

Witness Priyantha a three wheeler driver who parks the three wheeler at a park

7

near the Tangalle hospital. He heard the cries of a woman shouting “fukak uskS

urkjd”. Then the witness went towards the scene of the crime. He saw a

woman walking in front of a man and the man held her and turned her, and the

man cut her with a knife near the ear. The woman fell and the man dealt two

further blows with the knife. The woman was carrying a baby and an umbrella.

This witness identified the accused at an identification parade.

Inspector Mahagedera of the Tangalle Police states the deceased

came to make a complaint to the Fraud Bureau against the accused. Sub

Inspector Dayaratne and WPC Kanthi stated that they heard some one making

cries that “uu tlS uerejd t,a,qus .ia yf;a .sh;a lula keye. W.P.C Kanthi

states she saw the accused coming into the police station with hands raised.

I observe that the above utterances were made by the accused

which are spontaneous and contemporaneous statements. At that point of

making the utterances accused was not a suspect, and statements made in the

air. Res Gestae – Sec 6 of the Evidence Ordinance. Facts, which, though not in

issue, are so connected with a fact in issue as to form part of same transection,

are relevant, closeness of the connection between the fact sought to be proved

and the fact in issue 42 NLR 244; R Vs. Iyasamy Wijeratnam (1941) 22 CLW 1).

This is a group of facts so connected together, as to be referred to by a single

legal name, as a ‘crime’ (1964) 67 NLR 8; (1931) 34 NLR 19. The utterances are

8

admissions by the accused and made immediately after the occurrence R. Vs.

Herashamy (1946) 47 NLR 83;

Our Penal Code more particularly Sec 294 Exception (1) of the Code

Contemplates (a) offender deprived of self control (b) By grave and sudden

provocation, and cause the death of the person who provoked the offender.

Penal Code does not refer to cumulative provocation. But our courts seems to

have dealt with the question of ‘cumulative provocation in some decided cases.

One such case is Premalal Vs. A.G. This could be look at as a development in law

in that area. But it is also possible to argue otherwise. The question is whether

such a plea goes beyond the provisions of the Penal Code. Whatever it may be

in the oral and written submissions on behalf of the Accused-Appellant-

Appellant following have been urged on the footing that the Court of Appeal

erred in law by failing to consider the following facts.

(a) The fact that the deceased was having an illicit love affair with Upul

Susantha Wijesinghe alias Suddha

(b) The deceased on or about 12.05.2005 eloped with the said Upul Susantha

Wijesinghe alis Suddha and her brother, Mahinda Kithsiri Ekanayake

made a complaint to the Middeniay Police in that regard on 18.05.2005

(V1) and the Petitioner too made a complaint to the Middeniya Police in

that regard on 20.05.2005 (V2).

(c) The fact that the deceased and the Petitioner were subjected to a binding

over order to observe peace by the Police, under Sec. 81 of the Criminal

Procedure Code, in or about May 2005.

9

(d) The fact that the deceased and her paramour, the said Upul Susantha

Wijesinghe alia Suddha were parties to the abduction of the Petitioner on

or about 20.07.2005 in respect of which incident, Case No. MC

Walasmulla 96961 was pending at the time of the instant incident on

20.11.2005.

(e) The fact that there was a maintenance case pending in the Magistrate

Court of Walasmulla, filed by the deceased against the Petitioner in which

case the Petitioner challenged the paternity of the deceased’s child.

(f) The fact that on 28.10.2005, the Petitioner had made a complaint that

there are death threats against him from the deceased and the said Upul

Susantha Wijesinghe (V3) and

(g) The fact that on 11.09.2005, the Petitioner has made a complaint against

the deceased and Upul Susantha Wijesinghe for the theft of the electricity

meter, a cut out and the water meter in his Middeniya house (V4).

The above suggest the ill-feeling between the accused and the deceased.

No doubt the above items at (a) to (g) spread over a period of time. In normal

circumstances between estranged married couples such allegations may be

prevalent. The question is whether (a) to (g) above could be considered in a plea

of cumulative provocation, to bring the case within culpable homicide not

amounting to murder? In A.G Vs. John Perera 54 NLR 265 vividly describe what

is required in a case of this nature.

Where the mitigatory plea of grave and sudden provocation is taken under Exception

1 to Section 294 of the Penal Code, the accused must show that the kind of provocation

10

actually given was the kind of provocation which the jury as reasonable men would regard as

sufficiently grave to mitigate the actual killing of the deceased person.

“The words ‘grave’ and ‘sudden’ are both of them relative terms and must at least to

a great extent be decided by comparing the nature of the provocation with that of the

retaliatory act. It is impossible to determine whether the provocation was grave without at

the same time considering the act which resulted from the provocation; otherwise some quite

minor or trivial provocation might be thought to excuse the use of a deadly weapon”.

The question is whether words uttered by the deceased (as in the

dock statement) provoked the accused gravely and suddenly and the accused

lost his self-control. Can a reasonable man in the same class likely to lose his self-

control as a result of provocation? No other witness heard what was uttered by

the deceased. “WU fldfydu yrs ysfrag hj,d miai n,kafka”. It is apparent

from the dock statement that he went to the police initially to prevent the

deceased making a statement against him regarding a forgery of a deed, which

was the main issue, in this murder case. The dock statement of the accused

explains the position very clearly. Accused stated “uu W;aiy lf,a udj wmyiq

;djhg m;alrk tl udj jskdY lrk tl j,lajd .kak”. Notwithstanding (a)

to (g) above on which the accused relies to establish his plea, by the above

statement of the deceased as contained in the dock statement, it could be

assumed that accused tried his best to prevent the deceased wife making a

statement against the accused based on a forgery of a deed which deed in fact

was in the name of the deceased’s wife. This could well destroy the accused

11

professional career, as an Attorney-at-Law. Even criminal proceedings could be

initiated.

I agree with the learned Additional Solicitor General that it is the

point at which the accused premeditated the murder of the accused. I also agree

that the complainant of forgery is extraneous to the incidents that arose

consequent to the illicit affair. As such (a) to (g) above explains only the ill-

feelings between the accused and the deceased wife. It is somewhat a prestige

battle at a very low level between husband and wife. The illicit affair between

the accused driver and the deceased wife was the earliest stage of this episode.

Over the years it matured and a fact well known to others in the village, including

the police. The incidents in (a) to (g) are separate to the act of alleged forgery.

The murderous intention was entertained by the accused only at the point of

the deceased wife making a complaint to the police and the above utterance by

the deceased. Further if one were to argue from the point of view of the accused

party, I wish to observe that from the time the deceased wife made utterances

in the police station which is somewhat of a threat to the accused he would have

been easily provoked with such utterance of the deceased wife and then and

there or spontaneously could have reached and attacked her. In the case in hand

it was not so. Assuming the accused was provoked, but the stabbing took place

12

very much later. It was more than sufficient time to cool down. As such the plea

of cumulative provocation was in any event not available to the accused.

I note that the accused prepared himself to commit the act of

murder as he went to the Tangalle town to purchase a knife for which he

bargained for the price, with the vendor. By that time the murderous intention

was entertained by the accused, and consequently attacked the deceased wife

with a deadly weapon (knife).

A formidable deadly weapon which was a knife was used by the

accused. Use of such a weapon and having cut the deceased near the ear itself

demonstrate the accused murderous intention. Deceased wife fell with the first

blow with the knife and having fallen further blows were dealt by the deceased.

This would further fortify the murderous intention of the accused. In this regard

I refer to the text “The Law of Crimes” 18th Ed by Ratanlal Ranchhoddas &

Dhirajlal Keshavlal Thakore Pg. 724, Chapter XVI

‘Imminently dangerous.’ - Where it is clear that the act by which the death is caused

is so imminently dangerous that the accused must be presumed to have known that

it would, in all probability, cause death or such bodily injury as is likely to cause death,

then unless he can meet this presumption, his offence will be culpable homicide, and

it would be murder unless he can bring it under one of the exceptions? Thus a man

who strikes at the back of another a violent blow with a formidable weapon must be

taken to know that he is doing an act imminently dangerous to the life of the person

at whom he strikes and that a probable result of his act will be to cause that person’s

death. Similarly, if a man strikes another in the throat with a knife he must have known

that the blow is so imminently dangerous that it must in all probability cause death

13

and the injury intended to be inflicted is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to

cause death.

Can the accused rely on the plea of grave and sudden provocation

and the plea of cumulative provocation? Was he deprived of his self-control. I

would refer to the above text which lay down certain guide lines.

At pg. 272..

The test to see whether the accused acted under grave and sudden provocation is

whether the provocation given was in the circumstances of the case likely to cause a

normal reasonable man to loose control of himself to the extent of inflicting the injury

or injuries that he did inflict. In Mancini v. Director of Public Prosecutions Viscount

Simon laid down – “It is not all provocation that will reduce the crime of murder to

manslaughter. Provocation, to have that result, must be such as temporarily deprives

the person provoked of the power of self-control, as the result of which he commits

the unlawful act which causes death ... The test to be applied is that of the effect of

the provocation on a reasonable man, so that an unusually excitable or pugnacious

individual is not entitled to rely on provocation which would not have led an ordinary

person to act as he did. In applying the test, it is of particular importance (a) to

consider whether a sufficient interval has elapsed since the provocation to allow a

reasonable man time to cool, and (b) to make into account the instrument with which

the homicide was effected, for to retort, in the heat of passion induced by

provocation, by a simple blow, is a very different thing from making use of a deadly

instrument like a concealed dagger. In short, the mode of resentment must bear a

reasonable relationship to the provocation if the offence is to be reduced to

manslaughter.” In another case Lord Simon said: “The whole doctrine relating to

provocation depends on the fact that it causes, or may cause, a sudden and temporary

loss of self-control whereby malice, which is the formation of an intention to kill or to

inflict grievous bodily harm is negatived. Consequently, where the provocation

inspires an actual intention to kill, or to inflict grievous bodily harm, the doctrine that

provocation may reduce murder to manslaughter seldom applies. Only one very

14

special exception has been rocognised viz. the actual finding of a spouse, in the act of

adultery.”

In all the facts and circumstances of the case in hand it is not

possible to conclude that the accused was provoked and thereby caused by a

sudden and temporary loss of self control. Mere abusive words cannot amount

to grave and sudden provocation. In the context of the case in hand the

provocation was not sufficient to deprive a reasonable man of his self control.

There was no immediate impulse of provocation. Murderous intention would be

further fortified by the accused purchasing a knife. No reasonable man would

do so, and it was done according to a plan to murder the deceased wife and the

accused entertained a murderous intention, and committed murder. There is no

justification to bring the case within exception (1) of Section 294 of the Penal

Code. Questions of law are answered in the negative. Therefor both Judgements

of the High Court and Court of Appeal are affirmed. This appeal is dismissed.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Priyasath Dep. P.C., C.J.

I agree.

CHIEF JUSTICE

Priyantha Jayawardena P.C., J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

15