==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 20

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application under and in

terms of Article 17 read along with Article 126

of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

Pathmasiri Dissanayakalage

Priyalal Chaminda Sirisena,

238/10, School Lane,

Kanduboda, Delgoda.

PETITIONER

Vs.

1. Madushanka Dias,

Officer in Charge of Miscellaneous

Complaints Unit,

Police Station, Negombo.

2. Wootler Udayakumara,

Headquarters Inspector,

Negombo Police Station,

Negombo.

3. The Inspector General of Police,

Police Headquarters,

Colombo 01.

S.C. (F.R.) Application No. 06/2018

Page 2 of 20

4. Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department,

Hulftsdorp, Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

BEFORE : P. Padman Surasena, C.J.,

Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J.

Janak De Silva, J.

COUNSEL : Lakshan Dias for Petitioner

Rajiv Goonetillake, SDSG, for 1st to 4th Respondent

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS : 30.11.2021 by Petitioner 02.06.2020 by Respondent ARGUED ON : 28.02.2023 DECIDED ON : 31.03.2026

Janak De Silva, J.

The Petitioner holds a Bachelor of Laws (LL.B.) degree from the University of Colombo

and is an Attorney-at-Law. He had been in practice for about 11 years when the incident

forming the subject matter of this application occurred.

He alleges that the 1st and 2nd Respondents prevented him from performing his

professional obligations when he sought to represent the interest of Ms. H.P.D. Princes

Angelina Sanduni (Client) at an inquiry held at the Negombo Police Station.

Leave to proceed has been granted under Article 14(1)(g) of the Constitution.

Page 3 of 20

Version of the Petitioner

In November, 2017 the Client had been referred to the Petitioner by Rev. Father Sarath

Iddamalgoda and Rev. Sister Noel Christine seeking his assistance. The Client had been a

victim of domestic violence.

The Client met the Petitioner accompanied by her Grand Mother, Mrs. Mary Margret

Fernando (Grand Mother) and another person. During the consultation, the Client

revealed that she has been going through continuous harassment at the hands of her

abusive husband Kalamullage Dileepa Deshan Fernando (Husband), and that she had left

her matrimonial house and was living in hiding at the time.

The Client had once escaped from the Husband and moved to the residence of her Grand

Mother. However, the Husband had taken her back forcibly after threatening her and her

family members.

The Husband had lodged a complaint at the Police Station claiming that the Client had left

home and that the Grand Mother was keeping her against her will. The Grand Mother had

already provided a statement to the Police on this complaint. However, the 1st Respondent

had directed that she produces the Client.

The Client informed the Petitioner that her Husband was a member of a business family

in Negombo area and that she was sceptical about the impartiality of the officers of the

Negombo Police Station at an inquiry on the said complaint.

The Petitioner realised that the Client was worried about her safety as the Husband could

easily trace her whereabouts once she appears at the inquiry. The Client sought his legal

assistance to file an action on domestic violence against the Husband to obtain a

protection order form the Magistrates Court of Negombo and to file for a divorce.

Page 4 of 20

Accordingly, the Petitioner filed Case No. L 55617 in the Magistrates Court of Negombo

and obtained a protection order on 05.12.2017 under Section 5(1)(a) of the Prevention of

Domestic Violence Act No. 34 of 2005 (Act) against the Husband. The proceedings of that

day indicate that the learned Magistrate had issued an interim protection order

preventing the Husband from threatening the Client, preventing him from entering the

temporary residence of the Client and preventing the Husband from using any compulsion

by telephone.

Since he had obtained the protection order and the Police inquiry was on 07.12.2017, the

Petitioner instructed his Client and Grand Mother to go to the Police without fear.

However, as the Client and Grand Mother were still worried about the impartiality of the

Police Officers, they sought the assistance of the Petitioner at the Police inquiry.

Accordingly, he accompanied both of them to the Negombo Police Station at 9 a.m. on

07.12.2017. The Husband along with his mother were also present. The parties were

summoned to the room of the 1st Respondent, who was the Officer-in-Charge of the

Miscellaneous Complaints Unit.

At the beginning of the inquiry, the Petitioner informed the 1st Respondent that the Client

has left her Husband due to various harassments and that the Client is not being held by

anyone by force and that the Client would give a statement clarifying her position. The

Client also informed the 1st Respondent that she had left her Husband due to harassments,

and that she left home on her free will. The Petitioner further informed the 1st Respondent

that the Magistrates Court of Negombo has already issued an order against the Husband

and the Client was seeking a divorce.

At that stage, the 1st Respondent asked the Petitioner and Grand Mother to leave the

room. Thereafter the 1st Respondent had pressurised the Client to reconcile with the

Husband and stated in colloquial language that she will become a redundant coin if she

fails to do so.

Page 5 of 20

After sometime, the 1st Respondent summoned the Petitioner and Grand Mother back to

his room. The Husband had asked the Client to return the smart phone which was used

by her claiming that it was purchased by him. The Petitioner informed that in view of the

on-going action in the Magistrates Court, the mobile phone of the Client contained

important evidence of the threats made by the Husband and that such evidence would be

lost if the mobile phone was returned to the Husband. Nevertheless, the 1st Respondent

ordered the Client to return the mobile phone to the Husband before 12 noon the same

day and was ordered to make a statement.

During the inquiry, the mother of the Husband blamed the Petitioner and Client using foul

language and the 1st Respondent merely allowed her to continue the verbal abuse.

The 1st Petitioner asked for a visiting card of the Petitioner and the Grand Mother gave the

visiting card of the Petitioner which was with her.

The Grand Mother went to her residence to bring the mobile phone while the Client was

making a statement.

While the Petitioner and Client were waiting at the Police Station until the return of the

Grand Mother, the 2nd Respondent, the Headquarters Inspector, came to them and

inquired about the issue. After the Grand Mother returned to the Police Station with the

mobile phone, the 2nd Respondent summoned the parties to his room for an inquiry again.

The 1st Respondent approached the 2nd Respondent and made certain statements in

favour of the Husband in a bias manner. At that stage, the 2nd Respondent asked the

Petitioner and Grand Mother to leave the room. Thereafter the door of the room was

closed and only the 1st and 2nd Respondents and the Client and Husband were in the room.

The 2nd Respondent then induced the Client to return to her husband’s home and advised

the Husband saying "එහෙනම් අද හම්කිව හෙනිහිල්ලා රෑට කිරි එකක් බීලා දරුවක් ෙදපන් ''.

The 2nd Respondent compelled the Client to hold hands with her Husband and hug him.

Page 6 of 20

After sometime, the Client and Husband were sent out of the room and the Petitioner and

Grand Mother were summoned to the room again. Then the 2nd Respondent started to

blame and curse the Petitioner and the legal professionals as a whole saying "හම් වහේ

කුරුළු කූඩු කැඩිලා යන්හන් හදමව්පිහයෝ නිසා, ඒ වහේම නීතිඥහයෝ නිසා. හම් නීතිඥයන්ට

දිට්ඨධම්මහව්පදනීය කර්මය පළ හදන්නට ඕනෑ".

The Petitioner and his Client and her Grand Mother left the Police Station after handing

over the mobile phone to the husband.

The 1st Petitioner has given the contact details of the Petitioner to a relative of the

Husband. As a result around 12.35 p.m. that day, the Petitioner received a call from mobile

number 0777 388828. The caller claimed to be with the 1st Respondent at that moment

and stated that the issue should be settled out of Court. The Petitioner was informed that

the caller was an uncle of the Husband.

Around 1.44 p.m. on the same day, the Petitioner received a call from the Grand Mother

stating that a group of persons including the Husband had raided the house where the

Client was staying. The Petitioner immediately called mobile number 0777 388828 and

found that the uncle of the of the Husband was also in the group that had gone to the

house of the Client.

This group threatened to kill the Client, Grand Mother and the Petitioner.

The Petitioner has made a written complaint to the National Police Commission about the

incident.

The Petitioner claims that the 1st and 2nd Respondents have by their acts or omissions

infringed the rights of the Petitioner to engage in a lawful profession as guaranteed by

Article 14(1)(g) of the Constitution.

Page 7 of 20

Version of the 1st Respondent

On or about 30.11.2017, a complaint was made by the Husband, Kalamullage Dileepa

Deshan Fernando. In response to this complaint, the 1st Respondent summoned the

relevant parties to be present on 07.12.2017.

The Petitioner represented the Client at the inquiry and made submissions. After he made

submissions, the 1st Respondent requested only the couple who were having a marital

dispute to remain in the room to ascertain their views without the influence of the

Husband’s mother, Grand Mother and the Petitioner.

The 1st Respondent merely asked the couple as to why they cannot live together. When

the Client indicated that she was unwilling to live with the Husband, he called the others

back to the room. This fact was recorded in the settlement entry made at 9.40 a.m. that

day.

The Husband asked the Client for his phone. The 1st Respondent inquired from the Client

if she was willing to return the phone, to which she agreed. The Grand Mother returned

home to bring the phone. The phone was thereafter handed over to the Husband after

the SIM was removed by the Client in the presence of the 1st Respondent.

After the 1st Respondent entered the settlement entry, he received a message to send the

parties to the office of the 2nd Respondent. At this stage the inquiry was concluded and

the settlement entry had been made. The 2nd Respondent wanted to speak to the parties.

The 1st Respondent also attended the office of the 2nd Respondent and explained what

took place at the inquiry. He denies that he made statements in favour of any party or in

a biased manner.

The 1st Respondent is aware of the complaint made by the Petitioner to the National

Police Commission. He was summoned and has given his response to the said complaint.

Page 8 of 20

Version of the 2nd Respondent

A lady unknown to the 2nd Respondent came to his office and informed that her 23 years

old son, who had been married for four years, was having a marital dispute and requested

him to intervene in the marital dispute. As the 1st Respondent had already met the parties,

the 2nd Respondent asked the 1st Respondent to bring all the parties before him to discuss

the matter.

The Husband informed the 2nd Respondent that he wished to speak to him with the Client

on this personal matter. In the circumstances, the 2nd Respondent requested all others to

leave the room. The wife consented to this arrangement and remained in the room and

as such the discussion that followed was a consensual discussion. All persons cooperated

with this arrangement. The 2nd Respondent did so to respect their privacy on a family

matter.

The 2nd Respondent advised the parties that they were a young couple and that they

should try to resolve their marital disputes amicably.

The 2nd Respondent denies asking the parties to hold hands or embrace each other as

suggested by the Petitioner and Client.

After discussing with the young couple, the 2nd Respondent invited the others to return to

the room. The 2nd Respondent informed all the parties that he had advised the young

couple to amicably resolve their disputes. He had further informed them that there was

no more he could do using his good office and any further dispute would have to be

resolved in Court.

The 2nd Respondent did not conduct a second inquiry. A formal inquiry had been held by

the 1st Respondent and had been concluded by the time the parties came to meet him.

Page 9 of 20

The Petitioner accompanied the Client to the Police Station and assisted her to make a

statement and in the circumstances the Petitioner was not prevented from performing his

duty to his client.

Analysis

In Perera v. Jayawickrema [(1985) 1 Sri LR 285 at 323], it was held that while Article

14(1)(g) recognises a general right in every citizen to do work of a particular kind and of

his choice, it does not confer the right to hold a particular job or to occupy a particular

post of one’s choice.

Article 14(1)(g) confers a fundamental right on an Attorney-at-Law to represent the

interest of his client in a forum where he is entitled to do so.

The Police (Appearance of Attorneys-at-Law at Police Stations) Rules, 2012 (Rules) have

been made by the Inspector-General of Police under Section 55 of the Police Ordinance

and published in Gazette Extraordinary No. 1758/36 dated 18.05.2012.

Rule 3(1) states that any Attorney-at-Law who enters a Police Station for the purpose of

representing and watching the interests of a person who is the client of such Attorney-at-

Law, shall be treated cordially and courteously and given a fair and patient hearing by the

Police Officers attached to such Police Station.

This is a clear acknowledgement that an Attorney-at-Law is entitled to represent his client

at any Police Station. Accordingly, the Petitioner should have been treated cordially and

courteously and given a fair and patient hearing by both the 1st and 2nd Respondents.

This Rule is an amplification of the fundamental right guaranteed to an Attorney-at-law by

Article 14(1)(g) of the Constitution. I may add in passing that the Rules came to be

formulated consequent to the terms of settlement entered in D.W.C. Mohotti v. Upul

Seneviratne, OIC, Bambalapitiya and Others [S.C.F.R. 527/2008, S.C.M. 27.04.2009].

Page 10 of 20

The SVASTI of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka assures to

the People inter alia Justice as the intangible heritage that guarantees the dignity and

well-being of succeeding generations of the People of Sri Lanka. Many democratic

structures and institutions form essential components of the quest for Justice. The legal

profession forms an indispensable part of this system of administration of justice.

Similarly, the law enforcement officers also form an essential component of this system.

These two branches must work together in ensuring that justice is meted out. This

requires extending courtesy to each other in the exercise of their respective functions.

The Rules reflect this obligation on the part of the Police officers towards an Attorney-at-

Law. Similarly, all Attorney-at-Laws must extend courtesy to Police Officers in the discharge

of their duties.

This case is not about an omission on the part of the Petitioner. On the contrary the

Petitioner complains that both the 1st and 2nd Respondents failed to follows the Rules.

Let me begin the examination of the alleged infringement by referring to the complaint

made by the Husband to the Police. It reads as follows:

මීෙමුව හපාලිස් ස්ථානහේ සී.අයි.බී. (ii) හොරතුරු සටෙන් හපාහෙන් උපුටා ෙන්නා ලද ිටපෙකි.

දිනය: 2017.11.30. ිටුව:03 හේදය: 368 හව්පලාව: 11.30

බිරිඳ නිවසින් යාමක්

අංක 131/ඩී, ෙල්කටුව පාර, දලුපෙ, මීෙමුව ලිිනහේ පදිංචි හේශාන් යන අය බිරිඳ නිවසින් යාමක් සම්බන්ධව පැමිණිල්ලක් කිරීමට අවශය බව දන්වා සිටියා. හපා.සැ. 58537 දයානන්ද වන මා ඔහුහේ ප්‍රකාශය පෙෙ සටෙන් කරමි. සම්පූර්ණ නම නලවුල්ලගේ දිලීප ගේශාන් ප්‍රනාන්ු වයස අවු. 23 යි ආගම ග ෝමානු කග ෝලික විවාහකයි පදිිංචිය අිංක 131 ගල්කටුව පා දලුප මීගමුව 0772998070 මම ඉෙෙ ලිිනහේ පදිංචිව සිටිනවා. මා විවාෙ වී සිටින්හන් අංක 513/51/ඒ මහිමහොඩල්ල වත්ෙ මීෙමුව ලිිනහේ පදිංචි ප්‍රින්සස් අංජලිකා ප්‍රනාන්ු යන අයයි. අප හදහදනා විවාෙ හවලා දැනට අවු. 04 ක් හවනවා. අප හදහදනාට දරුවන් නෑ. අහේ පවුල් ජීවිෙයට බිරිඳහේ අම්මා වන මාජි යන අය අෙ දානවා. හමහස් අෙ දමලා අහේ පවුල් ජීවිෙයට හනාහයකුත් ප්‍රශ්න දමනවා. හම් මාජි අම්මා නිෙරම අහේ හෙදරට ුරකථනහයන් කො කරනවා. හමහස් සිටින විට

Page 11 of 20

2017.10.28. වන දින මහේ බිරිඳයි අෙහර් ප්‍රශ්නයක් ඇතිවුණ නිසා හමම අම්මා පැමිණ මහේ බිරිඳ එක් කරහෙන ගියා. දැනට බිරිඳ අම්මා ළඟ ඉන්නවා. මම හපාලිසිහයන් ඉල්ලා සිටින්හන් හමම අයහෙන්වා විභාෙ කර මට මහේ බිරිඳ හෙන්වා හදන හලසටයි. මට කීමට ඇත්හත් එපමණයි. කියවා හත්රුම් කර ුන්නා. නිවැරදි බවට ිළිහෙන (XXXXX) (දිලීප හේශාන් ප්‍රනාන්ුහේ අත්සන) අත්සන් කරා. ඉෙෙ හේශාන් යන අයහේ ප්‍රකාශය හපා.සැ. 58537 දයානන්ද වන මා අවංක හලසත් නිවැරදි හලසත් සෙය හලසත් වාර්ථා ෙෙ කළ බවට හමයින් ප්‍රකාශ කරසිටිමි (XXXXX) (හපා.සැ. 58537 දයානන්ද නිළධාරියාහේ අත්සන)

ඉෙෙ ිටපෙ හපා.හකා. 88645 ගීත් වන මා විසින් නිවැරදිව ිටපත් කල බවට හමයින් ප්‍රකාශ කරමි.

This complaint is referable to Section 109(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15

of 1979 (Code). Further steps that the Police may take on this complaint is conditional

upon the satisfaction of the requirements in Section 109(5) Code. There must be reason

to suspect the commission of a cognizable offence or to apprehend a breach of the peace.

The complaint made by the Husband does not disclose a cognizable offence. Neither does

it establish any breach of peace. Clearly the matter was a marital dispute of a civil nature.

In these circumstances, the decision taken by the 1st Respondent to proceed further is

questionable and lends credence to the fear entertained by the Client and Grand Mother

that the Police was biased towards the Husband and his family.

Moreover, the Grand Mother had previously made a statement consequent to the

complaint made by the Husband to the Negombo Police. The 1st and 2nd Respondents have

failed to tender a copy of this statement along with their objections although they

tendered the complaint made by the Husband. This failure must be considered as an

attempt to withhold evidence which is adverse to the case of the 1st and 2nd Respondents.

The Grand Mother has averred in her affidavit that despite the statement she made, the

1st Respondent insisted that she brings the Client to the Police Station.

These circumstances, lends further credence to the allegation made that the 1st

Respondent was acting partially towards the Husband.

Page 12 of 20

The 1st Respondent admits that he asked the Petitioner to go out of his room leaving the

Client and her husband in his room. This was not a course of action open to the 1st

Respondent. I have no hesitation in accepting that the Petitioner informed the 1st

Respondent of the interim protection order given in M. C. Negombo Case No. L 55617.

This has been corroborated by both the Client and her Grand Mother. The 1st Respondent

does not make any allegation that the Client and the Grand Mother entertained any

animosity towards him. Upon the 1st Respondent being notified of this order, he should

have not proceeded with the inquiry. Instead, the 1st Respondent proceeded to deprive

the Petitioner of representing his Client by sending him out of the room and keeping the

Husband and the Client together despite the interim protection order. Thereby, the 1st

Respondent infringed the fundamental rights of the Petitioner guaranteed by Article

14(1)(g) of the Constitution.

The situation was aggravated by the conduct of the 2nd Respondent who also admits

having sent the Petitioner out of his room while keeping the Client and the Husband in his

room. I have no hesitation in rejecting his claim that this was consensual. It is

inconceivable that the Client did so on her free will having just two days prior obtained an

interim protection order from the Magistrates Court preventing the Husband from

threatening her, preventing him from the entering her temporary residence and

preventing the Husband from using any compulsion by telephone. The Petitioner has

categorically stated that he informed the 2nd Respondent of the interim protection order.

This is corroborated by both the Client and the Grand Mother. The 2nd Respondent does

not make any allegation that the Client and the Grand Mother entertained any animosity

towards him. In these circumstances, the 2nd Respondent could not have sent out the

Petitioner and kept the Husband and the Client in the room.

Moreover, the Client was clearly apprehensive of the impartiality of the Police and had

requested the Petitioner to accompany her to the Police and represent her at the inquiry.

Page 13 of 20

I conclude that the 2nd Respondent kept the Client in her room without the Petitioner

against her free will. Thereby, the 2nd Respondent infringed the fundamental rights of the

Petitioner guaranteed by Article 14(1)(g) of the Constitution.

I am convinced that the 2nd Respondent did utter the words "එහෙනම් අද හම්කිව

හෙනිහිල්ලා රෑට කිරි එකක් බීලා දරුවක් ෙදපන්'' and "හම් වහේ කුරුළු කූඩු කැඩිලා යන්හන්

හදමව්පිහයෝ නිසා, ඒ වහේම නීතිඥහයෝ නිසා. හම් නීතිඥයන්ට දිට්ඨධම්ම හව්පදනීය කර්මය පළ

හදන්නට ඕනෑ". This is corroborated by both the Client and her Grand Mother against

whom the 2nd Respondent makes no allegation of animosity towards him.

These statements by the 2nd Respondent shows an abject lack of appreciation of the

emotions of a victim of domestic violence. Moreover, it is a totally misguided perception

of the role of an Attorney-at-Law. As much as the learned DSG did his best for the 1st and

2nd Respondents in this case, the Petitioner, and all Attorneys-at-Law for that matter, are

bound by the professional ethics set out in the Supreme Court (Conduct of and Etiquette

for Attorneys-at-Law) Rules 1988 and must inter alia exercise his skill with due diligence

to the best of his ability and care in the best interests of his client.

Rule 3(2) prohibits any Police Officer using physical force on the person of such Attorney-

at-Law or resort to the use of abusive language or any other form of intimidatory conduct.

The 2nd Respondent breached this rule by the utterance of the above statement aimed at

the Petitioner and Attorneys-at-Law as a whole.

In summary, I declare that the 1st and 2nd Respondents infringed the fundamental rights

guaranteed to the Petitioner by Article 14(1)(g) of the Constitution.

I order the 1st Respondent to pay the Petitioner a sum of Rs. 30,000/= as compensation

from his personal funds. I further direct the 2nd Respondent to pay the Petitioner a sum of

Rs. 60,000/= as compensation from his personal funds. Additionally, both the 1st and 2nd

Respondents will pay the Petitioner Rs. 10,000/= each as costs of this application.

Page 14 of 20

Application allowed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

P. Padman Surasena, C.J.

The Petitioner is an Attorney-at-Law. The 1st Respondent is the Officer in Charge of

Miscellaneous Complaints Unit of Police Station Negombo. The 2nd Respondent is the

Headquarters Inspector (HQI) of Police Station of Negombo. Petitioner has stated that on

07-12-2017 around 9.00 a.m. he accompanied his client, who claimed to be a victim of

domestic violence, named H.P.D. Princes Angelina Sanduni along with her grandmother

Mary Margret Fernando and one other person to the Negombo Police Station.

According to the Petitioner, the 1st Respondent (the Officer in Charge of the Miscellaneous

Complaints Unit) had a discussion with the Petitioner who looked after the interests of his

client (H.P.D. Princes Angelina Sanduni) and her (Sanduni’s) grandmother in an inquiry

conducted by the 1st Respondent into a complaint made against the grandmother by the

husband of the client (Sanduni).

Although many things have been stated by the Petitioner in the Petition, the allegation

the Petitioner has made against the 1st and 2nd Respondents is limited to the allegation

that the 1st and 2nd Respondents have violated the fundamental right of the Petitioner to

engage in his lawful profession as guaranteed by Article 14(1)(g) of the Constitution. I

observe that it is in respect of the said alleged violation that this Court by its Order dated

04-06-2018 has granted Leave to Proceed.

I observe that neither the client of the Petitioner nor her grandmother are Petitioners in

this fundamental rights Petition. However, despite the fact that they have not come before

this Court, the Petitioner through his Petition appears to have attempted to vindicate the

rights of his client and the client’s grandmother in the instant Fundamental Rights

Application. In my view, this is not possible.

Page 15 of 20

This Court has been consistent in holding that only a person whose Fundamental Rights

have been violated, can file a Petition in terms of Article 126(2) of the Constitution. The

only exception to this rule is set out in Article 126(2) in the following terms:

“Where any person alleges that any such fundamental right or language right

relating to such person has been infringed or is about to be infringed by executive

or administrative action, he may himself or by an Attorney-at-Law on his behalf,

within one month thereof, in accordance with such rules of court as may be in force,

apply to the Supreme Court by way of petition in writing addressed to such Court

praying for relief or redress in respect of such infringement. Such application may

be proceeded with only with leave to proceed first had and obtained from the

Supreme Court, which leave may be granted or refused, as the case may be, by not

less than two judges.”

This Court in the case of Mohamed Ibrahim Mohamed Ishran Ahamed and Others vs.

Senior Superintendent of Police and Others,1 has observed as follows:

“31. In Somawathie v. Weerasinghe [(1990) 2 Sri LR 121], it was the wife of the

aggrieved party who petitioned the Supreme Court (quite similar to these three

Applications). Under such circumstances, Justice Dr. A.R.B. Amerasinghe, observed

that, "Article 126(2) confers a recognized position only upon the person whose

fundamental rights are alleged to have been violated and upon an attorney-at-law

acting on behalf of such a person. No other person has a right to apply to the

Supreme Court for relief or redress in respect of the alleged infringement of

fundamental rights". This view aligns with the plain and literal interpretation I have

earlier adopted to interpret Article 126(2) of the Constitution and Rule 44(2) of the

Supreme Court Rules. Moving further, Justice Dr. Amerasinghe in this Judgment has

also considered the aspect of adopting an expansive interpretative approach to

1 SC FR Application Nos: 46, 47 & 48/2020 decided on 09-02-2026

Page 16 of 20

Article 126(2) beyond its literal sense and has stated that “…in the Article before us,

the words are in themselves precise and unambiguous and there is no absurdity,

repugnance or inconsistency with the rest of the Constitution, the words themselves

do best declare that intention. No more can be necessary than to expound those

words in their plain, natural, ordinary, grammatical and literal sense". I find myself

in agreement with this view, as a written law (and certainly an Article in the

Constitution) should be given an expansive interpretation only in instances where

the law stands ambiguous, absurd, repugnant, or inconsistent with the provisions

of the Constitution. In my view, the written law contained in Article 126(2) when

read in its plain literal sense, provides a clear and coherent rule on permitted

standing, to make a Fundamental Rights Application to the Supreme Court. That is

the availability of standing only to the aggrieved person himself or an Attorney-at-

Law acting on his behalf.”⁠

The instant case is not a case the Petitioner has filed acting on behalf of his clients. Nor

has the Court granted Leave to Proceed for alleged violation of Fundamental Rights of his

clients. Therefore I have to disregard all the allegations the Petitioner has made in his

Petition against the Respondent with regard to the alleged violations of Fundamental

Rights of the Petitioner’s client and the client’s grandmother. Therefore it is not necessary

for me to evaluate the veracity of those allegations as this Court will not be able to

adjudicate on the rights of those two other persons referred to in by the Petitioner in this

case. On the other hand, as mentioned above, this Court has granted Leave to Proceed

only to the Petitioner in respect of the alleged infringement of his fundamental right

guaranteed under Article 14(1)(g) of the Constitution. I.e., the Petitioner’s entitlement to

engage in his profession.

Page 17 of 20

The Police Rules 2012 published in the Gazette bearing No. 1758/36 dated 18-05-2012

has laid down certain guidelines to be followed by police officers with regard to

appearances of Attorneys-at-Law at police stations. Clause 3(1) and 3(2) of the aforesaid

Rules is as follows:

"3. (1) Every Attorney-at-Law, who enters the precincts of a police station

established under the Police Ordinance (Chapter 53) situated in any part of Sri

Lanka, in his capacity of an Attorney-at-Law for the purpose of representing and

watching the interests of a person who is the client of such Attorney-at-Law,

shall be treated cordially and courteously and given a fair and patient hearing

by the police officers attached to such Police Station, whatever their rank.

(2) Every police officer attached to a Police Station shall not at any time during

which he is dealing with an Attorney-at-Law present in such police station for

the purpose of representing and watching the interests of a person who is his

client, use physical force on the person of such Attorney-at-Law or resort to the

use of abusive language or any other form of intimidatory conduct.”

Although the Petitioner has placed reliance on an Order made by a Magistrate under

Section 5(1)(a) of the Domestic Violence Act No. 34 of 2005 it is to be noted that the

learned Magistrate had made this Order on the husband of the Petitioner’s client. The

said Order is reproduced below:

“2017.12.05 දින ඉහත නම් සඳහන් පීඩාවට පත් තැනැත්ිය වවනුවවන් ඉදිරිපත් කල

කරුණු සලකා බැලීවෙත් පසුව ඉහත නම් සදහන් වගඋත්තරකරු විසින් වෙෙ නඩුවට අදාල

පීඩාවට පත් තැනැත්ියට දැනට පදිිංචි ස්ථානවේ දී කරනු ලබන සියලු තාඩන පීඩන

බලපෑම් සහ තර්ජන වලින් සහ වනාෙනා හැසිරිම් වලින් වලකින වලසට 2005 අිංක 34

දරණ ගෘහස්ථ ප්‍රචන්ඩ ක්‍රියා වැළැක්වීෙ පනවත් 5 (1) (අ) වගන්ිය ප්‍රකාර අතුරු ආරක්වෂණ

ආඥාවක්ව නිකුත් කරමි.”

Page 18 of 20

While the Petitioner has not maintained a specific allegation against the 1st Respondent,

the only thing the Petitioner has told against the 1st Respondent is the fact that the 1st

Respondent was continuously trying to compel his client to return to the home of the

husband against her will. The Petitioner states that the 1st Respondent had done this after

he informed him about the Order issued by the learned Magistrate of Negombo against

his client’s husband and that that client was seeking a divorce.

However, in my view, the mere fact that the 1st Respondent did not accede to the request

of the Attorney-at-Law cannot be an infringement of the fundamental rights of the

Attorney-at-Law guaranteed under Article 14(1)(g) of the Constitution to engage in a

lawful practice of his profession.

The only allegation the Petitioner has made against the 2nd Respondent is the fact of 2nd

Respondent making the following statement:

“වම් වවේ කුරුළු කූඩු කැඩිලා යන්වන් වදෙව්පිවයෝ නිසා, ඒ වවේෙ නීිඥවයෝ නිසා. වම්

නීිඥයන්ට දිට්ඨධම්ෙ වව්පදනීය කර්ෙය පළ වදන්නට ඕනෑ”

The Petitioner has taken up the position that the 2nd Respondent by making the above

statement has prevented him from representing his client at the inquiry in the police

station. The fact of mere making of the above statement is the reason as to why the

Petitioner states that he could not discharge his professional duties towards his client at

the said inquiry.2

In as much as the Petitioner is assertive of his fundamental rights, one needs to

understand that the 2nd Respondent would also be free to express his views according to

his thinking. Even if I accept that the 2nd Respondent has made that statement (the 2nd

Respondent has denied in his Affidavit) having regard to the nature of the above

statement, I am unable to conclude that the Petitioner’s fundamental rights to engage in

2 Paragraphs 44 and 45 of the Petition dated 05-01-2017.

Page 19 of 20

his profession inside the police station under Article 14(1)(g) of the Constitution has been

violated by the 2nd Respondent by the mere making of such statement.

It is to be noted that the Petitioner does not make any other allegation against the 2nd

Respondent. Indeed, according to the Petitioner himself, the 2nd Respondent had

permitted his presence. The fact of a police officer requiring to interrogate a person in the

absence of an Attorney-at-Law in my view cannot be taken as an infringement of the

fundamental right of such Attorney-at-Law to engage in his lawful practice.

I must state here that when serious crimes are committed, investigating police officers are

required to interrogate the persons who are suspected or having committed or are

involved in such serious crimes. Such police officers are also required to expeditiously

conduct inquiries and investigations and conclude such investigations within the shortest

possible time. They are called upon to collect evidence and apprehend the offenders.

Investigations such as those cannot be conducted unless such police officer is given a free

hand to interrogate such persons.

The Rules published in the Gazette No. 1758/36 dated 18-05-2012 does not give an

Attorney-at-Law, an entitlement to be present right through when the investigators

interrogate persons. In my view, one should always weigh the consequences of such

serious crimes, their investigations, against the rights of persons under arrest, and strike

a smooth balance between them.

For the above reasons, I am unable to accept the position of the Petitioner that the

Respondents have infringed his Fundamental Rights to engage in his profession in this

instance. I dismiss the Petition without cost.

CHIEF JUSTICE

Page 20 of 20

Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J.

I have had the benefit of reading the draft judgment of Hon. Justice Janak De Silva and

the opinion expressed by His Lordship, the Chief Justice.

I am in agreement with the opinion expressed by Justice De Silva.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT