==== BLOCKS ==== 

[SC/FR/500/2019] - Page 1 of 7

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application in terms of Article

126 read with Article 17 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Mohideed Bawa Naufer

No. 169,

Kiwlekada,

Horowpathana.

Currently at the Wariyapola Remand Prison

PETITIONER

Vs.

1. Roshan Sanjeewa,

Officer-in-Charge,

Horowpathana Police Station,

Horowpathana.

2. 28071 Premaratne,

Police Sergeant,

Horowpathana Police Station,

Horowpathana.

3. 10516 Sisira,

Police Sergeant,

Horowpathana Police Station,

Horowpathana.

4. 33685 Jayathilaka,

Police Constable,

SC/FR/500/2019

[SC/FR/500/2019] - Page 2 of 7

Horowpathana Police Station,

Horowpathana.

5. Officer-in-Charge,

Kebethigollawa Police Station,

Kebethigollawa.

6. Officer-in-Charge,

Terrorist Investigation Division,

Colombo 01.

7. Thilina Hewapathirane,

Superintendent of Police,

Anuradhapura.

8. Inspector General of police,

Police Headquarters,

Colombo 01.

9. Hon. Attorney General ,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

BEFORE : P. PADMAN SURASENA, CJ

MENAKA WIJESUNDERA, J

M. SAMPATH K.B. WIJERATNE, J

COUNSEL : Ermiza Tegal with Mark Schubert instructed by

Tharmarajah Tharmaja for the Petitioner.

Madawa Tennekoon DSG, with Sajith Bandara SC for all

the Respondents.

[SC/FR/500/2019] - Page 3 of 7

ARGUED ON : 08-10-2025

DECIDED ON : 30-01-2026

P. PADMAN SURASENA J.

Petitioner complains that he was arrested and placed in remand custody by the 1st

Respondent (the Officer-in-Charge of Horowpathana Police Station) without any

justification. The 2nd Respondent, 3rd Respondent and the 4th Respondent are,

respectively, two Police Sergeants and a Police Constable attached to Horowpathana

Police Station who were also involved in the arrest of the Petitioner.

Admittedly, the Petitioner was arrested by Horowpathana Police as a suspect in terms

of the Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA).

I had the occasion to consider the legality of an arrest of a person under PTA in

SC/FR/51/2021.1 I would like to make the following quotation from that Judgment

which would be self-explanatory:

“Section 31 of the PTA.

“unlawful activity" means any action taken or act committed by any

means whatsoever, whether Within or outside Sri Lanka, and whether

such action was taken or act was committed before or after the date of

Coming into operation of all or any of the provision of this Act in the

commission or in connection with the commission of any

offence under this Act or any act committed prior to the date of

passing of this Act, which act would, if committed after such date,

constitute an offence under this Act.2

1 SC Minutes 30-01-2025 2 Emphasis added.

[SC/FR/500/2019] - Page 4 of 7

This means that any action taken or act committed, in connection with the

commission of any offence under this Act, would be an unlawful activity. Thus,

such ‘action taken or act committed’ although on its own may not constitute an

offence (therefore would not constitute a cognizable offence in any case),

would still fall under the definition of an ‘Unlawful Activity’, if such action taken

or act committed, was done in connection with the commission of any offence

under PTA.

In the case of Dissanayaka v Superintendent Mahara Prison and others,3

Kulatunga, J. held as follows:

"The expression "unlawful activity" as defined in Section 31 of the

(Prevention of Terrorism) Act is of wide import and encompasses

any person whose acts "by any means whatsoever" are connected

with "the commission of any offence under this Act". This would

include a person who has committed an offence under the

Act".4

Therefore, one could observe that the threshold requirement under section

32(1)(b) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act for the existence of ‘a

reasonable suspicion or being concerned of any cognizable offence’ has been

reduced under Section 6(1) of the PTA to a threshold requirement of the

existence of ‘a reasonable suspicion or being connected with or concerned in

any unlawful activity’. The said “unlawful activity" could be any action taken or

act committed by any means whatsoever, in the commission or in connection

with the commission of any offence under this Act...”

The 1st Respondent, in his affidavit dated 20th October 2022, has explained the

circumstances which led to the arrest of the Petitioner in the instant case. I will set

out below some factual positions revealed from the said affidavit.

3 1991 (2) SLR 247, 248-249. 4 Emphasis added.

[SC/FR/500/2019] - Page 5 of 7

There was a terrorist attack with bombs exploding at eight different locations around

the country on 21st April 2019 and investigations commenced country wide upon the

guidance provided by the specialized agencies including Sri Lanka Police, Armed-forces

and Intelligence Agencies.

The law enforcement authorities through the above information from time to time had

identified a number of persons whom they had suspected as having connections to

the aforesaid bomb explosions. Accordingly, the Officer-in-Charge of Horowpathana

Police Station had requested, from the Senior Superintendent of Police of

Anuradhapura, permission to arrest five suspects in terms of the PTA. This letter has

been produced marked 1R1 and this letter contains names of 5 persons. Pursuant to

this letter the SSP Anuradhapura has granted permission for the Officer-in-Charge of

Horowpathana Police Station to arrest these suspects under the PTA. Thus, it was

pursuant to this permission that Horowpathana Police had arrested the Petitioner on

24th May 2019.

Horowpathana Police Station had recorded a statement from the Petitioner on 25th

May 2019. Perusal of the statement of the Petitioner reveals that the Police had

questioned him with regard to his connections to a person named Abu Bakr; his

activities in relation to an Arabic school run by Abu Bakr; his possible connections with

a person called Zaharan, etc.

Moreover, the Petitioner in his statement has admitted that he withdrew Rs. 1,000,000

(One Million Rupees) from his bank account and given the same to Abu Bakr. He has

also admitted that he at one point of time, had received from some unknown source,

a video clip containing a lecture conducted by Zaharan. He also has been instrumental

in opening an account in Horowpathana branch of Bank of Ceylon, in the name of an

Arabic School. It is from that account that he has withdrawn Rs. 1,000,000 (One Million

Rupees) and given it to Abu Bakr.

[SC/FR/500/2019] - Page 6 of 7

The learned Counsel for the Petitioner has admitted in the course of her submissions

that investigation against Abu Bakr is continuing to date.

In these circumstances, we are unable to accept the submissions of the learned

Counsel for the Petitioner that Horowpathana Police had arrested the Petitioner on the

mere basis that the Petitioner belonged to a certain Community.

We observe that there were five cases listed along with this case before this Court.

These cases are SC/FR/500/2019, SC/FR/501/2019, SC/FR/502/2019,

SC/FR/503/2019, and SC/FR/504/2019. The Respondent Police Officers in

SC/FR/501/2019, SC/FR/502/2019 and SC/FR/504/2019 who arrested the Petitioners

in those cases had come forward to tender an apology to the Petitioners for any pain

of mind they would have had undergone due to the arrest under the above

circumstances. This is because subsequently, after the completion of the investigation

the investigators had decided to discharge the Petitioner. Following the tendering of

the said apology, the cases SC/FR/501/2019, SC/FR/502/2019 and SC/FR/504/2019

were concluded.

When this case came up before Court on 11-11-2024, the learned Counsel for the

Petitioner in SC/FR/500/2019, informed Court that the Petitioner has lost his

employment due to this incident of arrest. It was at that time that Court intervened

and the learned Deputy Solicitor General undertook to explore the possibility of

addressing the said issue to ensure the reinstatement of the Petitioners as the

investigators have cleared him of any involvement in terrorist activities.

In the course of the argument, the learned Counsel for the Petitioner conceded that,

as undertaken by the learned Deputy Solicitor General, he did facilitate the

reinstatement of the Petitioner in service. Therefore, the learned Counsel for the

Petitioner conceded that the Petitioner has been reinstated in his employment and has

been paid back wages during the period he was out of employment. In our view, this

redress which the Court facilitated for the Petitioner to receive, would be sufficient

and has met the ends of justice in this case.

[SC/FR/500/2019] - Page 7 of 7

The purpose of arresting a person on being suspected of having any connection with

any unlawful activity is to continue with the investigation into that particular suspected

activity. As has already been stated above, we are convinced that there were

suspicious circumstances, namely; the opening of a bank account; withdrawing

Rupees One Million and giving it to Abu Bakr against whom the investigation is still

continuing. These circumstances in our view, would have been sufficient to raise some

suspicion in the minds of the Police Officers who decided to arrest the Petitioner.

Therefore, we are not inclined to accept the contention of the learned Counsel for the

Petitioner that Horowpathana Police arbitrarily arrested the Petitioner. Therefore, the

Petitioner is not entitled to succeed with this Petition.

We decide to dismiss the Petition without costs.

CHIEF JUSTICE

MENAKA WIJESUNDERA, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

M. SAMPATH K.B. WIJERATNE, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT