1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA S.C. Appeal No. 97/2013

S.C (HCCA) LA Application No. 410/2012

WP/HCCA/I.N/MT/101/08 (F)

D.C. Mt. Lavinia 607/00/RE

In the matter of an Application for Leave to Appeal in terms of the Article 128 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka read with Section 5(c) of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990 as amended by the Act No. 54 of 2006 Samarakoon Mudiyanselage Saheli Sajeera Samarakoon No. 80, Library Mawatha, Maharagama PLAINTIFF Vs. Karunadasa Abeywickrema No. 72, “Samram Groceries” High Level Road, Maharagama

DEFENDANT AND BETWEEN

2

Karunadasa Abeywickrema No. 72, “Samram Groceries” High Level Road, Maharagama DEFENDANT-APPELLANT Vs. Samarakoon Mudiyanselage Saheli Sajeera Samarakoon No. 80, Library Mawatha, Maharagama PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT AND NOW Karunadasa Abeywickrema No. 72, “Samram Groceries” High Level Road, Maharagama DEFENDANT-APPELLANT-PETITIONER-APPELLANT Vs. Samarakoon Mudiyanselage Saheli Sajeera Samarakoon No. 80, Library Mawatha, Maharagama PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT

3

BEFORE: B.P. Aluwihare P.C. J., Anil Gooneratne J. & Nalin Perera J. COUNSEL: Gamini Hettiarachchi for the Defendant-Appellant-Petitioner-Appellant

Ranjan Suwandaratne P.C. for the Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent-Respondent ARGUED ON: 19.06.2017 DECIDED ON: 03.08.2017 GOONERATNE J.

This was an action filed in the District Court of Mt. Lavinia bearing

No. 607/00/RE to eject the Defendant-Petitioner-Appellant and all those holding

under him from the property described in the schedule to the plaint and recover

arrears of rent in a sum of Rs. 83,000/- and continuing damages at Rs. 10,000/-

per month from 01.12.1999 until Plaintiff is placed in possession. The premises

in dispute was a business premises. It was pleaded in the plaint that the monthly

rental was Rs. 1000/- per mensum and the premises in question was ‘excepted

premises’. It was also pleaded that the rental was in arrears since June 1993 and

Defendant had put up an unauthorised structure in or about 1994. Notice to quit

4

was sent on 18.10.1999 to terminate tenancy and hand over vacant possession

on or before 01.02.1999 with damages fixed at Rs. 10,000/- as aforesaid.

Defendant party takes up the position that the premises in dispute

is subject to the provisions of the Rent Act No. 7 of 1972 and that the Defendant

is a statutorily protected tenant. Defendant denies of any arrears of rental or

that he constructed an unauthorised constructions. He also takes up the position

that the termination of tenancy is contrary to Act No. 7 of 1972 and tenancy has

not been properly terminated. It is also pleaded that since Plaintiff refused to

accept rent, he deposited rent at the Maharagama Pradeshiya Sabha. Parties

proceeded to trial on 22 issues and 6 admissions. It was admitted that the rent

was Rs. 1000/- per month and the premises in question was a business premises,

situated with the Town Council area which is at present within the Maharagama

Pradeshiya Sabhawa. It was submitted that the Defendant was the Plaintiff’s

tenant and M.C. Gangodawila Case No. 5246 was filed.

The material submitted to this court indicates that the Plaintiff

succeeded in the District Court and in the High Court. The issues raised in the

lower court suggest that the crucial issues were whether the premises in

disputes were excepted premises, or that the premises in question was subject

to the provisions of the Rent Act No. 7 of 1972. The other matter of some

5

importance is whether tenancy was properly terminated, and Defendant failure

to hand over vacant possession by 20.11.1999.

Supreme Court granted Leave on the following questions of law.

1. Whether their Lordships Judges have erred in law by not considering the

fact that according to certified copy of the annual assessment in respect

of the said premises in 1988 the annual value of the said premises is less

than the relevant amount according to the provisions of the Rent Act?

2. Whether their Lordships Judges have erred in law by misinterpreting the

sections 2(4), 2(5) and the schedule of the Rent Act?

3. Have the Hon. Judges when arriving at the final conclusion considered the

question of arrears of rent.

4. Whether there was a cause of action based on arrears of rent?

If not, whether the Judgments of both District Court and High Court

erroneous.

In the case in hand the most important question to be decided is

whether the premises in dispute is an ‘excepted premises’ as per the Rent Act.

As such before I proceed to analyse the evidence and Judgments of the lower

court, I prefer to consider the following matters on the question of excepted

premises, gathered mainly from authorities and statute.

6

Section 2(4) of the Rent Act provides if the Rent Act is in operation

in any area provisions of the Act applies to all premises other than excepted

premises. Section 2(5) states that regulation in the schedule to the Act has the

effect of determining that the premises shall be ‘excepted’ premises. The

schedule to the Act gives a chart. Column (1) describes the Local Authority area.

Municipality, Town Council etc. and Column II gives the annual value. If the

annual value exceed the specified figure in Column (II), it is deemed to be

excepted premises, and January 1968 value is also relevant. In Plate Ltd Vs.

Ceylon Theatres Ltd 75 NLR at 129 per Samarawickrema J. It was the intention

of the legislature not to exercise control over a certain category of premises. The

premises of that kind were deliberately regarded by the legislature as falling

outside the scope of the objects of policy which necessitated the protection of

tenants in certain circumstances. The annual value in excess of the amount set

out in the schedule is assessed by the Local Authority.

In Podisinghe Vs. Perera 75 NLR 333. Wimalaratne J. held. Annual

value for the time being simply means, in my view, the annual value at the time

of institution of the action, irrespective of the fact that any objection has been

taken to it.

The burden of proof is placed very fairly and squarely on the party

who asserts that the premises in question are “excepted premises”. In

7

Muttucumaru Vs. Corea.n59 NLR 525 Plaintiff sued the Defendant alleging that

the premises were “excepted premises within the meaning of the Rent Act.

Notice to quit was admitted, and the only question on which the parties went to

trial related to the issue whether the premises in suit were “excepted premises”

within the frame work of the Rent Act. Sinnatamby J. declared: “the burden of

proof no doubt was on the Plaintiff to establish that the premises are

“excepted”.

I have examined the evidence led at the trial and the two

Judgments of the lower courts. Plaintiff in her evidence inter alia states as per

P2 (annual value) was 4912/- in 1989 and thereafter the annual value rose to

Rs.10,294/-. Quit Notice and registered postal article was produced as P6 and

P6(a). It was her father who was the land-lord and on his demise her mother

collected rents. The Mother’s death resulted her becoming the owner and land-

lord. It was her father that gave the premises on lease to the Defendant. The

building in question was in existence since 1970 and it was admitted that

Plaintiff did not produce extracts of annual value from 1970 to 1980. Plaintiff’s

position was that documents were destroyed in 1988 due to communal

violence. Plaintiff denied that the annual value was 396/- in the year 1988. The

defence in cross examination of the Plaintiff witness confronted her (witness)

with the rates extracts from 1988 onwards and produced same as V1. In cross-

8

examination it is permissible to mark and produce documents to contradict the

witness (Section 175(2) proviso) Civil Procedure Code.

This being a very relevant item of evidence I wish to incorporate the

items of evidence elicited by the defence to prove document V1 and establish

that the annual value in 1988 was Rs. 396 (cross-examination of Plaintiff

witness).

m% : uy;auhdg js. 1 orK f,aLKh fmkajkjd.

uy;auhdf.a m,mqreoao wkqj lshkak, fus f,aLKh uyr.u m%foaYsh iNdj

;snqk ld,fha m%foaYsh iNdfjka ksl=;a l, f,aLKhla?

W. fusl 2002 Pqks udifha ksl=;a lrk ,o f,aLKhla.

m%. fuasl uyr.u m%foaYsh iNdfjs uyr.u-wjsiaidfjs,a, mdfra jrsmkus wxl

72 g wod,j ksl=;a lrmq jdraIsl ;lafiare jdra;djla?

W. Tjs. tfyu lshkak mq,qjka.

m% : uy;auhd uyr.u k.riNdj fjkak fmr, uyr.u m%dfoaYsh iNdfjs

fiajh l,do?

W. Ujs.

m% : fuu js. 1 orK f,aLKh wkqj jrsmkus wxl 72 orK ia:dkh ioyd 1988

jraIfha jdraIsl jgskdlu ioyka lr ;sfnkjd?

W. Ujs.

m% : js. 1 wkqj mdfra ku jYfhka ioyka jkafka wjsiaidfjs,a, mdr?

W. Ujs.

whs;slre ns. tus. Vs. js,aika

fldkafl%sgs jy, iys; f.dvke.s,a, iy bvu.

tys jdraIsl jgskdlu 396 lg ;lafiare fj,d ;sfnkjd.

9

W. Ujs.

fuu f,aLK wdra. vs m;au,;d lshk wh w;aika lr ;sfnkafka. weh ;ju fiajh

lrkjd

wef.a rPldrsfha fldgila fus jrsmkus iusnkaOj lghq;= lsrSu.

wef.a w;aik woqkkak mq,qjka.

pdkaoks oeka uyr.u k.r iNdfjs keye. l,ska jrsmkus lf,a thd. uu wehj;a

okakjd. wef.a w;aik;a okakjd.

js. 1 f,aLKfha w;aika ud yoqkd .kakjd.

tfiau js. 1 f,aLKh uyr.u k.r iNdfjka ksl=;a lrk ,o f,aLK nj;a

ms,s.kakjd. tfiau tu js. 1 f,aLKh uyr.u-wjsiaidfjs,a, mdfra jrsmkus wxl

72 orK ia:dkhg ksl=;a lrk ,o f,aLK njg;a ms,s.kakjd.

m% : 1989 jraIfha isg fus mrsY%h ;lafiare lr jrsmkus wxl 72 hs?

W. Ujs.

m% : 1989 os tys jraIsl jgskdlu re 396/- hs?

W. tfyuhs

m% : 1989 g fmr wxl 72 orK ia:dkh jHdmdrsl ia:dkhla jYfhka mej;=u

nj ms,s.kakjdo?

W. Ujs.

m% : 1988 os;a tf,i mej;=Kdo?

W. Ujs.

m% : 1987 os mej;=Kdo?

m% : 1986, 1985, 1984, 1983 jraI j, jHdmdrsl ia:dkhla jYfhka mej;=k nj

ms,s.kakjdo?

W. Ujs.

10

The Appellant no doubt proved that the annual value was Rs.

396/- (V1) in the year 1988. The value of this item of evidence is more probable

and legally admissible in cross-examination of Plaintiff’s witness by the defence

on the point suggested from document V1.

I have already discussed that the burden of proof, to prove that the

premises in dispute is ‘excepted’ premises is on the Plaintiff-Respondent.

Plaintiff party thought it fit only to produce the rates extracts as P2 from the

year 1989. The first assessment of the premises in dispute according to law is

not made known to court, by Plaintiff. There is evidence that the building in

question was in existence even in the year 1970. I note the requirement of the

Rent Act of 1972 to determine the premises as excepted premises. The schedule

to the Act reads thus:

Any business premises (other than premises referred to in regulation 1 or

regulation 2) situated in any area specified in Column 1 hereunder shall be excepted

premises for the purposes of this Act if the annual value thereof as specified in the

assessment made as business premises for the purposes of any rates levied by any

local authority under any written law in force on the first day of 1968 or, where the

assessment of the annual value thereof as business premises is made for the first time

after the first day of January 1968, the annual value as specified in such assessment,

exceeds the amount specified in the corresponding entry in Column 11:

1 11

Area Annual Value

Rs.

Municipality of Colombo 6,000

Municipality of Kandy, Galle or any other Municipality 4,000

11

Town within the meaning of the Urban Councils Ordinance 2,000

Town within the meaning of the Town Councils Ordinance 1,000

I have perused the case of Wickremasinghe Vs. Atapattu 1986 (1)

SLR 16

The plaintiff sued the defendant for ejectment of his tenant the defendant from

premises let to him. The entire basis of the action was that the premises were business

premises situated within the Town Council limits of Maharagama and excepted

premises as the annual value was over Rs. 1,000. The defendant was not resident in

the premises in suit but ran a private tutory in them.

Held –

The premises were business premises as a private tutory was being run there but for

the plaintiff to succeed the burden was on him to prove that the premises were

excepted premises within the meaning of the Rent Act. For this the plaintiff had to

prove firstly that the premises were assessed as business premises for the purpose of

rates levied by the local authority and secondly that the annual value was over Rs.

1000. All business premises of which the landlord is the Commissioner of National

Housing or a local authority are also excepted premises. The premises in suit though

of the annual value of over Rs. 1,000 had been assessed as residential premises. Hence

the plaintiff’s suit fails.

This court having examined the Judgments in the lower courts, it is

unfortunate that both courts did not even attempt to consider document V1

produced in cross examination of Plaintiff. Nor can I find a clue on perusal of

both Judgments as to whether the lower courts considered the relevant

12

provisions in the Rent Act, more particularly the schedule referred to above.

That is the yard stick to determine ‘excepted premises’.

The premises in dispute fall within the description of “town within

the meaning of the Town Councils Ordinance, the annual value being Rs. 1000/-

In the year 1988 the annual value was on Rs. 396/-. In fact there is material to

establish that the building in question was in existence in the year 1970. It may

be that the premises in dispute was in existence even prior to 1970. If that be so

the Plaintiff is bound to produce the assessment register for the year 1970 or

prior to 1970. The schedule referred to above under the Rent Act refer to the

period January 1968. Plaintiff has miserably failed to provide the required proof

to establish that the premises in dispute is an ‘excepted premises’. Plaintiff has

not discharged the burden of proof on this aspect. The premises in dispute does

not fall within the description of ‘excepted premises’ in terms of the Rent Act.

As such I set aside both Judgments of the District Court and the High Court and

allow this appeal as per sub paragraphs ‘c’, ‘d’, ‘e’ & ‘f’ of the prayer to the

petition. The questions of law are answers as follows:

(1) & (2) - yes in favour of the Appellant

(3) Yes, but in view of the answers to (1) and (2) above this answer does not

favour the Plaintiff.

13

(4) In view of the fact that the premises are not excepted premises it does

not arise.

Appeal allowed as above.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

B.P. Aluwihare P.C., J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Nalin Perera J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT