==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Final Appeal

to the Supreme Court from the Judgment dated

26th August 2016 of the Honourable Judge of

the High Court of Western Province (exercising

Civil Jurisdiction) in case No.

HC/CIVIL/97/2008/MR

SC/CHC/Appeal/02/2017 Arunesh Seelanathakuruppu

CHC Case No. 450/24 Gehan Mawatha

HC/CIVIL/97/2008/MR Koswatte, Talangama North,

Battaramulla.

PLAINTIFF

vs

1. Bartleet Asset Management (Pvt) Ltd.

2. Bartleet Religare Securities (Pvt) Ltd.

Both of -No. 65, Braybrooke Place, Colombo 02. DEFENDANTS AND NOW BETWEEN Arunesh Seelanathakuruppu

450/24 Gehan Mawatha,

Koswatte, Talangama North,

2

Battaramulla.

PLAINTIFF – APPELLANT

vs 1. Bartleet Asset Management (Pvt) Ltd.

2. Bartleet Religare Securities (Pvt) Ltd.

Both of -No. 65, Braybrooke Place, Colombo 02. DEFENDANT - RESPONDENTS

BEFORE : Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J. Menaka Wijesundera, J & M. Sampath K. B. Wijeratne J. COUNSEL : Mohamed Adamaly, P.C. with Anoukshi Vidanagamage for the Plaintiff – Appellant.

Romesh de Silva, P.C. with Shanaka Cooray for the Defendant - Respondents. ARGUED ON : 28.03.2025 DECIDED ON : 22.10.2025

M. Sampath K. B. Wijeratne J.

Introduction

The Plaintiff-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as ‘Appellant’) in this matter is a

businessman who was involved in a business ‘G. Seelanathakuruppu and Sons

(Tea Export) limited’ since 1990s. According to the Appellant, owing to his health

3

issues coupled with his age, he wanted to release himself from administering his

affairs and wanted to delegate the same to a professional company. Therefore, he

had approached the 1st Defendant -Respondent (hereinafter referred to as ‘1st

Respondent’) who is a professional Asset Management Company for the purpose

of managing, investing and administering his funds. Accordingly, a Fund

Management Agreement (‘P4’) has been entered into between the Appellant and

the 1st Respondent on 18.08.2005.

The 1st Respondent as already stated engages in the business of portfolio

investment management whereas the 2nd Defendant- Respondent (hereinafter

referred to as 2st Respondent) is a licensed stock broker operating in Colombo

stock Exchange who is entrusted with the management of the funds of the

Appellant entrusted with the 1st Respondent Company.

Appellant originally filed this action against 1st and 2nd Respondents in the

Commercial High Court of Western Province. The basis of his claim, as pleaded, is

that the Appellant has suffered losses of Rs. 6,200,870 by wrongful acts and/or

breach of contractual obligations and/or negligence and/or recklessness of the

Respondents in managing and investing the funds of the Appellant and there was

an unjust enrichment on the part of the Respondents.

In their answer, the 1ˢᵗ and 2ⁿᵈ Respondents denied the Appellant’s claim and

sought to dismiss the action.

After trial, the learned Commercial High Court Judges held that the Appellant

have failed to prove the purported cause of action and dismissed the action with

taxed cost. Being dissatisfied with the judgment of the Commercial High Court,

the Appellants preferred the instant appeal before this Court seeking to set aside

the judgment of the Commercial High Court and to get the relief prayed in the

plaint tendered to Commercial High Court in HC(Civil) 97/2008/MR.

4

Breach of contract

The relationship between the Appellant and the Respondents primarily arisen out

of the Fund Management Agreement (‘P4’) where Appellant entrusted the

management of fund constituting a sum of fifteen million Rupees to the 1st

Respondent, Bartleet Asset Management (Pvt) limited.

The Appellant states that the Respondents are in breach of following provisions of

the said Fund Management agreement.

Schedule 1 item 5- The manager shall make every effort to make the

maximum possible return to the assignor that is not below the rate of

risk-free return prevailing on the commencement date. That is nine per

centum per annum.

Schedule 1 item 5.1- However the manager thrives to make a minimum

retune of sixteen per centum per annum. [emphasis added]

It is the submission of the Appellant that as per the said clause Appellant is

guaranteed with minimum return of 9% per annum and obliges the Respondent to

aspire to provide a return of 16% per annum.

When closely reading the aforesaid provisions, there is nothing in the provision

that compel the Respondent to guarantee minimum return of 9% per annum as

evident in the phase ‘shall make effort’ which only requires the Respondents to

make best possible effort to achieve such target.

Here it is noteworthy that the agreement entered into between the Appellant and

the 1st Respondent is an agreement to manage and invest the funds of the

Appellant in different portfolios, in essence a ‘risky business’ considering the fact

there will always be a probability of incurring losses relative to the expected return

5

on the capital one put into investment irrespective of the type of the investment

you undertake.

In BP Southern Africa (Pty) Ltd v Mahmood Investments (Pty) Ltd1 (SCA) Lewis JA stated the following in a unanimous judgment at para [11],

“It is settled law that the contractual provision must be interpreted in its context, having regard to the relevant circumstances known to the parties at the time of entering into the contract …. It is also clear that the provision must be given a commercially sensible meaning …”

In such a context, interpreting the aforesaid provision in favour of the Appellant

would not make commercially sensible meaning, but rather would impose an

unfair burden on the Respondents considering the fact that there is always a risk of

investment suffering a loss despite one exercising his expertise to best of his

abilities.

The Appellant argues that as per the agreement marked ‘P4’, the Respondents are

required to invest the funds in diversified portfolios instead of ‘placing all the

eggs in one basket’ and therefore Respondents have acted in contravention to the

Fund Management Agreement entered into between the parties. To support his

contention the Appellant relies on Clause 1 of the Agreement and Clause 4 of the

Schedule 1 which read as follows;

Clause 1- The manager shall with the concurrence of the Assignor agree

upon an investment plan as per schedule 1 of this agreement which shall

include the guidelines on the mixture of assets, benchmarks for

measurement of performance, provision for income distribution, any

specific instructions of the assignor and such other matters as may be

mutually agreed between the parties.

1 [2010] 2 All SA 295.

6

Clause 4 of schedule 1- fixed income securities of any type that would

consist but not limited to Government securities, corporate debentures,

promissory notes, commercial papers, scrutinize papers, unit trusts.

Any type of equities those are listed on the Colombo Stock Exchange

Any listings that would come after the commencement date too would be

considered the purpose of investing in, either upon their listings or at

Initial Public offerings."

However, Clause 2 of the said agreement gives ‘sole discretion over managing the

funds’ to fund Manager. Accordingly fund manager has the discretion to determine

the type/ types of investments to be done as per the agreement. However, the

question whether Respondents are actually negligent in investing all the funds in

one investment, I would be addressing in the latter part of the judgment.

Wrongful Delegation of Authority

Appellant submit that the 1st Respondent in contravention to the provisions of

agreement P4 has delegated entire management of the fund to the 2nd Respondent.

As per the Latin maxim ‘Delegatus non potest delegare’ Which translates as ‘a

delegate cannot further delegate’. Therefore, the resultant position is that an agent

cannot without the authority of principal devolve upon another the obligations that

he himself has undertaken to fulfill personally as observed by Thesiger LJ in De

Bussche v. Alt. 2

However, this is only a general rule and there are numerous instances where an

agent can validly delegate his authority.

In De Bussche v. Alt (supra) Thesiger LJ went on to held that,

2 (1878) LR8 ChD 286 310.

7

“[T]he exigencies of business do from time to time render necessary the

carrying out of the instructions of a principal by a person other than the

agent originally instructed for the purpose, and where that is the case,

the reason of the thing requires that the rule should be relaxed, so as, on

the one hand, to enable the agent to appoint what has been termed 'a

sub-agent or substitute and, on the other hand, to constitute, in the

interests and for the protection of the principal, a direct privity of

contract between him and such substitute.”

Therefore, a delegation will be valid in the event where principal has expressly or

impliedly authorised such delegation.

In the instant case, when reading Clause 4 of the agreement with the Clause 2 it is

quite evident that 1st Respondent is empowered to delegate the management of

funds to a management officer.

Clause 2- "The manager shall have the sole discretion over managing the funds and this would not preclude by and way the manager consulting the assignor on matters that the manager deems to be necessary to do so."

Clause 4- "The manager shall appoint a person to manage the portfolio (hereinafter referred to as the fund manager) who shall be responsible for the general directions and supervision of the guidelines specified in the investment plan"

As the Appellant expressly authorises the 1st Respondent to delegate the fund

management to a ‘management officer’ by the agreement ‘P4’ itself, in the evet of

absence of evidence to the effect that 2nd Respondent is unqualified or unsuitable

fulfilling the delegated task, the delegation would not be unlawful.

8

Negligence

Here the relationship that exists between the Appellant and the Respondents takes

a form of agent- principal relationship. An agent is required to exercise reasonable

care and skill.

The standard of care is that expected of a reasonable agent in his position. Stuart

Smith LJ in Chaudry vs Prabhakar3 sums up the duty of care expected of an agent

exercising any trade or profession in the following manner;

“'[H]e is required to exercise the degree of skill and diligence

reasonably to be expected of a person exercising such trade, profession

or calling, irrespective of the degree of skill he may possess”

An agent could be liable in negligence if he fails to meet that expectation.

As a general rule, investment advisors and stock brokers owe their clients a duty to

carry out client instructions with due diligence, care and in good faith. In most

cases, if the investment advisors and stock brokers discharges those duties, then

the advisor will not be considered negligent if the resulting investment turns out to

be unprofitable.

Appellant submit that the Respondents were negligent in investing all the funds

only in share market. There is a risk of any investment. Though one undertakes

higher risk when investing funds in a one particular branch rather than diversifying

investment, that per se does not mean that investment is reckless or irresponsible

as this depended on the particular circumstances of the investor, its objectives and

the context and background of the investment itself.

Appellant contends that he was under the impression that portfolio investments are

equivalent to fixed deposits. However, unlike Fixed Deposits which is known for

3 [1989] 1 WLR 29 (CA).

9

their safety and guaranteed returns, stock market is highly volatile and dynamic,

with prices fluctuating based on variety of factors. Stocks have the potential for

higher returns compared to FDs. While FDs offer a fixed deposit interest rate,

stocks can provide substantial gains if performs well. This is one of the main

reasons that investors choose to invest in stock market rather than opting for fixed

deposits.

Being a businessman himself, it could be assumed that the Appellant was aware of

the risk and benefits associated with the investments done in stock market. As

revealed by the evidence, it was not disputed before the Commercial High Court

that there was a risk involve with the investment and it was within the knowledge

of the Appellant as well.

Q: Your loss according to you is that you gave a certain sum of money

to invest and you did not get it back?

A: Correct.

Q: That is, the nature of investment in the share market. If you invest in

the market, the price of the shares can go up or the price of the shares

can go down, correct?

A: Correct.

Q: Investing in any type of thing is a risk.

A: Yes.

Q: When you invested monies or you wanted monies invested, you knew

there was a risk entailed.

A: That is right.

Q: That risk was entitled because when you invest in the share market,

the price of the shares can go up or the price of the shares can come

down?

A: Exactly.

(Proceedings before CHC dated 11.03.2013)

10

As Portfolio value of any investment may fluctuate according to market risks, in

this context Respondents cannot be made liable for such, unless it is due to their

own fault that such loss is incurred.

The Fund Management Agreement itself states as follows:

Clause 11- “The manager shall take all reasonable steps to prudently manage the portfolio assigned to them but shall not be responsible for losses of whatever nature unless such losses are attributable to fraud or willful negligence on the part of the manager or agent or servants occasioned by market conditions"

Thus, I am of the view that mere loss that is incurred by investing in share market

is not prima facie evidence to indicate that Respondents have been negligent in

their dealings and to hold them accountable for such loss unless there is clear and

convincing evidence to that effect.

Fraudulent Misrepresentation

The Appellant claims that Respondents have acted fraudulently by misrepresenting

the facts to the Plaintiff by stating that they will ‘guarantee or return the

investment’ to induce the Appellant to enter into the agreement ‘P4’ and that the

investment ‘is doing well’ during the continuance of the agreement to give the

assurance to the Appellant that investment was secure.

In order to find fraud on the part of the Respondents through misrepresentation,

following elements needed to be proven; A false representation that was made to

the client, some level of knowledge of the falsehood of the representation on the

11

part of the maker of such statement, such false misrepresentation has induced the

client to act and such actions resulted in a loss.4

Here one has to consider whether misrepresentation was linked sufficiently closely

or directly to the loss for legal liability to ensue. In this case there are ample of

evidence to suggest that the Appellant possessed relevant knowledge at all time to

make an informed decision to advise the Respondents if he was not in agreement

with the decisions taken by the Respondents, though in such event, the Respondent

would not be liable for any loss incurred as a consequence.

Q: The question is you were made aware of every purchase

by sending you a purchase note?

A: That is the trading of 3 days I used to get all the purchase notes.

(………..)

Q: Similarly, when the Defendant Company sold any of your shares in

your share portfolio, the whole note was sent to you?

A: Sent to me yes.

Q: At no stage have you protested to the Defendant Company about the

sale of any of those shares?

A: I am not supposed to do that. I didn't do it.

(………..)

Q: You did not protest. As a fact you met them every month and you

accepted their full explanation as a fact. In that background, if the

4 In Brackett v. Griswold, 20 N.E. 376, 378 (N.Y. 1889) fraudulent misrepresentation is defined as follows “false representation, known to be such, made by the defendant, calculated and intended to influence the plaintiff, and which came to his knowledge, and in reliance upon which he in good faith parted with property, or incurred the obligation which occasioned the injury of which he complains”

12

shares went down in twice, that's the risk you take when you invest in

the share market?

A: That's right. When the share price went down and when I asked

them every month when I see the portfolio value, it has gone down in

value, they say now it is not good time to invest, we have invested on

commercial papers, government bonds and various other investment

activities. As far as they take my 16 p.a. monthly, I was not worried

about what they are doing. [emphasis added]

(Proceedings before CHC dated 11.03.2013)

Accordingly, I am of the view that as Appellant being a businessman himself and

having the possession of all the relevant information including CDS statements,

purchase and sales notes regarding shares and portfolio statements to make an

informed decision cannot said to have misled by the Respondents.

Unjust enrichment

Though Appellant contend that the Respondents have unjustly enriched through

the Appellant, he has failed to produce any positive evidence of such unjust

enrichment. Moreover, the statements of the Appellant himself shows that the

allegation of unjust enrichment is an assumption which he himself is not aware of,

as for a fact.

Q: It's not a question what you meant. Please answer my question. You

said under oath that you are not aware whether the defendants have

been enriched. Now my question therefore is, it is a mistake when you

say in this paragraph that the defendants have been enriched?

13

A: I have lost Rs. 6.2 million. The defendants may have taken that

money.

Court: You are not sure about it?

A: I am not very sure.

[emphasis added]

(Proceedings before CHC dated 11.03.2013)

Evaluation of evidence by learned Judges of Commercial High Court

At the trial, a number of documents were marked in evidence. After the trial, the

learned judges of the Commercial High Court refused to admit documents marked

‘P5(a)’, ‘P5(b)’ and ‘P (10)’ as evidence which is now being challenged before this

Court.

The learned Judges of the Commercial High Court refused to admit ‘P5(a)’,

‘P5(b)’ and ‘P (10)’ on the ground that they are mere photocopies and originals

have not been tendered before the Court. Further it was held that ‘P5(a)’ and

‘P5(b)’ which are two cheque deposit slips are inadmissible as evidence as officers

of the relevant bank was not called to give evidence. Similarly, no author or any

officer of the issuing authority was called to prove the content of ‘P10’ which is a

client stock valuation report issued by Colombo Stock Exchange.

It is noteworthy that under existing law of Sri Lanka four categories of evidence

are recognized, namely ‘oral evidence’, ‘documentary evidence’,

‘contemporaneous audio-visual recordings’ and ‘computer evidence’.

Documentary evidence plays a significant role particularly in civil cases at the

case at hand. According to section 61 of the Evidence Ordinance, the contents of

documents may be proved either by primary or by secondary evidence. While

section 62 describes what is primary evidence relating to a document, Section 63

elaborates on what comes within the purview of secondary evidence. As per

14

section 64 documents must be proved by primary evidence, except in the

circumstances laid down in section 65.

In Stassen Exports Limited vs. Brooke Bond Group Ltd., and Two others5

Saleem Masoof J. expounded the rationale behind Section 64 and 65 as follows;

“It may be useful to pause here to explain that although according to

Section 61 of the Evidence Ordinance, the contents of document may be

proved either by primary or by secondary evidence, it is expressly

provided in Section 64 of the Ordinance that documents must be proved

by primary evidence, expect in the specific instances listed in Section 65

of the Ordinance as cases in which secondary evidence may be given.

This provision embodies the so called ‘Best Evidence’ rule, which

postulates that it is in the interests of justice to produce the best

evidence as opposed to inferior evidence, which in the case of a

document would mean that it is desirable to produce in court the

original rather than a copy thereto”

As noted by Yasantha Kodagoda, P.C., J. in Weerawarnakulasuriya Boosabaduge

Shamaline Fernando vs Kusalanthi Fernando and Another6 since these

provisions have been crafted to ensure that genuine documents are produced in

judicial proceedings, and thus go into the very root of the integrity of documentary

evidence, the rules relating to admissibility of documentary evidence must be

strictly adhered to.

Thus, I am of the view that learned Judges of the Commercial High Court are

correct in their refusal to admit documentary evidence marked ‘P5(a)’, ‘P5(b)’ and

‘P (10)’.

5 [2010] 2 SRI L.R. 36. 6 SC Appeal No. SC Appeal 55/2020, SCM 9.11.2023.

15

Conclusion

For the reasons stated above, the judgment of the Commercial High Court is

affirmed. Appeal is dismissed with costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J.

I Agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Menaka Wijesundera, J.

I Agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT