SC/APP /145/2016

1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

SC Appeal 145/2016

Court of Appeal Case No:

CA/LA/493/06

DC Case No: 20456/L

Hettiarachchige Manel alias Manel

Hettiarachchi,

2/38, Heerasagala Road,

Kandy

PLAINTIFF

- VS –

1. Victor Seneviratne

2. Manel Dissanayake

Both of

1/38, Heerasagala Road, Kandy

3. Seetha Chandrasekara (deceased)

32, Devi Road, Watapulawa, Kandy

3A. Indrani Dissanayake,

32, Devi Road, Watapulawa

Kandy

DEFENDANTS

AND THEN

Manel Dissanayake

Both of 1/38, Heerasagala Road,

Kandy

SC/APP /145/2016

2

2nd DEFENDANT – APPELLANT

- VS -

Hettiarachchige Manel alias Manel

Hettiarachchi,

2/38, Heerasagala Road, Kandy

PLAINTIFF – RESPONDENT

1. Victor Seneviratne

of 1/38, Heerasagala Road, Kandy

3A. Indrani Dissanayake,

32, Devi Road, Watapulawa,

Kandy.

1st and 3A Defendants – Respondents

AND NOW BETWEEN

Manel Dissanayake

Both of 1/38, Heerasagala Road,

Kandy

2nd DEFENDANT – APPELLANT –

APPELLANT

- VS -

Hettiarachchige Manel alias Manel

Hettiarachchi,

2/38, Heerasagala Road, Kandy

SC/APP /145/2016

3

PLAINTIFF – RESPONDENT –

RESPONDENT

1. Victor Seneviratne

of 1/38, Heerasagala Road,

Kandy.

1A. Neeta Magret Seneviratne (nee

Amarasinghe)

1/38, Heerasgala Road,

Mulgampola, Kandy

3. Seetha Chandrasekara

32, Devi Road, Watapulawa, Kandy

3A. Indrani Dissanayake

No. 32, Heerassagala Road, Kandy

1st AND 3A DEFENDANTS –

RESPONDENTS – RESPONDENTS

Before : Justice Murdu Fernando, PC., CJ.

Justice E.A.G.R. Amarasekara, J.

Justice Achala Wengappuli, J.

Counsel

:

Sachindra Sanders instructed by Ms. Manoja Gunawardana for the 2nd

Defendant – Appellant – Appellant.

Ms. Mudithavo Premachandra for the Plaintiff – Respondent –

Respondent.

SC/APP /145/2016

4

Argued on : 31.01.2023

Decided on : 13.06.2025

E.A.G.R Amarasekara, J.

The Plaintiff – Respondent – Respondent (Hereinafter referred to as the “Plaintiff”) instituted

an action in the District Court of Kandy under DC Case No: 20456/L against the 2nd Defendant

– Petitioner – Appellant (Hereinafter referred to as the “Appellant” or “2nd Defendant”) and 1st

and 3A Defendants – Respondents – Respondents (Hereinafter sometimes referred to as the

“1st Defendant” and “3A Defendant” and all 3 Defendants will be collectively referred to as

“Defendants”) by virtue of the Plaint dated 3.7.2001 – Vide page 142 of the Brief.

As per the Plaint dated 03.07.2001, the Plaintiff had stated how the title devolved on her from

the original owners to the land mentioned in the schedule to the Plaint and she had also claimed

prescriptive title to the same. She had also stated that the whole land that belonged to her is

described in the 1st schedule to the Plaint and the portion disputed by the Defendants is

described in the 2nd schedule to the Plaint. As per the Plaint, her land is also depicted as Lot 1

and Lot 2 in Plan No.3764 made by T. B. Atthanayake, L.S.

The Plaintiff, in her Plaint, alleged that the Defendants were disputing the southern boundary

of the land described in the 2nd schedule to the Plaint from March 2001 and they had encroached

a certain portion from that land towards the South. Thus, the Plaintiff, among other things, had

prayed for a declaration of title to the land described in the 1st and 2nd schedules to the Plaint,

to demarcate the southern boundary of the land described in the 2nd schedule to the Plaint and

eviction of the Defendants from the portion encroached and to put her back in peaceful

possession of the same.

The 1st and 2nd Defendants filed their Answer and denied any right for the Plaintiff to file or

maintain an action against them. They had stated that they are the protected tenants in terms of

Rent Act under the 3rd Defendant, and there was a rent and ejectment case between the 3rd

Defendant and the 1st Defendant before the District Court, Kandy, which was decided in favour

of the 1st Defendant. The 2nd and 3rd Defendants alleged that this was a collusive action by the

SC/APP /145/2016

5

Plaintiff and the 3rd Defendant to evict the 1st and 2nd Defendants from the property relevant to

this action. Even though the 1st and the 2nd Defendant had averred that they are tenants under

the 3rd Defendant, in the land relevant to this case at hand (vide paragraph 3 of their joint

Answer), they have described in a schedule to the said Answer, a property that once belonged

to the 3rd Defendant- vide paragraph 4 and schedule of the said Answer. However, the 1st and

2nd Defendants had alleged that there appeared to be an attempt by the Plaintiff to encroach

their 10 feet wide access road. Thus, the 1st and 2nd Defendants had prayed for a dismissal of

the Plaintiff’s action, a declaration that they are the lawful tenants under the 3rd Defendant and

to make a 10 feet road available as their access road to the property described in the schedule

to the Answer. It must be noted that the description of the land in the Plaint is quite different

from the land described in the schedule to the Answer.

The 3rd Defendant or her substitute 3A Defendant had not filed an Answer and the matter had

been decided ex parte against the 3A Defendant along with an inter-parte Judgment made

against the 1st and 2nd Defendant following an inspection of the subject matter that took place

with the consent of the Plaintiff and the 1st and 2nd Defendants.

During the inspection, the learned District Judge had observed a roadway relating to the dispute

presented by the Defendant which was only 4 ½ and 5 feet wide in contrast to the claim of 10

feet width by the 1st and 2nd Defendants. It was also observed by the learned District Judge that

said road access was widened for about 6 to 7 feet of width at a certain place by the Defendants

on a day close to the inspection. The learned District Judge further observed certain things

relating to the water drainage system on the ground and hindrance caused to the flaw of water

due to certain acts of the said Defendants. It should be noted that the said Defendant’s claim in

the Answer was that an existing 10 feet wide road was at the verge of being encroached by the

Plaintiff but no road with such width was observed by the learned District Judge other than an

attempt to widen it by the Defendants.

Thus, the learned District Judge, after the inspection done on 15.09.2003, delivered his inter

parte Judgment dated 07.10.2003 based on the inspection which among other things stated as

follows;

• Being tenants, the 1st and 2nd Defendants have no right to ask for a wider access road

from the Plaintiff and it is a claim that should be prayed for by the 3rd Defendant.

SC/APP /145/2016

6

• Defendants should not block the water drainage system on the ground and Defendants

should make certain changes to the said drainage system as directed in the Judgment.

On the same day the learned District Judge delivered his aforesaid inter parte Judgment,

aforesaid ex parte trial against the 3A Defendant had taken place and the Judgment dated

07.10.2003, was given against the 3A Defendant. As per the page 97 of the brief, the 1st and

2nd Defendants were also present and represented by their lawyer before the District Court on

that date. Thus, they should be aware of the ex parte Judgment against the 3A Defendant from

the day it was delivered. In terms of the ex parte Judgment, which appears to have been later

confirmed as there is no dispute over that, reliefs in Prayer (a), (b), (c) and (e) had been granted

to the Plaintiff against the 3A Defendant. It appears that the Prayer (d) was to call for a

commission report through a surveyor and such report had been taken and marked during the

ex parte trial. Thus, all the reliefs prayed for by the Plaintiff had been granted to her which

includes the declaration of title, demarcation of the southern boundary of the land in the second

schedule and especially the eviction of the Defendant from the encroached portion of the land

which is depicted in the said plan marked X at the ex-parte trial. It appears that a decree had

been entered combining the ex parte Judgment and inter parte Judgment and later on, an

amended decree had been entered- vide pages 165 to 175 of the brief.

It is alleged in the Petition that the Plaintiff sought to amend the decree without notice being

sent in that regard to the Petitioner (the 2nd Defendant) and the 1st Defendant as per the

procedure laid down in Section 189 of the Civil Procedure Code (hereinafter “C P C”). All the

journal entries of the District Court or the full brief of the District Court including documents

relating to service of notices etc have not been tendered to establish that no notice was given.

Only certified copies of selected portions of the District Court are available in the brief. It is

true that if the Judgment or order is going to be amended, it is essential to give notice. However,

basically, a decree is one should be prepared by the Court (vide Section 188 of C P C) in

conformity with the Judgment. Thus, what is important is whether this amended Decree is in

conformity with the Judgments delivered or not. On the other hand, I do not see any clear

allegation to say that the amended decree is not in conformity with the judgments delivered. If

it is in conformity with the Judgment, it is the decree that has to be executed. It appears that the

position of the Appellant is that the said decree should not be allowed to be executed against

or to affect the 1st Defendant and the 2nd Defendant, as the case between the Plaintiff and them

SC/APP /145/2016

7

was decided as per the findings of the inspection and concluded, making it unlawful to execute

the decree against them. Further, as no notice was given, it is violative of Section 189 and

breach of natural justice.

It appears that based on the resistance made to the execution of the writ of possession, the 1st

and 2nd Defendants and another was charged for contempt, but what is challenged in this

application is the Order made by the learned District Judge dated 08.12.2006, refusing the

application made by the 1st and 2nd Defendants, which contained certain objection against the

issuance and enforcement of writ of execution and the refusal of the Court of Appeal to set

aside the said Order of the District Court by the Court of Appeal judgment dated 05.10.2015.

As per the Order dated 08.12.2006, the learned District Judge refused the said application made

by the 2nd Defendant, among other things, on the following grounds;

• Even though the position of the 2nd Defendant was that there is no decree empowering

to issue a writ of execution against the 1st and 2nd Defendants, or to evict the 1st and 2nd

Defendants, prayer (e) of the Plaint had been granted to the Plaintiff which prayed for

the eviction of the Defendants and everyone claims under them from the portion

encroached towards the southern boundary of the portion of land described in the

second schedule to the Plaint and to put her back in peaceful possession of the same.

• There is no appeal made against that judgment.

• As the tenancy under the 3rd Defendant had been admitted, there is no bar to execute

this writ of execution.

The learned Judges of the Court of Appeal refused to set aside the said Order, inter alia on the

grounds mentioned in the paragraph quoted below;

“All parties have not disputed the fact that the 1st and 2nd defendant petitioners are tenants of

the 3A defendant and is in occupation of the house belonging to the 3A defendant according to

plan No. 2003-40 a strip of two perches of land belonging to the plaintiff’s land had been

encroached by 3A defendant, the land shown as Lot 3 is occupied by 1st and 2nd defendants.

The exparte judgment given against the 3A defendant petitioner on this issue have not been

challenged by the 3A defendant. The prayer to the plaintiff respondent’s plaint to evict the

SC/APP /145/2016

8

defendants which includes the 1st and 2nd defendants as well has not been challenged in appeal

by the 3A defendant. The exparte judgment stands unchallenged.”

Further the learned Court of Appeal Judges has stated that the learned District Judge had

carefully analyzed the evidence and has correctly refused the objections and allow the Plaintiff

to execute decree of the District Court.

When one reads the above reasons given by the Court of Appeal, as well as the learned District

Judge, it may give the impression, that, as prayer (e) was granted by the ex parte Judgment,

grant of that relief itself allows evicting the 1st and 2nd Defendants qua 1st and 2nd Defendant as

it is prayed in that part of the prayer to evict all the Defendants and all who claims under them

from the encroached portion and put the Plaintiff back in peaceful possession. However, the

case between the Plaintiff and the 1st and 2nd Defendants concluded with the inspection and the

inter parte Judgment made in accordance with the inspection. Thus, as far as the ex parte

Judgment against 3A Defendant is concerned, prayer (e) in the Plaint has to be read and

understood as a relief prayed for to evict the 3rd Defendant and all who claim under her from

the said encroached portion of the land as 1st and 2nd Defendants are not parties to the ex parte

trial and Judgment. If the 1st and 2nd Defendants fall within the category of ‘all who claim under

the 3rd Defendant’, irrespective of the fact that they were the 1st and 2nd Defendants for the inter

parte Judgment, they have to face the consequence of the issuance of the writ against the 3A

Defendant. Even if they were never Defendants in this case, and only 3A was the Defendant,

still if they fall under the term ‘all who claim under 3A Defendant’, they are bound to respect

the decree. If the 1st and 2nd Defendants do not fall under the term ‘all who claim under the 3rd

Defendant’, they can make their claim or objection when the writ of possession is executed,

but here admittedly, through their Answer, they have stated that the Plaintiff has no right to file

or maintain an action of the nature of what is contained in the Plaint against them, indicating

that they have nothing to do with the cause of action of the Plaintiff, which is based on the

encroachment of his property, apparently because they are tenants of the 3rd Defendant, who is

the landlord. When the writ is issued against the legal representative of the 3rd Defendant,

namely 3A defendant, they cannot say that they do not fall under the term “All who claim under

the 3rd Defendant”. In fact, the relevant part of the amended decree which is relevant to the ex

parte Judgment, order to evict the 3A Defendant and all who claim under 3A Defendant. Thus,

the amended decree and any writ of execution based on that amended decree is lawful. On the

other hand, any unlawful encroachment done in favour of the 3rd Defendant has to be proceeded

SC/APP /145/2016

9

against the 3rd Defendant (now against his legal representative) and people claimed under him.

The amended decree with regard to the ex parte Judgment has been entered lawfully for that

purpose. The inter parte Judgment and the part of the decree entered in that regard against 1st

and 2nd Defendants qua 1st and 2nd Defendants cannot stop executing the decree against the 3rd

Defendant’s legal representative and against them, not as 1st and 2nd Defendants but as the

people who claimed under 3rd Defendant. There may be a part of a building put up on the

encroached portion, but it goes with the soil rights of the Plaintiff, as the case had been decided

against the 3rd Defendant and in favour of the Plaintiff with regard to the encroached portion.

The Plaintiff is entitled to get the amended decree enforced against 3rd Defendant (now the 3A

Defendant, legal representative) and people claimed under him. The 3rd Defendant and the 1st

and the 2nd Defendants through their agreement to let cannot create tenancy rights over the

property of the Plaintiff without his consent.

It appears that because of the cross claim they made against the Plaintiff over a dispute

regarding a road access, the inspection had taken place. However, it has to be observed that

they could not have made a cross claim when they refused the Plaintiffs’ entitlement to file and

maintain the action, as cross claims can be made when it is of a nature that can be set off with

the claim of the Plaintiff. Anyway, no objection had taken place, and with the consent of parties,

an inspection had been taken place and an inter parte Judgment had been made on that.

Anyway, that part of the decree is not challenged.

While granting Leave to Appeal, this Court has accepted the following questions of law, and

they are answered accordingly as below;

Q. i) Did the learned District Judge as well as their Lordships /Ladyships of the Court of

Appeal err, misdirect and/non direct themselves by failing to appreciate that the

Plaintiff had got the decree amended without prior notice to the petitioner and the 1st

Defendant by violating the express provisions of section 189 of the Civil Procedure

Code (as Amended)?

A. Answered in the Negative as, other than a mere statement in the application, there is

no sufficient material to say that no notice was given to the 1st and 2nd Defendants in

the brief provided. On the other hand, the relevant part of the amended decree is

relevant to the 3rd Defendant (Now 3A legal Representative) and people claiming

SC/APP /145/2016

10

under her. Thus, if any notice is necessary, it has to be given to the 3A Defendant, but

she had been absconding the proceedings and the matter went ex parte. After serving

notice, no step had been taken to vacate the ex parte Judgment. Thus, there is no need

of notice on the 3rd Defendant or her legal representative. Further, being present on the

day of the ex parte trial, the 1st and the 2nd Defendants were aware of the outcome of

that trial.

Q. ii) Did the Learned District Judge as well as their Lordships /Ladyships in the Court

of Appeal err, misdirect and/or nondirect themselves by holding that, the amended

decree in question had not caused any prejudice to the petitioner’s tenancy rights?

A. Answered in the Negative.

Q. iii) Did the Learned district Judge as well as their Lordships /Ladyships of the Court

of Appeal err, misdirect and/or none direct themselves that the settlement between the

Petitioner and the plaintiff could have been enlarged to include the execution of the

writ of possession where the settlement(sic) involved or concerned the 3A Defendant?

A. Answered in the Negative.

Q. iv) Are the 1st and 2nd Defendant-Petitioner-Petitioner bound by the Judgment against

the 3rd Defendant as those who are holding under the 3rd Defendant?

A. Answered in the affirmative.

Q. v) By the Judgment delivered against the 1st and 2nd Defendant-Petitioners has their

claim being rejected by and dismissed by the District Court?

A. Answered in the affirmative as their claim had not been granted after the Judgment

made following the inspection.

Q. vi) Have the 1st and 2nd defendants fail to prefer an appeal against the said Judgment

if they are agreed (sic)?

SC/APP /145/2016

11

A. Does not arise as the Judgment against the 1st and 2nd Defendants appear to have been

made after inspection in terms of Sections 408 and 428 of the C P C. Thus, no appeal

lies. Judgment against the 3rd Defendant was made ex parte and 3rd Defendant did not

move to vacate it. 1st and 2nd Defendants being persons claimed under the 3rd

Defendant and not a party to the ex parte trial, has no right of appeal over it.

On the other hand, as said before, the 1st and 2nd Defendants do not have any rights to the lands

of the Plaintiff. Their contractual rights as tenants are with the 3A Defendant. That has nothing

to do with the rights of the Plaintiffs relating to the encroached lands of the Plaintiff. The 1st

and 2nd Defendants have not claimed any land rights to that portion, nor have any contractual

rights with the Plaintiff as to the tenancy. Therefore, it cannot be said that any substantial right

of the 1st and 2nd Defendants are going to be affected by the enforcement of the amended decree.

I do not see any reasonable ground for making these appeals to the Court of Appeal and then

to this Court other than relying on mere technicalities without any merit. The conduct of the

Appellant has hindered the Plaintiff enjoying his victory peacefully for about twenty years.

Thus, this Court orders that the Plaintiff-Respondent is entitled to twice the amount of taxed

costs.

Hence, this appeal is dismissed with costs as above.

……………………………………………

Judge of the Supreme Court

Hon. Murdu Fernado, PC, CJ.

I agree.

………………………………………….

The Chief Justice

Hon. Achala Wengappuli, J.

I agree.

…………………………………………

Judge of the Supreme Court