==== BLOCKS ==== 

SC CHA APPEAL NO. 13/2023 - JUDGMENT 1

IN THE SUPREME COURT

OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of Section

754(1) of the Civil Procedure Code read with

Section 5 of the High Court of the Provinces

(Special Provisions) Act No.10 of 1996.

Ran Ruwan Company (Private) Limited

382/4, Sri Nandasara Avenue,

Arangala,

Hokandara North.

Defendant-Appellant

SC CHC APPEAL NO.13/2023

Commercial High Court Case

No.561/2016/MR

-Vs-

Bank of Ceylon

Bank of Ceylon Square,

Bank of Ceylon Aveneue,

Colombo 01.

Plaintiff-Respondent

SC CHA APPEAL NO. 13/2023 - JUDGMENT 2

BEFORE : YASANTHA KODAGODA, PC, J.

KUMUDINI WICKREMASINGHE, J. &

MENAKA WIJESUNDERA, J.

COUNSEL : Sumedha Mahawanniarachchi instructed by Nishan

Balasooriya for the Defendant-Appellant.

Neomal Pelpola with Aushadhi Wickramasinghe instructed

by Subhani Nanayakkara for the Plaintiff-Respondent.

ARGUED & DECIDED ON : 11TH November 2025

JUDGMENT

YASANTHA KODAGODA, PC, J.

This direct Appeal to the Supreme Court arises out of a judgment of the High Court of

the Provinces exercising commercial jurisdiction (therefore commonly referred to as the

‘Commercial High Court’) dated 3rd February 2023 by which the Commercial High Court

had held in favour of the Plaintiff in case No. CHC 561/2016/MR.

Albeit briefly, the position of the Plaintiff is that the afore-stated action was filed to

recover a sum of Rs. 7,428,273.94 together with interest thereon from the Defendant who

is the present Appellant before this Court. The position of the Plaintiff, which has been

substantiated by way of evidence led at the trial and accepted by the learned trial Judge,

is that the Defendant-Appellant had obtained a term loan amounting to Rs. 4,650,000.00

payable within a period of 120 months in monthly installments. The stipulated interest

rate was 16% per annum. The total sum to be paid back to the Plaintiff – Respondent was

Rs. 7,700,895.00.

SC CHA APPEAL NO. 13/2023 - JUDGMENT 3

Learned Counsel for the Plaintiff-Respondent has drawn the attention of this Court to

document marked and produced “Pe 3” which he submits stood as both the application

seeking the loan (which originated from the Defendant – Appellant) as well as the

corresponding loan agreement. It is not in dispute that “Pe 3” has been signed by two

Directors of the Defendant - Appellant company and by an official of the Plaintiff –

Respondent bank. Further proof of the afore-stated loan agreement is found in document

marked and produced “V 1” produced at the trial by the Defendant – Appellant which

reiterates the terms and conditions of the afore-stated loan. It is not in dispute that the

Plaintiff - Respondent had disbursed a sum of Rs. 4,650,000.00 to the Defendant -

Appellant’s current account bearing No. 369 3646. “Pe 3” discloses the purpose for which

the loan was sought by the Defendant – Appellant and granted by the Plaintiff –

Respondent, and that being to service the working capital requirements of the Defendant

– Appellant company. In view of the foregoing items of evidence, I conclude that by the

signing of “Pe 3”, the Plaintiff – Respondent and the Defendant – Appellant had entered

into an enforceable agreement.

The parties before this Court are not in disagreement that the disbursed amount having

been credited to the account referred to above had been mobilized by the Plaintiff-

Respondent to partially settle an overdraft facility that was pending in the same current

account. It is also not in dispute that the Defendant - Appellant had failed to honour the

terms and conditions contained in “Pe 3” and had failed and neglected to repay the afore

stated loan. In the circumstances, I conclude that the Defendant – Appellant had

breached the loan agreement referred to above. Thus, as determined by the learned trial

Judge, the amount stated in the Plaint was in fact due payable by the Defendant -

Appellant to the Plaintiff - Respondent as at the date on which action before the

Commercial High Court was instituted.

SC CHA APPEAL NO. 13/2023 - JUDGMENT 4

The primary argument of learned Counsel for the Defendant - Appellant was that though

the loaned amount was disbursed to his current account referred to above, the Defendant

- Appellant could not use the money received from the Plaintiff – Respondent as working

capital which was the purpose for which the loan was obtained. The position of learned

Counsel for the Plaintiff - Respondent is that it was well within the contractual

entitlement of the Plaintiff - Respondent to have unilaterally use the amount disbursed

to the current account of the Defendant - Appellant for the purpose of partially settling

the overdrawn facility that had been granted to the Defendant – Appellant company by

the Plaintiff – Respondent bank.

On a consideration of the terms and conditions based upon which the afore-stated loan

had been obtained, it is the view of this Court that it was within the contractual

entitlement of the Plaintiff - Respondent bank to have mobilized the disbursed money for

the purpose of unilaterally settling the overdrawn facility of the current account of the

Defendant – Appellant. In the circumstances, it is not possible for this Court to accept the

submission of learned Counsel for the Defendant - Appellant that the Plaintiff-

Respondent had conducted itself contrary to the terms and conditions of the afore-stated

loan agreement.

I have also carefully gone through the impugned judgment of the High Court, and I have

noted that the learned trial Judge has judiciously considered the evidence, and arrived at

a finding, by which he has rightly rejected the narrative provided through oral evidence

on behalf of the Defendant-Appellant, that the loan in issue had been applied for at the

instance of the relevant branch Manager of the Plaintiff-Respondent bank, to enable the

Manager to satisfy his superiors that he had met with credit targets imposed on him. That

position has been rejected by the learned trial Judge and it is necessary to observe that it

is not a probable narrative and is not supported by any of the documentary evidence.

SC CHA APPEAL NO. 13/2023 - JUDGMENT 5

In the circumstances, it is the view of this Court that this is Appeal does not carry any

merit. Therefore, this Appeal is dismissed.

Accordingly, the Plaintiff – Appellant shall be entitled to recover the amount due together

with interest calculated thereon.

Given the fact that this Appeal does not attract any merit, the Appellant is directed to pay

the cost of this litigation to the Plaintiff Respondent.

The learned Judge of the Commercial High Court is directed to enter the decree according

to this Judgment.

Subject thereto, proceedings relating to this Appeal is terminated. The Registrar of the

Supreme Court is directed to forward to the Registrar of the Commercial High Court a

copy of this Judgment.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

KUMUDINI WICKREMASINGHE, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

MENAKA WIJESUNDERA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT