IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Thiththalapitige Tilakaratne,

Rukgahawila, Walpola.

Plaintiff

SC APPEAL NO: SC/APPEAL/125/2016

SC LA NO: SC/HC/CALA/290/2015

HCCA GAMPAHA NO: WP/HCCA/GPH/69/2009/F

DC GAMPAHA NO: 39762/P

Vs.

1. Thiththalapitige Chandrawathi

Perera, (Deceased)

2. Thiththalapitige Wilbert Perera,

3. Thiththalapitige Ruban Perera,

All of

Rukgahawila, Walpola.

Defendants

AND BETWEEN

1. Thiththalapitige Tilakaratne,

Rukgahawila, Walpola.

Plaintiff-Appellant

Vs.

2

1. Thiththalapitige Chandrawathi

Perera, (Deceased)

2. Thiththalapitige Wilbert Perera,

3. Thiththalapitige Ruban Perera,

All of

Rukgahawila, Walpola.

Defendant-Respondents

AND NOW BETWEEN

3. Thiththalapitige Ruban Perera,

(Deceased)

3A. Thiththalapitige Vipula Namal

Priyadharshana Perera,

All of

Rukgahawila, Walpola.

3rd Defendant-Respondent-

Appellant

Vs.

1. Thiththalapitige Tilakaratne,

Rukgahawila, Walpola.

Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent

2. Thiththalapitige Wilbert Perera

Rukgahawila,

Walpola.

2nd Defendant-Respondent-

Respondent

3

Before: Sisira J. De Abrew, J.

S. Thurairaja, P.C., J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Amarasiri Panditharatne with Gaithri De Silva for the

substituted 3rd Defendant-Respondent-Appellant.

Dr. Sunil F.A. Coorey with Sudarshani Coorey for

the Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent.

Argued on : 03.05.2021

Written submissions:

by the 3rd Defendant-Respondent-Appellant on

29.07.2016.

by the Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent on

09.04.2021.

Decided on: 21.05.2021

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The Plaintiff filed this action in the District Court of Gampaha

naming three parties as Defendants seeking to partition the land

described in the schedule to the plaint among the parties to the

action. Only the 3rd Defendant contested the case. After trial

the learned District Judge dismissed the Plaintiff’s action

without answering the issues on the basis that the land sought

to be partitioned had not been properly identified. In addition,

the learned District Judge also briefly stated that the Plaintiff

had failed to present a comprehensive pedigree. On appeal, the

High Court of Civil Appeal set aside the Judgment of the District

4

Court and entered Judgment as prayed for by the Plaintiff. It is

from this Judgment of the High Court that the 3rd Defendant

preferred this appeal.

This Court granted leave to appeal predominantly on three

questions of law: (a) whether the corpus has been properly

identified, (b) whether the Plaintiff proved his pedigree, and (c)

whether the Court considered the 3rd Defendant’s paper title and

prescriptive title.

Let me first consider the question of identification of the corpus.

It is the contention of the 3rd Defendant that notwithstanding

the land to be partitioned as described in the schedule to the

plaint is about three acres, the Preliminary Plan depicts only a

land in extent of 1 acre, 3 roods and 3.46 perches and therefore

the Plaintiff’s action shall fail as the corpus has not been

properly identified.

In a partition action, if the corpus cannot be identified, ipso

facto, the action shall fail. There is no necessity to investigate

title until the corpus is properly identified. The decision that the

corpus has not been properly identified decides the fate of the

action without further ado. This underscores the great care with

which this decision shall be taken by Court. It shall not be used

as a convenient method to summarily dispose of long-drawn-out

and complicated partition actions without embarking on the

arduous task of investigating the title of each party.

The decision of the learned District Judge in the instant case

that the corpus has not been identified is erroneous. Let me

explain.

5

The land described in the schedule to the plaint is as follows:

The land called Meegahawatta situated at Walpola in

Udugaha Pattu of Siyane Korale of Colombo District in the

Western Province and bounded on the North by the Live

Fence of the Lands belonging to Biyanwilage Don Luwis

and Tittalapitige Karanis Perera and others, East by the

Paddy Field belonging to Karanis Perera and others, South

by Live Fence of the Land belonging to Tittalapitige Yohanis

and others, and West by the Land belonging to the Native

Physician Gasin Achchige Karolis and others, and

containing in extent about 3 Acres.

All the title Deeds marked by the Plaintiff at the trial – P2 of

1987, P3 of 1987, P4 of 1960, P5 of 1959, P6 of 1962, P7 of

1976, P8 of 1984, P9 of 1984, and P10 of 1976 – describe the

land in the same manner.

The 3rd Defendant marked two Deeds at the trial in claiming

rights to the land to be partitioned. One is 3V1 of 1930 and the

other is 3V2 of 1976. It is significant to note that in these two

Deeds also the land is described in the same manner as it is

described in the schedule to the plaint.

Simply put, the land described in the schedule to the plaint is a

reproduction of the land described in the title Deeds of both the

Plaintiff and the 3rd Defendant.

A commission to prepare the Preliminary Plan was issued to the

Surveyor in terms of section 16 of the Partition Law, No. 21 of

1977, as amended. The Surveyor sent the Preliminary Plan and

6

Report to Court in accordance with section 18. In the

Preliminary Plan, the land surveyed is described in the following

manner:

The land called Meegahawatta situated at Walpola in

Udugaha Pattu of Siyane Korale of Colombo District in the

Western Province and bounded on the North by the Lands

claimed by K. Sumanawathie, S.M. Somawathie, T.

Somawathie, Shanthi Jaya Manike and T.P. Karunaratne,

East by the Lands claimed by T.P. Karunaratne, S.A.

Padmini, K. Piyadasa, the Road and the Canal, South by

the Canal and the Land claimed by T. Victor Perera, and

West by the Lands claimed by K. Sumanawathie and T.

Victor Perera, and containing in extent 1 Acre, 3 Roods and

3.46 Perches.

The Surveyor states in his Report that the Plaintiff and the 2nd

and 3rd Defendants were present at the time of the survey and

all three of them showed him the land to be surveyed. At the

time of the survey, the 3rd Defendant had not told the surveyor

that a larger land was to be surveyed. The 3rd Defendant does

not dispute the content of this Report.

Section 16(2) of the Partition Law reads as follows:

The commission issued to a surveyor under subsection (1)

of this section shall be substantially in the form set out in

the Second Schedule to this Law and shall have attached

thereto a copy of the plaint certified as a true copy by the

registered attorney for the Plaintiff. The court may, on such

terms as to costs of survey or otherwise, issue a

7

commission at the instance of any party to the action,

authorizing the surveyor to survey any larger or smaller

land than that pointed out by the Plaintiff where such party

claims that such survey is necessary for the adjudication of

the action.

The Surveyor in his Report answers the question “Whether or not

the land surveyed by him is in his opinion substantially the same

as the land sought to be partitioned as described in the schedule

to the plaint” in the affirmative.

After the Preliminary Plan and Report were received by Court on

18.05.1998, the 3rd Defendant filed a statement of claim dated

02.11.1998. Thereafter, as seen from the proceedings dated

15.11.1999 and Journal Entry No. 17, on the second date of

trial, with the 3rd Defendant fully represented by Counsel,

uncontested evidence of the Plaintiff was led and the Court fixed

the case for Judgment. As per Journal Entry No. 18, on the

date of the Judgment, the 3rd Defendant (after apparently

retaining another Counsel) made an application to refix the case

for trial and also sought permission for a commission to be

issued to prepare an alternative Plan. The Court allowed this

application as there was no objection from the other parties.

However, no steps were taken by the 3rd Defendant to issue a

commission for an alternative plan. Thereafter, as per Journal

Entry No. 19, the 3rd Defendant informed Court on the

commission returnable date that he did not require an

alternative Plan but only wanted to amend the statement of

claim. This was allowed and the amended statement of claim

dated 15.09.2000 was tendered. In this amended statement of

8

claim, the 3rd Defendant stresses that the Plaintiff cannot

maintain the action as the entire land to be partitioned is not

depicted in the Preliminary Plan. But the 3rd Defendant does

not specify the portion of land not surveyed or even the

approximate extent of that portion.

The conduct of the 3rd Defendant was contrary to section 19(2)

of the Partition Law, which lays down the procedure to be

followed by a Defendant who seeks to have a larger land

partitioned. Section 19(2) reads as follows:

19(2)(a) Where a Defendant seeks to have a larger land

than that sought to be partitioned by the Plaintiff made the

subject-matter of the action in order to obtain a decree for

the partition or, sale of such larger land under the

provisions of this Law, his statement of claim shall include

a statement of the particulars required by section 4 in

respect of such larger land; and he shall comply with the

requirements of section 5, as if his statement of claim were

a plaint under this Law in respect of such larger land.

(b) Where any defendant seeks to have a larger land made

the subject-matter of the action as provided in paragraph (a)

of this subsection, the court shall specify the party to the

action by whom and the date on or before which an

application for the registration of the action as a lis pendens

affecting such larger land shall be filed in court, and the

estimated costs of survey of such larger land as determined

by court shall be deposited in court.

9

(c) Where the party specified under paragraph (b) of this

subsection fails to comply with the requirements of that

paragraph, the court shall make order rejecting the claim to

make the larger land the subject-matter of the action, unless

any other party, in whose statement of claim a similar claim

shall have been set up, shall comply therewith on or before

the date specified in paragraph (b) or within such extended

period of time that the court may, on the application of any

such party, fix for the purpose.

(d) After the action is registered as a lis pendens affecting

the larger land and the estimated costs of the survey of the

larger land have been deposited in court, the court shall-

(i) add as parties to the action all persons disclosed

in the statement of claim - of the party at whose

instance the larger land is being made the subject-

matter of the action as being persons who ought to be

included as parties to an action in respect of such

larger land under section 5; and

(ii) proceed with the action as though it had been

instituted in respect of such larger land; and for that

purpose, fix a date on or before which the party

specified under paragraph (b) of this subsection shall,

or any other interested party may, comply with the

requirements of section 12 in relation to the larger

land as hereinafter modified.

(e) Where the larger land is made the subject-matter of the

action, the provisions of sections 12, 13, 14 and 15 shall,

10

mutatis mutandis, apply as if the statement of claim of the

party seeking a partition or sale of the larger land were the

plaint in the action; and-

(i) such party shall with his declaration under section

12, in lieu of an amended statement of claim, file an

amended caption including therein as parties to the

action all persons not mentioned in his statement of

claim, but who should be made parties to an action

for the larger land under section 5, and such

amended caption shall be deemed for all purposes to

be the caption to his statement of claim in the action;

(ii) summons shall be issued on all persons added as

parties under paragraph (d) of this subsection and all

persons included as necessary parties under sub-

paragraph (i) hereof;

(iii) notice of the action in respect of the larger land

shall be issued on all parties to the action in the

original plaint together with a copy of the statement of

claim referred to above;

(iv) the provisions of section 20 shall apply to new

claimants or parties disclosed thereafter.

(f) If the party specified by the court under paragraph (b) of

this subsection or any other interested party fails or

neglects to comply with the provisions of section 12, as

hereinbefore modified on or before the date specified in that

11

paragraph, the court may make order dismissing the action

in respect of the larger land.

(g) Where the requirements of section 12 as hereinbefore

modified are complied with, the court shall order

summonses and notices of action as provided in paragraph

(e) of this subsection to issue and shall also order the issue

of a commission for the survey of the larger land, and the

provisions of sections 16, 17 and 18 shall accordingly apply

in relation to such survey.

The 3rd Defendant did not take any steps required by law to have

a larger land than that sought to be partitioned by the Plaintiff

made the subject matter of the action. If the 3rd Defendant

wanted to enlarge the corpus, he ought to have taken steps to

file an amended plaint inter alia naming new parties as

Defendants, because according to the Preliminary Plan there are

several claimants to the adjoining lands on all four boundaries.

All those alleged owners are third parties.

At the trial, the 3rd Defendant raised the unspecific issue

whether the land described in the schedule to the plaint is not

depicted in the Preliminary Plan. He did so in an attempt to

dismiss the action, as he is in possession of the entire land.

Soon after raising issues, the Plaintiff gave evidence. In his

evidence, he marked the Preliminary Plan and the Report stating

that the former depicts the land to be partitioned. Even at that

point, the 3rd Defendant did not make an application to mark

them subject to proof. Section 18(2) enacts inter alia that the

Preliminary Plan and Report can be used as evidence without

12

further proof. However under the proviso to section 18(2), the

3rd Defendant could have called the Surveyor to give evidence.

This was not done.

Section 18(2) of the Partition Law reads as follows:

The documents referred to in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of

subsection (1) of this section may, without further proof, be

used as evidence of the facts stated or appearing therein at

any stage of the partition action:

Provided that the court shall, on the application of any

party to the action and on such terms as may be

determined by the court, order that the surveyor shall be

summoned and examined orally on any point or matter

arising on, or in connection with, any such document or any

statement of fact therein or any relevant fact which is

alleged by any party to have been omitted therefrom.

The 3rd Defendant states in his evidence that he has been in

possession of the land depicted in the Preliminary Plan from the

time he was born in 1942 and that his parents lived on the land

before him. He further adds that he became entitled to the land

by paternal inheritance and Deeds. The Deeds he refers to are

3V1 and 3V2. This means, although 3V1 and 3V2 describe a

land in extent of about 3 acres (the same land which is

described in the schedule to the plaint), in point of fact, the land

on the ground has continuously been as depicted in the

Preliminary Plan.

13

The Surveyor went to the land to prepare the Preliminary Plan in

the year 1998, i.e. 68 years after the execution of the 3rd

Defendant’s Deed 3V1 of 1930. In 3V1, there is mention of

another Deed executed in 1922. This means the Surveyor went

to the land 76 years after the execution of the earliest known

Deed. One cannot expect the boundaries of land in Gampaha to

remain unchanged for 76 years.

The Nittambuwa-Urapola high road shown in the Preliminary

Plan running along the northern boundary and the canal

running along the southern boundary are of recent origin and

did not exist in the 1920s.

It is relevant to note that in the old Deeds tendered by both

parties, the boundaries are described by the names of the

owners of the adjoining lands at that time. In the Preliminary

Plan, the Surveyor records the existing boundaries. In doing so,

he gives the names of the present owners. The Plaintiff in his

evidence has also stated so.

Without analysing the evidence from the proper perspective, the

learned District Judge made a superficial comparison of the

boundaries and extent of the land described in the schedule to

the plaint which is based on old Deeds with the existing

boundaries and extent of the land as depicted in the Preliminary

Plan to conveniently conclude that the land has not been

properly identified. On this basis, without examining the

evidence on the pedigrees of the parties and without answering

the issues raised at the trial, the action was summarily

dismissed. This is erroneous.

14

The land to be partitioned has been properly identified. I answer

the questions of law on the identification of the corpus against

the 3rd Defendant.

Let me now turn to the questions of law whereby the 3rd

Defendant states that the Plaintiff failed to prove his title

according to law, and that the Court failed to properly consider

the 3rd Defendant’s paper title and prescriptive title.

According to the evidence of the 3rd Defendant, he claims title to

the land on paternal inheritance, Deeds, and prescription.

To prove paternal inheritance, the 3rd Defendant produces Deed

No. 10216 marked 3V1. This Deed is referred to in paragraph 3

of the plaint. By virtue of this Deed, the 3rd Defendant’s father

Thiththalapitige Luwis Perera got an undivided 1/24 share of

the land and upon his death, the 3rd Defendant, who is one of

his three children (the other two being the 1st and 2nd

Defendants), inherited an undivided 1/72 share.

The only other Deed the 3rd Defendant relies on to prove title is

Deed No. 56 marked 3V2. This Deed is referred to in paragraph

8 of the plaint. By this Deed, a person by the name of Sibel

Nona transferred an undivided (1/2 x 1/3) 12/72 share of the

land to the 3rd Defendant.

The Plaintiff does not dispute Deeds 3V1 and 3V2. The 3rd

Defendant is entitled to those undivided rights which amount in

total to a 13/72 share of the land. The High Court has allotted

this share to the 3rd Defendant.

15

There can be no dispute that the 3rd Defendant is a co-owner of

the land. There is no evidence to say the 3rd Defendant acquired

prescriptive title to the entire land against all the co-owners.

There shall be cogent evidence to successfully claim prescriptive

title against co-owners. Mere continuous long possession of the

entire common property by one co-owner does not constitute

prescriptive possession against all the co-owners. It is clear that

the plea of prescriptive title by the 3rd Defendant was only an

afterthought. Such a plea was not vigorously pursued at the

trial or before this Court.

At the argument before this Court, learned Counsel for the 3rd

Defendant submitted that although the Plaintiff states in

paragraph 2 of the plaint that by Deed Nos. 1403 and 1433

marked P2 and P3 respectively, Luwis Perera transferred an

undivided 3/24 share to the Plaintiff, the transferor is not Luwis

Perera, but some others. These others are not strangers. The

transferors of P2 and P3 are the 1st to 3rd Defendants who are

the children of Luwis Perera. They transferred the said share by

right of paternal inheritance. This is stated in the Deeds.

P2 and P3 as well as other Deeds marked by the Plaintiff were

not marked subject to proof. A partition case is not a criminal

case to secure a dismissal by creating doubts of the Plaintiff’s

pedigree in the mind of the District Judge. The Plaintiff need

not prove his pedigree beyond reasonable doubt but on a

balance of probabilities. P2 and P3 are not fraudulent Deeds.

In paragraph 4 of the plaint, the Plaintiff states that he became

entitled to an undivided 8/24 share by Deed No. 10376 marked

16

P4 and Deed No. 9196 marked P5 from Tiththalapitige Singho

Perera. These Deeds were executed in 1960 and 1959

respectively. The 3rd Defendant submits that there is no proof of

how Singho Perera got his title. In P4 there is no mention of

how Singho Perera got title but in P5 he refers to Deed No. 5554

of 1954 as the root of his title.

The same submission is made in respect of the Deeds mentioned

in paragraphs 6 and 7 of the plaint.

In paragraph 6 of the plaint, the Plaintiff states that by Deed No.

11182 of 1962 marked P6 and Deed No. 75 of 1976 marked P7,

Saranelis Perera transferred 12/24 share and 2/24 share

respectively to the Plaintiff.

Deeds P6 and P7 provide Deed Nos. 9196 of 1959 and 10376 of

1960 as the source of title for Saranelis Perera.

In paragraph 7 of the plaint, the Plaintiff states that by Deed No.

863 of 1984 marked P8, Tiththalapitige Sanchi Nona transferred

2/24 share to Wilbert Perera and Wilbert Perera by Deed No.

6808 of 1984 marked P9 transferred the same to the Plaintiff.

Deed P8 refers to Deed No. 717 of 1928 and Deed P9 refers to

Deed No. 863 of 1984 as the source of title for the transferors.

What about the 3rd Defendant’s pedigree? Does he tender title

Deeds from time immemorial?

By Deed No. 10216 of 1930 marked 3V1, although the 3rd

Defendant claims 1/72 share by paternal inheritance (i.e.

Thiththalapitige Luwis Perera’s rights), there is no clear proof of

17

how the transferor of this Deed, i.e. Kakulawalage Lui Nona got

title except to rely on what is recited in the Deed which states

she got title from her mother Thiththalapitige Nikohamy. There

is no further proof that Nikohamy was Lui Nona’s mother.

By Deed No. 56 of 1976 marked 3V2 whereby the 3rd Defendant

claims an undivided 12/72 share to the land, there is no clear

proof of how the transferor, Thiththalapitige Sibel Nona, got title

to such share except to rely on what is recited in the Deed

whereby she states she got title by Deed No. 13300 of 1926 and

Deed No. 718 of 1928.

It is true that in a partition action the Plaintiff shall unfold the

full pedigree. However this does not mean that he shall unfold a

perfect pedigree starting from the very first Deed ever executed

on the land. It is not possible to trace the very first Deed or the

very first original owner of the land. We must stop tracing back

at a convenient point. What constitutes this convenient point

shall be decided on a case by case basis and not by way of a

rigid formula. This point was lucidly explained in the Court of

Appeal case of Magilin Perera v. Abraham Perera [1986] 2 Sri LR

208 at 210-211 by Gunawardene, J. with the agreement of

G.P.S. De Silva, J. (later C.J.) in the following manner:

When a partition action is instituted the Plaintiff must

perforce indicate an original owner or owners of the land. A

Plaintiff having to commence at some point, such owner or

owners need not necessarily be the very first owner or

owners and even if it be so claimed such claim need not

necessarily and in every instance be correct because when

18

such an original owner is shown it could theoretically and

actually be possible to go back to still an earlier owner.

Such questions being rooted in antiquity it would be correct

to say as a general statement that it could be well nigh

impossible to trace back the very first owner of the land.

The fact that there was or may have been an original owner

or owners in the same chain of title, prior to the one shown

by the Plaintiff if it be so established need not necessarily

result in the case of the Plaintiff failing. In like manner if it

be seen that the original owner is in point of fact someone

lower down in the chain of title than the one shown by the

Plaintiff that again by itself need not ordinarily defeat the

plaintiff's action. Therefore, in actual practice it is the usual,

and in my view sensible, attitude of the Courts that it would

not be reasonable to expect proof within very high degrees

of probability on questions such as those relating to the

original ownership of land. Courts by and large

countenance infirmities in this regard, if infirmities they be,

in an approach which is realistic rather than legalistic, as to

do otherwise would be to put the relief given by partition

decrees outside the reach of very many persons seeking to

end their co-ownership.

The Plaintiff has proved his title on the balance of probabilities.

The 3rd Defendant’s claim on inheritance and Deeds has been

accepted while his claim on prescription has been rightly

rejected. The questions of law raised on these points are

answered against the 3rd Defendant.

19

I accept that the High Court did not give adequate reasons in

overturning the Judgment of the District Court. There is no

analysis of evidence or law in relation to the questions of

identification of the corpus or devolution of title. However I

agree with the conclusion arrived at by the High Court, subject

to the variation that issue No. 3 raised by the Plaintiff in the

District Court on prescription shall be answered in the negative.

Subject to the said variation, the Judgment of the High Court is

affirmed and the appeal of the 3rd Defendant is dismissed with

costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Sisira J. De Abrew, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

S. Thurairaja, P.C., J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court