[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 1 of 45

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application in terms of

Article 126 read with Article 17 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

SC FR NO. 35/2024

Bulugaha Pathirannehelage Sarith Maheeputhra Pathirathne, No. 110/1, Wataddara, Veyangoda.

PETITIONER Vs. 1. Hon. Mahinda Yapa Abeywardena, (Speaker of the Parliament) Chairman of the Constitutional Council. 2. Hon. Dinesh Gunawardena, (Prime Minister) Member of the Constitutional Council. 3. Hon. Sajith Premadasa, (Leader of the Opposition) Member of the Constitutional Council. 4. Hon. Nimal Siripala de Silva, (Minister of Ports, Shipping and Aviation) Member of the Constitutional Council. 5. Hon. Sagara Kariyawasam, (Member of Parliament) Member of the Constitutional Council. 6. Hon. Kabir Hashim, (Member of Parliament)

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 2 of 45

Member of the Constitutional Council. 7. Dr. Prathap Ramanujam, Member of the Constitutional Council. 8. Dr. Dilkushi Anula Wijesundere, Member of the Constitutional Council.

9. Prof. Weligama Vidana Arachchige Dinesha Samararatne, Member of the Constitutional Council. 10. Mr. Dhammika Dasanayake, Secretary General to the Constitutional Council. All 1st to 10th Respondents: Constitutional Council, Parliament of Sri Lanka, Sri Jayewardenepura Kotte. 11. Hon. Attorney General Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12.

12. Dr. Mahim Mendis 301/1A, Kotte Road, Mirihana, Nugegoda. 13. Venerable Dambara Amila Thero Sri Purana Gallen Viharaya, Kindelpitiya, Horana. And Nalanda Wishwa Vidhyayathanaya, Kuda Uduwa, Horana.

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 3 of 45

14. Conganeige Anne Ruwani Niwanthika Fonseka No. 297, Negombo Road, Nagoda.

RESPONDENTS

BEFORE : P. PADMAN SURASENA, J. ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J. & MAHINDA SAMAYAWARDHENA, J. COUNSEL : Faiszer Mustapha, PC with Amila Perera, Naveen Maha

Arachchige, Mehran Careem and Shaheeda Barrie

instructed by Sanjeewa Kaluarachchi for the Petitioner.

Ms. Kanishka de Silva Balapatabendi, DSG with Ms.

Madhushka Kannangara, SC and Ms. Abigail Jayakody, SC

for the 1st, 2nd, 4th, 5th, 10th and 11th Respondents.

M. A. Sumanthiran, PC with Ermiza Tegal, Divya

Mascranghe for the 3rd and 6th Respondents.

Dr. Kanag-Isvaran, PC with Viran Corea, PC, Lakshman

Jeykumar and Ermiza Tegal for the 7th, 8th and 9th

Respondents.

Venuka Coorey instructed by Cooray and Cooray for the

14th Respondent.

Upul Jayasuriya, PC with Kasala Kameer, Sandamal

Rajapaksha for the 13th Respondents.

Dinal Phillips, PC with Heshan Thambimuttu, Anushka

Athulathmudali for the 12th Respondents.

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 4 of 45

ARGUED ON : 25-07-2024

DECIDED ON : 12-12-2024

P. PADMAN SURASENA, J. The Petitioner in his Petition has stated that he is a citizen of Sri Lanka and an

Attorney-at-Law by profession. As can be seen from the caption, the 1st Respondent

is the Hon. Speaker of Parliament; the 2nd Respondent is the Hon. Prime Minster; the

3rd Respondent is the Hon. Leader of the Opposition in Parliament; the 4th Respondent

is a Member of Parliament, the Hon. Minister of Ports, Shipping and Aviation and; the

5th and 6th Respondents are both Members of Parliament. While the 1st Respondent is

ex-officio, the Chairman of the Constitutional Council, the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, and 6th

Respondents together with the 7th, 8th and 9th Respondents are Members of the

Constitutional Council. All of them have been made Respondents to this Petition in

their capacities, respectively, as the Chairman and the Members of the Constitutional

Council (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the Council). The 10th Respondent is the

Secretary General to the Constitutional Council and the 11th Respondent is the Hon.

Attorney General.1

The 12th Respondent, the 13th Respondent and the 14th Respondent have been added

to the Caption, as the Court, by its Order dated 30-04-2024, had permitted the

applications made by them seeking to intervene into this case. It is thereafter, that

those three persons have been added to the caption as the 12th, 13th, and 14th

Respondents by way of the Amended Caption filed with the Motion, dated 28-06-2024.

As I could see from the Petitions filed by the intervenient Petitioners, the primary

concern of the 12th, 13th and 14th Respondents has been to get the instant Petition

dismissed and the Interim Order issued by the Court on 30-04-2024, dissolved.

At the outset, let me albeit briefly, set out the background of the issue relevant to this

case. One of the Hon. Judges of this Court was to retire from service with effect from

16-11-2023. In order to fill the vacancy that was to be created by the said retirement,

1 These are the positions held by the persons mentioned in this paragraph at the time of the conclusion of the argument of this case; the Parliament was subsequently dissolved on 24-09-2024.

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 5 of 45

the Secretary to His Excellency the President (by order of His Excellency the

President), had nominated the Hon. Justice who presently holds the office of the

President of the Court of Appeal by his letter dated 25-10-2023. (The said nominated

Justice will hereinafter sometimes be referred to as the Nominee Judge). His

Excellency the President has made this nomination in terms of Article 41C (1) read

with Article 107 (1) of the Constitution. The Hon. Speaker as well as the Secretary to

His Excellency the President have produced this letter (marked A), as an annexure to

the respective affidavits they have filed in these proceedings.

After several deliberations which will be adverted to in this Judgment shortly, the

Constitutional Council by majority view had decided not to approve the proposal by

His Excellency the President to appoint the Nominee Judge as a Judge of the Supreme

Court. The Petitioner in the instant case challenges the aforesaid majority decision of

the Constitutional Council. Upon this Petition being supported, this Court having

considered the submissions, by its order dated 30-04-2024, had decided to grant

Leave to Proceed in respect of the alleged violations of the Petitioners Fundamental

Rights guaranteed under Article 12 (1) of the Constitution.

The Chairman and all the other members of the Constitutional Council, who have been

made Respondents to this Petition, have filed their affidavits before this Court. At the

outset, it would be relevant to note that these Respondents rely on more or less the

same set of documents, although they have submitted those documents separately

with their affidavits. The other Respondents (other than the Chairman and the

members of the Constitutional Council) also did not dispute those documents. The

case for the Petitioner as far as the said documents are concerned, is not different.

This is because the Petitioner also relies on the same set of documents. Thus, at the

outset, it is to be noted that both the Petitioner and the Respondents are not at

variance with regard to the factual positions as revealed from the documents relevant

to the proceedings before the Constitutional Council pertaining to the issue relevant

to this case.

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 6 of 45

Article 41C (4) of the Constitution requires that the Constitutional Council shall obtain

the views of the Chief Justice when discharging its functions relating to the

appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court and the President and Judges of the

Court of Appeal.

The Hon. Chief Justice has written the letter dated 06-11-2023, addressed to the Hon.

Speaker as the Chairman of the Constitutional Council. The caption of this letter stands

as Nomination sent by the Honble President to be considered for the post of a Judge

of the Supreme Court. The phrase With reference to your above titled letter dated

01.11.2023 shows that the Hon. Chief Justice has sent the said letter as a reply to

the letter he had received from the Hon. Speaker in his capacity as the Chairman of

the Constitutional Council.

The Hon. Chief Justice by the said letter dated 06-11-2023 has conveyed to the Hon.

Speaker who is the Chairman of the Constitutional Council, his (the Hon. Chief

Justices) concurrence, to appoint the Nominee Judge as proposed by His Excellency

the President, as a Judge of the Supreme Court, to fill the vacancy created by the

retirement of one of the Hon. Justices of this Court on 16-11-2023. The Hon. Chief

Justice in the said letter, having briefly stated at the beginning about certain career

achievements of the Nominee Judge, has also stated at the end of the said letter that

he has no hesitation in concurring with the afore-stated nomination made by His

Excellency the President. The 9th Respondent has produced this letter, marked R 1 A,

with her affidavit. The other two Civil Society members, the 7th and 8th Respondents

have also produced this letter, marked R 1 A, with their respective affidavits.

The Constitutional Council at its Thirty Fifth Meeting, held on 09-11-2023, had

considered the nomination forwarded by His Excellency the President, to appoint the

Nominee Judge, as a Judge of the Supreme Court. At that meeting, the views of the

Hon. Chief Justice, obtained as per Article 41C (4) of the Constitution, in respect of

this nomination was also placed before the Constitutional Council for consideration by

its members. In that meeting, after discussion, the Constitutional Council had decided

to look into the possibility of obtaining certain specific information from the Hon. Chief

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 7 of 45

Justice relating to the Judges whose nominations are forwarded by His Excellency the

President, for its approval. The 9th Respondent has annexed the minutes of the said

Thirty Fifth Meeting of the Constitutional Council held on 09-11-2023, marked R 1.

According to the said minutes, the Constitutional Council, after discussion, had

requested the Hon. Speaker (Chairman of the Council) to write to the Hon. Chief

Justice to explore the possibility of obtaining the afore-said information.

At the same meeting (the Thirty Fifth Meeting), the Council after discussion, had

agreed to make the final decision with regard to the approval or disapproval of the

nomination forwarded by His Excellency the President, to appoint the Nominee Judge,

as a Judge of the Supreme Court. The Council also decided to consider the other

nomination forwarded by His Excellency the President, for the appointment of the next

senior-most Judge of the Court of Appeal as the President of the Court of Appeal in

the event of the Council granting the approval for the Nominee Judge to be appointed

as a Judge of the Supreme Court.

According to the minutes of the Thirty Fifth Meeting of the Council, the Council after

discussion had agreed to make the final decision in respect of these two nominations

at the next meeting of the Council due to the absence of two of its members at the

said Thirty Fifth Meeting.

The next meeting, which is the Thirty Sixth Meeting of the Constitutional Council, was

held on 17-11-2023. In the course of that meeting, Hon. Speaker had informed the

other members of the Council who were present, that he had written the letter to the

Hon. Chief Justice seeking the possibility of obtaining more information regarding the

Judges whose nominations are forwarded by His Excellency the President. The Hon.

Speaker at this meeting had also tabled the said letter for the information of the

members of the Council. This is the letter, dated 14-11-2023, written by the Hon.

Speaker addressed to the Hon. Chief Justice, which the Petitioner has produced with

his Petition, marked P 1. In the interest of all parties concerned, I prefer to reproduce

the said letter, rather than paraphrasing its contents to avoid any possible distortion

of its spirit. This approach is also warranted because, as I will explain later, the same

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 8 of 45

Petitioner had previously filed another Fundamental Rights Petition, the subject matter

of which centred around this letter, thereby rendering it no longer confidential. The

said letter reads as follows:

14th November 2023

Hon Jayantha Jayasuriya, PC

Chief Justice

Chief Justices Chambers,

Supreme Court,

Colombo 12.

Dear Chief Justice,

Granting Approval for the Appointment of Judges to Superior Courts under

Article 41C of the Constitution

The Constitutional Council considers its mandate to grant approval for the

appointment of judges of the Superior Courts under Article 41C of the

Constitution as a matter of great responsibility and is of the view that it

needs necessary information to carry out its duty in an effective and efficient

manner. The Constitutional Council, having taken into cognizance that

Article 41C (4) provides for the seeking of views of the Chief Justice by the

Constitutional Council in discharging its function relating to the appointment

of Judges of the Supreme Court, and the President and Judges of the Court

of Appeal, decided to ask from you whether it would be possible to provide

information in relation to the following aspects of the Judges nominated,

when your views are requested by the Constitutional Council;

a) Performance of the Judge concerned in terms of the number of

Judgments delivered and pending delivery for the last few

years.

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 9 of 45

b) The number of Judgments overruled by the Superior Court and

any observations by the Superior Court in respect of the same.

c) The conduct of the Judge concerned and any notable

contribution for the development of the legal jurisprudence etc.

I would very much appreciate if you could assist the Council in this regard.

Yours sincerely,

Sgd

Mahinda Yapa Abeywardana

Speaker

On 08-11-2023, the then Hon. Minister of Sports had raised certain concerns making

certain negative remarks about the Nominee Judge in Parliament. The then Hon.

Minister of Sports in the course of that statement had adversely criticized certain acts

which he had attributed to the conduct of the Nominee Judge in his present post as

the President of the Court of Appeal. Thereafter, on 09-11-2023, the Hon. Minister of

Justice, Prison Affairs and Constitutional Reforms had also raised similar concerns in

Parliament in relation to the conduct of the Nominee Judge as the President of the

Court of Appeal. I would reproduce below, the portion of the statement made by the

Hon Minister of Justice, Prison Affairs and Constitutional Reforms, on 09-11-2023

which is recorded in Hansard of 09-11-2023 (R 3 B). It is as follows:

,

.

,

.

,

.

.

.

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 10 of 45

. , , ,

.

One must bear in mind that all the members of the Constitutional Council except the

7th, 8th and 9th Respondents, are Members of Parliament who were present when Hon.

Minister of Sports and Hon. Minister of Justice, Prison Affairs and Constitutional

Reforms brought the above facts to light in Parliament. Therefore, there is no doubt

that they had knowledge and insight into what was discussed in Parliament. There is

also no doubt that they participated in the deliberations in the Constitutional Council

being equipped with that knowledge.

It was in the above backdrop that, at the Thirty Seventh Meeting of the Constitutional

Council held on 18-11-2023, the Council after discussion about this aspect, had

decided to obtain views of the Hon. Chief Justice in relation to the afore-said

statements made in Parliament regarding the conduct of the Nominee Judge before

arriving at a decision on the proposed appointment of the Nominee Judge. Pursuant

to the said decision, the Council had decided that the Hon. Speaker as the Chairman

of the Constitutional Council should discuss this matter with the Hon. Chief Justice and

agreed that the matter should be further considered at the next meeting of the

Council.

According to the 9th Respondent the Council had again discussed this matter on or

about 20-11-2023. At that meeting, as seen from R 5, the Council was informed that

the Hon. Chief Justice had indicated that there was a practical difficulty to find the

material to base on. Thereafter, pursuant to the Council members agreeing to take a

secret vote on the proposed appointment of the Nominee Judge, three members had

voted in favour and three members had voted against the proposal. Two members of

the Council had abstained from voting. According to Article 41E (4) of the Constitution,

no approval or decision made by the Council shall be valid unless supported by not

less than five members of the Council present at such meeting. In view of this

requirement in Article 41E (4), the Council had decided that it could not arrive at a

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 11 of 45

decision on the approval of the relevant nomination. The minutes of the Thirty Eighth

Meeting of the Constitutional Council held on 20-11-2023, have been produced by the

9th Respondent, marked R 5. Pursuant to the decision made by the Council on 20-11-

2023, it was decided to communicate to His Excellency the President, the fact that the

Council could not arrive at a decision on the proposed appointment of the Nominee

Judge on that day. In view of the Council not arriving at a decision on the proposed

appointment of the Nominee Judge, the Council did not proceed to consider/approve

the other nomination forwarded by His Excellency the President, for the appointment

of the next senior-most Judge of the Court of Appeal as the President of the Court of

Appeal.

On 05-12-2023, the Petitioner in the instant application, had filed the Fundamental

Rights Petition bearing SC/FR/290/2023 to challenge the letter submitted by the Hon.

Speaker addressed to the Hon. Chief Justice dated 14-11-2023 (P 1). The Petitioner

in that Fundamental Rights Petition, had alleged that the said letter (P 1) had infringed

his Fundamental Rights. The Petitioner in his Petition in the instant case, has stated

that the contents of the said letter (P 1) which is in the form of a questionnaire, had

flagrantly undermined the Independence of the Judiciary, contravened the principle

of separation of powers, and was arbitrary, unreasonable and wholly irrational and

therefore infringed upon his Fundamental Rights.2

The Petitioner has stated in his Petition in the instant case, that when the case bearing

SC/FR/290/2023 came up for support before this Court, the Hon. Attorney General

appeared in Court and conveyed to Court that the Constitutional Council had decided

to withdraw the said letter (P 1) and would not proceed any further with regard to

the questionnaire set out therein. It was upon that undertaking that the Petitioner had

withdrawn the said SC/FR/290/2023 case.

According to the minutes of the Fortieth Meeting of the Constitutional Council held on

05-12-2023 (produced by the 9th Respondent, marked R 6), the Hon. Attorney General

2 Paragraph 9 of his Petition.

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 12 of 45

along with an Additional Solicitor General and a Deputy Solicitor General, had attended

the said meeting of the Constitutional Council. It could be seen as per the said minutes,

that it was on the advice of the Hon. Attorney General that the Council had decided

not to pursue the letter (P 1) addressed to the Hon. Chief Justice.

According to the minutes of the Forty Sixth Meeting of the Constitutional Council held

on 19-01-2024, the 9th Respondent had raised concerns about an incident of three

civil society members, i.e. 7th, 8th and 9th Respondents being excluded from the

meeting that the 1st Respondent had with the Hon. Attorney General. The Council had

also discussed as to how it should arrive at its decision with regard to the

approval/non-approval of the Nominee Judge for the proposed appointment.

Thereafter, His Excellency the President, by the letter dated 09-01-2024, had written

to the Hon. Speaker highlighting the importance of taking a decision with regard to

the Nominee Judge to avoid the delay in appointment of Judges to the Supreme Court

as it could adversely affect the Independence of the Judiciary and the effective

administration of justice.

On 24-01-2024, the Hon. Leader of the Opposition also had raised certain negative

concerns with regard to the Nominee Judges conduct in relation to the contents of

the written submissions filed on behalf of the Hon. Attorney General in Writ Application

bearing No. CA (Writ) 377/2023. The 9th Respondent has produced a copy of the

proceedings before Parliament which took place on 24-01-2024 (Hansard), marked R

9. The 9th Respondent has also produced a copy of the afore-said written submissions,

marked R 9 A. The Leader of the Opposition had also sent a copy of the said written

submissions via WhatsApp to the mobile phone of the 9th Respondent.

The 7th, 8th and 9th Respondents are persons appointed as members of the Constitution

Council in terms of Article 41A (1) (e) (iii) and are not Members of Parliament. As the

next meeting of the Council was approaching, the 7th, 8th and 9th Respondents had

discussed and agreed that the 9th Respondent would draft on behalf of the Council,

the reasons for the decision to be taken on the appointment of the Nominee Judge.

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 13 of 45

Pursuant to the said agreement, the 9th Respondent had drafted the reasons, marked

R 10.

At the Forty Seventh Meeting of the Constitutional Council held on 30-01-2024, the

Council had again considered the nomination forwarded by His Excellency the

President, to appoint the Nominee Judge, as a Judge of the Supreme Court. The

Council having discussed the necessity to arrive at a decision without further delay,

had agreed to cast votes openly to decide the matter. The voting then took place. The

3rd, 6th, 7th, 8th and 9th Respondents have cast their votes against granting the approval

for the Nominee Judge to be appointed as a Judge of the Supreme Court. The 2nd, 4th

and 5th Respondents have cast their votes in favour of the appointment. Accordingly,

in terms of Article 41E (4) of the Constitution, the nomination of His Excellency the

President to appoint the Nominee Judge as a Judge of the Supreme Court was not

approved by the Council. The reasons given by the five members of the Council for

not approving the nomination of the incumbent President of the Court of Appeal as a

Judge of the Supreme Court are as follows:

Under Article 41C the Constitutional Council has been vested with the discretion

to approve/disapprove nominations made by the President to several

constitutional offices including the Court of Appeal and Supreme Court. When

performing this function, the Council should act impartially and reasonably. In

the exercise of the discretion vested in the Council, it must apply its mind to

the decision, consider relevant factors, not consider irrelevant factors and

exercise its discretion for the purpose for which it has been vested with the

Council.

This discretion has been vested with the Council to protect the independence

and integrity of several constitutional institutions, including that of the judiciary.

Public confidence in the independence and integrity of the justice system

requires that judges are, and are also perceived to be impartial and beyond

reproach. Ensuring the independence of the judiciary and public confidence in

the judiciary is a primary responsibility of the Council.

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 14 of 45

In CA Writ 377/2023 (decided 17 November 2023), oral and Written

Submissions were made by the Attorney General's department on behalf of the

Respondents, which suggest/allege attempts by the petitioner to 'bench fix' (to

have matters taken up before the nominee) and thereby abuse the judicial

process. The attention of the members of the Council was drawn to this serious

suggestion/allegation due to the public reporting and debate on this matter.

These submissions have since then been verified. We took note of the fact that

these oral and Written Submissions were made by the Attorney General's

Department, a constitutional institution that is required to act with

independence. The Attorney General is recognized as the chief law officer of

the State. The submissions are therefore to be taken serious note of. We further

note that these submissions are not dealt with or refuted in the judgement of

the Court of Appeal in the said writ matter.

It is the responsibility of the Council to take account of credible information and

exercise our discretion to determine approval or disapproval of a judicial

nominee, bearing in mind our responsibility to protect the actual and perceived

independence and integrity of the judiciary. The Constitution does not envisage

the Council making conclusive findings on credible allegations that are made

but nevertheless requires the Council to exercise its discretion in the

approving/disapproving nominations to judicial office.

Having deliberated this matter at length and having carefully considered it in

light of the constitutional duty cast upon the Council, we have taken the view

that we cannot satisfy ourselves on the suitability of the said nominee for

appointment to the Supreme Court, the apex court of the country. The

nomination, therefore, is not approved.

It is the afore-stated majority decision of the Constitutional Council which the

Petitioner in the instant case has challenged.

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 15 of 45

The Petitioner in his Petition has asserted that he has filed this Petition in his own

personal interest as well as in the interest and benefit of the public at large. He has

complained that the said majority decision is arbitrary and/or unreasonable and/or

wholly irrational. The Petitioner has further stated that the said decision has flagrantly

undermined the Independence of the Judiciary, contravened the principle of

Separation of Powers and the Rule of Law, and has infringed upon his Fundamental

Rights and those of the general public. Petitioner has further stated that the Council

has failed to act in a fair, reasonable and rational manner in conformity with due

process and the Rule of Law.

The Petitioner has also stated in his Petition that the decision by the Council to

withdraw the letter P 1 has confirmed the complete illegality of the said procedure. It

is his position that the majority decision of the Council is perverse and has jeopardized

the process of administration of justice in this country. He has further asserted that

the said decision is based on surmise and conjecture. It is the Petitioners position that

the Attorney General in the written submissions filed in CA (Writ) 377/2023 had not

made any allegations against the Nominee Judge and therefore it is unreasonable for

the Constitutional Council to reject the nomination on the allegation of bench fixing.

It is in the above background that the Petitioner in his Petition had prayed for the

following main reliefs from this Court:

i. A declaration that the decision of the Constitutional Council not to approve the

Nominee, i.e. the incumbent President of the Court of Appeal to the Post of a

Judge of the Supreme Court, as reflected in P 2 and P 3, is a violation of the

Fundamental Rights of the Petitioner as guaranteed by Article 12 (1) of the

Constitution, by the Constitutional Council and/or any one, more or all of the

1st to 9th Respondents;

ii. A declaration that the conduct of the 1st to 11th Respondents have violated the

Fundamental Rights of the Petitioner as guaranteed by Article 12 (1) of the

Constitution;

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 16 of 45

iii. An order setting aside the decision of the Constitutional Council set out at

paragraph 08 of the Minutes, marked as P 2;

iv. A declaration that the communication in P 3 has no force or avail in law;

v. A direction on the Constitutional Council and the 1st to 9th Respondents to

approve the recommendation made by His Excellency the President to appoint

the Nominee, i.e. the incumbent President of the Court of Appeal to the Post of

a Judge of the Supreme Court.

As stated at the beginning of this Judgment, the 1st Respondent who is ex-officio the

Chairman of the Constitutional Council, the 2nd Respondent who is the Prime Minister,

the 3rd Respondent who is the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament, the 4th, 5th, and

6th Respondents who are Members of Parliament, and the 7th, 8th and 9th Respondents

who are persons appointed as members of the Constitutional Council in terms of Article

41A (1) (e) (iii), have filed their affidavits before this Court and actively participated

through their respective Counsel in the adjudication of this case. None of them at any

time raised any argument that the decisions of the Constitution Council are not

reviewable by this Court through the exercise of its Fundamental Rights jurisdiction.

On the other hand, the Constitution has positively asserted the said jurisdiction in

Article 41J which I reproduce below:

Article 41J

Subject to the provisions of Article 126, no court shall have the power or

jurisdiction to entertain, hear or decide or call in question, on any ground

whatsoever, or in any manner whatsoever, any decision of the Council or any

approval or recommendation made by the Council, which decision, approval or

recommendation shall be final and conclusive for all purposes.

Thus, from now onwards, let me proceed on the premise that the decisions of the

Constitution Council are reviewable by this Court in the exercise of its Fundamental

Rights jurisdiction.

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 17 of 45

Let me now consider whether there is merit in the Petitioners complaint that the

majority decision of the Council is arbitrary and/or unreasonable and/or wholly

irrational. In doing so, let me albeit briefly, touch on the law that should be applied

when considering the above issue.

Lord Greene, in the landmark case of Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd. v

Wednesbury Corporation,3 introduced the ground of unreasonableness as a yet

another ground upon which an impugned decision by an administrative body could be

reviewed. As elucidated by Lord Greene in the passage cited below, prior to the

introduction of the above ground, which has now established itself as trite law and is

commonly known as Wednesbury Unreasonableness, the grounds upon which a

decision of a public body could be challenged were limited.

...The courts must always, I think, remember this: first, we are dealing with

not a judicial act, but an executive act; secondly, the conditions which, under

the exercise of that executive act, may be imposed are in terms so far as

language goes, put within the discretion of the local authority without limitation.

Thirdly, the statute provides no appeal from the decision of the local authority.

What, then, is the power of the courts? They can only interfere with an act of

executive authority if it be shown that the authority has contravened the law.

It is for those who assert that the local authority has contravened the law to

establish that proposition.

...

When an executive discretion is entrusted by Parliament to a body such as the

local authority in this case, what appears to be an exercise of that discretion

can only be challenged in the courts in a strictly limited class of case. As I have

said, it must always be remembered that the court is not a court of appeal.

When discretion of this kind is granted the law recognizes certain principles

upon which that discretion must be exercised, but within the four corners of

3 [1948] 1 KB 223.

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 18 of 45

those principles the discretion, in my opinion, is an absolute one and cannot be

questioned in any court of law. What then are those principles? They are well

understood. They are principles which the court looks to in considering any

question of discretion of this kind. The exercise of such a discretion must be a

real exercise of the discretion. If, in the statute conferring the discretion, there

is to be found expressly or by implication matters which the authority exercising

the discretion ought to have regard to, then in exercising the discretion it must

have regard to those matters. Conversely, if the nature of the subject- matter

and the general interpretation of the Act make it clear that certain matters

would not be germane to the matter in question, the authority must disregard

those irrelevant collateral matters.4

There have been in the cases expressions used relating to the sort of things

that authorities must not do, ... under other cases where the powers of local

authorities came to be considered. I am not sure myself whether the

permissible grounds of attack cannot be defined under a single head. It has

been perhaps a little bit confusing to find a series of grounds set out. Bad faith,

dishonesty - those of course, stand by themselves - unreasonableness,

attention given to extraneous circumstances, disregard of public policy and

things like that have all been referred to, according to the facts of individual

cases, as being matters which are relevant to the question. If they cannot all

be confined under one head, they at any rate, I think, overlap to a very great

extent. For instance, we have heard in this case a great deal about the meaning

of the word "unreasonable." 5

In the same case, Lord Greene has succinctly propounded, the role of Courts in

reviewing the unreasonableness of an administrative decision as follows:

I think Mr. Gallop in the end agreed that his proposition that the decision of

the local authority can be upset if it is proved to be unreasonable, really meant

4 ibid, at page 228. 5 ibid, at page 229.

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 19 of 45

that it must be proved to be unreasonable in the sense that the court considers

it to be a decision that no reasonable body could have come to. 6

Moreover, Lord Diplock in the seminal GCHQ case has further elucidated the test to

be adopted by Courts to review such administrative decision by public bodies in the

following paragraph:

By 'irrationality' I mean what can now succinctly be referred to as Wednesbury

unreasonableness... It applies to a decision which is so outrageous in its

defiance of logic or of accepted moral standards that no sensible person who

had applied his mind to the question to be decided could have arrived at it.

Whether a decision falls within this category is a question that judges by their

training and experience should be well equipped to answer, or else there would

be something badly wrong with our judicial system... 7

The Superior Courts of our country, has time and again applied the afore-said test of

unreasonableness, in numerous cases.

As has already been stated, the Petitioner in the instant case has challenged the

decision of the Constitution Council not to approve the nomination of His Excellency

the President to appoint the Nominee Judge as a Judge of the Supreme Court.

Therefore, it would be necessary for me to briefly address the standards that a Judge

is expected to maintain.

The Latin phrase Quis custodiet ipsos custodes? used by the Roman poet Juvenal, a

work of the 1st and 2nd century, literally means who will guard the guards themselves?

Although this phrase was originally used to denote the difficulties in effectively

maintaining marital fidelity, it rings true for the problems encountered in the effective

maintenance of judicial fidelity of the Judges in office. This may be perhaps why in

legal parlance more often than not, the speakers on this subject state that, A judge,

6 ibid, at page 30. 7 Council for the Civil Service Unions v. Minister for the Civil Service [1984] All ER 935 at 951.

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 20 of 45

like Caesar's wife, must be above suspicion. This analogy is drawn from an incident

in 67 BC where Roman Emperor Julius Caesar divorced his wife Pompeia based merely

on rumours of her adultery with no actual proof as to whether adultery was indeed

committed, saying Caesar's wife must be above suspicion.

Mr. Sumanthiran PC, in his submissions adverted to the commonly known phrase, A

judge, like Caesar's wife, must be above suspicion. This means that even a suspicion

based on some evidence would be enough to taint the public trust reposed in a Judge.

Be that as it may, a Judge must decide each case based on the facts of that case,

applying the relevant law in its correct perspective. If a Judge decides a case based

on extraneous reasons, then he is not performing his duties in accordance with the

law. After all, an appellate Court may only rectify an apparent judicial mistake, for it

would not under normal circumstances be always possible to sense whether the Judge

had also considered extraneous reasons when deciding a particular case. Thus, it is

not unreasonable to expect such a high standard from a person who is being

considered for an appointment as a Judge of the Superior Courts of the country as

such a Judge would be exercising extensive powers of varied nature. This assumes

much more importance when appointments are considered for Judges of the Supreme

Court of the country as the law does not provide for any further appeal against

Judgments of the Supreme Court.

I find that the quotation cited by the learned Presidents Counsel for the 7th to 9th

Respondents from the work of Hon. Justice A. R. B. Amerasinghe on the Judicial

Conduct Ethics and Responsibilities is also on the same lines. It is reproduced below:

...,the allegations, have not been against the judiciary as a whole or even

against large numbers of judges, although, admittedly, when public confidence

in one judge is shaken, public confidence in the judiciary as a whole is affected.

That is the other side of the judicial independence coin. 8

8Amerasinghe A. R. B., Judicial Conduct and Ethics and Responsibilities (Sarvodaya Vishva Lekha 2002) 157, also cited at page 15 of the Written Submissions of the 7th to 9th Respondents, Volume II of the Case Brief.

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 21 of 45

His Lordship has further highlighted in his work, the connection between public

confidence in the judiciary and the enforceability of its decisions as follows:

Be that as it may, the courts, and particularly the apex court of each country,

wield great power and the community looks to the courts for the protection of

minorities and individuals against the overreaching of their legal interests by

the political branches of the government. Yet, unlike the other two arms of

government, the judiciary depends entirely on public confidence for the

exercise of its authority.9

...

The members of a civilized society do not wish to be ruled by raw power or by

public clamour. Settled and secure democratic societies rest on the rule of law

and the prevalence of the rule of law depends in turn on the acceptance of the

decisions of the courts of law.10

The above paragraphs clearly show the nexus between public confidence in the

judiciary and the enforceability of its Judgments which underscores the importance of

maintaining the judicial integrity all times at high levels.

Moreover, as pointed out by the learned Presidents Counsel for the 7th to 9th

Respondents, Hon. Justice A. R. B. Amarasinghe in his work, has cited Stephen Parker,

former Vice-Chancellor of the University of Canberra who explained the importance of

public confidence in the judiciary for the maintenance of law and order in the following

manner:

Courts largely depend upon public confidence in the law and its processes for

compliance with their decisions: As soon as the independence of judges and

magistrates come into question, so too does the impartiality of their decisions.

9 ibid at 168, also cited at page 16 of the written submissions of the 7th to 9th Respondents, Volume II of the Case Brief. 10 ibid at 172, also cited at page 16 of the written submissions of the 7th to 9th Respondents, Volume II of the Case Brief.

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 22 of 45

Crumbling confidence in the courts could have untold consequences for our

sense of security and ultimately lead to the ugliest of situations. Courts, it has

been said, are a civilised society's substitute for vengeance.11

The above being the standards, a Judge is expected to maintain, let me next proceed

to consider whether the majority decision of the Constitutional Council which the

Petitioner in the instant case has challenged, is unreasonable in the Wednesbury

sense.

At the very commencement of this endeavour, it is necessary briefly to set out the

background in which the Hon. Attorney General in the written submissions filed in case

No. CA (Writ) 377/2023, had alleged certain insinuations about the procedure adopted

in the disposal of that case in the Court of Appeal.

The subject matter in CA (Writ) 377/2023 was in relation to an impending arrest of

the Petitioner of the said Writ Application as a suspect in a case where police had

reported facts to Court in relation to an offence alleged to have been committed under

the Penal Code and the ICCPR Act. The written submissions reveal that the Petitioner

of the said Writ Application had previously filed another Writ Application bearing No.

CA (Writ) 308/2023 and also a Fundamental Rights Application in this Court bearing

No. SC FR 141/ 2023 on the same matter.

The said Writ Application bearing No. CA (Writ) 308/2023, was listed for hearing before

the Hon. President of the Court of Appeal (the Nominee Judge) and Hon. Justice M.

A. R. Marikar. As the President of the Court of Appeal (the Nominee Judge) had

travelled overseas for official purposes, Hon. Justice Sobhitha Rajakaruna was

appointed as the Acting President of the Court of Appeal. It was due to that reason

that the Bench comprising of Hon. Justice Sobhitha Rajakaruna as Acting President of

the Court of Appeal and Hon. Justice M. A. R. Marikar had commenced the hearing of

the said case on 15-06-2023.

11 ibid at 166, also cited at page 16 of the written submissions of the 7th to 9th Respondents, Volume II of the Case Brief.

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 23 of 45

When the matter was taken up for support on 15-06-2023, the learned Senior State

Counsel for the Respondents had raised certain preliminary objections. The Junior

Counsel who had appeared for the Petitioner had moved for a postponement of the

case indicating that the learned Presidents Counsel appearing for the Petitioner was

indisposed.

Despite the afore-stated application, being satisfied that the Petitioner before them

would not be prejudiced as he was well represented and would have the opportunity

of responding to the submissions on the next date, the Bench comprising Hon. Justice

Sobhitha Rajakaruna and Hon. Justice M. A. R. Marikar had unanimously decided to

allow the learned Senior State Counsel for the Respondents to raise those preliminary

objections. Accordingly, the learned Senior State Counsel for the Respondents appears

to have concluded the submissions with regard to the said preliminary objection. This

was followed by the submissions of Mr. Sanjeeva Jayawardena PC, who had appeared

for some parties seeking intervention in the case. Thereafter, that bench had fixed the

matter to be resumed before the same bench on 21-06-2023.

When the case came up before the same Bench on 21-06-2023, the Petitioner who

had right throughout agitated that the case must be heard as an extremely urgent

matter, unexpectedly moved to withdraw the Petition with no prior indication and

without sufficient or legitimate reason. The written submissions had alleged that up

until that time, there was no indication whatsoever that the Petitioner would want to

withdraw that case. The fact that the Petitioner had moved Court to take up the case

for hearing on urgent basis initially must be noted as a significant factor at this

juncture. Accordingly, the bench comprising Hon. Justice Sobhitha Rajakaruna and

Hon. Justice M. A. R. Marikar had allowed the application for withdrawal and the

matter was pro-forma dismissed. I must reiterate that it was the Petitioner who was

eager to prevent his arrest as fast as possible who just on the second date of hearing

had withdrawn the Petition giving no reason for such withdrawal. What follows next

will confirm the suspicion that anyone would likely to have entertained about the

Petitioners withdrawal of that case in the aforesaid circumstances.

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 24 of 45

Almost three weeks after withdrawing the initial Writ Application, bearing No. CA (Writ)

308/2023, the Petitioner had subsequently filed the second Writ Application dated 10-

07-2023 bearing No. CA (Writ) 377/2023. The said Writ Application had been filed on

the same basis and the same facts praying for similar reliefs as pleaded in both CA

(Writ) 308/2023 and the Fundamental Rights Application filed in the Supreme Courts

bearing No. SC/FR/144/2023. What happened then? A Bench presided over by the

Hon. President of the Court of Appeal (the Nominee Judge) and Hon. Justice M. C. B.

S. Morais entertained the subsequent Writ Application, bearing No. CA (Writ)

377/2023, took it up for support on 04-10-2023 before them.

In the written submissions filed in the second Writ Application CA (Writ) 377/2023

(marked R 9A) it has been alleged on behalf of the Attorney General that the Petitioner

had taken the steps to rectify all the shortcomings of the first Writ Application which

the Attorney General took as Preliminary Objections.

In the said written submissions, the Attorney General had also alleged that the

Petitioners withdrawal of the first Writ Application (CA (Writ) 308/2023), without

providing any reasons, after the Bench comprising two different Justices had

commenced hearing the case during the time the President of the Court of Appeal

(the Nominee Judge) was abroad, and the subsequent refiling of the same case under

a different number to ensure it would be heard before the Bench where the President

of the Court of Appeal (the Nominee Judge) was presiding, amounted to Bench

hunting tactics. In the course of the hearing of CA (Writ) 377/2023 it was alleged that

the only reasonable inference for the Petitioner to file the same case twice, after taking

steps to remedy all errors and shortcomings of the first case, was that the Petitioner

was indulging in Bench hunting tactics for the Nominee Judge to hear this matter.

It was further submitted that the Court of Appeal could not and should not hear a

case involving the same facts in issue and praying for similar reliefs which had already

been pleaded in a Fundamental Rights Petition filed before the Supreme Court, as

such a matter was already sub-judice. It was submitted on behalf of the Attorney

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 25 of 45

General that the manner in which the new case was filed, was the first of that nature

in the judicial history of this Country. In addition to the attempts to surreptitiously

avoid the Preliminary Objections already raised by the Respondents in the initial Writ

Application, it was further submitted on behalf of the Hon. Attorney General that the

Petitioner has completely suppressed the fact that there was a Fundamental Rights

Petition bearing No. SC/FR/141/2023 which was filed by the Petitioner and several

others regarding the same subject matter.

The Respondents in CA (Writ) 308/2023 had submitted for the consideration of Court

several case laws to support the allegations of bench-fixing, drawing a parallel

between the actions of the Petitioner in CA (Writ) 377/2023 and the instances referred

to in those case laws. I would reproduce below some of those citations.

In Shahzad Hasan Khan v. Ishtiaq Hasan Khan & Anr.12, the Supreme Court of

India held thus:

The convention that subsequent bail application should be placed before the

same Judge who may have passed earlier orders has its roots in principle. It

prevents abuse of process of court inasmuch as an impression is not created

that a litigant is shunning or selecting a court depending on whether the court

is to his liking or not, and is encouraged to file successive applications without

any new factor having cropped up. If successive bail applications on the same

subject are permitted to be disposed of by different Judges there would be

conflicting orders and a litigant would be pestering every judge till he gets an

order to his liking resulting in the credibility of the court and the confidence of

the other side being put in issue and there would be wastage of courts time.

Judicial discipline requires that such a matter must be placed before the same

Judge, if he is available for orders."

12 1987 AIR 1613, decided on 28 April, 1987, at page 1615, also cited at page 9 in annexture R 9 A, of the Affidavit of the 9th Respondent in the case brief.

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 26 of 45

In State of Maharashtra v. Captain Buddhikota Subha Rao13, the Court, placing reliance

on Shahzad Hasan Khan (supra), opined that:

"..... In such a situation the proper course, we think, is to direct that the matter

be placed before the same learned judge who disposed of the earlier

applications. Such a practice or convention would prevent abuse of the process

of court inasmuch as it will prevent an impression being created that a litigant

is avoiding or selecting a court to secure an order to his liking. Such a practice

would also discourage the filing of successive bail applications without change

of circumstances. Such a practice if adopted would be condusive to judicial

discipline and would also save the Court's time as a judge familiar with the facts

would be able to dispose of the subsequent application with despatch. It will

also result in consistency".

In Vikramjit Singh v. State of Madhya Pradesh14 it was held that "... Otherwise, a party

aggrieved by an order passed by one Bench of the High Court would be tempted to

attempt to get the matter re-opened before another Bench, and there would not be

any end to such attempts. Besides, it was not consistent with the judicial discipline

which must be maintained by Courts both in the interest of administration of justice

by assuring the binding nature of an order which becomes final, and the faith of the

people in the judiciary..."

Further, in Jagmohan Bahl v. State (Nct of Delhi) 15, in which the above Judgments

are also cited with approval, the Indian Supreme Court went on to observe:

"...Needless to say, unless such principle is adhered to, there is enormous

possibility of forum-shopping which has no sanction in law and definitely, has

no sanctity. If the same is allowed to prevail, it is likely to usher in anarchy,

13 1989 AIR 2292, decided on 29 September, 1989, at page 2296, also cited at page 9 in annexture R 9 A, of the Affidavit of the 9th Respondent in the case brief. 14 1992 AIR SC 474, decided on 10th September 1991, at paragraph 3, also cited at page 9 in annexture R 9 A, of the Affidavit of the 9th Respondent in the case brief. 15 Decided on 18 December 2014, at paragraph 13 of the Judgment, also cited at page 9 in annexture R 9 A, of the Affidavit of the 9th Respondent in the case brief.

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 27 of 45

whim and caprice and in the ultimate eventuate shake the faith in the

adjudicating system. This cannot be allowed to be encouraged. In this regard

we may refer to the pronouncement in Chetak Construction Ltd. V. Om Prakash

and others, wherein this Court has observed that a litigant cannot be permitted

"choice" of the "forum" and every attempt at "forum-shopping" must be

crushed with a heavy hand..."

Having considered the afore-stated sequence of events in light of the contents of the

written submissions filed on behalf of the Hon. Attorney General in CA (Writ)

377/2023, I can at once state that the practice referred to in that sequence of events

whether it amounts to, or known as, Bench Fixing or Bench Hunting or any other,

irrespective of the person responsible for it, be it a Petitioner or a Counsel or an

Instructing Attorney or a Judge, would undoubtedly be a practice which must be

condemned in no uncertain terms and immediately stopped. There is no doubt that

any balanced and smooth system of administration of justice, any court system, any

legal regime must immediately take steps to arrest such situations. However, in the

case of the Writ Applications bearing Nos. CA (Writ) 308/2023 and CA (Writ) 377/2023,

it appears to me that whoever who had successfully engaged in that practice was

allowed to do so solely because of the inaction of the Court.

We have to bear in mind that the Judge whose nomination was forwarded by His

Excellency the President to the Constitutional Council for approval, for him to be

appointed as a Judge of the Supreme Court, was the President of the Court of Appeal

at the relevant time. The material shows clearly that the second Writ Petition bearing

No. CA (Writ) 377/2023 was entertained, heard and decided in favour of the Petitioner

of that Application by a Bench presided over by him.

Given that this incident took place in the Court of Appeal, the question arises as to

who should take the initiative to stop, whoever who had engaged in this kind of

practices, which would destroy the whole judicial system of the country? In my view,

it is primarily the President of the Court of Appeal, who must put in place, an

appropriate and adequately robust mechanism to prevent such destructive practices

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 28 of 45

and to protect the whole Court system of the country. Unfortunately, the President of

the Court of Appeal was the presiding Judge when this practice was allowed to

successfully pass through his hands.

Be that as it may, the question before us is as to what the Constitutional Council

should have done when the material relevant to the aforesaid incident was made

available before it. The question before us is not to find out who exactly was

responsible for that practice. In other words, the question before us is as to what the

Nominee Judge as the President of the Court of Appeal did, to avert such practice. Did

the Bench which he presided, at its least, consider the aforesaid submissions made on

behalf of the Hon. Attorney General? The answer is clearly no. The bench presided

over by him failed to even mention a word about this aspect in its Judgment. This was

despite the written submissions filed on behalf of the Hon. Attorney General had given

a prominent place to highlight this destructive practice. In the above circumstances, I

am unable to accept the Petitioners submission that the Constitutional Council should

not have considered these material against the Nominee Judge.

As regards the role of the Constitutional Council, I observe that the Petitioners position

is no different. This is because the Petitioner himself,16 has relied on the following

observation made by this Court in its Special Determination on the Nineteenth

Amendment to the Constitution. The said observation is as follows:

"The purpose and object of the Constitutional Council is to impose

safeguards in respect of the exercising of the President's discretion,

and to ensure the propriety of appointments made by him to

important offices in the Executive, the Judiciary and to the

Independent Commissions. It sets out a framework within which the

President will exercise his duties pertaining to appointments" 17

16 Paragraph 18 of Part I of the Written Submissions of the Petitioner, dated 19-07-2024 at page 12. 17 SC/SD/04/2015, Decisions of the Supreme Court on Parliamentary Bills, (2014-2015) Vol. XII, page 26 at page 36. (Emphasis added)

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 29 of 45

In the instant case, the consideration before the Constitutional Council was the

question of suitability of the Nominee Judge to be appointed as a Judge of the

Supreme Court which is the apex Court of this country.

The wording of Article 4(c) provides for the Judicial power of the people to be

exercised by Parliament through courts, tribunals and other institutions created by

law. It has long been interpreted that it is the Courts which exercise the Judicial power

independently for the benefit of the People. (Vide: Hewamanne v. De Silva and

Another18, Premachandra v. Major Montague Jayawickrema and another (Provincial

Governors Case)19, Dr. Athulasiri Kumara Samarakoon and Others v. Ranil

Wickramasinghe and Others (Economic Crisis case)20.

There is no doubt that the Constitution assures to uphold, the Independence of the

Judiciary for the People of this country. In order to achieve this, the Constitution has

provided for numerous measures aimed at the protection and maintenance of the

Independence of the Judiciary. One would observe that the Constitution has even

proceeded to dedicate a whole section sub-titled Independence of the Judiciary

included in Chapter XV of the Constitution titled The Judiciary.

One such Article found under Chapter XV of the Constitution is Article 107. Article 107

sets out the procedure for appointment and removal of Judges of the Superior Courts

and the Chief Justice under sub-articles (1) and (2)-(3) respectively. Article 107(1) has

been amended by the 21st Amendment to the Constitution to specifically qualify the

absolute discretion of the power of appointment of Judges of the Superior Courts

hitherto vested in the hands of the President by subjecting it to the approval of the

Constitutional Council.

Apart from the above, Articles 107(5) and 108 seek to secure the Independence of

the Judiciary through providing for both security of tenure and financial independence

18 (1983) 1 Sri. L. R. 1, at 20. 19 (1994) 2 Sri. L. R. 90, at 107. 20 S.C. (F.R.) 195/2022 and 212/2022, S.C.M. 14-11-2023, at page 64.

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 30 of 45

respectively. Article 108 seeks to ensure financial independence of Judges, particularly

through Sub-article (2) which prohibits the reduction of the salaries of Judges after

appointment. Thus, one may not need any more reasons to understand that it is

primarily to safeguard and protect the Independence of the Judiciary that the

Constitution itself has put in place a filtering process in terms of Article 41C of the

Constitution before any person could be appointed as a Judge of the Superior Courts.

The learned Presidents Counsel for the Petitioner attempted to stress that there is no

proof to fix the responsibility for the afore-stated sequence of events relating to the

allegations of bench fixing/hunting tactics in CA/Writ/377/2023 to the Nominee Judge.

I have already adverted to above, the attitude shown to these questionable events by

the Bench which was presided over by the Nominee Judge. That attitude is not at all

acceptable. It is beyond the norms of the established practice of Courts. That is why

perhaps the written submissions filed on behalf of the Hon. Attorney General referred

to it as an incident occurred for the first time in the judicial history of this Country.

I have already stated that the Constitutional Council is not only entitled but also has

a solemn duty to consider this kind of material which have emanated from more than

one source against the conduct of the Nominee Judge. The Petitioner seems to be

saying that it is unlawful for the Constitutional Council to probe into these

allegations/conduct as such actions are not within its mandate. I cannot agree. There

is no merit in that submission.

As stated above, it is well within the mandate of the Constitutional Council to write to

the Hon. Chief Justice the letter P 1 dated 14-11-2023, expecting the Hon. Chief

Justice to comment on the conduct of the Nominee Judge for the Constitutional Council

to take an informed decision.

The Petitioner claims that he is an Attorney-at-Law who is engaged in these litigations

with a spirit of public interest. The Petitioner in his Petition has stated as follows:

the present application has not been made for the benefit of the

nominee. The application has been made out of public interest

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 31 of 45

challenging the perverse, arbitrary and most unreasonable reasoning of

the Council to reject the recommendation of the nominee. Hence, the

nominee need not be made a party as an interested party. Further, it's

inconceivable that any form of public interest litigation can be instituted

as applicants would have to make all parties on behalf of whom the

application is made to be parties (it is reiterated that this application is

not made on behalf of the nominee). 21

What did the public-spirited Petitioner do with regard to the letter P 1, to vindicate

the rights of public? He came to this Court to challenge the issuance of the letter P 1

by the Constitutional Council claiming to be acting in the interest of public. When the

Constitutional Council refused to approve the name of the Nominee Judge for the

appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court, then the Petitioner states that the said

decision of the Constitutional Council has flagrantly undermined the Independence of

the Judiciary, contravened the principle of Separation of powers, is capricious,

arbitrary, unreasonable, wholly irrational and thereby infringed the Fundamental

Rights of both the Petitioner and the rights of the citizens of the Republic under Article

12(1) of the Constitution.22

As I have already stated, the Constitutional Council wanted the information it sought

through P 1 to make the right decision about the Nominee Judge. That was their

solemn duty. If they found that the Nominee Judge was in regular practice of those

kind of things, the Constitutional Council is well within law not to approve that name.

In that sense the Petitioners action to challenge the letter P 1, in my view, is not a

genuine act on the part of the Petitioner. Most certainly it is not in the public interest,

it is totally against the public interest and against the expectations of the provisions

of the Constitution. This is because, in my view, such a move to block such information

being received in the hands of the Constitutional Council would only benefit an

unsuitable person to get his nomination passed through this important threshold.

21 Paragraph 18 at Part II of the written submissions for the Petitioner, dated 19-07-2024, at page 54. 22 Paragraph 21 of the Petition, dated 13-02-2024.

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 32 of 45

Thus, I am of the view that the Petitioner lacks uberrima fides ; he has filed the Petition

in the instant case for collateral purposes and/or collateral considerations and/or at

the behest or instigation of others as alleged by the 7th to 9th Respondents. Therefore,

in my view, there was no legal basis for the Constitutional Council to withdraw the

letter P 1. If advice was given to the Constitution Council to withdraw the letter P 1,

it is wrong advice given without any legal basis for some other purpose other than the

purpose of maintaining the Independence of Judiciary.

I observe that if the Petitioner did not previously file the Fundamental Rights Petition

SC/FR/290/2023, in this Court to challenge the letter P 1, the Hon. Chief Justice would

have provided the material requested by the Constitutional Council enabling it to

consider all relevant material when deciding whether it should approve or disapprove

the nomination forwarded by His Excellency the President, to appoint the Nominee

Judge, as a Judge of the Supreme Court. Then how can the Petitioner complain that

the said letter (P 1) was arbitrary, unreasonable and wholly irrational and therefore

had undermined the Independence of the Judiciary. In my view, it is the blocking of

this information and not permitting its availability before the Constitutional Council

which is obnoxious to the Rule of Law. In my view, the Petitioner in the instant case

is attempting to unreasonably and unlawfully force the 3rd, 6th, 7th, 8th and 9th

Respondents who are Members of the Constitutional Council to approve the name of

the Nominee Judge with an unfounded allegation that the Constitutional Council had

acted in an arbitrary and unlawful way. In these circumstances, I totally reject the

said argument advanced by the Petitioner.

I have stated at the beginning of this Judgment that the Court by its Order dated 30-

04-2024, had permitted the 14th Respondent to intervene in this case. Thus, the 14th

Respondent too stands as a Respondent in this case. It would be pertinent at this

stage, to refer to his stance. The 14th Respondent in his Statement of Objections dated

8th July 2024, had taken up the position that the Petitioner is trying to canvass for the

Nominee, blatantly violating the constitutional harmony envisaged by the framers of

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 33 of 45

the Constitution undermining the functionality of the Constitutional Council.23 The 14th

Respondent had relied on the Judgment of this Court in SC/Appeal/11/2024, marked

R 14(a). It is the position of the 14th Respondent that this Court in that Judgment

had commented on the practice of preparing Judgments by copying and pasting the

contents of the written submissions filed by parties. The same practice had been

adopted in the impugned Judgment in that case pronounced by a Bench of the Court

of Appeal comprising the Nominee Judge. The 14th Respondent claims that this too

should have been a ground for the Constitutional Council to disapprove the nomination

of such judges for appointment to the apex court. It is relevant to note that this Court

in the said appeal had to say the following about the Judgment pronounced by the

majority of a Divisional Bench of the Court of Appeal of which the Nominee Judge was

the Presiding Judge.

I am constrained to address another point relied on by the Appellant, which

has caused Court great concern. The learned counsel for the Appellant

submitted that:

(a) The entire majority judgment, including the parts which are

seemingly an analysis of the case before us, is directly from the written

submission of the 1st Respondent and, accordingly, with no analysis in

Law;

(b) The parts of the majority judgment which is a reproduction of the

said Written Submissions of the 1st Respondent is a blatant and manifest

misapplication and misconstruction of the law pertaining to a Writ of Quo

Warranto.

In elaborating on this allegation, the Appellant contended that the content of

the majority judgment (from pages 5 to 27) comprises, sequentially, a verbatim

reproduction of the Appellant's petition before the Court of Appeal, the

23 Paragraph 6 of the Statement of Objections of the 14th Respondent, dated 08-07-2024.

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 34 of 45

Appellant's Written Submissions filed in March 2023 and the 1st Respondent's

Written Submissions filed in May 2023.

In order to buttress this submission, the Appellant has with his Written

Submissions tendered a table marked "X5" setting out each paragraph of the

judgment and the corresponding paragraphs of the petition or the Written

Submissions. According to this chart, there are 80 such places in the majority

judgment.

According to the Appellant the only original parts of the majority judgment are

found from the 3rd paragraph on page 26 of the judgment, a total of five

paragraphs. According to the Appellant, the original paragraphs are as follows:

"The conditions required to apply to the court to issue a Writ is restricted

in several ways. There is no bar or restriction on who can apply. Any

person can apply as long as their fundamental or any other legal right is

being breached. In cases where there is no breach of right, a question

of public interest must arise with respect to the application. It should not

be made for the sake of certain hidden political struggle or undercurrent.

The applicant should act in public interest, and not expect any benefit

or unethical gain through making the application. The application made

by the applicant should be bona fide.

A Writ is only granted to compel the performance of duties of a public

nature and not merely of a private character, that is to say for the

enforcement of a mere private right stemming from a contract of the

parties. The Petitioner has failed to satisfy this court that he has a

statutory right against the 1st Respondent.

The preliminary objections are upheld. Accordingly, we see no merit in

the Application of the Petitioner. For all the above reasons, this court is

not disposed to grant the discretionary remedy asked for.

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 35 of 45

The application of the Petitioner is an action of private nature and

therefore not governed by any statutes of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka. As such the Petitioner is not entitled to invoke the

Writ jurisdiction of this Court against the 1 Respondent.

The merits of the case also do not warrant the issuance of the Writ

prayed for. As such the Petitioner's application warrants dismissal."

I have given anxious consideration to this submission of the Appellant and find

that there is much merit in it. The majority judgment (from pages 5 to 27)

indeed contains 80 parts as alleged by the Appellant, sequentially, which are

either a verbatim reproduction or a slight variation (without any

acknowledgment of the source) of the Appellant's petition before the Court of

Appeal, the Appellant's Written Submissions filed in March 2023 and the 1st

Respondent's Written Submissions filed in May 2023.

The only original five paragraphs of the majority judgment by far does not set

out the correct principles that govern the issue of a Writ of Quo Warranto. 24

It is a fact that this Court in the aforesaid Judgment had criticized the Judge who

wrote the Judgment in the Court of Appeal by adopting a copy and paste approach

from the Petition and the written submissions filed by the parties. The 14th Respondent

has attributed this practice as a practice engaged by the Nominee Judge. This material

was not before the Constitutional Council. Hence the Council did not have the

opportunity to consider it. However, in my view, if the Nominee Judge was responsible

for adopting such a practice, it is certainly a matter which must attract the attention

of the Constitutional Council when deciding whether it should approve the nomination

forwarded by His Excellency the President, to appoint the Nominee Judge, as a Judge

of the apex Court of the country.

24 At Pages 29-30.

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 36 of 45

I observe that if the Petitioner did not challenge the letter P 1, it was well within the

Hon. Chief Justices means to provide such material when the Constitutional Council

requested his views by P 1. Then that would have enabled the Constitutional Council

to come to a right decision. As I have already mentioned, what jeopardises the public

interest is the failure by the Constitutional Council to consider such negative practices

of any Judge when such persons name is forwarded to the Constitutional Council for

approval for such person to be appointed as a Judge of a Superior Court of the country.

Therefore, I agree with the 14th Respondents concern that the Petitioner in this

Petition had attempted to canvass for the Nominee Judge in his own interest, which I

cannot accept as being in the public interest.

Turning to the affidavit submitted by the Secretary to His Excellency the President, I

find that the Secretary to the President had just produced the following documents:

the recommendation by His Excellency the President to the Constitutional Council,

seeking its approval to appoint the incumbent President of the Court of Appeal as a

Judge of the Supreme Court (the letter dated 25-10-2023, marked A); the

communication by the Hon Speaker dated 21-11-2023 addressed to his Excellency the

President, marked B; the decision of the Constitutional Council which was dated 31-

01-2024 sent by the Hon Speaker addressed to His Excellency the President, marked

C. It is the position of the Secretary to His Excellency, that His Excellency the President

has in all times acted in good faith in accordance with the Constitution and has not

violated the Fundamental Rights of the Petitioner.

The 2nd, 4th and the 5th Respondents in their affidavits (all dated 18-06-2024), have

stated that they cast their vote in favour of approving the nomination forwarded by

His Excellency the President, to appoint the Nominee Judge, as a Judge of the

Supreme Court while the majority of the members voted to disapprove the said

nomination as reflected in the minutes of the Forty Seventh Meeting of the

Constitutional Council held on 30-01-2024. All of them, i.e. the 2nd, 4th and 5th

Respondents have annexed the documents: the recommendation by His Excellency

the President to the Constitutional Council, seeking its approval to appoint the

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 37 of 45

incumbent President of the Court of Appeal as a Judge of the Supreme Court (the

letter dated 25-10-2023, marked A); the communication by the Hon. Speaker dated

21-11-2023 addressed to his Excellency the President, marked B; the communication

by His Excellency the President, dated 09-01-2024 addressed to the Hon. Speaker,

marked C; the minutes of the Forty Sixth Meeting of the Constitutional Council held

on 19-01-2024, marked D; the minutes of the Forty Seventh Meeting of the

Constitutional Council held on 30-01-2024, marked E; the communication of the

decision of the Constitutional Council not approving the appointment of the Nominee

as a Judge of the Supreme Court to His Excellency the President by letter dated 31-

01-2024, marked F; the minutes of the Forty Eighth Meeting of the Constitutional

Council held on 19-02-2024, marked G.

It is significant to observe that none of these Respondents, namely, the 2nd, 4th and

5th Respondents have complained or even attempted to complain that the reasoning

of the majority decision of the Council violates any provision of law. They only have

asserted that they have cast their vote in favour of the appointment of the Nominee

Judge. The 1st Respondent, Hon. Speaker has also correctly taken a neutral stand in

this case. He has confined to his averments in the affidavit, to the role he has played

as the Chairman of the Constitutional Council. The effect of the affidavit of the

Secretary General of the Constitutional Council dated 12-03-2024, is no different.

Thus, the composite position taken up by all the said Respondents is that there is

nothing that had happened at their hands to substantiate any infringement of the

Petitioners Fundamental Rights.

However, to the surprise of Court, the learned Deputy Solicitor General made

submissions before us attempting to convince us that the reasoning of the majority

decision of the Constitutional Council is wrong when the Constitutional Council, inter

alia, had relied on the written submissions tendered by the Attorney General in CA

(Writ) 377/2023 to come to that conclusion. In view of the positions taken up by the

Respondents, for whom the learned Deputy Solicitor General appears, we cannot see

any basis upon which the learned Deputy Solicitor General could have made such

submissions before us.

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 38 of 45

The Petitioners position is that the decision of the Constitutional Council not to

approve the name of the Nominee Judge to be appointed as a Judge of the Supreme

Court has infringed his Fundamental Rights guaranteed by Article 12 (1) of the

Constitution. The corollary of this position is that minority decision of the Constitutional

Council to approve the name of the Nominee Judge to be appointed as a Judge of the

Supreme Court is the legally valid decision. Having that in mind, let me now turn to

the minority decision of the Constitutional Council.

I would commence this discourse with reproducing the reasons attached to the

minority decision of the Constitutional Council, marked R 11, which is as follows:

The Hon Nimal Siripala de Silva stated that he is not in agreement with the

aforesaid statement and requested to include the following statement in the

Minutes.

"The nomination sent by the Hon President is the President of the Court of

Appeal who has been recommended for the Supreme Court. This person's

recommendation to the office of the President of the Court of Appeal was

unanimously approved by the same Council months ago. The Hon Chief Justice

has also recommended this nominee, in writing, as a fit and proper person to

be appointed as a Judge of the Supreme Court. As alleged by the Civil Society

members of the Council, there is no provision to go into the merits of a

Judgment and assessed by the Council. If a Judicial officer is unsuitable, he

would be expelled otherwise he can walk up to the highest position. Such

expulsion should be only by Constitutional provisions and there should be an

impeachment motion passed by Parliament with 2/3 majority. Without adhering

to that, the Council is not in a position to decide a person is unsuitable. This is

a greater erosion of Justice and Fundamental Rights of Judicial Officers and

interfering the Judiciary. This would be violating the Constitution if the Council

adopts it in this nature. Therefore, myself, Hon Sagara Kariyawasam and the

Hon Prime Minister are not inclined to accept the reasons given by civil society

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 39 of 45

members taking in to account that there are no cogent reasons that have been

given to reject this nomination.

The Hon Prime Minister agreed with the same. The Hon Sagara Kariyawasam

informed that he does not agree with the statement made by the Hon Nimal

Siripala de Silva in its entirety but however he approves the recommendation

of the Hon President.

As stated above, the Petitioner states that the above view is the correct view which

the Constitutional Council should have taken and approve the nomination forwarded

by His Excellency the President, to appoint the Nominee Judge, as a Judge of the

Supreme Court. Let me consider this argument next.

I find that there are four main reasons provided in the above reasoning given by the

4th Respondent with which the 2nd and 5th Respondents had concurred. Let me start

with the first of those reasons. It is the fact that the Constitutional Council had

unanimously approved the Nominee Judge to be appointed as the President of the

Court of Appeal some months ago. One must bear in mind that the material considered

by the Constitutional Council in the instant matter was not available before it when it

considered the approval of the Nominee Judge to be appointed as the President of the

Court of Appeal previously. The written submissions filed on behalf of the Hon.

Attorney General in CA (Writ) 377/2023 is dated 10-11-2023. The letter by which Hon.

Chief Justice had given his concurrence for the appointment of the Nominee Judge,

as a Judge of the Supreme Court was dated 06-11-2023. It was on 08-11-2023 that

the then Hon. Minister of Sports had raised concerns about the Nominee Judge in

Parliament, making certain negative remarks about the conduct of the Nominee Judge.

It was at the Thirty Fifth Meeting, held on 09-11-2023, that the Constitutional Council

considered, presumably for the first time, the nomination forwarded by His Excellency

the President, to appoint the Nominee Judge, as a Judge of the Supreme Court. It was

on 08-11-2023 that the Hon. Minister of Justice, Prison Affairs and Constitutional

Reforms, had made a statement relevant to the issues raised by the then Hon. Minster

of Sports on the previous date. Therefore, it is clear that the material which the 3rd,

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 40 of 45

6th, 7th, 8th and 9th Respondents had focussed when casting their votes against the

approval for the Nominee Judge to be appointed as a Judge of the Supreme Court had

come to light much after the Constitutional Council had unanimously approved the

Nominee Judge to be appointed as the President of the Court of Appeal.

Moreover, when the Constitutional Council approves the name of a Judge of the High

Court or an officer from the Attorney Generals Department or any other person who

does not belong to either of the above groups, it can only consider the conduct,

performances, achievements and other related factors in relation to that persons

career up to that point. On the other hand, the Judges holding different positions,

namely, as a Judge of the Court of Appeal, the President of the Court of Appeal, a

Judge of the Supreme Court, the Chief Justice have different levels of challenges to

meet. Therefore, the fact that the Constitutional Council had unanimously approved

the Nominee Judge to be appointed as the President of the Court of Appeal at a certain

time should not prevent the Constitutional Council from revisiting the matter afresh

for the next appointment, as a Judge of the Supreme Court.

As I have already stated, if the Constitutional Council fails to consider the material

unearthed after it had approved the Nominee Judge for his appointment as the

President of the Court of Appeal, I can simply say that it is obnoxious to the spirit of

Article 12 (1) of the Constitution. Therefore, I am of the view that the first reason

provided by the 4th Respondent with which the 2nd and 5th Respondents had agreed,

i.e. the fact that the Constitutional Council had unanimously approved the Nominee

Judge to be appointed as the President of the Court of Appeal some months ago,

cannot be accepted as a lawful or justifiable reason.

Obviously, the Constitutional Council considered the Nominee Judge for the

appointment to the post of the President of the Court of Appeal when the Nominee

Judge was yet to assume duties as the President of the Court of Appeal. The President

of the Court of Appeal has more important role to play than a Judge of the Court of

Appeal. Indeed, the effectiveness and the quality of administration of justice would

depend on the way the President of the Court of Appeal conducts himself and decisions

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 41 of 45

he takes towards making the Court of Appeal more effective to its users. The allegation

which the Constitutional Council in this instance had considered is the conduct of the

Nominee Judge in his capacity as the President of the Court of Appeal. Any officer

holding its position as a trust to the general public must act in such a way that the

trust reposed in him by the general public and the system is not breached. If the

President of the Court of Appeal whose name has been cleared by the Constitutional

Council to be appointed as the President of the Court of Appeal acts in breach of that

trust after securing his appointment, then the question arises as to his suitability for

the next appointment. For instance, if a person who has been appointed as the

President of the Court of Appeal after approval by the Constitutional Council, develops

a practice which is unbecoming of a Judge, the question arises as to whether the

Constitutional Council is under an obligation to proceed to approve such Judges

nomination for the next higher post merely because it had earlier approved such Judge

for the post he currently holds. In my view the answer clearly is no.

The second reason provided by the 4th Respondent with which the 2nd and 5th

Respondents had concurred is the fact that the Hon. Chief Justice has also given his

concurrence to appoint the Nominee Judge, as a Judge of the Supreme Court. The

Hon. Chief Justice had given his concurrence by the letter dated 06-11-2023. I have

already adverted to above, the time line with regard to adverse information against

the Nominee Judge coming to light. The allegations made from several quarters

against the Nominee Judge started coming to light since 08-11-2023 when the then

Hon. Minister of Sports had raised negative concerns about the Nominee Judge in

Parliament. Therefore, I observe that this material may not have been available before

the Hon. Chief Justice. If such material had been available, the Hon. Chief Justice

would have brought them to the attention of the Constitutional Council, at least as

unverified observations. This is so when the 3rd, 6th, 7th, 8th and 9th Respondents had

dutifully and rightly with the spirit of discharging their function entrusted to them by

the citizens of this country through the provisions in the Constitution, namely Article

41C, had proceeded without any hesitation to consider such material when making

their decision with regard to the appointment of the Nominee Judge to the Supreme

Court.

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 42 of 45

Therefore, the second reason provided by the 4th Respondent with which the 2nd and

5th Respondents had agreed i.e., the fact that the Hon. Chief Justice has given his

concurrence to appoint the Nominee Judge, as a Judge of the Supreme Court, also

cannot be accepted as a lawful or justifiable reason.

The third Reason provided by the 4th Respondent with which the 2nd and 5th

Respondents had concurred is the view that there is no provision for the Constitutional

Council to go into the merits of Judgments. The reasoning provided by the 3rd, 6th,7th,

8th and 9th Respondents had never questioned the validity of any Judgment. All what

they had considered was the conduct of the Nominee Judge. Indeed, one of the

matters [item (c)] referred to in the letter dated 14-11-2023 (P 1), written by the

Hon. Speaker addressed to the Hon. Chief Justice, is a request for the Hon. Chief

Justice to comment on The conduct of the Judge concerned and any notable

contribution for the development of the legal jurisprudence etc. As I have already

adverted to, if the Petitioner did not block this information from being received by the

Constitutional Council by previously filing the Fundamental Rights Petition

SC/FR/290/2023, the Hon. the Chief Justice would well have provided his

comments/observations on this aspect of the conduct of the Nominee Judge thereby

enabling the Constitutional Council to consider them when making its decision. I must

also note another important feature here. The Constitutional Council had thought it fit

to consider the views of the Hon. Chief Justice on the conduct of the Nominee Judge

before making up their minds on the matter solely by themselves. Thus, I am unable

to accept the argument of the Petitioner that the 3rd, 6th, 7th, 8th and 9th Respondents

have acted in an arbitrary manner. I have also adverted to above, that the letter (P

1) was not arbitrary, unreasonable, irrational or had undermined the Independence

of the Judiciary. I have also already held that it is the blocking of this type of

information which had prevented the Constitutional Council from evaluating the

expected comment by the Hon. Chief Justice, which is obnoxious to the Rule of Law.

Therefore, I reaffirm that the Constitutional Council is entitled to take into

consideration, the conduct of the Judge when it is called upon to consider the

nomination for the suitability for such Nominee to be appointed to the next post.

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 43 of 45

The fourth reason provided by the 4th Respondent with which the 2nd and 5th

Respondents had concurred is the view that a judicial officer if unsuitable, should be

expelled from service and in the absence of such expulsion, such judicial officer is

entitled to walk up to the highest position. In my view this statement is completely

wrong in law, in fact and in practice. If this position is correct, the following questions

arise: Why is the Constitutional Council there? What role the Constitutional Council

has to play, when it is called upon to approve the name of a judicial officer to be

appointed as a Judge of a Superior Court?

Firstly, if the above reason provided by the 4th Respondent is correct, then I see no

positive role which the Constitutional Council can play in its decision-making process

if the nominee is a sitting Judge. If the nominee is a sitting Judge and if he has not

been expelled from service, then the Constitutional Council has no option but to

approve the name of such sitting Judge. This is because the Constitutional Council can

refrain from approving a nomination of a sitting Judge only if such person has been

expelled from service. Then in the first place, such person would not be a sitting Judge.

Secondly, for the Constitutional Council to refrain from approving a nomination of such

a person on such basis, His Excellency the President should have nominated a former

sitting Judge who has been expelled from service. This cannot happen. Moreover, if

this reason is valid, then it would not be within the powers of the Constitutional Council

to consider the conduct of such Judge, the competence of such Judge for a higher

post, the suitability of such Judge, or the ability of such Judge to function as a Judge

of a Superior Court. Additionally, it is a common occurrence that all persons who join

the judiciary as Magistrates would not end up as High Court Judges; and all High Court

Judges would not end up as Court of Appeal Judges; and all Court of Appeal Judges

would not end up as Judges of the Supreme Court; and all Judges of the Supreme

Court would not end up as Chief Justices. I do not think I should say any more than

this, to show the fallacy of this reasoning.

I have also adverted to above, that the letter (P 1) was not arbitrary, unreasonable,

irrational or had undermined the Independence of the Judiciary. I have also already

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 44 of 45

held that it is the blocking of this type of information which had prevented the

Constitutional Council from evaluating the expected observations by the Hon. Chief

Justice which is obnoxious to the Rule of Law.

In that sense it is wrong for the minority of the Constitutional Council to take a view

that non-approval of the Nominee Judges name in this instance would amount to a

greater erosion of Justice and Fundamental Rights of Judicial Officers and interfering

the Judiciary. Finding out about the Judge by whatever means the Constitutional

Council can, and subsequently considering them carefully and objectively to arrive at

a decision on the suitability of a nominee for the proposed appointment is the duty of

the Constitutional Council. Therefore, the minority view that such a move would be

violating the Constitution if the Council adopts such a move, is not correct. Therefore,

the reasons given by the three members of the Constitutional Council who voted to

approve the name of the Nominee Judge lacks any legal or factual basis. Therefore,

that view would amount to an arbitrary view.

The Petitioner also has deprived the Nominee Judge the opportunity of defending his

actions/conduct since the Petitioner has not made the Nominee Judge a party to this

case at least for notice. For the reasons best known to him, the Petitioner had pre-

supposed that the 3rd, 6th, 7th, 8th and 9th Respondents have acted in an arbitrary

manner to unlawfully refuse to approve the name of the Nominee Judge for the

appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court. Similarly, the Petitioner had pre-

supposed that the reasons provided by the 4th Respondent with which the 2nd and 5th

Respondents had concurred is reasonable and lawful. I have already rejected these

arguments and given reasons.

For the foregoing reasons, I hold that none of the Respondents have infringed any of

the Fundamental Rights of the Petitioner guaranteed by the Constitution. In the above

circumstances, the Petitioner is not entitled to succeed in this application. I have

already held that the Petitioners action to challenge the letter P 1, is not a genuine

act on the part of the Petitioner. I have also already held that the Petitioners action

to challenge the majority decision of the Constitutional Council is not a litigation in the

[SC FR 35/2024] - Page 45 of 45

public interest but is totally against the interest of public and against the expectations

of the provisions of the Constitution. I have also taken the view that the Petitioner has

lacked uberrima fides ; he has filed this Petition for collateral purposes and/or collateral

considerations and/or at the behest or instigation of others. Having taken these

aspects into consideration, I proceed to dismiss this Petition with costs fixed at Rs.

500,000 (Rupees five hundred thousand) each to the 7th, 8th and 9th Respondents [a

total of Rupees 1.5 million], who not being Members of Parliament but being persons

appointed as members of the Constitution Council in terms of Article 41A (1) (e) (iii)

nevertheless had to retain Counsel to represent them in these proceedings, owing to

the conduct of the Petitioner. The Petitioner is also directed to deposit another sum

of Rs. 500,000 (Rupees five hundred thousand) in the Registry of this Court as costs

of the State. Registrar is directed to take necessary steps to ensure the payment of

these costs within 02 months from today.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J. I agree,

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

MAHINDA SAMAYAWARDHENA, J. I agree,

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT