IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Chemisales Holding (Pvt) Ltd.,

21, Wattalpola Road,

Moon Crescent,

Pallimulla, Panadura.

And

45, Industrial Colony,

Nagoda, Kalutara.

Defendant-Respondent-Appellant

SC/APPEAL/148/2019

WP/HCCA/KAL/45/2013/REV

DC PANADURA DR/03/2010 Vs.

Peoples Bank,

75, Sir Chittampalam A. Gardiner

Mawatha, Colombo 2.

Plaintiff-Petitioner-Respondent

Before: Hon. Justice P. Padman Surasena

Hon. Justice Shiran Gooneratne

Hon. Justice Mahinda Samayawardhena

Counsel: Mahinda Nanayakkara for the Defendant-Respondent-

Appellant.

Rasika Dissanayake for the Plaintiff-Petitioner-Respondent.

Argued on: 19.11.2024

Written Submissions:

By the Appellant on 04.09.2020 and 22.01.2025

By the Respondent on 16.02.2021 and 10.02.2025

Decided on: 03.04.2025

2 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

Samayawardhena, J.

Factual matrix

The plaintiff, Peoples Bank, instituted this action against the defendant

company by plaint dated 24.05.2010 in the District Court of Panadura,

seeking to recover a sum of Rs. 9,801,583.31, together with interest as

stated therein, in respect of a temporary overdraft facility obtained by the

defendant through current account No. 148-1001-1-7192993 maintained

at the Panadura branch of the plaintiff bank in terms of section 4(1) of the

Debt Recovery (Special Provisions) Act No. 2 of 1990, as amended by Act

No. 9 of 1994.

Having been satisfied with the contents of the affidavit and the annexures

filed with the plaint, the District Judge, at the first instance, entered decree

nisi in terms of section 4(2) of the Act, which was thereafter served on the

defendant. The defendant, by way of petition and affidavit, sought either the

dissolution of the decree nisi or, in the alternative, permission to file an

answer. By order dated 13.10.2011, the District Judge decided to grant the

defendant an opportunity to file an answer unconditionally.

In the answer, the defendant, while seeking the dismissal of the plaintiffs

action, made a claim in reconvention for a sum of Rs. 20 million, alleging

that the entire business of the defendant came to a standstill due to the

institution of this action. Upon the filing of the replication, the case was

fixed for trial.

At the third date of trial, the defendant raised preliminary objections

seeking the dismissal of the plaint based on section 30 of the Act. By order

dated 08.08.2013, the District Judge upheld these objections and

dismissed the plaintiffs action.

3 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

Being dissatisfied with the District Court order, the plaintiff filed a revision

application before the High Court of Civil Appeal of Kalutara. By judgment

dated 27.07.2018, the High Court set aside this order and directed the

District Judge to recommence the proceedings from the beginning,

requiring the plaintiff to support the application for the decree nisi afresh.

The defendant filed this appeal with leave obtained against the order of the

High Court. This Court granted leave to appeal on the following question of

law.

Did the High Court of Civil Appeal fail to observe that there is no

instrument, agreement or document produced by the plaintiff to support

its contention as required by section 4(1) of the Act and therefore the

action of the plaintiff has been instituted in violation of the mandatory

provisions of the Debt Recovery (Special Provisions) Act No. 2 of 1990

as amended?

The purpose and scheme of the Act

The Debt Recovery (Special Provisions) Act No. 2 of 1990 was enacted as

part of a series of Acts introduced in 1990 to strengthen the economy by

expediting recovery of debts. The package of Acts passed by Parliament in

1990 include:

(1) Debt Recovery (Special Provisions) Act, No. 2 of 1990

(2) Mortgage (Amendment) Act, No. 3 of 1990

(3) Recovery of Loans by Banks (Special Provisions) Act, No. 4 of 1990

(4) Registration of Documents (Amendment) Act, No. 5 of 1990

(5) Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, No. 6 of 1990

(6) Motor Traffic (Amendment) Act, No. 8 of 1990

(7) Agrarian Services (Amendment) Act, No. 9 of 1990

(8) Consumer Credit (Amendment) Act, No. 7 of 1990

4 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

(9) National Development Bank of Sri Lanka (Amendment) Act, No. 10

of 1990

(10) Public Servants (Liabilities) (Amendment) Act, No. 11 of 1990

(11) Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, No. 12 of 1990

(12) Trust Receipts (Amendment) Act, No. 13 of 1990

(13) Inland Trust Receipts Act, No. 14 of 1990

(14) Credit Information Bureau of Sri Lanka Act, No. 18 of 1990

(15) Inland Revenue (Amendment) Act, No. 22 of 1990

(16) Excise (Amendment) Act, No. 37 of 1990

(17) Banking (Amendment) Act, No. 39 of 1990

(18) Excise (Special Provisions) (Amendment) Act, No. 40 of 1990

(19) Inland Revenue (Amendment) Act, No. 42 of 1990

(20) Turnover Tax (Amendment) Act, No. 43 of 1990

(21) Specified Certificate of Deposits (Tax and Other Concessions) Act,

No. 45 of 1990 and

(22) Industrial Promotion Act, No. 46 of 1990.

While a legal framework for recovering debts through ordinary money

recovery actions by adopting regular and summary procedure already

existed, such proceedings were often unduly protracted, adversely affecting

the lending portfolios, solvency, and financial performance of banks. A well-

functioning financial system is essential for sustainable economic

development, and its stability depends on a reliable mechanism for prompt

recovery of debts. The efficient circulation of money, rather than its

concentration in the hands of a few, is vital for a stable and thriving

economy. In this context, the recovery of debts owed to lending

institutions, plays a pivotal role in ensuring sustainable economic growth.

According to section 2(1) of the Debt Recovery (Special Provisions) Act, a

lending institution may, subject to subsection (2), recover a debt due to it

by instituting an action in accordance with the procedure prescribed in the

5 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

Act. Such an action shall be filed in the District Court within whose

jurisdiction the defendant resides, the cause of action arises, or the contract

sought to be enforced was made.

Section 2(2) stipulates that the sum alleged to be in default must exceed

one hundred and fifty thousand rupees. Furthermore, according to the First

Schedule of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 10

of 1996, actions under the Debt Recovery (Special Provisions) Act No. 2 of

1990 cannot be instituted in the Commercial High Court, notwithstanding

that the debt exceeds 50 million rupees. In other words, all actions under

the Debt Recovery (Special Provisions) Act No. 2 of 1990 shall be instituted

in the District Court.

The terms lending institution and debt are defined in section 30.

lending institution means

(a) a licensed Commercial Bank within the meaning of the Banking

Act, No, 30 of 1988;

(b) the State Mortgage and Investment Bank established by the State

Mortgage and Investment Bank Act, No. 13 of 1975;

(c) the National Development Bank established by the National

Development Bank of Sri Lanka Act, No. 2 of 1979;

(d) the National Savings Bank established by the National Savings

Bank Act, No. 30 of 1971;

(e) the Development Finance Corporation of Ceylon established by the

Development Finance Corporation of Ceylon Act (Chapter 165);

and

(f) a company registered under the Finance Companies Act, No. 78 of

1988, to carry on finance business, and includes a liquidator

appointed under the Companies Act, No. 17 of 1982 or any

6 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

authority duly appointed, to carry on, or wind up, the business of

any bank, corporation or company referred to above.

What is a debt?

Under Section 2(1) of the Act, an action may be instituted only for the

recovery of a debt. The term debt as defined in section 30 reads as

follows:

debt means a sum of money which is ascertained or capable of being

ascertained at the time of the institution of the action, and which is in

default, whether the same be secured or not, or owed by any person or

persons, jointly or severally or as principal borrower or guarantor or in

any other capacity, and alleged by a lending institution to have arisen

from a transaction in the course of banking, lending, financial or other

allied business activity of that institution, but does not include a sum

of money owed under a promise or agreement which is not in writing.

Accordingly, the essential characteristics of a debt under this Act may be

identified as follows:

(a) It must be a sum of money that is either ascertained or capable of

being ascertained at the time of instituting the action and is in

default. It is important to emphasise that even if the sum is not

ascertained, the criterion is satisfied as long as it is capable of being

ascertained by a simple arithmetic calculation.

(b) The sum to be recovered may be secured or unsecured and may be

owed by any person or persons, whether jointly or severally, or in the

capacity of a principal borrower, guarantor, or any other capacity.

(c) The sum to be recovered shall have arisen from a transaction in the

course of banking, lending, financial or other allied business activity

of the lending institution.

7 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

(d) However, this does not extend to a sum of money owed under a

promise or agreement that is not in writing.

Written promise or agreement

The phrase but does not include a sum of money owed under a promise or

agreement which is not in writing in the definition of debt in section 30 of

the Act has been subject to various interpretations. It has been observed in

the minority judgment in Kularatne v. Peoples Bank [2021] 2 Sri LR 474 at

513-514 and Chandrasekera v. Indian Overseas Bank

(SC/APPEAL/48/2021, SC Minutes of 23.01.2024 at pages 13-16) that the

definition of debt in section 30, which states that debt...does not include

a sum of money owed under a promise or agreement which is not in writing,

makes it mandatory that an action under this Act must be based on a

written promise or agreement. The logical extension of this interpretation is

that it is mandatory for the plaintiff to file the written promise or agreement

with the plaint for the District Court to be clothed with the jurisdiction to

proceed under this Act.

Let me pause for a moment to state that it is the wrong question to ask

whether it is mandatory for the plaintiff to file a written promise or

agreement with the plaint. The right question to ask is: What are the

documents that should be filed by the plaintiff with the plaint in terms of

the Act? I will address this in the next subtopic.

The aforementioned interpretation is primarily based on the Supreme Court

Determination in connection with some amendments proposed to this Act

in the year 2003 [SC Special Determination No. 23/2003 on Debt Recovery

(Special Provisions)(Amendment) Bill of 2003] where it had been stated in

connection with debt...does not include a sum of money owed under a

promise or agreement which is not in writing, that the special procedure

could be resorted to only in instances where there is a written promise or

8 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

agreement on the basis of which the sum is claimed. The implication of this

observation in the special determination is that, if there is no written

promise or agreement, an action under the Debt Recovery (Special

Provisions) Act cannot be filed.

In this regard, let me first state the following. The aforesaid Bill, brought in

2003, has not become law as an Act of Parliament. In Ukwatte v. DFCC Bank

[2004] 1 Sri LR 164, Sripavan J. (as His Lordship then was) stated at 167

that in Supreme Court Special Determinations what is examined by the

Supreme Court is the constitutionality of a Bill and not the constitutionality

of the provisions contained in an Act already in force. The constitutional

jurisdiction of the Supreme Court is distinct and different from the appellate

jurisdiction it exercises. Supreme Court Special Determinations have no

binding effect as they are advisory in character.

If this Court were to hold that the special procedure under the Debt

Recovery (Special Provisions) Act applies only where there is a written

promise or agreement, such an interpretation would be inconsistent with

section 4(1) of the Act, which requires the plaintiff to file with the plaint the

instrument, agreement or document sued upon, or relied on by the

institution. The term or is a coordinating conjunction used to present

alternatives. The words instrument and document in section 4(1) cannot

be rendered meaningless and redundant. The legislature does not employ

words in vain, and every word in a statute must be given meaning. A written

agreement and a document are not the same. All written agreements are

documents but all documents are not written agreements. Therefore, the

proposition that an action under this Act can only be filed on a written

promise or agreement is not acceptable.

If the intention of the legislature were to restrict the institution of actions

under this Act solely to cases where there is a written promise or agreement,

the legislature, in section 4(1), instead of stating that the plaintiff shall file

9 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

with the plaint the instrument, agreement or document sued upon, or

relied on by the institution, could have stated that the plaintiff shall file

with the plaint the written promise or agreement sued upon or relied on by

the institution.

Similarly, in the definition of debt under section 30, instead of stating that

and alleged by a lending institution to have arisen from a transaction in

the course of banking, lending, financial or other allied business activity of

that institution, but does not include a sum of money owed under a promise

or agreement which is not in writing, the legislature could have stated,

and alleged by a lending institution to have arisen from a written promise

or agreement in the course of banking, lending, financial or other allied

business activity of that institution.

This was acknowledged by the minority judgment in Kularatne v. Peoples

Bank (supra) at page 515 when it was stated that Thus, if there is no written

instrument, agreement or document sued upon or relied on by the institution,

a lending institution is not entitled in law to institute action under the

procedure stipulated in the Debt Recovery Act to recover a debt due to the

institution.

It is clear that the purpose of excluding a sum of money owed under a

promise or agreement which is not in writing under section 30 of the Act is

to insist on tangible proof of the debt by documentary evidence.

Although the special determination states that the special procedure could

be resorted to only in instances where there is a written promise or agreement

on the basis of which the sum is claimed, the Court immediately thereafter

clarifies the rationale for the insistence of written promise or agreement. It

states, unless there is a written promise or agreement, The resulting

position is that the court would not have any written evidence of the

10 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

commitment on the part of the debtor when it issues decree nisi in the first

instance.

Accordingly, if there is written evidence of the commitment on the part of

the debtor, the Court can entertain the action. As stated above, section 4(1)

allows an action to be filed based on an instrument, agreement or document

sued upon, or relied on by the institution. An instrument, written agreement

or document sued upon or relied on would provide written evidence of the

commitment on the part of the debtor when it issues decree nisi in the first

instance.

There is no conflict between section 4(1) and the definition of debt in

section 30. Those two sections are complementary and must be read

together.

The primary function of the Court in interpreting statutes is to ascertain

the intention of the legislature and the objective of the legislation, and to

give effect to them in accordance with established principles of statutory

interpretation. In the instant case, the legislative intent and objective are

clear: the expeditious recovery of debts owed to lending institutions, thereby

facilitating overall economic improvement for the greater benefit of society.

Hence it is the duty of the Court to give effect to this legislative intent.

In the House of Lords case of R v. Secretary of State for Health ex parte

Quintavalle (on behalf of Pro-Life Alliance) [2003] UKHL 138, Lord Bingham

stated:

The basic task of the court is to ascertain and give effect to the true

meaning of what Parliament has said in the enactment to be construed.

But that is not to say that attention should be confined and a literal

interpretation given to the particular provisions which give rise to

difficulty. Such an approach not only encourages immense prolixity in

drafting, since the draftsman will feel obliged to provide expressly for

11 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

every contingency which may possibly arise. It may also (under the

banner of loyalty to the will of Parliament) lead to the frustration of that

will, because undue concentration on the minutiae of the enactment

may lead the court to neglect the purpose which Parliament intended

to achieve when it enacted the statute. Every statute other than a pure

consolidating statute is, after all, enacted to make some change, or

address some problem, or remove some blemish, or effect some

improvement in the national life. The courts task, within the

permissible bounds of interpretation, is to give effect to Parliaments

purpose. So the controversial provisions should be read in the context

of the statute as a whole, and the statute as a whole should be read in

the historical context of the situation which led to its enactment.

Harmonious construction is employed to resolve apparent inconsistencies

or contradictions within the same law. It rests on the principle that every

statute is enacted with a distinct purpose and intention and should,

therefore, be interpreted as a cohesive whole.

In Sultana Begum v. Prem Chand Jain AIR 1997 SC 1006, it was held:

[T]he rule of interpretation requires that while interpreting two

inconsistent, or, obviously repugnant provisions of an Act, the courts

should make an effort to so interpret the provisions as to harmonise

them so that the purpose of the Act may be given effect to and both the

provisions may be allowed to operate without rendering either of them

otiose.

In the case of Project Blue Sky Inc. v. Australian Broadcasting Authority

[1998] HCA 28, McHugh, Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ (Chief Justice

Brennan wrote a separate judgment) stated at para 70:

A legislative instrument must be construed on the prima facie basis

that its provisions are intended to give effect to harmonious

12 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

goals. Where conflict appears to arise from the language of particular

provisions, the conflict must be alleviated, so far as possible, by

adjusting the meaning of the competing provisions to achieve that

result which will best give effect to the purpose and language of those

provisions while maintaining the unity of all the statutory provisions.

In Rajavarothiam Sampanthan and Others v. The Attorney General and

Others (SC/FR/351-356, 358-361/2018, SC Minutes of 13.12.2018) at 61

it was held:

The next principle of interpretation which should be mentioned is that,

where there is more than one provision in a statute which deal with the

same subject and differing constructions of the provisions are

advanced, the Court must seek to interpret and apply the several

provisions harmoniously and read the statute as a whole. That rule of

harmonious interpretation crystallises the good sense that all the

provisions of a statute must be taken into account and be made to work

together and cohesively enable the statute to achieve its purpose.

Chief Justice Goddard in Barns v. Jarvis [1953] 1 All ER 1061 at 1063

stated One has to apply a certain amount of common sense in construing

statutes and to bear in mind the object of the Act.

It is on this basis that a series of cases has held that an overdraft falls

within the definition of debt under section 30, read with section 4(1) of the

Act, notwithstanding the absence of a written agreement in a single

document.

In Kularatne v. Peoples Bank (supra) the majority judgment at pages 480-

481 held:

The term debt as defined above [section 30 of the Act] is very wide

and covers many situations, the material factor being that the sum of

13 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

money should be ascertainable at the time of institution of the action

and alleged by a lending institution to have arisen from a banking,

lending, financial or other allied business activity of the institution.

This term debt has been considered by the Appellate Courts on many

an instance and given a wide meaning to include overdrafts and

guarantees as well.

In Kiran Atapattu v. Pan Asia Bank Ltd [2005] 2 Sri LR 276 at 279, the

Court of Appeal held whether one calls the sum borrowed an overdraft

or a loan if it is capable of being ascertained it falls within the meaning

of debt under section 30 of the Debt Recovery (Special Provisions) Act

preponing the theory that what is material is the sum being capable of

being ascertained at the time of institution of the case.

Similarly, in Dharmaratne v. Peoples Bank [2003] 3 Sri LR 307, a case

filed under the Debt Recovery Act, the Court of Appeal held that an

overdraft falls within the definition of debt as the overdraft arises

from a transaction relating to banking. In that case the contention of

appellant, that the overdraft was not a debt or a loan was rejected

by the Court of Appeal.

In Eassuwaran and others v. Bank of Ceylon [2006] 1 Sri LR 365, a

case decided by this Court, Raja Fernando, J. (with S.N. Silva, C.J. and

Thilakawardena, J. agreeing) held that a guarantee provided by the

appellants falls within the definition of debt and a lending institution

could have recourse to the provisions of the Debt Recovery (Special

Provisions) Act No. 2 of 1990 as amended. In this case the contention

that the provisions of the Act apply only to a fixed term loan and not

to any credit or overdraft facility and that if the debt was a credit

facility or an overdraft facility, the provisions of the Debt Recovery

(Special Provisions) Act No. 2 of 1990 as amended does not apply was

overruled by this Court.

14 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

Thus, from the above referred judicial decisions, it is amply clear that

an overdraft falls within the four corners of the Act subject to the other

prerequisites therein being fulfilled.

When an action is instituted in relation to a temporary overdraft, what is

the instrument, agreement or document sued upon or relied on by the

plaintiff? Primarily, the issued cheques and the statement of account.

Additionally, there may be several other supporting documents.

In Kularatnes case (supra), which involved a temporary overdraft facility,

the first question of law raised by the defendant-appellant before this Court

was that no instrument, agreement or document sued upon had been

annexed to the plaint, in violation of section 4(1) of the Act. This question

was answered against the defendant by the majority judgment stating at

page 486 that, In the instant appeal, it is apparent that the provisions in

section 4(1) of the Act were adhered to by the plaintiff bank. To the plaint filed

before the District Court was annexed an affidavit, a decree nisi, required

stamps, two cheques and a statement of the defendants current account.

In Eagle Breweries Ltd v. Peoples Bank [2008] 2 Sri LR 199, the Court held

that while a cheque and a statement of account may not individually fall

within the meaning of instrument or agreement, as they do not

independently establish a contractual relationship between two parties,

they may, when considered together, constitute a document that

embodies the terms of such a contract. Somawansa J. at page 205 stated:

My considered view is that a cheque drawn from a Bank and a statement of

account from a Bank would come within the ambit of a document in terms of

section 4(1) of Act No. 2 of 1990.

As held by this Court in Bank of Ceylon v. Aswedduma Tea Manufactures

(Pvt) Ltd [2017] 1 Sri LR 150, when a bank files a regular action on an

overdraft facility, the case is not based on the cheques but on the overdraft

15 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

facility. Therefore, the presentment of all cheques is not an indispensable

requirement. The issuance of cheques by the customer and their

subsequent payment by the bank constitute a contract based on the

principle of offer and acceptance.

However, I must make it clear that this interpretation should never be taken

to mean that a financial institution can merely annex some documents to

the plaint and obtain a decree nisi as a matter of course when instituting

an action under the Debt Recovery (Special Provisions) Act. Before issuing

the decree nisi, the Court shall inter alia be satisfied on a prima facie basis

that the documents are properly stamped if required by law, are not

suspicious, are not barred by prescription, and that the sum claimed is

lawfully due to the institution. If the Court is satisfied that the plaintiff is

entitled only to a portion of the sum claimed, it may issue a decree nisi

limited to that amount. If the Court finds that the plaintiff is not entitled to

any sum, it need not enter a decree nisi. I must emphasise that both the

financial institution and the Court must act with responsibility. While

financial institutions must not institute actions under this Act

irresponsibly, the Court must also exercise caution in determining the sum

for which the decree nisi is issued. At the stage of considering the issuance

of a decree nisi, as at the stage of seeking leave to appear and show cause,

the Court does not adjudicate the main case on its merits. Once a decree

nisi is issued, the role of the Court at the end of the inquiry is confined to

deciding whether to make the decree nisi absolute in whole or in part and

not whether the plaintiff is entitled to the sum originally claimed in the

prayer to the plaint.

Hence, it is not correct to state that an action under the Debt Recovery

(Special Provisions) Act No. 2 of 1990 cannot be filed in the absence of a

written promise or agreement. If there exists an instrument, written

agreement or document sued upon or relied on by the institution which

16 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

provides written evidence of the commitment on the part of the debtor, the

Court can entertain an action under this Act, provided that the plaintiff

satisfies the other prerequisites stipulated therein.

What shall the plaintiff file with the plaint?

Section 3 provides that an action under this Act shall be instituted by

presenting a plaint in the form prescribed by the Civil Procedure Code.

Section 4(1) sets out the documents that the plaintiff shall file along with

the plaint.

The institution suing shall on presenting the plaint, file with the plaint

an affidavit to the effect that the sum claimed is lawfully due to the

institution from the defendant, a draft decree nisi, the requisite stamps

for the decree nisi and for service thereof and shall in addition, file in

court, such number of copies of the plaint, affidavit, instrument,

agreement or document sued upon, or relied on by the institution, as is

equal to the number of defendants in the action.

According to section 4(1), the plaintiff lending institution shall file the

following with the plaint:

(a) an affidavit to the effect that the sum claimed is lawfully due to the

institution from the defendant;

(b) a draft decree nisi with the requisite stamps for the decree nisi and

for service thereof;

(c) the instrument, agreement or document sued upon, or relied on by

the plaintiff;

(d) such number of copies of the plaint, affidavit, instrument, agreement

or document sued upon or relied on, as is equal to the number of

defendants in the action.

17 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

Under section 4(1), the plaintiff is required to file an affidavit to the effect

that the sum claimed is lawfully due to the institution from the defendant.

However, this does not mean that the exact words lawfully due must

appear verbatim in the affidavit. What the section requires of the plaintiff is

to file an affidavit to the effect that the sum claimed is lawfully due to the

institution from the defendant. If the facts sworn or affirmed to in the

various averments of the affidavit satisfy the Court that the sum is lawfully

due to the plaintiff, the absence of exact words lawfully due shall not be a

ground to reject the plaint. (Ramanayake v. Sampath Bank [1993] 1 Sri LR

145, Metal Packing Ltd v. Sampath Bank Ltd [2008] 1 Sri LR 356)

According to section 4(4), the affidavit to be filed by the institution shall be

made by a principal officer with personal knowledge of the facts of the cause

of action. Such officer shall be liable to be examined as to the subject matter

thereof at the discretion of the judge.

Section 4(1) mandates the plaintiff to present with the plaint the

instrument, agreement or document sued upon, or relied on. Nonetheless,

a closer scrutiny of section 4(1) reveals that the filing of the instrument,

agreement or document sued upon, or relied on is an additional

requirement, not the primary one. The main requirement is the affidavit

accompanying the plaint, affirming that the sum claimed is lawfully due,

along with the draft decree nisi with the requisite stamps. Then the latter

part of section 4(1) states that the plaintiff shall in addition file in Court

copies of the plaint, affidavit, instrument, agreement or document sued

upon or relied on. I must emphasise that my observation in this regard does

not mean that filing copies of the instrument, agreement or document sued

upon or relied on is optional. The use of the word shall makes it mandatory

for the plaintiff to file at least copies of the instrument, agreement or

document sued upon or relied on with the plaint.

18 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

Before section 4(1) was amended by Act No. 9 of 1994, the plaintiff was

required to tender the original instrument, agreement or document sued

upon or relied on by the plaintiff. However, after the said amendment, it is

sufficient to file copies of them with the plaint.

This is further confirmed by section 8, as amended, which provides that, at

the stage of support, the Court may direct the plaintiff to produce the

original documents for its perusal and return.

In any proceedings under this Act, the court may order that the Original

of the instrument, agreement or other document copies of which were

filed with the plaint or on which the action is founded be made

available for examination by the court when the action is supported in

court and such instrument, agreement or document, thereafter,

notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Civil Procedure Code

(Chapter 103) shall be returned to the plaintiff after such examination.

When shall the Court enter decree nisi against the defendant?

The plaintiff can support the application for decree nisi, ex parte. Section

4(2) sets out the matters the Court shall consider when determining

whether decree nisi shall be entered.

If any instrument, agreement or document is produced to court and the

same appears to the court to be properly stamped (where such

instrument, agreement or document is required by law to be stamped)

and not to be open to suspicion by reason of any alteration or erasure

or other matter on the face of it, and not to be barred by prescription,

the court being satisfied of the contents contained in the affidavit

referred to in subsection (4), shall enter a decree nisi in the form set out

in the First Schedule to this Act in a sum not exceeding the sum prayed

for in the plaint together with interest up to the date of payment and

such costs as the court may allow at the time at making the decree nisi

19 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

together with such other relief prayed for by the institution as to the

court may seem meet and the decree nisi shall be served on the

defendant in the manner hereinafter specified.

According to section 4(2), when determining whether decree nisi shall be

entered, the Court shall consider whether:

(a) the instrument, agreement or document produced with the plaint is

properly stamped, if required by law;

(b) it is open to suspicion due to any alteration, erasure or other

irregularity on its face; and

(c) the claim for the recovery of debt is barred by prescription.

If the Court is satisfied that those requirements are met, it shall then

examine the contents of the affidavit filed by a principal officer of the lending

institution, as required by section 4(1) read with section 4(4) of the Act.

Debt recoverable including interest

According to section 4(2), decree nisi shall be entered for a sum not

exceeding the amount prayed for in the plaint, together with interest up to

the date of payment and such costs as the Court may allow at the time of

entering decree nisi, along with any other relief sought by the institution as

the Court deems appropriate.

Although section 5 of the Civil Law Ordinance states that the amount

recoverable on account of interest or arrears of interest shall in no case

exceed the principal, section 21 of this Act reads as follows:

Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Act or any other law,

an institution may recover as interest in an action instituted under this

Act, a sum of money in excess of the sum of money calculated as

principal, in such action.

20 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

Section 22 states:

No sum of money which constitutes a penalty for default in payment,

or delay in payment, of a debt shall be recoverable in an action

instituted for the recovery of such debt, in terms of the procedure laid

by this Act.

Section 23 states:

In an action instituted under this Act the court shall in the decree nisi,

order interest agreed upon between the parties up to the date of decree

nisi, and interest at the same rate on the aggregate sum of the decree

nisi from the date of decree nisi until the date of payment in full. In the

event of the parties not having agreed upon, the rate of interest, the

court shall in the decree nisi order interest at the market rate from the

date of institution of action up to the date of decree nisi and thereafter

on the aggregate sum of the decree nisi from the date of decree nisi

until the date of payment in full.

Adjustment of action

If the amount claimed in the plaint includes a sum that cannot be recovered

under this Act, what should the Court do? Such inclusion does not render

the plaintiffs action bad in law ab initio. If the amount claimed includes a

sum that cannot be recovered under the Act, the Court shall disallow the

recovery of that portion while allowing the recovery of the remaining portion

lawfully due under the provisions of the Act.

In terms of section 22, read with the proviso to section 6(3) of the Act, the

Court may adjust the amount at the stage of making the decree nisi

absolute. This issue was considered in Car Mart Ltd v. Pan Asia Bank Ltd

[2004] 3 Sri LR 56, where Amaratunga J. stated at page 59:

21 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

If the defendant at the end of the case satisfies court that a sum of

money is not legally due from him or a sum not legally recoverable from

him (such as the sum referred to in section 22) the court has power to

make adjustments to the decree nisi before making it absolute. If the

court has no such power it would lead to an injustice.

The decree nisi entered by court is in VIII parts. The court has granted

leave to the defendants to appear and defend after depositing a sum

of Rs. 6,100,000/- in court. After depositing this sum it is open to the

defendants to show that penal interest is included in the sums claimed

by the plaintiff Bank. Then the court has the power under section 6(3)

proviso read with section 22 to exclude the sum sought to be recovered

as a penalty from the decree absolute.

The proviso to section 6(3) reads as follows:

Provided that a decree nisi, if it consists of separate parts, may be

discharged in part and made absolute in part and nothing herein

enacted shall prevent any order being made by consent of the plaintiff

and the defendant on the footing of the decree nisi.

The proviso to section 6(3) grants the Court flexibility in making the decree

nisi absolute. It allows the Court to:

(a) discharge the decree nisi in part while making the remaining part

absolute, and

(b) issue any order on the decree nisi with the consent of both the plaintiff

and the defendant.

Such an adjustment is also possible on the first date the defendant appears

before the Court following the service of the decree nisi. Section 12 provides

for this:

22 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

Where the defendant appears in court in response to the decree nisi

and does not contest the decree nisi but admits liability and prays to

liquidate the debt in instalments, the court shall with the approval of

both parties to the action, minute the fact on the record and thereafter

make the decree absolute. Such settlement shall operate as a stay of

execution of proceeding unless the defendant acts in breach of any of

the terms of settlement, in which event the institution shall be entitled

to execute the decree.

This provision ensures an efficient resolution by allowing the defendant to

settle the debt in instalments while preserving the plaintiffs right to enforce

the decree upon non-compliance. It strikes a balance between facilitating

repayment and maintaining the integrity of the debt recovery process.

Service of the decree nisi

Detailed provisions were introduced by Act No. 9 of 1994 regarding the

service of decree nisi on the defendant, as this is an area often exploited by

defendants to prolong litigation by evading service. In essence, service is

effected by registered post to the address provided by the defendant to the

lending institution. The Court, however, has the discretion to order service

through the defendants employer, the head of the department, a process

officer by personal service, or by substituted service.

5(1) The decree nisi shall subject to the provisions of section 5B, be

ordinarily served on the defendant by registered post at the address

given by the defendant to the institution as the address to which

process may be served on him.

(2)(a) Where the defendant is a public officer, the court may at its

discretion, in addition to sending the decree nisi to the defendant by

registered post, also forward a copy of the decree nisi, in duplicate, by

registered post to the head of the department in which the defendant

23 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

is employed, and it shall be the duty of such head of department to

cause a copy of the decree nisi to be served personally on the

defendant, and to return the other copy of the decree nisi to the court

forthwith, with either an acknowledgement of receipt of the decree nisi

by the defendant or with a statement of service of the decree nisi

endorsed thereon and signed by the person effecting the service and

countersigned by the head of the department if the head of the

department has not himself effected the service.

(3) Where the defendant is not a public officer and is in the employment

of another person, the court may at its discretion, in addition to sending

the decree nisi by registered post to the defendant also forward a copy

of the decree nisi in duplicate to the employer of the defendant at his

usual place of business or, where the employer is a company or

corporation, to any secretary, manager or other like officer of the

company or corporation, and it shall be the duty of such employer or

officer, as the case may be, to cause a copy of the decree nisi to be

served personally on the defendant and to return the other copy of the

decree nisi to the court forthwith, with either an acknowledgement of

receipt of such decree nisi by the defendant or with a statement of

service of the decree nisi endorsed thereon and signed by the person

effecting the service and counter signed by the employer of the

defendant if such employer has not himself effected the service.

(4) In this section head of department -

(a) when used with reference to a member of any unit of the Sri

Lanka Army, Navy or Air Force, means the Commanding Officer

of that unit;

(b) when used with reference to a person employed in a

Provincial Council means the Secretary of that Provincial Council;

24 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

(c) when used with reference to a person employed in Provincial

Public Service means the head of the department in which such

person, is employed;

(d) when used with reference to a person employed in a local

authority, if the local authority is a Municipal Council means the

Municipal Commissioner of the Council; and if the local authority

is an Urban Council or a Pradeshiya Sabha, means the

Chairman of that Council or Sabha;

(e) when used with reference to any other public officer, means

the head of the department of Government in which such person

is employed.

5A(1) Where a decree nisi is served by registered post on any

defendant under sub-section (1) of section 5 the Advice of Delivery of

the registered letter in which the decree is sent, shall be sufficient proof

of the service of such decree nisi on the defendant.

(2) Where a decree nisi is served on a defendant under subsection (2)

or (3) of section 5, an acknowledgement of the receipt of the decree nisi

by the defendant or a statement of the service endorsed on the

duplicate of the decree nisi shall be sufficient proof of the service of

such decree nisi on the defendant.

(3) Where the court is satisfied that decree nisi has been sent to the

defendant by registered post but no advice of delivery has been

obtained in respect thereof, it shall authorise the Fiscal or any other

officer authorized by court in that behalf to affix the decree nisi to some

conspicuous part of the house in which the defendant ordinarily

resides or in the case of a company or corporation to the usual place of

business or office of such company or corporation and in such case the

decree nisi shall be deemed to have been duly served on the defendant.

25 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

(4) Where the court is satisfied that decree nisi has been sent to the

defendant by registered post under subsection (2) or (3) of section 5 but

no acknowledgment of receipt by the defendant or statement of service

on the defendant has been received in respect thereof it shall authorise

the Fiscal or other officer authorized by court in that behalf to affix the

decree nisi to some conspicuous part of the house in which the

defendant ordinarily resides, and in such case, the decree nisi shall be

deemed to have been duly served on the defendant.

5B(1) The court may, on application being made in that behalf

immediately after decree nisi is entered, and its discretion, order that

in lieu of serving the decree nisi by registered post, the decree nisi be

served by tendering or delivering the same on the defendant personally

through a process officer.

(2) If the service referred to in subsection (1) cannot by the exercise of

due diligence be effected, the process officer shall affix the decree nisi

to some conspicuous part of the house in which the defendant

ordinarily resides or in the case of a corporation or company, to the

usual place of business or office of such corporation or company, and

in every such case the decree nisi shall be deemed to have been duly

served on the defendant.

(3) It shall be the duty of the process officer, on decree nisi being served

on the defendant or any other person on his behalf, to require the

signature or the thumb impression or both of such defendant or person

to be made to an acknowledgement of the service of the decree nisi, on

the original.

(4) The process officer shall return the precept to court setting out in

detail the manner, the person, place and other particulars relating to

the identity of the person on whom, the date on which, and the time at

26 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

which, the decree nisi was served and also state in the report, whether

the person on whom it was served placed his signature or thumb

impression or both, or refused to place the signature or thumb

impression or both, on the original, in acknowledgment of such service.

(5) Refusal to place the signature or thumb impression or both, as the

case may be, on the original shall not invalidate the service of the

decree nisi.

(6) For the purpose of this section

process officer means the Fiscal Official of the court of Fiscal of a

court of like jurisdiction within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the

decree nisi is served or any officer specially authorized in exceptional

circumstances by court to serve the decree nisi or any process officer

of a court or Grama Niladhari or a private process server;

private process server means a person employed by an Attorney-at-

law or any institution, and who is registered as a private process server

by the Fiscal under any written law.

5C Where a decree nisi is ordered to be served personally through a

process officer, such decree nisi may be served in any part of Sri Lanka

provided that where a decree nisi is required to be served outside the

local limits of the jurisdiction of the court issuing the same, the decree

nisi shall be forwarded by such court to the court within whose

jurisdiction the defendant is believed to be residing, and it shall be the

duty of the last mentioned court to cause the decree nisi to be duly

served on the defendant in accordance with the provisions of this Act.

Once the decree nisi is served, the defendant cannot appear in Court on the

returnable date merely to request a further date to show cause. He shall

make the application in writing seeking leave to appear and show cause

27 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

against the decree nisi on the first date itself. The original section 4(3),

which stated The day to be inserted in the decree nisi as the day for the

defendants appearance and showing cause, if any, against it shall be as

early a day as can conveniently be named, regard being had to the distance

from the defendants residence to the court, was amended by Act No. 9 of

1994 by adding thereafter and no further time shall be given to the

defendant by court thereafter for appearing and showing cause against such

decree nisi, thereby manifesting the intention of the legislature not to grant

extension of time.

Section 4(3), as presently constituted, reads as follows:

The day to be inserted in the decree nisi as the day for the defendants

appearance and showing cause, if any, against it shall be as early a

day as can conveniently be named, regard being had to the distance

from the defendants residence to the court, and no further time shall

be given to the defendant by court thereafter for appearing and

showing cause against such decree nisi.

District Judges must be mindful of this requirement when fixing a

returnable date for the decree nisi and ensure that the decree nisi is served

on the defendant without delay.

Leave to appear and show cause

According to section 6(1), in an action instituted under the Debt Recovery

(Special Provisions) Act, the defendant cannot appear and show cause

against the decree nisi unless he obtains leave from the Court to do so.

In an action instituted under this Act the defendant shall not appear or

show cause against the decree nisi unless he obtains leave from the

court to appear and show cause.

28 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

The conditions upon which leave to appear and show cause shall be granted

are set out in section 6(2), which reads as follows:

The court shall upon the filing by the defendant of an application for

leave to appear and show cause supported by affidavit which shall

deal specifically with the plaintiffs claim and state clearly and

concisely what the defence to the claim is and what facts are relied

upon to support it, and after giving the defendant an opportunity of

being heard, grant leave to appear and show cause against the decree

nisi, either

(a) upon the defendant paying into court the sum mentioned in the

decree nisi; or

(b) upon the defendant furnishing such security as to the court may

appear reasonable and sufficient for satisfying the sum mentioned

in the decree nisi in the event of it being made absolute; or

(c) upon the court being satisfied on the contents of the affidavit filed,

that they disclose a defence which is prima facie sustainable and

on such terms as to security, framing and recording of issues, or

otherwise as the court thinks fit.

The granting of leave to appear and show cause is not automatic. In the first

place, the defendant shall file an application supported by affidavit in which

he shall:

(a) deal specifically with the plaintiffs claim;

(b) state clearly and concisely what the defence to the claim is and;

(c) what facts are relied upon to support it.

In deciding the question of granting leave to appear and show cause, the

Court shall thereafter afford the defendant an opportunity to be heard,

which is typically done by way of written submissions.

29 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

The defence disclosed shall not be a mere defence but shall be one which is

prima facie sustainable. This is different from prima facie defence or

sustainable defence. What is required is prima facie sustainable defence.

The term prima facie is a Latin term which means at first sight. This

means, the Court shall be satisfied that the defence disclosed is sustainable

at first sight, not after the trial.

In cases filed under Debt Recovery (Special Provisions) Act, there is no place

for technical objections, bare denials, evasive defences, or other vague and

imprecise responses, designed to prolong the proceedings. The Act has been

designed for speedy disposal of cases in the interests of trade and

commerce. In terms of section 6(2), the defendant shall deal specifically

with the plaintiffs claim and state clearly and concisely what the defence to

the claim is and what facts are relied upon to support it. This provision

imposes a legal obligation on the defendant to engage directly and

substantively with the plaintiffs claim, addressing it on its merits, not on

technical grounds. The defence must be articulated with clarity and

precision, specifying not only the nature of the defence but also the

particular facts upon which it is based, thereby demonstrating its prima

facie sustainability.

In Kiran Atapattu v. Pan Asia Bank Ltd [2005] 2 Sri LR 276 at 283, while

dismissing the application, Wimalachandra J. stated:

The section 6(2) of the Debt Recovery (Special Provisions) Act provides

for the affidavit of the defendant to deal specifically with the plaintiffs

claim on its merits. In the instant case the defendant has relied on

technical objections and not revealed his defence, if he has any, to the

claim made by the plaintiff. He has taken refuge mostly on the technical

objections set out in his affidavit. The defendant has not set up any

plausible defence relating to a triable issue.

30 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

If the defence is not prima facie sustainable, can the Court make the

decree nisi absolute?

If the Court decides that the defence is not prima facie sustainable, the

Court cannot make the decree nisi absolute. In such circumstances, the

Court cannot act under section 6(2)(c) but shall proceed under section

6(2)(a) and allow the defendant to appear and show cause by depositing the

entire sum mentioned in the decree nisi. However, depending on the nature

of the defence, the Court may proceed under section 6(2)(b) and allow the

defendant to appear and show cause by furnishing security. If the Court

proceeds under section 6(2)(b), the security ordered shall not be nominal

but reasonable and sufficient for satisfying the sum mentioned in the decree

nisi in the event of it being made absolute.

This conclusion that the Court cannot immediately make the decree nisi

absolute, even if the defence is not prima facie sustainable, is justified on

several grounds.

In the first place, what section 6(2) states is that The court shall upon the

filing of the defendant of an application for leave to appear and show cause

supported by affidavit....grant leave to appear and show cause against the

decree nisi, by directing the defendant (a) to deposit the entire sum; or (b)

to furnish reasonable and sufficient security; or (c) to furnish security or

otherwise as the Court thinks fit. The District Judge shall select one of the

three alternatives. Making the decree nisi absolute is not one of them.

At the stage of seeking leave to appear and show cause, while the Court

seriously considers whether a prima facie sustainable defence exists, it does

not necessarily adjudicate the main case on its merits.

One may wonder why the Court should grant the defendant an opportunity

to defend the plaintiffs case if the defendant fails to satisfy the Court at the

leave stage that he has a prima facie sustainable defence. When something

31 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

is obvious, we tend to refuse to afford a fair hearing stating that hearing

makes no difference as the end result would be the same. This is a

misguided notion. A fair hearing could uncover critical insights and

perspectives that were not initially apparent. Megarry J. in John v. Rees

[1970] Ch 345 at 402 elucidated this point as follows:

As everybody who has anything to do with the law well knows, the

path of the law is strewn with examples of open and shut cases which,

somehow, were not; of unanswerable charges which, in the event, were

completely answered; of inexplicable conduct which was fully

explained; of fixed and unalterable determinations that, by discussion,

suffered a change.

If the defendant deposits the sum stated in the decree nisi in Court as a

precondition to contesting the claim of the lending institution, there is no

reason for the Court to make the decree nisi absolute without affording an

opportunity to the defendant to show cause.

In Ramanathan v. Fernando (1930) 31 NLR 495 at 498, Garvin A.C.J. held:

It is the right of every person against whom an action is instituted to

appear and, unless he admits the claim, to file his answer. For the

purpose of expediting the recovery of claims of the nature specified in

section 703 by discouraging frivolous, vexatious, and purely dilatory

defences, the Legislature has in such cases curtailed this right by the

requirement that a defendant shall not be admitted to defend the action

until he has first obtained leave.

In reference to this dictum, in the case of Sebastian v. Kumarajeewa (1977)

80 NLR 264 at 268, Gunasekera J. stated:

If the Defendant merely deposits the full sum claimed without offering

any explanation, he can as of right file his Answer (Ramanathan v.

32 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

Fernando). And so if the Judge rejects the defence totally he cannot

proceed ex parte but must still give the Defendant an opportunity of

exercising the right he has in law to deposit the full sum claimed and

file his Answer.

Section 6(3) reads as follows: Where the defendant either fails to appear and

show cause or having appeared, his application to show cause is refused, the

court shall make the decree nisi absolute.

The decree nisi shall only be made absolute at the stage of leave, if the

defendant (a) having been served the decree nisi fails to appear and show

cause; or (b) having appeared, his application to show cause is refused. The

refusal under (b) above does not include refusal on the ground of non-

disclosure of a prima facie sustainable defence. An application to show

cause may be refused on various grounds, such as failure to file a proper

application seeking to show cause or failure to comply with the conditions

imposed by Court as a precondition to show cause.

In Seylan Bank PLC v. Farook [2021] 3 Sri LR 1, Jayawardena J. took the

same view when he stated at page 20:

If the defendant fails to appear in court upon service of the decree nisi, or

having appeared, his application for leave to appear and show cause is

refused by court for non-compliance with the requirements set out in

section 6(2) of the said Act, or because the defendant did not fulfill the

conditions imposed by the court in the order made under section 6(2) of

the said Act, the court shall make the decree nisi absolute under section

6(3) of the said Act.

Section 6(2) and 6(3) are complementary and must be read together, not in

isolation. There is no internal conflict between these provisions with regard

to the making of the decree nisi absolute at the stage of granting leave.

33 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

Is the Court necessarily obliged to grant leave to appear and show

cause unconditionally if it is satisfied that the defence is prima facie

sustainable?

In Kularatne v. Peoples Bank (supra) at 493, the majority took the view that

The Act does not permit unconditional leave to appear. Leave to appear is

always subject to conditions. The least being furnishing security as the court

thinks fit. Conversely, in Seylan Bank PLC v. Farook (supra) at page 17, the

Court held that the phrase or otherwise as the court thinks fit should be

interpreted to enable the court to make an appropriate order as it thinks fit,

including an order granting leave to appear and show cause against the

decree nisi without the defendant furnishing any security. In

Chandrasekera v. Indian Overseas Bank (supra) at page 31, the Court,

whilst admitting that It is not mandatory to impose security, nevertheless

held that The words, otherwise as the court thinks fit cannot be read to

mean that the District Court is empowered to grant leave with no terms or

conditions whatsoever. The Court held that The use of the words, on such

terms applies to security, framing and recording of issues, or otherwise as

the court thinks fit and therefore terms or conditions must be imposed when

granting leave.

Prior to the amendment by Act No. 9 of 1994, section 6(2)(c) read as The

court shall upon the application of the defendant give leave to appear and

show cause against the decree nisiupon affidavits satisfactory to the court

that there is an issue or a question in dispute which ought to be tried. In that

backdrop, it was held in Ramanayake v. Sampath Bank (supra) at page 152

that Leave may be granted unconditionally under section 6(2)(c) where the

court is satisfied that the defendants affidavit raises an issue or question

which ought to be tried.

After the amendment by Act No. 9 of 1994, section 6(2)(c) presently reads

as The court shall upon the application of the defendant give leave to appear

34 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

and show cause against the decree nisiupon the court being satisfied on

the contents of the affidavit filed, that they disclose a defence which is prima

facie sustainable and on such terms as to security, framing and recording of

issues, or otherwise as the court thinks fit.

The phrase in section 6(2)(c) of the Debt Recovery (Special Provisions) Act,

on such terms as to security, framing and recording of issues, or otherwise

as the court thinks fit was borrowed from section 706 of the Civil Procedure

Code in regard to summary procedure on liquid claims. Section 706 reads

as follows: The court shall, upon application by the defendant, give leave to

appear and to defend the action upon the defendant paying into court the

sum mentioned in the summons, or upon affidavits satisfactory to the court

which disclose a defence or such facts as would make it incumbent on the

holder to prove consideration, or such other facts as the court may deem

sufficient to support the application and on such terms as to security, framing,

and recording issues, or otherwise, as the court thinks fit. In Ramanayake

v. Sampath Bank (supra) at page 150 it was observed that The procedure

under this Act is very similar to the summary procedure on liquid claims

provided in Chapter 53 (sections 703 to 711) of the Code. In Sebastian v.

Kumarajeewa (supra), this Court, reviewed the previous authorities on the

applicability of section 706 regarding ordering security in greater detail.

Whilst holding that In an application for leave to appear and defend, even

if the affidavit of the defendant is satisfactory, the court can exercise its

discretion under section 706 and order the defendant to deposit part of the

sum claimed in the plaint as a condition to defend the action, the Court

further stated at page 269 that Needless to state however is the position,

that when the defence outlined is very satisfactory the learned Judge may

well exercise his discretion in terms of section 706 and permit the Defendant

to appear and defend unconditionally.

35 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

In my view, if the Court is satisfied that the defence is prima facie

sustainable, it shall, under section 6(2)(c), grant the defendant leave to

appear and show cause, depending on the facts and circumstances of the

case, either on such terms as to security or unconditionally. If there is a

strong prima facie sustainable defence for the defendant, imposing terms

and conditions on the defendant to appear and show cause would be

irrational. The Court may, in such circumstances, allow the defendant to

appear and defend unconditionally.

The matters the Court shall take into account when deciding whether to

issue a decree nisi are enumerated in section 4(2). Once this decision is

made and the decree nisi is issued, there is no provision empowering the

Court to dissolve it at the leave stage based on the existence of a strong

prima facie sustainable defence for the defendant. It needs to be done after

the inquiry.

The procedure after leave is granted

Once leave to appear and show cause against the decree nisi is granted, the

Court shall fix the case for inquiry at the earliest possible date to facilitate

its expeditious disposal.

Section 10 of the Act reads as follows:

In the court where cases may be instituted under this Act a Special

Inquiry Roll shall be kept of such cases in which leave to appear and

show cause against the decree nisi has been granted, and it shall be

competent for the Judge of such court to order such cases to be set

down for hearing on such days as may facilitate their early disposal,

any rule or practice of such court to the contrary notwithstanding, and

after giving the parties, reasonable notice of the date of inquiry.

Section 7 of the Act reads as follows:

36 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

If the defendant appears and leave to appear and show cause is given

the provisions of sections 384, 385, 386, 387, 390 and 391 of the Civil

Procedure Code (Chapter 101) shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to the

trial of the action.

Section 391 of the Civil Procedure Code reads as follows:

On the institution of an application of summary procedure which is not

made in, or incidental to, any already pending action, the court shall

commence and keep a journal entitled as of the matter of the

application, according to the rules prescribed in section 92, and this

journal so kept shall be the record of the matter of the application.

The procedure stipulated in this Act is a special procedure based on

summary procedure as opposed to regular procedure. This procedure is a

combination of the summary procedure set out in sections 373-391

(Chapter XXIV) and the summary procedure on liquid claims set out in

sections 703-711 (Chapter LIII) of the Civil Procedure Code.

Let me now examine sections 384, 385, and 386 of the Civil Procedure Code

in detail, as their application presents considerable complexity.

It may be noted that, these provisions of the Civil Procedure Code, shall,

mutatis mutandis (i.e. with the necessary changes having been made), apply

to the proceedings filed under the Debt Recovery (Special Provisions) Act,

not in their exact form.

Section 384 of the Civil Procedure Code reads as follows:

If on such day both the petitioner and the respondent appear, the

proceedings on the matter of the petition shall commence by the

respondent in person, or by his registered attorney, stating his

objections, if any, to the petitioners application; and the respondent

shall then be entitled to read such affidavits or other documentary

37 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

evidence as may be admissible, or by leave of the court to adduce oral

evidence in support of his objections, or to rebut and refute the evidence

of the petitioner:

Provided that no affidavit or other documentary evidence shall be so

read without express leave of court, unless a copy of the document

shall have been served on the petitioner or his registered attorney at

least forty eight hours before the day when the matter of the petition

comes on to be heard and determined; and the oral evidence shall be

taken down in writing by the Judge.

In terms of section 384:

(a) The respondent (the defendant) shall commence the inquiry by

stating his objections to the petitioners (the plaintiffs) application,

if any. In other words, the respondent shall commence the inquiry

by filing objections in the form of a petition supported by affidavits

and other relevant documents.

(b) If this is done, the respondent shall then be entitled to

(i) read such affidavits or other documentary evidence as may be

admissible, provided that the copies of the documents have

been served on the petitioner at least forty-eight hours before

the date of the inquiry. Notwithstanding the non-service of

copies as such, the defendant may nevertheless read such

affidavits or documentary evidence in Court with the express

leave of the Court

or

(ii) by leave of the Court to adduce oral evidence in support of his

objections, or to rebut and refute the evidence of the petitioner.

When an action is filed under the Debt Recovery (Special Provisions) Act,

the defendant is required by section 6(2) to make an application supported

38 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

by affidavits with other documents in order to seek leave to appear and

show cause. This can be considered as objections to the plaintiffs

application. Hence, there is no necessity to serve copies of them on the

plaintiff forty-eight hours before the date of the main inquiry, if those

documents had already been served on the plaintiff at the leave inquiry.

It is noteworthy that section 384 uses the phrase read such affidavits. The

provision does not specify from where or how the respondent shall read the

affidavits. If the respondent merely reads the affidavits, it does not amount

to adducing oral evidence. In such circumstances, the respondent cannot

be subjected to cross-examination. Oral evidence can be adduced only

under the second limb of section 384, which provides that the respondent

is entitled by leave of the court to adduce oral evidence. I need hardly

emphasise that the phrases read such affidavits and adduce oral

evidence are separated by the coordinating conjunction or, which is used

to present alternatives.

One cannot argue that it is unfair to allow the respondent to read the

affidavits without being subject to cross-examination, as the same

opportunity was granted to the petitioner, who was not subject to cross-

examination when he supported the application for the order nisi or decree

nisi, as the case may be.

However, if the respondent chooses to adduce oral evidence in support of

his objections or to rebut the evidence of the petitioner, he can be subject

to cross-examination. I must stress that the respondent can adduce oral

evidence only with the leave of the Court, and not as a matter of right.

Section 385 of the Civil Procedure Code reads as follows:

In the event of the respondent stating objections to the application, and

not otherwise, and after the respondents evidence, if any, shall have

39 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

been read or given, the petitioner shall be entitled by way of reply to

comment upon the respondents case.

According to section 385, when the evidence of the respondent is read or

given as set out in section 384, the petitioner is entitled, by way of reply, to

comment upon the respondents case. To comment upon the respondents

case means that the petitioner has the right to address, critique or respond

to the evidence presented by the respondent.

Section 386 of the Civil Procedure Code reads as follows:

When the respondents evidence has been taken, it shall be competent

to the court, on the request of the petitioner, to adjourn the matter to

enable the petitioner to adduce additional evidence; or, if it thinks

necessary, it may frame issues of fact between the petitioner and

respondent, and adjourn the matter for the trial of these issues by oral

testimony. And on the day to which the matter is so adjourned, the

additional evidence shall be adduced, and the issues tried in

conformity with, as nearly as may be, the rules hereinbefore prescribed

for the taking of evidence at the trial of a regular action.

According to section 386, after the petitioner has commented on the

respondents case, the petitioner may move the Court to allow him to

adduce additional evidence. This can be by way of counter affidavits and

documents. Alternatively, if the Court deems it necessary (and not

otherwise), the Court (not the parties) may frame issues of fact (not of law)

and adjourn the case for inquiry to try those issues by oral testimony, in

which event the rules governing the taking of evidence at a trial of a regular

action shall apply. It may be noted the use of the coordinating conjunction

or between adjourning the matter to adduce additional evidence and

adjourning the matter for the trial of the issues by oral testimony.

40 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

The Court fixes the case for the inquiry, not for the trial. What section 386

states is that the Court may frame issues of fact between the petitioner and

respondent, and adjourn the matter for the trial of these issues by oral

testimony, not to adjourn the matter for the trial of the action. (cf. section

80 of the Civil Procedure Code.) The section does not require a full trial to

be conducted following the regular procedure. What the section requires to

do is that the issues tried in conformity with, as nearly as may be, the rules

hereinbefore prescribed for the taking of evidence at the trial of a regular

action. While the Civil Procedure Code contains numerous provisions

governing the trial of a regular action, in an inquiry contemplated under

section 386, the rules applicable to a regular action need to be followed, as

nearly as may be, only in relation to the taking of evidence.

As section 387 makes it clear, after the inquiry, the Court delivers a final

order, not a judgment. If a full trial is conducted under the regular

procedure, the Court pronounces a judgment.

387. The court, after the evidence has been duly taken and the

petitioner and respondent have been heard either in person or by their

respective attorneys-at-law or recognized agents, shall pronounce its

final order in the matter of the petition in open court, either at once or

on some future day, of which notice shall be given in open court at the

termination of the trial.

In terms of section 19 of the Debt Recovery (Special Provisions) Act, any

matter or question of procedure not provided for in this Act the procedure

laid down in the Civil Procedure Code in a like matter or question shall be

followed by the Court if such procedure is not inconsistent with the

provisions of this Act.

In Bank of Ceylon v. Warnakulasuriya [2007] 1 Sri LR 33 at 36,

Wimalachandra J. stated:

41 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

Section 7 of the Debt Recovery (Special Provisions) Act No.2 of 1990 as

amended by Act No.9 of 1994 read with sections 384, 385, 386, 387,

390 and 391 of the Civil Procedure Code provides for the procedure

after the grant of leave to appear and show cause against the decree

nisi. Section 384 of the Civil Procedure Code spells out the manner and

the sequence in which the respondent may make his objections and

adduce evidence, and section 385 of the Civil Procedure Code provides

for the petitioner to reply, so that there cannot arise any dispute on the

burden of proof. It is only in the event of the court acting under section

386 of the Civil Procedure Code and, in its discretion, framing issues

and adjourning the matter for trial that the rules prescribed in the Civil

Procedure Code for the taking of evidence at the trial of a regular action,

as nearly as may be become applicable.

I must also add that, since the case is fixed for inquiry and not for trial, the

provisions of the law governing the filing of the list of witnesses and

documents before the pre-trial or trial will not be applicable, as those

provisions are applicable to trials, not for inquiries. However, it is a good

practice to file lists of witnesses and documents even in inquiries, as it

facilitates the efficient management of proceedings and promotes greater

transparency. When the Court decides to frame issues of fact under the

second limb of section 386 and adjourns the matter for inquiry, the Court

can, of course, direct the parties to file their lists of witnesses and

documents before a specific date fixed by the Court for the inquiry, with

notice to the opposite party.

Applicability of law to the facts of this case

Let me now apply the aforementioned statutory provisions to the facts of

the present case in order to determine whether the District Court and the

High Court were correct in their decisions and in the decision-making

process.

42 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

It is abundantly clear that the District Judge completely misunderstood the

special procedure applicable to cases filed under this Act. The approach

adopted in granting leave to appear and show cause unconditionally was

inconsistent with the scheme of the Act. The Court treated the case as one

filed under the regular procedure. The parties were allowed to file answer

(which included a claim in reconvention of Rs. 20 million), replication, lists

of witnesses and documents, and ultimately, the case was fixed for

inquiry/trial as a matter of routine. On the third date of trial, the

defendants counsel raised three purported preliminary objections to the

maintainability of the plaintiffs action. The District Judge upheld these

objections and dismissed the plaintiffs action. This approach was wholly

incompatible with the special procedural framework established under the

Act.

The Judgment of the High Court setting aside the order of the District Judge

with a direction to commence the case all over again from the stage of

supporting for decree nisi is equally flawed. There is no justification for the

High Court to require the plaintiff to support for the decree nisi again.

Due to this series of misapplications of the law, it has already taken fifteen

years for the plaintiff bank to recover the dues from the defendant. The Act

was introduced to expedite the recovery process, but its application now

appears to be counterproductive. Had the plaintiff bank filed the action

under the regular procedure, the money could have been recovered by now.

What are the three preliminary objections raised by the defendant at the

third date of trial, which were upheld by the District Judge?

1. 1994 9 1990

30

?

43 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

2. 30

?

3.

?

The District Judge answered them as follows and dismissed the plaintiffs

action.

1. .

2. .

3. .

The term has no meaning in this context. These questions lack

clarity.

The first and second answers are contradictory. Therefore the third question

could not have been answered in the affirmative.

It appears that what was meant by is a

written promise or agreement. I have previously addressed this matter in

this judgment. The action does not become bad in law merely because a

written promise or agreement is not filed with the plaint. The preliminary

objections are unsustainable in law.

The argument advanced before this Court is somewhat different. It is the

position of the counsel for the defendant before this Court that the plaintiff

did not tender with the plaint an instrument, agreement or document as

required by section 4(1) of the Act and therefore the action of the plaintiff

has been instituted in violation of the mandatory provisions of the Debt

Recovery (Special Provisions) Act No. 2 of 1990. Leave to appeal against the

judgment of the High Court was granted to the defendant on that basis. I

have previously addressed this matter also in this judgment.

44 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

There is no dispute that the plaintiffs case is based on a temporary

overdraft facility. A lending institution may institute action under this Act

to recover debts arising from an overdraft, provided that the other

statutory requirements are met.

Admittedly, the defendant maintained several current accounts with the

Panadura branch of the plaintiff bank. The plaintiff filed this action in

respect of the temporary overdraft facility availed by the defendant through

the current account No. 148-1-001-1-7192893. The cheques issued by the

defendant through this current account were presented with the plaint

marked P3(a)-(m). There is no dispute over issuance of those cheques and

honouring them by the bank.

According to the duly certified copy of the statement of account presented

with the plaint marked P4, the overdraft balance as at 15.02.2010 was Rs.

9,801,583.31.

According to section 90A of the Evidence Ordinance as it presently stands:

bankers books include ledgers, day books, cash books, account

books, and all other books used in the ordinary business of a bank and

includes data stored by electronic, magnetic, optical or other means in

an information system in the ordinary course of business of a bank;

certified copy means a copy of any entry in the books of a bank,

together with a certificate written at the foot of such copy that it is a

true copy of such entry; that such entry is contained in one of the

ordinary books of the bank, and was made in the usual and ordinary

course of business; and that such book is still in the custody of the

bank, such certificate being dated and subscribed by the principal

accountant or manager of the bank with his name and official title and

where the bankers books consist of data stored by electronic,

magnetic, optical or other means in an information system, includes a

45 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

printout of such data together with an affidavit made in accordance

with section 6 of the Evidence (Special Provisions) Act, No. 14 of 1995,

or such other document of certification as may be prescribed in terms

of any law for the time being in force relating to the tendering of

computer evidence before any court or tribunal.

Section 90C of the Evidence Ordinance reads as follows:

Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, a certified copy of any entry

in a bankers book shall in all legal proceedings be received as prima

facie evidence of the existence of such entry, and shall be admitted as

evidence of the matters, transactions, and accounts therein recorded in

every case where, and to the same extent as the original entry itself is

now by law admissible, but not further or otherwise.

Odgers Principles of Pleadings and Practice, 18th Edition (1963), page 285-

286 states:

It is important to distinguish between the legal burden which rests on

a party by law to satisfy the court upon the whole of the evidence that

he has proved his case and a provisional burden which is raised by

the state of the evidence. As the case proceeds, the latter burden

frequently shifts from the person on whom it rested at first to his

opponent. This occurs whenever a prima facie case has been

established on any issue of fact or whenever a rebuttable presumption

of law has arisen.

In terms of section 90A read with 90C of the Evidence Ordinance, the duly

certified statement of account of the bank marked P4 shall be received as

prima facie evidence of the existence of such entry, and shall be admitted

as evidence of the matters, transactions, and accounts therein recorded to

the same extent as the original entry itself. In terms of section 90E of the

Evidence Ordinance, a party may make an application to inspect and take

46 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

copies of any entries in a bankers book for any of the purposes of such

proceeding. I must acknowledge that the application of section 90C is

limited to the existence of such entry as the original entry itself but not

further, and I will leave that matter for a comprehensive discussion in an

appropriate future case. (Peoples Bank v. Gunasekera [2019] 1 Sri LR 20 at

33, Kularatne v. Peoples Bank (supra) at page 515) What needs to be

stressed for the present purposes is that, in view of section 90A read with

90C of the Evidence Ordinance, the defendant cannot cast doubt on some

entries of P4 through written submissions filed in respect of purported

preliminary objections to discredit the plaintiffs entire case and seek its

dismissal in limine.

If the District Judge was not satisfied with some entries of P4, it ought to

have been raised as an issue of fact and decided at the inquiry, not as a

preliminary question of law. It is evident that the District Judge has been

misled on this aspect as well.

.4

.

2009.11.18 :

9,801,583.31 .

.4 2009

-11-18 .4

2009-07-07 :

. : 106,936,363.56 2009-11-18

: 9,801,583.31

,

.4 .

30

47 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

.

The defendant has shown some discrepancy about the calculation of

amounts reflected on the cheques with the amount claimed by the plaintiff

to recover. The District Judge has taken this matter also into account to

conclude that there was no sum of money that could be ascertained at the

time of the institution of the action. The allegation is that the amount

claimed by the plaintiff was less than the sum reflected in the cheques, not

more than the sum reflected in the cheques. It appears that the defendant

embarked on a fishing expedition, seeking to create doubt in the plaintiffs

case, as if this were a criminal proceeding.

.1

. 30

. . 2

.

.3 () .3 ()

3

.

9,947,452.93 .

: 9,801,583.31 .

30

.

30

.

P6 tendered by the plaintiff with the plaint was the resolution passed by the

board of directors of the defendant company explicitly acknowledging the

overdraft facility obtained through the current account No. 148-1-001-1-

7192893. It reads as follows:

48 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

The board of directors meeting of Chemisales Holding PVT Ltd (the

defendant) at No. 45, Industrial Zone, Nagoda, Kalutara, held on 20th

June 2009 has proposed and agreed to convert the existing temporary

overdraft nearly 8 million in bank AC No. 100117192893 of Peoples

Bank Panadura branch to long term loans as a solution for the current

financial crisis in the organization.

It is significant to note that, by paragraph 9 of the answer, the defendant

admitted P6.

The letter of demand sent to the defendant demanding of Rs. 9,801,583.31

was tendered as P7. This was not replied to by the defendant if he was not

in agreement with that amount.

Although the failure to reply business letters alone cannot decide the whole

case, such failure can certainly be regarded as an item of evidence against

the defendant. Depending on the facts and circumstances of the case, it

may even amount to an admission of the claims made therein.

(Wickremasinghe v. Devasagayam (1970) 74 NLR 80 at 93, Saravanamuttu

v. de Mel (1948) 49 NLR 529, Colombo Electric Tramways and Lighting Co.

Ltd v. Pereira (1923) 25 NLR 193 at 195, Seneviratne v. LOLC [2006] 1 Sri

LR 230).

If I may reiterate at the cost of repetition, section 4(1) requires the plaintiff

to file with the plaint the instrument, agreement or document sued upon, or

relied on. A written agreement is one such document, but it is not the only

one. If the plaintiff annexes the instruments or documents sued upon or

relied on with the plaint, this satisfies the requirement under section 4(1).

In the instant case, the plaintiff has annexed, inter alia, the issued cheques

marked P3(a)-(m), the duly certified statement of account marked P4, the

board resolution marked P6, and the letter of demand marked P7 to the

plaint as instruments and documents sued upon or relied on to establish its

49 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

case. These documents collectively satisfy the requirement under section

4(1) of the Act.

Against this overwhelming evidence, what prompted the District Judge to

allow the defendant to show cause unconditionally and ultimately dismiss

the plaintiffs action in its entirety? This is primarily due to P2, which was

tendered by the plaintiff along with the plaint.

In paragraph 4 of the plaint, the plaintiff bank tendered P2 as the board

resolution of the defendant company requesting an overdraft facility from

the plaintiff bank. However, the defendant was quick to point out that the

said board resolution P2 relates to a different permanent overdraft facility

to be obtained through account No. 148-1-001-8-1443446 (which is

another current account maintained by the defendant in the same branch).

Admittedly, the facility obtained by the defendant for this case is a

temporary overdraft facility obtained through current account No. 148-1-

001-1-7192893. The defendant overzealously highlighted this discrepancy

in an attempt to discredit the plaintiffs entire case, as if it were the most

decisive document of the plaintiffs case. Regrettably, the District Judge fell

into this error. The District Judge was misled into believing that, due to this

discrepancy, there was no ascertainable sum of money at the time the

action was instituted, which is inconceivable. It may be recalled that an

action under this Act can be filed under section 2(2) for the recovery of a

debt, and according to section 30, debt means a sum of money which is

ascertained or capable of being ascertained at the time of the institution of

the action. The District Judge states:

.

30

.

50 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

.

. 2 2007-01-23

148-1001-81-443446

.

148-1001-1-7192893 .

.2

. 30

. .

There is no law requiring a board resolution for a bank to grant an overdraft

facility to a company. P2 is not a decisive document for the plaintiff to

establish its case. If the District Judge thought P2 is not relevant, she could

have disregarded that document and examined the other documents to

consider whether there is a sum of money which is ascertainable or capable

of being ascertained at the time of the institution of the action. Although

the District Judge highlighted P2, she failed to address her mind to P6,

which is the resolution passed by the board of directors of the defendant

company explicitly acknowledging the overdraft facility obtained through

the relevant current account.

The defendant admitted the issuance of cheques and payment by the bank

but conspicuously failed to explain how the overdrawn amounts were

repaid. This is the crux of the matter. The defendant must explain how the

overdraft was settled, either in full or in part, rather than advancing

convoluted arguments spanning several pages in the written submissions

filed before both the District Court and this Court, which do not assist the

Court but only serve to obfuscate the issue before the Court. As I have

already stated, in actions filed under this Act, defendants cannot raise high-

flown technical objections designed to prolong the proceedings to defeat the

purpose of the Act.

51 SC/APPEAL/148/2019

In my view, based on the facts and circumstances of this case, particularly

considering the board resolution marked P6, which is an admitted

document, the District Judge manifestly erred in granting the defendant

leave to appear and show cause unconditionally. The District Judge should

have acted in accordance with section 6(2)(a) or, at the very least, section

6(2)(b), by permitting the defendant to appear and show cause conditionally.

After the defendant was granted leave to show cause unconditionally, the

procedure followed by the District Judge was clearly flawed. Ultimately, the

District Judge erred in allowing the defendant to raise three purported

preliminary objections on the third date of trial and then dismissing the

plaintiffs action on a vague and legally unsustainable basis.

Conclusion

The question of law on which leave to appeal was granted, namely whether

the High Court of Civil Appeal failed to observe that the plaintiff did not

produce an instrument, agreement, or document as required by section 4(1)

of the Act, is answered in the negative. The order of the District Court dated

08.08.2013 and the judgment of the High Court dated 27.07.2018 are set

aside. The District Judge is directed to enter decree absolute forthwith. The

defendant shall pay Rs. 2,000,000 (two million) to the plaintiff bank as costs

of all three courts incurred over the last fifteen years.

Judge of the Supreme Court

P. Padman Surasena, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Shiran Gooneratne, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court