Page 1 of 18

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of

Article 128 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

S.C. Appeal No: 1. Nettikumara Appuhamilage

125/2012 Seelawathie,

“Walawwa”, Sandalankawa Road,

SC SPL LA No: Sandalankawa.

18/2011 2. S. M. Ashoka Lalith Subasinghe,

No. 26, Pangiriwatte Road,

CA. Appeal No: Gangodawila, Nugegoda.

916/2001 (F) 3. S. M. Gamini Ranjith Subasinghe,

Medagarawatte, Sandalankawa.

DC Kuliyapitiya No: 4. S. M. Chandrika Padmini Weragoda,

10808/L Makandura, Gonawila.

5. S. M. Anula Rohini Gunatunga,

“Walawwa”, Sandalankawa Road,

Sandalankawa.

6. S. M. Sujatha Ranjanie Abeyratne,

No. 125, Nawinna, Maharagama.

PLAINTIFFS

Vs.

1. N. M. Babynona,

2. A. G. Nihal Rohitha,

Both of Hendiyagala,

Sandalankawa.

DEFENDANTS

Page 2 of 18

AND BETWEEN

1. N. M. Babynona,

2. A. G. Nihal Rohitha,

Both of Hendiyagala,

Sandalankawa.

DEFENDANT-APPELLANTS

Vs.

1. Nettikumara Appuhamilage

Seelawathie,

“Walawwa”, Sandalankawa Road,

Sandalankawa.

2. S. M. Ashoka Lalith Subasinghe,

No. 26, Pangiriwatte Road,

Gangodawila, Nugegoda.

3. S. M. Gamini Ranjith Subasinghe,

Medagarawatte, Sandalankawa.

4. S. M. Chandrika Padmini Weragoda,

Makandura, Gonawila.

5. S. M. Anula Rohini Gunatunga,

“Walawwa”, Sandalankawa Road,

Sandalankawa.

6. S. M. Sujatha Ranjanie Abeyratne,

No. 125, Nawinna, Maharagama.

PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENTS

AND NOW BETWEEN

2. S.M. Ashoka Lalith Subasinghe,

No. 26, Pangiriwatte Road,

Gangodawila, Nugegoda. (deceased)

Page 3 of 18

Mallawa Arachchige Geethani Nilmini

Senanayake,

No. 26, Pangiriwatte Road,

Gangodawila, Nugegoda.

SUBSTITUTED 2nd PLAINTIFF-

RESPONDENT-APPELLANT

Vs.

3. N. M. Babynona (deceased)

3A. A. G. Manel Kanthi,

No. 649, Hendiyagala,

Sandalankawa.

By Her Power of Attorney

A. G. Nandana Lal Athula,

No. 649, Hendiyagala,

Sandalankawa.

3B. A.G. Nihal Rohitha,

No. 176, Thanipolgahawatte,

Korasa, Udugampola.

3C. A. G. Nandana Lal Athula,

No. 649, Hendiyagala,

Sandalankawa.

3D. A. G. Upul Hemantha,

Dasun Hardware, Sandalankawa.

3E. A. G. Niranjala Gamage,

No. 176, Thanipolgahawatte,

Korasa, Udugampola.

By Her Power of Attorney

A. G. Nihal Rohitha,

No. 176, Thanipolgahawatte,

Korasa, Udugampola.

Page 4 of 18

4. A. G. Nihal Rohitha,

No. 176, Thanipolgahawatte,

Korasa, Udugampola.

3A-3E and 4th DEFENDANT-

APPELLANT-RESPONDENTS

1. Nettikumara Appuhamilage

Seelawathie,

“Walawwa”, Sandalankawa Road,

Sandalankawa. (Deceased)

1A. Gamini Ranjith Subasinghe,

Medagarawatte, Sandalankawa.

1B. S. M. Chandrika Padmini,

Makandura, Gonawila.

1C. Anula Rohini Subasinghe,

“Walawwa”, Sandalankawa Road,

Sandalankawa.

1D. Sujatha Ranjanie Subasinghe,

No. 125, Nawinna,

Maharagama. (Deceased)

1D1. Witharana Kuruppu Arachchige

Praveen Karshana Abeyratne,

No. 125, Jayagath Road,

Nawinna, Maharagama.

1D2. Nathasha Piyumali Abeyratne,

No. 76/16, 9th Lane,

Ekamuthu Mawatha, Mawitthara,

Piliyandala.

1A-1D2 SUBSTITUTED PLAINTIFF-

RESPONDENT-RESPONDENTS

Page 5 of 18

3. S. M. Gamini Ranjith Subasinghe,

Medagarawatte, Sandalankawa.

5. S. M. Chandrika Padmini Weragoda,

Makandura, Gonawila.

6. S. M. Anula Rohini Gunatunga,

“Walawwa”, Sandalankawa Road,

Sandalankawa.

7. S. M. Sujatha Ranjanie Abeyratne,

No. 125, Nawinna, Maharagama.

3rd, 5th, 6th, 7th, PLAINTIFF-

RESPONDENT-RESPONDENTS

Before : S. Thurairaja, P.C., J.

: Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J.

: Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

Counsel : Rohan Sahabandu, P.C., with Ms. Chathurika

Elvitigala, Ms. Sachini Senanayake and Ms.

Pubudu Weerasuriya instructed by M. D. J.

Bandara for the Substituted 2nd Plaintiff-

Respondent-Appellant.

: Manohara de Silva, P.C., with Ms. Dilmini De Silva

instructed by Ms. Anusha Perusinghe for the 2nd

Defendant-Appellant-Respondent.

Argued on : 12-06-2025

Written Submissions : 18-09-2012 and 02-07-2025 (By the 2nd Plaintiff-

Respondent-Appellant)

: 11-07-2025 (By the Defendant-Appellant-

Respondents)

Page 6 of 18

Decided on : 25-09-2025

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

This is an appeal by the 2nd plaintiff-respondent-appellant (hereinafter

referred to as the 2nd plaintiff) on the basis of being aggrieved by the judgment

dated 17-12-2010 of the Court of Appeal, where the judgment pronounced by

the learned District Judge of Kuliyapitiya on 16-10-2001, which was partly in

favour of the plaintiffs of the action, was set aside.

When this matter was supported for Special Leave to Appeal before this Court

on 17-07-2012, Leave to Appeal was allowed on the questions of law as set

out in paragraph 18 (I) to (V) of the petition dated 23-01-2011.

The said questions of law read as follows,

I. Did the Court of Appeal err in law in its findings with regard to the

scope and nature of the case of the plaintiffs.

II. Has the Court of Appeal misdirected itself in law by arriving at the

conclusion that the claims of the both parties were on the basis of

prescriptive title.

III. Did the Court of Appeal err in law by failing to appreciate that the

appeal related to Lot No. 4 (schedule B) and already Lot 4B (schedule

C) had been given to the respondents by the judgment of the District

Court.

IV. Has the Court of Appeal misdirected in law by coming to the

conclusion that the learned District Judge has placed the burden on

the wrong party.

V. Did the Court of Appeal err in law by failing to consider that when

the respondents claimed rights in Lot No. 4 in D1 and D2 allegedly

executed by the predecessors of the plaintiffs it was incumbent of

the District Court to come to a finding whether the said deeds related

to the corpus.

At the hearing of this appeal, this Court heard the submissions of the learned

President’s Counsel who represented the 2nd plaintiff, as well as that of the

learned President’s Counsel who represented the defendant-appellant-

Page 7 of 18

respondents (hereinafter referred to as the defendants.) This Court also had

the benefit of considering the pre-argument, as well as, the post-argument

written submissions tendered by the parties, for the purpose of pronouncing

this judgment.

The matters that led to the impugned judgment pronounced by the Court of

Appeal can be summarized in the following manner.

The plaintiffs of the District Court action, including the 2nd plaintiff, instituted

an action in form of a vindicatory suit against the defendants, praying for the

declaration of title for the two lands morefully described in schedule B and C

of their plaint dated 29-12-1993, and also for an order of ejectment of the

defendants, and for damages. From the averments of their plaint, they have

pleaded title to the said lands based on a final partition decree, as well as on

the basis of prescription.

The defendants in their answer have denied the title claimed by the plaintiffs.

Having pleaded their title and also the prescriptive title as to the lands

described in the plaint, they have moved for the dismissal of the action.

At the trial held in that regard, there had been no admissions by the parties,

and the plaintiff of the action has raised 15 issues, while the defendants have

raised issue No. 16 to 32.

At the conclusion of the trial, the learned District Judge of Kuliyapitiya,

pronouncing her judgment on 16-10-2001 (page 177 of the appeal brief) has

correctly identified that the plaintiffs have come before the Court to get a

declaration of title to the land morefully described in schedules B and C of the

plaint, and also for the ejectment of the defendants and other incidental

reliefs.

After having determined that the plaintiffs have come before the Court in order

to get a declaration of title to the Northern portion of Lot 4 of plan No. 4455

dated 12-07-1942 prepared by G. A. de Silva Licenced Surveyor for the

purpose of Partition Action No. 230, and also for the Lot marked as 4B in the

same plan, the learned District Judge has proceeded to consider the title

pleaded by the plaintiffs.

Page 8 of 18

The earlier mentioned plan has been marked and produced as P-02 at the

trial (page 212 of the appeal brief), which is the final partition plan prepared

for the purposes of the District Court of Kurunegala Partition Action No. 230.

According to the final partition decree marked P-01, the said Lot 4 as depicted

in schedule A of the plaint has been allocated to the 3rd defendant of the

action, one Punchi Banda, while Lot 4B, which is the land depicted in

schedule C of the plaint, has been allocated to the 12th defendant of the action,

one Kirimenika. It has been the position of the plaintiffs that the said Punchi

Banda, to whom they have referred to as Punchi Banda Subasinghe, sold the

portion of the land South to the road that runs through Lot 4, and he was in

possession of the balance portion of Lot 4, which was to the North of the

earlier mentioned road.

The plaintiffs have claimed that the said portion of the land was held and

possessed by the earlier mentioned Punchi Banda Subasinghe, and upon his

death, his son Premachandra held and possessed the said portion of the land

along with Lot No. 4B of the final partition plan, and established prescriptive

title to the said two portions of the land. The plaintiffs have raised their issues

on the basis that upon the death of said Premachandra Subasinghe, the

plaintiffs inherited the said portions of the land and established prescriptive

title as well.

It was on the basis that the defendants forcibly evicted the plaintiffs on or

about 28-10-1993, which resulted in accruing a cause of action for them to

get a declaration of title and ejectment of the defendants, as well as damages,

the plaintiffs have initiated action before the District Court.

Although the defendants have only claimed for a dismissal of the action, they

have also raised their issues based on several title deeds as stated in their

pleadings and have also raised an issue on the basis of Res Judicata.

The learned District Judge in her judgment has determined that the plaintiffs

have established their title to the portion of land described in schedule B of

the plaint, while determining that they have failed to establish the title to Lot

Page 9 of 18

4B of the final partition plan. The said Lot 4B is the land described in schedule

C of the plaint.

While determining that the defendants have also failed to establish the title

as claimed by them in relation to the said Lot 4 of the final partition plan, it

has been determined that they have established title with regard to Lot 4B.

On the said basis, the learned District Judge has answered the issues in

favour of the plaintiffs in relation to schedule B of the plaint, while allowing

damages and also ejectment of the defendants from the said portion of the

land.

Being aggrieved of the said judgment, the defendants have appealed to the

Court of Appeal.

The Court of Appeal, of its judgment dated 17-12-2010, has determined that

the action before the District Court being a rei vindicatio action, it was

paramount on the plaintiffs to prove their title. It has been determined that

since the plaintiffs did not have documentary title, it was incumbent upon

them to prove the prescriptive title as claimed by them, however, they have

failed to establish any documentary or prescriptive title to the lands claimed

by them. It has also been determined that the learned trial Judge has placed

an unnecessary burden on the defendants to prove their title and had failed

to consider whether the plaintiffs have proved their title as claimed by them.

Holding that the learned trial Judge has misconstrued the principles in

relation to a rei vindicatio action, the judgment of the learned District Judge

has been set aside and the appeal has been allowed.

At the hearing of this appeal, it was the position of the learned President’s

Counsel who represented the 2nd plaintiff, who is the appellant in this case,

that the plaintiffs have properly identified the subject matter of this action

and have also pleaded their title to the satisfaction of the Court.

However, the learned President’s Counsel intimated to the Court that he will

not challenge the determination of the learned District Judge where it was

held that the plaintiffs have failed to prove their title to the land described in

Page 10 of 18

schedule C of the plaint, which was Lot 4B of the final partition plan marked

P-02.

He also submitted that the defendants who have claimed prescriptive title to

the land depicted in schedule B of the plaint have failed to establish their title,

and hence, the title established by the plaintiffs should prevail.

In reply to a question raised by the Court during the hearing of this appeal,

the learned President’s Counsel was of the view that it is not necessary always

to obtain the services of a surveyor and to show the land in dispute in relation

to a commission obtained through the Court in a rei vindicatio action. It was

contended that since the plaintiffs have described the land with its metes and

bounds and also by way of a final partition plan, there was no difficulty for

the trial Court to identify the subject matter of the action. It was submitted

further that the Court of Appeal erred in its determinations, and had failed to

consider the evidence placed before the trial Court and the judgment of the

learned District Judge in its correct perspective, when it was determined that

the plaintiffs had failed to establish their title as claimed before the trial Court.

It was the position of the learned President’s Counsel who represented the

defendants that it has been established before the trial Court that the portion

South of the road that runs through Lot 4 of the final partition plan marked

P-02, had been sold to the predecessor in title of the defendants by Punchi

Banda, who was the person who became entitled to the said portion by the

partition decree. It was also pointed out that it was undisputed that Lot 4A of

the final partition plan is also held and possessed by the defendants, while

the trial Court held that Lot 4B, though claimed by the plaintiffs, was held

and possessed by the defendants.

It was the position of the learned President’s Counsel that the disputed

portion referred to in schedule B of the plaint was also held and possessed by

the predecessors of the defendants and the defendants through title deeds as

pleaded by them. It was contended that they have established prescriptive

title as well to the said portion by holding and possessing the said portion

along with the balance portion of Lot 4, Lot 4A, and Lot 4B as one single entity.

Page 11 of 18

It was his submission that the plaintiffs have failed to prove that they held

and possessed the said disputed portion of the land until 28-10-1993 as

claimed by them in their plaint, and it was the defendants who possessed it

throughout, even after the entering of the final partition decree.

The learned President’s Counsel went on to contend that the plaintiffs have

failed to prove the title to an identified subject matter, and had failed to prove

any material proof of prescription, and hence, the Court of Appeal was correct

in setting aside the judgment of the learned District Judge of Kuliyapitiya.

Having in mind the facts relating to this matter, the arguments presented to

this Court, and the relevant law in that regard, I will now proceed to consider

whether the 2nd plaintiff has a basis to succeed in this appeal.

I do not find any misdirection as to the relevant law when the Court of Appeal

determined that in a rei vindicatio action, the burden is entirely on the plaintiff

to prove his title.

It was held in the case of D.A. Wanigaratne Vs. Juwanis Appuhamy 65 NLR

167 at 168;

“It had been laid down now by this Court that in an action rei vindicatio

the plaintiff should set out his title on the basis on which he claims a

declaration of title to the land and must, in Court, prove that the title

against the defendant in the action. The defendant in a rei vindicatio

action need not prove anything, still less, his own title. The plaintiff

cannot ask for a declaration of title in his favour merely on the strength

that the defendant’s title is poor or not established. The plaintiff must

prove and establish his title.”

However, I am not in a position to fully agree with the determination of the

Court of Appeal that the plaintiffs of the action do not possess a documentary

title, and therefore, they have failed to establish documentary or prescriptive

title.

Page 12 of 18

It is clear from the pleadings and the evidence placed before the Court on

behalf of the plaintiffs that they have relied on the final partition decree

marked as P-01 to claim their title. It has been their position that the 3rd

defendant mentioned in that final partition decree, namely, Punchi Banda,

who became entitled to Lot 4 of the final partition plan marked P-02, was their

predecessor in title. They have claimed title based on inheritance, which they

are entitled when claiming title.

Although they could claim title to the land described in schedule B of the

plaint on the basis of inheritance, when it comes to the land mentioned in

schedule C, the only mode they could claim title would be by claiming

prescription through their predecessor in title. Therefore, it is clear that

plaintiffs have relied on paper title and prescription in relation to the land

described in schedule B, while claiming prescription in relation to the land

mentioned in schedule C of the plaint in order to pray for a declaration of title.

In the case of Leisa and Another Vs. Simon and Another (2002) 1 SLR 148,

it was held;

1. The contest is between the right of dominium of the plaintiffs and the

declaration of adverse possession amounting to prescription by the

defendants.

2. The moment title is proved the right to possess is presumed.

3. …

4. An averment of prescription by a plaintiff in a plaint after pleading paper

title is employed only to buttress his paper title.

5. For the Court to have come to its decisions as to whether the plaintiff

had dominium, the proving of paper title is sufficient.

6. The mere fact that the plaintiff claimed both on deeds as well as by long

possession did not entail the plaintiff to prove prescriptive title thereto.

Their possession was presumed on proving paper title. The averment of

prescription in the plaint did not cast any burden upon the plaintiff to

prove a separate title by prescription in addition to paper title.

Page 13 of 18

Although it can be said that the plaintiffs have claimed prescription in relation

to the land described in schedule B of the plaint, it may have been that the

prescription has been mentioned in order to buttress their paper title.

However, as I have stated before, when it comes to the land described in

schedule C of the plaint, they will necessarily have to establish the

prescriptive title.

Therefore, it is my view that this was a case where the plaintiffs were required

to establish paper title, as well as prescriptive title, in relation to the two

respective lands for which they claimed a declaration of title against the

defendants. It is also important to have in mind that the defendants have

claimed prescriptive title to both the lands mentioned in the respective

schedules of the plaint, besides claiming paper title based on deeds they have

produced before the trial Court.

It was undisputed during the hearing of this appeal that, the determination

of the learned District Judge that the land mentioned in schedule C of the

plaint, namely, Lot 4B of the final partition plan marked P-02, is a land

belonging to and held and possessed by the defendants. It was also

undisputed that the land mentioned as 4A in the same plan, which is the land

to the South of Lot 4B, is also a land held and possessed by the 1st defendant

of the action. In such a scenario, I find it necessary to consider whether the

learned District Judge was correct in the finding that the plaintiffs have

established the title to the land depicted in schedule B of the plaint.

When it comes to the title in relation to the said portion of land as claimed by

the plaintiffs, they have gone on the basis that their immediate predecessor

in title, namely Premachandra Subasinghe, was the son of Punchi Banda

Subasinghe, who became entitled to Lot 4 of the final partition plan marked

P-02.

However, the deeds marked as V-01 and V-02 by the defendants show that in

fact the said Punchi Banda and Premachandra were sons of Kirimundyanse

Korala of Sandalankawa, which means they are in fact brothers. The plaintiffs

have failed to explain this discrepancy as to their claimed title.

Page 14 of 18

If they were indeed brothers as it appears, contrary to the claim by the

plaintiffs that they are father and son, the plaintiffs’ title pleaded based on

inheritance shall fail since they have failed to establish the inheritance they

claimed.

It is my considered view that in a rei vindicatio action, proving of title to the

subject matter of an action includes the proper identification of the land for

which a plaintiff is claiming title.

I am in agreement with the submissions of the learned President’s Counsel

on behalf of the 2nd plaintiff, that in terms of Section 41 of the Civil Procedure

Code, when a claim is made in an action for some specific part of a land or

some share or interest in a specific portion of land, then the portion of land

must be described in the plaint so far as possible by reference to physical

metes and bounds or by reference to a sufficient sketch, map or plan

appended to the plaint and not by name only.

However, it is also my view that whether stating as such in a plaint would be

sufficient to succeed in an action in the nature of a rei vindicatio would depend

on facts and circumstances specific to each case.

The case under appeal is a matter where there has been no admission as to

the corpus. It is true that the plaintiffs have described the land in question in

relation to a final partition plan that was prepared in the year 1942. The plaint

in this action has been filed in the year 1993, more than five decades after the

final partition plan was prepared.

The plaintiffs have claimed not the entire Lot 4 of the final partition plan

marked P-02, but only the Northern portion separated through a road running

through the Lot 4. The evidence placed before the Court has established the

fact that the Southern portion of the said Lot 4 has been sold to the

predecessor in title of the defendants by way of the deed marked V-02, by the

person who became entitled to the entire Lot 4, who is also the predecessor

in title as claimed by the plaintiffs.

Page 15 of 18

Although the said deed appears to be a deed executed after the conclusion of

the partition action, there is no reference to the title in relation to the final

partition decree in the said deed. However, the fact remains that the

predecessors in title of the defendants have had the possession of the

Southern portion of the Lot 4 since the year 1942.

The plaintiffs have come before the Court on the basis that the defendants

entered the Northern portion of the Lot 4, a few months before they instituted

the action, which means they have admitted that the questioned land was in

the possession of the defendants.

When it comes to the facts and the circumstances specific to the case under

appeal, it is clear that the defendants have also claimed title to the disputed

portion through deeds, although the said deeds have been executed in relation

to a final determination of the partition action. They have claimed that on the

strength of their deeds, they held and possessed the entire land.

It is also clear from the evidence that the two plots of land mentioned as Lot

4A and Lot 4B have been held and possessed by the defendants’ predecessors

in title as well as the defendants, along with the Southern portion of Lot 4 and

also the Northern portion of the said Lot 4 now claimed by the plaintiffs.

Because of such a possession, it is reasonable to assume that there would not

be identifiable boundaries between the Northern portion of the Lot 4, Lot 4A

and Lot 4B.

Therefore, it is my considered view that for the plaintiffs to claim title to a part

of Lot 4 which they have described as the Northern portion of the said Lot

separated by a road that runs through the said land, it was paramount on

them to identify the land claimed for which they are seeking a declaration of

title through a survey plan obtained for the purposes of the action.

This is so necessary due to the fact of the defendants’ claim of title to the said

Lot along with the lands adjacent to the disputed portion.

Page 16 of 18

In the case of Jamaldeen Abdul Latheef Vs. Abdul Majeed Mohamed

Masoor and Another (2010) 2 SLR 333 Saleem Marsoof, P.C., J., at page

377 observed as follows;

“It is trite law that the identity of the property with respect to which a

vindicatory action is instituted is an fundamental to the success of the

action as the proof of the ownership (dominum) of the owner (dominus).

The passage from Wille’s Principles of South African Laws (9th Edition -

2007) at pages 539-540, which I have already quoted in this judgement,

stresses that to succeed with an action rei vindicatio, which this case

clearly is, the owner must prove on a balance of probabilities, not only

his or her ownership in the property, but also that the property exists and

is clearly identifiable. It is also essential to show that the defendant is

“in possession or detention of the thing at the moment the action is

instituted.” Wille also observes that the rationale for this “is to ensure

that the defendant is in a position to comply with an order for

restoration.”

The identity of the subject matter is of paramount importance in a rei

vindicatio action because the object of such an action is to determine

ownership of the property, which objective cannot be achieved without

the property being clearly identified. Where the property sought to be

vindicated consists of land, the land sought to be vindicated must be

identified by reference to a survey plan or other equally expeditious

method. It is obvious that ownership cannot be ascribed without clear

identification of the property that is subjected to such ownership, and

furthermore, the ultimate objective of a person seeking to vindicate

immovable property by obtaining a writ of execution in terms of Section

323 of the Civil Procedure Code will be frustrated if the fiscal to whom

the writ is addressed, cannot clearly identify the property by reference to

the decree for the purpose of giving effect to it. It is therefore essential in

a vindicatory action, as much as in a partition action, for the corpus to be

identified with precision.”

Page 17 of 18

There can be no argument that the plaintiffs have not obtained the services

of a surveyor to prepare a plan and a report, depicting the disputed portion of

the land in relation to the final partition plan under which they claim title. If

there was a plan and a report of such a nature, it would have been clear to

the trial Court as to the corpus in dispute. The trial Court would be in a much

better position to determine the plaintiffs’ claim that they were dispossessed

of the land only in the year 1993, a few months before they instituted the

action.

For the reasons as considered above, I am of the view that this was a case

where the learned District Judge, as well as Her Ladyship of the Court of

Appeal who pronounced the appellate judgment, had failed to consider

whether the corpus for which the plaintiffs claimed title, has been properly

identified.

The learned District Judge has gone on the basis of the plan prepared for the

partition action which has been concluded in the year 1942. As I have

considered earlier, this would not give a clear understanding of the disputed

portion of the land claimed by the plaintiffs.

Although the Court of Appeal in its determination has not considered the

question of the identity of the land separately, it is my view that proving the

title as claimed by the party includes the proper identification of the land for

which such a party claims title.

Under the circumstances, I am of the view that the learned District Judge has

failed to consider the necessary ingredients that needs to be established in an

action for declaration of title, when the matter was determined in relation to

the land morefully described in schedule B of the plaint in favour of the

plaintiffs.

I find that the Court of Appeal was correct in its final determination to allow

the appeal and set aside the District Court judgment, based on the premise

that the plaintiffs have failed to prove the title claimed by them, though the

question of identity of the land has not been discussed in any detail.

Page 18 of 18

Accordingly, I answer the questions of law under which this appeal was

considered in the following manner.

I. No.

II. Although it was not only on the basis of prescriptive title the parties

have claimed their rights, it is not a basis to interfere with the Court of

Appeal judgment.

III. No.

IV. No.

V. No.

Hence, the appeal is dismissed due to the aforementioned reasons, as I find

no merit in the appeal.

The parties shall bear their own costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

S. Thurairaja, P.C., J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court