==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 31

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal in terms of Section 5 (2) of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 10 of 1996 as amended by High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) (Amendment) Act No. 54 of 2006.

People’s Bank, No. 75, Chiththampalam A. Gardiner Mawatha, Colombo 02. S.C. Appeal (CHC) No. 05/2007 H.C. (Civil) No. 139/2001

Plaintiff Vs. 1. Fawziya Nizam,

No. 07, Mosque Lane, Watarappala Road, Mount Lavinia. 2. Tuan Furkan Buhary,

No. 11/D/2, National Housing Scheme, Raddolugama. 3. Abdul Jabar Ifthikar Hussein,

No. 47/5, Main Street, Moratuwa. 4. Noor Mohamed Mohamy Nizam,

No. 07, Mosque Lane, Watarappala Road, Mount Lavinia. Defendants

Page 2 of 31

AND NOW BETWEEN

People’s Bank, No. 75, Chiththampalam A. Gardiner Mawatha, Colombo 02. Plaintiff-Appellant Vs. 1. Fawziya Nizam,

No. 07, Mosque Lane, Watarappala Road, Mount Lavinia. 2. Tuan Furkan Buhary,

No. 11/D/2, National Housing Scheme, Raddolugama. 3. Abdul Jabar Ifthikar Hussein,

No. 47/5, Main Street, Moratuwa. 4. Noor Mohamed Mohamy Nizam,

No. 07, Mosque Lane, Watarappala Road, Mount Lavinia. Defendant-Respondents

Before: Hon. Vijith K. Malalgoda, P.C., J.

Hon. A. H. M. D. Nawaz, J.

Hon. Janak De Silva, J.

Page 3 of 31

Counsel:

Kushan De Alwis, P.C. with Prasanna de Silva and S. Mudannayake for Plaintiff-

Appellant

Geoffrey Alagaratnam, P.C. with Bushan Illeperuma for the 2nd and 3rd Defendant-

Respondents

Written Submissions:

04.11.2014 and 19.06.2012 by the Plaintiff-Appellant

03.11.2014 and 31.07.2012 by the Defendant-Respondents

Argued on: 25.03.2022

Decided on: 02.08.2024

Janak De Silva, J.

The Plaintiff-Appellant Bank (“Appellant”) instituted this action in the Provincial High

Court of the Western Province (Exercising Civil Jurisdiction) Holden in Colombo

(“Commercial High Court”) against the 1st to 4th Defendants-Respondents

(“Respondents”) seeking, inter alia, judgment and decree jointly and severally in a sum

of Rs. 13,000,000 together with legal interest from 06.06.2001 until date of decree and

thereafter legal interest on the aggregate amount of the decree until payment in full.

The Appellant provided banking facilities to International Fashions (Pvt) Ltd.

(“Company”), which maintained a current account with the Appellant. On or about

11.03.1993, an application was made by the Company to the Appellant for an overdraft

facility in a sum of Rs. 6,500,000/=. The Appellant granted the facility on the condition

that the amount be repaid within a period of 180 days (A3 and A4).

Page 4 of 31

The 1st to 4th Respondents executed what is termed as a “Guarantee” (A5)

(“Guarantee”) in favour of the Appellant as security for the repayment of the said

overdraft facility.

On 11.08.1997 the Appellant demanded the repayment of the outstanding sum due

on the overdraft facility. The Company failed and neglected to pay the amount due.

On or about 11.08.1997, the Appellant made a demand on the 1st to 4th Respondents

for a sum of Rs. 5,980,847/05 due on the Guarantee given by them (P12 to P15). This

action was instituted as they failed to pay on the demand.

Having considered the evidence lead at the trial, the learned trial judge delivered

judgment dismissing the action with costs although he answered all issues pertaining

to the overdraft facility in favour of the Appellant. The application was dismissed on

the basis that it was prescribed in law.

The learned trial judge concluded that any action for the recovery of the amount due

on the overdraft facility should have, in terms of Section 10 of the Prescription

Ordinance, been filed within 3 years from the final overdrawn date. He went on to hold

that the Respondents, as sureties, are entitled to rely on any defenses which may be

available to the Company in an action for the recovery of the amount due on the

overdraft facility. As any such action was prescribed by the time this action was

instituted on 06.06.2001, the learned trial judge held that this action was prescribed.

Before proceeding to consider the merits of the arguments made before us, I must

clarify that the principal debt, amount due from the Company to the Appellant on the

overdraft facilities, is not extinguished by the operation of Section 10 of the

Prescription Ordinance. For reasons more fully explained by me in S. Albert and Others

v. S. Sivakumar [S.C. (C.H.C) Appeal No. 04/2007, S.C.M. 23.01.2023 at page 13], the

common phrase “no action shall be maintainable” in Sections 5 to 10 indicate “that

these sections are not intended to extinguish an obligation” but to “prevent an action

being maintained on an obligation after the lapse of a specified period”.

Page 5 of 31

Weeramantry [The Law of Contracts, Lawman (India)(Pvt.)Ltd. (1969 Reprint in 1999),

Vol. II, page 857] confirms this at footnote 14 in stating:

“It would not be strictly correct to relate the rule as is often done to the

extinction of the accessory obligation upon the extinction of the principal, for

the debt is not in our law extinguished but only rendered unenforceable.”

There are two issues that arise for determination in this appeal. One is determining the

applicable section in the Prescription Ordinance for the purposes of an action on the

Guarantee. The other is, even if the action on the Guarantee is not prescribed, whether

the Respondents are entitled to rely on any defense of prescription which could have

been raised by the Company against the Appellant.

I will first consider the applicable section in the Prescription Ordinance. Prior to doing

so, it is important to clear a misconception on the part of the learned trial judge who

held that this action is based on the overdraft facility provided to the Company. Upon

an examination of the plaint, it is clear that the cause of action relied on by the

Appellant is the failure on the part of the Respondents to pay on demand as agreed in

the Guarantee.

In Hatton National Bank Ltd. v. Sellers Sports (Pvt) Ltd. and Others [(2000) 3 Sri.L.R.

326] it was held that as regards the guarantee in issue, Section 6 of the Prescription

Ordinance which relates to amounts due on a written promise or other written security

is the applicable section and the period of prescription is 6 years. It was further held

that the period should be computed not from the date of the default on the principal

obligation, but from the date on which the payment upon the Guarantee became due

namely, 10 days after demand in writing was made.

I am of the view that the relevant principle has been correctly expounded in Hatton

National Bank Ltd. v. Sellers Sports (Pvt) Ltd. and Others [ibid.]. Section 6 of the

Prescription Ordinance is applicable in determining whether the cause of action on the

Page 6 of 31

Guarantee is prescribed. The demand was made on 11.08.1997 and this action was

filed on 06.06.2001. Hence, this action is not prescribed.

Nevertheless, the Respondents submit that an action on the overdraft facility was

prescribed as at the date this action was instituted. Therefore, it is contended that the

Respondents can rely on that as a defense in this action against them.

On this point, parties took opposing positions. The Appellants contend that the

Respondents tendered the Guarantee to the Appellant whereby they bound

themselves as principal debtor. Thus, even where the debt of the Company to the

Appellant in prescribed, the guarantor is not discharged from their liability to the

Appellant.

The Respondents countered that the Guarantee is collateral to the contract already in

existence between the Appellant and the Company. Where the transaction between

the Appellant and Company is void or unenforceable by the Appellant, the guarantors

are not bound. The cause of action on the overdraft facility was prescribed by the time

this action was instituted against the Respondents. Therefore, this action cannot be

maintained.

I must begin examining these competing and intricate positions by addressing an

interesting conflicts of law question. The common law of Ceylon being the Roman-

Dutch law, the general law of contracts in Ceylon is the Roman-Dutch law

[Weeramantry (supra.), page 37].

However, in terms of Section 3 of the Civil Law Ordinance, in all questions or issues

with respect to the law of banks and banking, the law to be administered shall be the

same as would be administered in England in the like case [Weeramantry (supra.), page

45].

Page 7 of 31

As the Respondents are private parties, it is arguable that the governing law is the

Roman-Dutch law. Nevertheless, the Guarantee was given as part of a banking

transaction and arguably English law will govern the issue. Which of these laws should

be applied in determining whether the guarantors are not bound where the

transaction between the Appellant and Company is void or unenforceable?

After considering the respective positions in both the Roman-Dutch law and English

law, I am of the view that no determination on this issue need be made, as upon a

consideration of the facts in this matter the position in both these laws are the same

on this issue. In the event a firm position needs to be taken, I am inclined to hold that

the governing law is the English law for the reason set out above.

In examining the position in Roman-Dutch law, Weeramantry [supra. pages 856-857]

states as follows:

“The general principle would be that where the debt of the principal debtor is

barred by limitation, the remedy against the surety is also barred for the

reason that by the Roman-Dutch law the surety undertakes to pay the debt of

the principal debtor only so lang as the debt is enforceable in law and has not

in fact been paid by the debtor. On the same principle, if there is interruption of

prescription in respect of the principal debtor, such interruption operates also as

an interruption against the surety, contrary to the general rule that interruption

of prescription is operative only in respect of the person by whom the

acknowledgement is made.” (emphasis added)

The first case in South Africa in which this issue arose was Cronin v. Meerholz (1920

TPD 403). The plaintiff took judgment against the principal debtor and thereafter sued

the surety. At the time there was no prescription in respect of a judgment and what

had to be decided was whether the claim against the surety had similarly become

‘imprescribable’. The Court held that it had.

Page 8 of 31

Wessels JP in his judgement relied on Voet 46.1.36 which reads as follows:

“If in sooth the making of a demand on one of two joint debtors interrupts

prescription in respect of the other also, when each of them was bound as a

principal debtor, far more must we say that an obligation against a surety is

prolonged by a demand which was made on the principal debtor. It is more in

accord with nature for an accessory to go with its principal, than for one

principal thing to be assessed on another.” (Gane’s Translation)

In Union Government v. Van der Merwe [1921 TPD 318 at 321], one of the authorities

relied on by Weeramantry for his statement, Wessels J.P. held:

“The contract of suretyship presupposes a principal obligation which has the

same object, in the sense used by Continental jurists, as the contract of the

surety. This is expressed by the maxim una eadem res vertitur in obligatione.

Troplong, Cautionnement, sec.22.

The legal scope of the surety’s contract is identical with that of the principal

debtor --- accessorium sui principalis naturam sequitur. The surety undertakes

the same obligation as the debtor, and undertakes to perform this same

obligation so soon as the debtor, when called upon, fails to perform it. Troplong,

caut:46. It is true there are two contracts, the one between the creditor and the

debtor and the other between the creditor and the surety. But the contract

between the creditor and the surety is not an independent contract with an

obligation of its own but an accessory contract with the very same obligation

that exists between the principal debtor and the creditor.

Although it is true that the suretyship contract may be entered into by an

agreement different to that of the principal contract, yet immediately the surety

agrees to become such, whether by a written or a verbal agreement, then his

contract with the creditor is of the same nature as that of the principal debtor,

Page 9 of 31

because it becomes accessory to it, or is, as it were, absorbed by it.” (emphasis

added)

The position in Roman-Dutch law as expounded in the authorities cited above was

challenged in Rand Bank Ltd. v. De Jager [1982(3) SA 418(C)] where Baker J. held that

Voet had incorrectly extended the principal that applied only to co-debtors to sureties.

It was held that Cod. 8.39(40).4(5) refers to co-debtors in solidum and not to sureties

and that Justinian did not apply it to sureties, nor did he intend to and that sureties

were a species apart and were governed by their own rules.

However, this debate has now been laid to rest by the Supreme Court of Appeal of

South Africa in Shirley Joyce Jans v. Nedcor Bank Limited (86/02) [(2003) ZASCA 15,

(2003) 2 All SA 11 (SCA) (24 March 2003)] where the decision in Rand Bank Ltd. v. De

Jager (supra.) was overruled. The position now is that the contract between the

creditor and the surety is not an independent contract with an obligation of its own

but an accessory contract with the very same obligation that exists between the

principal debtor and the creditor and hence sureties are entitled to raise any defense

that may be raised by the principal debtor against the creditor which makes the

principal debt unenforceable.

Nevertheless, there is another aspect to the issue. Weeramantry relies on Caney’s

Novation [L.R. Caney, A Treatise on the Law Relating to Novation (Cape Town, 1938),

page 140] for the first part of the statement quoted above. Nevertheless, according to

Caney’s The Law of Suretyship [Forsyth & Pretorius (eds.), 5th edition (Juta & Co. Ltd.,

2002), page 32], Roman-Dutch law appears to recognize a difference in the position

between the creditor and surety or guarantor when the principal debt is invalid or

prescribed. It reads as follows:

“What then is the difference between a guarantee that a debtor will perform

and suretyship? Lubbe makes one point of distinction clear : the guarantor’s

obligation, as an obligation independent of that of the debtor, is to indemnify

Page 10 of 31

the creditor in respect of losses suffered through the debtor’s non-performance,

whereas the surety, as we have seen, is only liable for losses resulting from the

debtor’s breach of contract. Thus if the creditor suffers grave losses when it

turns out that debtor’s contract is invalid, the guarantor’s obligation remains

in force and he will have to pay those losses but the surety’s obligation falls

away and he will not have to pay a penny. A second point of distinction is this:

as we have seen, suretyship is an undertaking, in the first instance, that the

debtor himself will perform, and only secondarily that if he fails to perform

that the surety will do so. With guarantee, on the other hand, the guarantor

undertakes to pay on the happening of a certain event but does not promise

that that event will not happen.” (emphasis added)

In so far as English law is concerned, contracts of suretyship can take two main forms.

They are either contracts of guarantee or contracts of indemnity.

Halsbury’s Laws of England, (5th ed., 2008), para. 1013 states that:

“A guarantee is an accessory contract by which the promisor undertakes to be

answerable to the promise for the debt, default or miscarriage of another

person, whose primary liability to the promise must exists or be contemplated.”

According to Geraldine Andrews and Richard Millet in Law of Guarantees [6th ed.

(Thomson Reuters, 2011), at page 3], the essential distinguishing feature of a contract

of guarantee is that the liability of the guarantor is always ancillary, or secondary, to

that of the principal, who remains primarily liable to the creditor. There is no liability

on the guarantor unless and until the principal has failed to perform his obligations.

It follows from the secondary nature of the obligation, that the guarantor is generally

only liable to the same extent that the principal is liable to the creditor, and that there

is usually no liability on the part of the guarantor if the underlying obligation is void or

unenforceable, or if that obligation ceases to exist. This is known as “the principle of

co-extensiveness” [ibid., pages 5, 272].

Page 11 of 31

Hence, if the principal debtor’s obligation turns out not to exist, or is void, diminished

or discharged, so is the guarantor’s obligation in respect of it [Lakeman v.

Mountstephen (1874) LR 7 HL 17 at 24-25]. In Vossloh Aktiengesellschaft v. Alpha

Trains (UK) Ltd. [(2011) 2 All ER (Comm) 307 at para. 24] this co-extensiveness

between the principal debtor’s and the guarantor’s obligation has been identified as

an ‘essential distinguishing feature of a true contract of guarantee’.

Nevertheless, not all guarantees have the principle of co-extensiveness. The true

nature of the relationship and the respective rights and obligations between the

guarantor and the creditor depends on the true construction of the instrument. In

Paget’s Law of Banking, Ali Malek QC and John Odgers (eds.), 14th ed., (LexisNexis,

2014, page 466] it is stated as follows:

“This must be contrasted with the situation where, on the true construction of

the promise, a primary or direct undertaking has been given by the guarantor

to perform the principal debtor’s obligation. If the obligation is of this nature,

then the promise: (a) will be enforceable whether or not the principal debtor’s

obligation is enforceable; and (b) will not be a true contract of guarantee,

because the promise will have a primary rather than a secondary liability to

the creditor.” (emphasis added)

Accordingly, the true nature of the relationship between the Appellant and the

Respondents and their respective rights and liabilities must be determined by an

examination of the Guarantee. In construing the Guarantee, we must not apply to it

merely technical rules but must interpret it so as to reflect what may fairly be inferred

to be the parties’ real intention and understanding as expressed by them in the

agreement [Peerylease Ltd. v. Imecar AG [(1988) 1 WLR 463 at 469H-470A]. It must

be construed by looking at it as a whole without preconceptions as to what it is.

Page 12 of 31

Nevertheless, English courts have identified certain types of documents as creating

either primary and secondary obligations. In particular, it has been recognized that an

“on demand” instrument, taking effect as an independent instrument creates a

primary obligation [See Edward Owen Engineering Ltd. v. Barclays Bank International

Ltd. [(1978) 1 All ER 976; Esal (Commodities) Ltd. and Reltor Ltd. v. Oriental Credit Ltd.

and Wells Fargo Bank NA (1985) 2 Lloyd’s Rep. 546; IIG Capital LLC v. Van Der Merwe

and another (2008) EWCA Civ 542] whereas a true guarantee creates a secondary or

accessory liability which is predicated on the default of the principal [See Paddington

Churches Housing Association v. Technical and General Guarantee Co. Ltd. (1999) BLR

244; Marubeni Hong Kong and South China Ltd. v. Government of Mongolia (2005)

EWCA Civ. 395].

Moreover, it has been held that performance bonds given by banks are almost

invariably construed as imposing a liability on the bank to pay, whatever dispute there

may be on liability under the underlying contract while instruments which are not

banking instruments and formed part of a transaction outside the banking context and

which was not described either on its face or in the supporting legal opinion in terms

“appropriate to a demand bond or something having equivalent legal effect” created

a “strong presumption against” interpretation as a demand bond [IIG Capital LLC v.

Van Der Merwe and another (supra.) at para. 8].

The Guarantee was issued by the Respondents and not the Appellant Bank. Hence it is

possible to claim that it was not part of a banking transaction. Nevertheless, the

beneficiary is the Appellant bank and the Guarantee was given as security for a banking

transaction, namely overdraft facility. Let me now construe the Guarantee to identify

its true legal effect.

It is true, that the Guarantee is titled “Guarantee”. Nevertheless, the answer is not so

straightforward as the body contains several references to “guarantee” as well as to

“surety”. Moreover, the Guarantee must not be construed based purely on internal

linguistic considerations. In Wijeyewardene v. Jayawardene (26 N.L.R. 193) the Privy

Page 13 of 31

Council held that the words “this guarantee shall be a continuing guarantee” did not

change the character of the obligation created by paragraph 1 into one of suretyship.

The mere use of a descriptive term cannot affect the reality of the transaction. The

agreement must be construed as a whole.

In this examination, Clause (ix) of the Guarantee (A5) offers an important insight of the

intention of the parties. It reads:

“(ix) Any money herein mentioned shall be deemed to be owing

notwithstanding any incapacity of or limitation upon the debtor or any person

acting or purporting to act on behalf or in the name of the debtor with respect

to borrowing or of or upon the Bank or any person acting or purporting to act

on behalf or in the name of the Bank with respect to lending, or any defect or

insufficient in the borrowing powers to the debtor or any such person aforesaid

or in the lending powers of the Bank or any such person aforesaid, or in the

exercise thereof respectively, which might be a defence as between the debtor

and the Bank…” (emphasis added)

Accordingly, defenses touching on capacity or authority which may be available to the

Company against the Appellant, in an action based on the overdraft facility, is not

available to the Respondents. No doubt, this has not excluded defenses such as

prescription. Nevertheless, this provides a vital indication that the obligations between

the Appellant and the Respondents were intended to be independent of the

obligations between the Appellant and the Company at a minimum on these matters.

By virtue of Clause 2 of the Guarantee (A5), the Respondents have bound themselves

to:

“[…] pay to the Bank in (COLOMBO – Corporate) the moneys herein mentioned

ten days after demand (PROVIDED ALWAYS that the total liability including all

interest from the date of demand, and such further sums by way of Banker’s

charges, Legal costs and expenses in accordance with the Bank’s usual course of

Page 14 of 31

business shall not exceed the sum of Rupees Thirteen Million only ( Rs.

13,000,000/=)”

This shows that the Guarantee is an on-demand guarantee. As Carnwath L.J. held in

Marubeni Hong Kong and South China Ltd. v. Mongolia [supra., at para. 23],

“demand bonds” however described are a specialised form of irrevocable instrument

developed by the banking world for its commercial customers. They have been

accepted by the courts as the equivalent of letters of credit.

In my view, these observations are equally applicable to the Guarantee although it was

not given by a bank. It was given by the Respondents to the Appellant bank as security

for a banking transaction. A bank when lending on commercial basis will

understandably seek to cover the amount loaned with an on-demand guarantee that

assures repayment in the absence of any other security such as mortgage of property

as in this case.

In IIG Capital LLC v. Van Der Merwe and another (supra. para 19), Lord Justice Waller

held:

“[…] there is no doubt that in a contract of guarantee parties may, if so

minded, exclude any one or more of the normal incidents or suretyship.

However if they choose to do so clear and unambiguous language must be used

to displace the normal legal consequence of the contract […]” (emphasis added)

The Appellant and the Respondents have sought to do so in Clause 9 of the Guarantee

(A5) which reads as follows:

“9. Although my/our ultimate liability hereunder cannot exceed the limit

hereinbefore mentioned, yet this present guarantee shall be construed and take

effect as a guarantee of the whole and every part of the moneys herein

mentioned and accordingly I am/we and each of us are not and is not to be

entitled as against the Bank to any right of proof in the insolvency of the

Page 15 of 31

debtor or other right of a surety discharging his liability in respect of the

principal debt, unless and until the whole of the moneys herein mentioned

including interest and charges as aforesaid shall have first been completely

discharged and satisfied.” (emphasis added)

This is an unequivocal statement that the Respondents are not entitled to any right of

a surety discharging his liability in respect of the principal debt. This includes the right

of a surety to be considered discharged from his liability upon the cause of action on

the principal debt becoming prescribed. This exclusion further fortifies the position

that it is an “on demand” guarantee creating a primary obligation between the

Respondents and the Appellant.

The matter is put beyond doubt in Clause 14 of the Guarantee (A5) which reads as

follows:

“14. I/we and each of us specially agree that the Bank shall be at liberty, either

in one action to sue the debtor and me/us and each or any of us jointly and

severally, or to proceed in the first instance against me/us and each or any of us

only, and further that I/we and each of us hereby renounce the right to claim

that the debtor should be excused or proceeded against by action in the first

instance, and (where this guarantee is given by more than one person) the right

to claim that the Bank should divide its claim against us and bring actions

against us, each for his portion pro rata, and the right to claim in any action

brought against all of us that the Bank should only recover from each of us a pro

rata share of the amount claimed in that action, and all other rights and benefits

to which sureties are or may be by law entitled IT BEING AGREED that I/we and

each of us am/are and is liable in all respects hereunder as principal

debtor/principal debtors jointly and severally, to the extent aforementioned,

including the liability to be sued before recourse is had against the debtor.”

(emphasis added)

Page 16 of 31

This is what is generally termed as a “principal debtor” clause. It was at one time held

that a self-standing provision of this nature may be construed as preventing a

guarantor from claiming that he has been discharged from liability by virtue of a

fundamental breach of the contract with the borrower by the bank.

However, the prevailing view is that the inclusion of a “principal debtor” clause will not

usually suffice in itself to determine the nature of the contract [Carey Value Added SL

v. Grupo Urvasco SA [(2011) 2 All E.R. (Comm) 140 at para.22].

Nevertheless, in combination with the other clauses of the Guarantee referred to

above, it establishes that the intention of the parties was to create an independent

obligation on the part of the Respondents to the Appellant.

In summary, there is a general principle in both the Roman-Dutch law and English law

that if the principal debtor’s obligation turns out not to exist, or is void, diminished or

discharged, so is the guarantor’s obligation in respect of it. However, parties can by

agreement vary such rights and make the obligation under the agreement between

them primary rather than a secondary obligation.

The Guarantee when constructed as a whole is an independent undertaking given by

the Respondents to the Appellant creating a primary obligation. They undertook to pay

on demand, all monies due according to its terms. This undertaking was not a collateral

undertaking with that of the Company but an independent and primary obligation to

pay on demand. The Respondents are not entitled to rely on any defenses that the

Company would have in discharging its obligations in respect of the principal debt,

namely the overdraft facility.

The learned Judge of the Commercial High Court erred in failing to consider the true

nature of the Guarantee. Instead, he applied the general principle and assumed that

any action on the Guarantee will be barred where an action on the failure to make

payments on the overdraft facility was barred by Section 10 of the Prescription

Ordinance.

Page 17 of 31

The clear terms of the Guarantee, coupled with legal principles and precedents

supports the contention of the Appellant that the Guarantee was a primary obligation

undertaken by the Respondents. This action is not prescribed even though an action

on the overdraft facility is prescribed. It is for this reason that the Appellants, as

guarantors, cannot raise prescription based on the principal debt.

For all the foregoing reasons, I answer issue no. 14 in the affirmative and issue nos. 15

(a), 15 (b), and 17 in the negative. The answer to all the other issues shall remain as in

the judgment of the Commercial High Court.

Accordingly, the judgment of the Commercial High Court dated 07.12.2006 is set aside.

Judgment is entered as prayed for in the plaint dated 06.06.2001.

The learned Commercial High Court Judge is directed to enter decree accordingly.

The Appellant is entitled to costs in both the Commercial High Court and this Court.

Appeal allowed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Vijith K. Malalgoda, PC, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

A. H. M. D. Nawaz, J.

Only two pivotal questions arise in this appeal from the court a quo- the Commercial

High Court.

a) Is the assurance or security document labeled as "Guarantee" a combination

of a guarantee and an indemnity, or is it merely a true guarantee?

Page 18 of 31

b) Does the characterization of the so-called guarantee as either a "true

guarantee" or a "guarantee and indemnity" affect the Respondent-Defendants'

(the guarantors) defense of prescription (time bar) against the principal debt

claimed by the Plaintiff-Appellant (Peoples' Bank) in this case?

The appeal also raises the issue of the residual applicability of Roman-Dutch law to

matters relating to banks and banking. This question must be clarified due to the

transactions between the parties in the case, specifically the Peoples Bank (the lender),

the principal debtor (a company), and the Defendant-Respondents (the Directors of

the company) who guaranteed the loan. The principal debtor did not figure as a

Defendant in this litigation; only the Directors (the guarantors) were sued in the case.

At the outset, I venture to say that though I do not disagree with the essence of the

conclusion of Janak de Silva.,J that the appeal of the People’s Bank must be allowed,

on balance I take the view that some further and different reasons have to be set down

to buttress my own conclusions.

The security document that gave rise to the cause of action, as averred, by the People’s

Bank, is classified as a Guarantee. However, it is well-established in law that the title of

the document will not determine whether it is a guarantee and/or an indemnity.

Neither will the practice of referring to the guarantor and indemnifier simply as a

guarantor, even though this is widespread. For example, there is authority from the

English Court of Appeal that a director’s obligation under a document described as a

guarantee was, by virtue of its wording, a primary obligation payable on demand

without recourse to the defenses available to the underlying obligor and that it was, in

effect, a performance bond -a type of demand guarantee -see Francina Johanna van

der Merwe and Gerrit le Roux van der Merwe v IIG Capital LLC.1

The guarantee in the instant case shares similarities with the guarantee encountered

in the English precedent. In both instances, the principal debtor is a company, while

1 (2007) EWCA Civ 542.

Page 19 of 31

the guarantors are the company's directors. I will discuss this aspect later in this

judgment under the rubric “co-extensiveness.” Some English cases suggest that even

when the contract between a creditor and a principal debtor is void, it may not vitiate

the contract between the creditor and the so-called guarantors of the principal debt.

This is particularly so in the case of a guarantor who is a director of a borrowing

company.2

Quintessential Issue in the appeal

I will further delve into this matter in the course of the judgment. The resolution of the

quintessential issue in this case hinges on whether the guarantee in question is a true

guarantee or a combination of a guarantee and an indemnity, a construct that

frequently appears in banking transactions.

Factual Template

To understand the crux of the legal questions before this court, it is necessary to

narrate the facts. The People’s Bank, the Plaintiff-Appellant in this case, advanced

financial accommodation by way of an overdraft facility to a company called

International Fashions (Pvt) Ltd, in the amount of Rs. 6,500,000. This was a temporary

overdraft, as International Fashions (Pvt) Ltd promised to repay the amount within 180

days. On March 11, 1993, an application was made for the aforesaid temporary

overdraft, which was repayable on demand and secured by a document titled

'’Guarantee'’ provided by five directors of the principal debtor company, International

Fashions (Pvt) Ltd. Additionally, a promissory note dated March 11, 1993, was given to

the People’s Bank as further assurance for the repayment of the overdraft facility.

2 J Steyn, ‘Guarantees: The Co-Extensiveness Principle' (1974) 90 LQR 246, 248-251,explaining Gerrard v James [1925]1 Ch 616 and other cases, but noting that if the result follows because the 'guarantor agreed to be liable regardless of the company's capacity, then the contract is probably better understood as an indemnity; Note that clause 1 (ix)- the ultra vires clause of the guarantee in this case renders the guarantee enforceable notwithstanding the incapacity of the corporate borrower,

Page 20 of 31

The document titled "Guarantee" is central to this case and gives rise to the legal

questions at hand. Before addressing these legal questions, it is important to complete

the narrative of the remaining facts in the case.

The evidence provided by a bank officer who testified in the Commercial High Court,

along with the statement of accounts he produced, clearly establishes that the

principal debtor, International Fashions (Pvt) Ltd, utilized the overdraft facility by

drawing cheques on its current account and thereby increasing its indebtedness.

Though the repayment was required within 180 days from the date of the overdraft,

this obligation was not fulfilled.

Although the application for the overdraft was in writing as stated above, it should be

noted that even in the absence of such an application, the drawing of a cheque or the

issuance of any other form of payment instruction is typically considered a request for

an overdraft.3 Numerous such requests are evident upon examining the statement of

accounts, and the People’s Bank subsequently honored these cheques.

Long before November 29, 1996, the advances made to the principal debtor had been

classified as non-performing advances (NPAs), and as of that date, the liability of the

principal borrower had increased to Rs. 5,980,052.89. The evidence shows that

demands for repayment were made to International Fashions (Pvt) Ltd, but the

company responded with various settlement proposals. Time continued to pass, with

the last demand made to the company and respondent-directors on August 23, 1997.

No action was filed against the principal debtor-the company other this action against

the guarantor-directors which was filed only on June 6, 2001. These dates become

essential as the prescriptive plea raised by the guarantors has to be resolved having

regard to them.

3 See Paget’s Law of Banking, Fifteenth Edition (2018) at p141; also see Lloyds Bank plc v Voller (2000) 2 All ER (Comm.) 978 (CA).

Page 21 of 31

My discussion so far has focused on the principal debtor, which is relevant because the

guarantors (the Defendant-Respondents) are relying on the time bar for repayment by

the principal debtor. In their answer, the Directors (the Defendant-Respondents) raised

the defence of prescription of the principal debt. The crux of their defense is that their

own liability has been extinguished due to the principal debt becoming prescribed.

Though they provided a guarantee, their promise of repayment is incapable of being

acted upon or has become inoperative—so goes the argument of the guarantors.

This argument by the guarantors was accepted by the learned judge of the Commercial

High Court in his judgment dated December 7, 2006. As I mentioned earlier, this

amounts to an argument of co-extensiveness invoked by the providers of the

guarantee. The answer filed by the Defendant-Respondents (the guarantors) in the

Commercial High Court brought to the forefront the question of prescription of the

principal debt, which was also raised as an issue by the Defendant-Respondents.

Thus, the pith and substance of the defense of the Defendant-Respondents has been

a case of co-extensiveness. If the principal debt had become prescribed, it would have

extinguished the co-extensive liability of the guarantors. This argument succeeded in

the Commercial High Court and the action filed by the People’s Bank against the

guarantor-directors failed. The dismissal of the plaint on this ground has given rise to

this appeal.

Though unsaid in the judgment of the Commercial High Court, it is this principle of co-

extensive liability of the sureties that pervaded the spirit of the judgment of the court

a quo. I now turn to that aspect of the matter.

Co-extensiveness

As guarantees are secondary obligations, the general principle is that the guarantor’s

liability is co-extensive with that of the principal debtor. Lord Selbourne said in

Lakeman v. Mountstephen ‘until there is a principal debtor, there can be no suretyship.

Nor can a man guarantee anyone else’s debt unless there is a debt of some other

Page 22 of 31

person to be guaranteed’.4 Thus, if there is no enforceable debt, the liability of the

guarantors becomes nullified.

The principle of co-extensiveness arises from the very nature of a true guarantee. It is

trite law that a guarantee obligation is secondary and accessory to the obligation the

performance of which is guaranteed; the guarantor undertakes that the principal

debtor will perform his (the principal debtor’s) obligation to the creditor and that he

(the guarantor) will be liable to the creditor if the principal debtor does not perform5

In a true guarantee the liability of a surety or a guarantor is so bound up with the

primary obligation of the principal debtor that the obligation of the guarantors is

treated as accessory to the underlying transaction.

Thus, if the principal debt is void or is voidable (and has been rescinded by the

principal), no liability will attach to the guarantor.6 In Censura Forensis Van Leeuwen

says in 1.4.17.3 ‘suretyship is an accessary obligation, by which a person, by means of

a stipulation, pledges his credit on another’s obligation, the principal debtor still

remaining bound.’ All this proves the crucial point that a valid principal obligation is

essential for suretyship; suretyship has no independent existence.

The description above, which outlines the fundamental characteristics of a suretyship

or guarantee, typically applies only to guarantees in the traditional sense. This

perspective may not accurately reflect modern obligations undertaken by guarantors.

In contemporary banking law, it is common to encounter situations where, based on

the true interpretation of the promise, a guarantor provides a primary or independent

undertaking to fulfill the principal debtor’s obligation. This stands apart from

traditional guarantee arrangements, as most standard form guarantees today

effectively combine elements of both a guarantee and an indemnity.

4 (1864) LR 7 HL at 24-25. 5 Moschi v Lep Air Services Ltd (1973) AC 331. HL. 6 Heald v O’Connor (1971) 1 WLR 497.

Page 23 of 31

If this is the case, then the guarantor’s obligation would be to fulfil his own primary

responsibility according to its specific terms, rather than merely ensuring that the

principal debtor’s obligation is met. It is important to emphasize this distinction, as the

guarantors in this case have argued that their obligation constitutes a true guarantee,

which is typically considered secondary and accessory to the underlying transaction.

Is the security document a true guarantee or a guarantee and indemnity?

In particular, this court needs to ascertain whether the document titled “Guarantee”

in this case is a “true” guarantee (creating a secondary obligation) or some form of

indemnity or demand bond (creating a primary obligation). As a matter of English Law

and Roman – Dutch law, the form they take makes a difference and the significance of

the difference between a guarantee and an indemnity is that in the case of indemnities

the guarantor’s promise; (a) will be enforceable whether or not the principal debtor’s

obligation is enforceable; and (b) will not give rise to a true contract of guarantee,

because the guarantor will have a primary rather than a secondary liability to the

creditor.7

As I stated earlier, ascertaining the nature of the promise in any given case depends

upon the true construction of the actual words in which the promise is expressed.

Regard must be had both to the words of the promise and the context in which it was

given. In each case, the ultimate question is whether the person giving the promise has

given an independent undertaking to perform the principal debtor’s obligation,

regardless of whether that obligation has ever been or remains valid and enforceable

as between the creditor and the principal debtor.

Before determining the nature of the document titled "Guarantee", I will now proceed

to address the guarantors' argument that the prescription of the principal debt has

extinguished their liability. According to their claim, their obligation was accessory to

7 Paget’s Law of Banking, 15th edition at p 511

Page 24 of 31

the underlying principal debt, and thus, its expiration should also terminate their

liability.

The key issue is whether the principal debt was time-barred at the time the case was

brought against the guarantors. In the case before the Commercial High Court, the

guarantors’ stance was that since the principal debt was barred by prescription, it

could not be recovered in court.

Consequently, they contended that the suretyship or guarantee contract with the

Defendant-Respondents should be deemed terminated. The critical question,

therefore, is whether the principal debt was indeed time-barred when the legal action

was initiated against the guarantors.

Prescription of the principal debt

It must be acknowledged that the learned Commercial High Court judge's finding that

the principal debt was prescribed at the time of the institution of the action cannot be

faulted. However, the learned judge miscalculated the commencement of the

prescriptive period by treating the last date of payment by the principal debtor as the

starting point.

The challenge before this court is against the further conclusion of the learned

Commercial High Court judge that, due to the invalidity or unenforceability of the

principal debt because of the time bar, the liability of the guarantors has ended. Has

the liability of the guarantors indeed terminated due to the successful running of

prescription against the principal debt?

I would proceed to answer this question after shedding a few thoughts on the facts

relating to the time bar of the principal debt. As the evidence clearly shows, the last

payment by the principal debtor seems to have been recorded on 29.11.1996. On this

particular day, the statement of accounts shows the overdrawn amount as Rs.

5,980,052.89.

Page 25 of 31

The People’s bank sent a letter of demand to both the principal debtor and the

guarantors on 11.08.1997. Given that the repayment of the temporary overdraft was

contingent upon a demand, the limitation period in respect of a claim for repayment

of an overdraft would commence from the date on which the demand for repayment

is made and not from the date the overdraft was granted. It has to be remembered

that a contrary view was taken by the English Court of Appeal in Parr’s Banking Co. Ltd

v. Yates8, where a claim against a guarantor was held to be time-barred in respect of

advances made more than 6 years before the issue of the writ. Paget’s Law of Banking

lays down that in modern banking practice, overdrafts are treated as repayable on

demand, and it is thought that Parr’s case does not represent the law today.9

The document titled "Application for a Temporary Overdraft" includes an agreement

to repay the amounts on demand. As such, the three-year prescriptive period for

overdrafts in this case would commence from the date of the demand, specifically

11.08.1997, rather than from 29.11.1996, which reflects the date of the last overdrawn

balance. Hence, the bank’s claim against the principal debtor in respect of the

outstanding amount on the overdraft facility would be time-barred or prescribed on

11.08.2000. The People’s bank in the case never instituted an action against the

principal debtor as the principal debt had become prescribed.

Could this prescription of the principal debt extinguish the obligation of the guarantors

and release them from their liability?

It repays attention that the action against the guarantors was instituted on 06.06.2001

– nearly 10 months after the principal debt had become time-barred. The question

arises as to which law would govern the contract of guarantee on which the guarantors

were sued: English law or Roman-Dutch law? Would the governing law allow the

guarantors to raise the defence of time-bar of the principal debt?

8 (1898) 2 QB 460, CA 9 Pagets Law of Banking, 15th edition at p129

Page 26 of 31

Although banking law in Sri Lanka is governed by English law, the law of guarantees is

governed by Roman-Dutch law. Consequently, a guarantor in Sri Lanka is entitled to

certain defenses or privileges unless they have been expressly renounced. I had the

occasion to analyze the defenses or privileges in the case of Sri Lanka insurance

Corporation Ltd v. the Attorney General10 in the Court of Appeal.

While English law does not substantially differ from Roman-Dutch law regarding the

benefits accorded to sureties, it is important to remember that Roman-Dutch law

applies to contracts of guarantee.

I have previously alluded to the legal position under English law on unenforceability of

principal debt.11 English law suggests that if the debt becomes extinguished and

unenforceable, it goes without saying that since there is no debt to be guaranteed, the

lability of a true guarantor would be at an end. What is the position of an indemnity

under English law? The obligation to repay the debt to the creditor survives, provided

that the promise to pay is embodied in an indemnity. What, then, is the position in

Roman-Dutch Law?

Can the guarantor in a transaction governed by Roman-Dutch law use the prescription

of the principal debt as a peremptory defence in a suit brought against him by the

creditor? It must be recalled that the guarantors contended that their obligation was

collateral and accessory, asserting it constituted a true guarantee secondary to the

principal debt contract. This point had been contentious under Roman-Dutch law.12

In Jans v Nedcor Bank Ltd13 the South African Supreme Court of Appeal remarked

that it wanted to settle an issue 'which ha[d] been the subject of debate for centuries'

(at 649). The question that 'occupied the minds of jurists for a long time' (at 651) was

whether ‘an interruption or delay in the running of prescription in favour of the

10 CA / LA / 50 / 2007 (decided on 02.08.2019) 11 See ibid fn 7. 12 See Christopher Forsyth, ‘Prescription, Suretyship and the Unwelcome Revival of Correality’ (1999) 11 S Afr Mercantile LJ 385; C.F. Forsyth, ‘Suretyship and Prescription; A New Frontier’ (1984) 101 S African LJ 237. 13 2003 (6) SA 646 (SCA).

Page 27 of 31

principal debtor interrupted [or delayed] the running of prescription in favour of a

surety'(at 649). After an exhaustive analysis of the fundamental principles applicable

to suretyship the court concluded that it did (at 663). The South African Supreme Court

concluded that sureties enjoy the benefit of raising defences which are available to the

principal debtor.

Scott JA stated (at 661):

' By its very nature a contract of suretyship is burdensome. The surety undertakes

responsibility for the fulfilment of another's obligation. No doubt for this reason the

law affords protection to a surety in a number of different ways. At common law, for

example, a surety will be released if the creditor does something in his dealings with

the principal debtor which has the effect of prejudicing the surety... In order to be valid,

contracts of suretyship must now also be embodied in a written document signed

by or on behalf of the surety .. But a balance must be struck. Sureties do not assume

the obligations of others against their wills, but with their free consent. Once having

done so they cannot expect to be entitled simply to disabuse their minds of the fortunes

of the principal debtor's liability and then require the law to protect them against their

ignorance. If prescription in favour of the principal debtor is delayed or interrupted

without their knowledge, they generally have themselves to blame.

In Eley (formally Memmel) v Lynn & Main Inc14 the South African Supreme Court of

Appeal was called upon to decide whether a claim against a surety who had bound

herself as surety in respect of a debt that was confirmed and reinforced by a judgment

against the principal debtor, prescribed after three years, or after 30 years as

contemplated by the Prescription Act 68 of 1969. (In terms of section 11(a)(ii) of the

Prescription Act, the period of prescription in respect of any judgment debt' is 30 years,

whereas, under section 11(d), it is three years in respect of 'any other debt'.)

14 2008 (2) SA 150 (SCA).

Page 28 of 31

The surety sought to distinguish the decision in Jans on the basis that Jans concerned

the interruption or delay in the running of prescription and not directly whether a

judgment against the principal debtor resulted in prescription against the surety being

extended to 30 years, in line with section 11(a)(ii) of the Prescription Act. Mthiyane JA

rejected this distinction that the surety sought to draw as 'illusory' and affirmed that

Jans 'set . .] out the fundamental principles applicable to suretyship contracts in

general and [was] not confined to the effect of the interruption of the running of

prescription against the principal debtor' (at 154).

The judge remarked that this was particularly clear from the judgment in Jans where

Scott JA observed that to permit the claim against the surety to prescribe before the

claim against the principal debtor would be subversive of the whole contract of

suretyship (Jans at 662).

Mthiyane JA thus concluded that the contention that the claim against the surety had

prescribed after three years fell to be rejected.

Thus, the Roman-Dutch law position as clearly spelled out above makes it patently

clear that it is in regard to true guarantees that the above proposition applies.

That finally brings us to the quintessential issue to which category of guarantees that

the security instrument provided by the defendant- respondents belongs. I have

already adumbrated the key differences between true guarantees and indemnities.

The tests or guidelines which delineate the distinctions between the two categories

have been set out in the course of this judgment.

In a nutshell it is not a matter of label to be attached but a question of substance of

the obligations. It is the obligation that the guarantors undertook in the document

titled the guarantee a primary, independent obligation. Upon a careful perusal of the

component parts of the document, I take the view that the document in question

created a primary, independent obligation, so that the principal debtor’s defenses are

unavailable to the guarantors.

Page 29 of 31

The document in question partakes of the characteristics of a combination of a

guarantee and indemnity which has assumed primacy in standard guarantee

documents. Bearing in mind that the task is to identify the nature of the obligations

assumed by the guarantors under the guarantee, the method of construction of the

wording and context of the bond would revolve around the following.

Clauses or features in the guarantee that render the obligation enforceable as an

indemnity

Clause 1 (ix) which is generally referred to as the ultra vires clause makes it clear that

the guarantors have undertaken to accept primary liability as principal debtor for any

sums which cannot be recovered from the company. The clause puts beyond doubt

that the guarantor’s liability is not affected by the irregular exercise of borrowing

powers of the company or even when the indebtedness becomes void or

unenforceable by the bank. No legal limitation or lack of contractual capacity on the

part of the principal debtor exculpates or exonerates the guarantors from liability and

thus, the guarantors have assumed primary liability for all monies they guaranteed

under the document of assurance.

Waiver of Legal Privileges

The law relating to personal guarantees or suretyship is Roman-Dutch Law which

affords several privileges and defences to sureties, such as,

(i) the beneficium ordinis seu excussionis, whereby the surety when sued may

call upon the creditor to first proceed against the principal debtor and to come against

him only if the debtor is unable to pay or satisfy the judgment debt in full.

(ii) the beneficium divisionis, whereby when several persons are sureties for the same

debt, each of them, may when sued for the whole amount, require the creditor to

divide his claim and sue the other co-sureties as well, each for his share pro rata insofar

as the others are not insolvent.

Page 30 of 31

(iii) the beneficium cedendarum actionum, whereby if a surety pays the creditor the

debt due, he is entitled to demand from the creditor a cession of action not only as

against the principal debtor but also against all other persons who may be liable.15

The defense Beneficium ordinis seu excussionis or simply “benefit of excussion” allows

a surety to resist payment to a creditor by insisting that the creditor must first attempt

to collect the debt from the principal debtor.

The benefit is procedural in that the surety could raise this defence when litigation is

instituted, with the result that the benefit then delays payment by insisting that the

creditor must follow a certain procedure-he must excuss the principal debtor before

seeking to recover the outstanding debt from the surety. Thus, it is a dilatory plea, not

a peremptory defence.

Although the benefit of excussion, one of the ancient protections afforded to sureties

under Justinian's legislation (Caney's The Law of Suretyship in South Africa, 5th ed., by

CF Forsyth & JT Pretorius (2002), 15ff), is still recognized, sureties often waive or tacitly

renounce this benefit by assuming liability as "surety and co-principal debtor."

These special defenses protected sureties against possible collusion between the

debtor and the creditor. By way of clause 14, the guarantors have renounced all these

privileges and the effect of all this renders each of the guarantors liable in all respects

as principal debtors jointly and severally, which includes the liability to be sued before

recourse is had against the debtor.

Consequently, I conclude that the guarantors have bound themselves as primary

debtors and not as true guarantors who principally assume secondary liability.

I have already alluded to an additional test namely - if the guarantors demonstrate

personal interest in the borrowing of the corporate entity, the guarantors must be

15 See Wijewardene v Jayawardene (1917) 19 N.L.R 449.

Page 31 of 31

treated as having undertaken primary liability.16 In the circumstances I entertain no

doubt that there was no impediment to the People’s Bank instituting this action against

the guarantors and the prescription of the principal debt cannot be invoked by the

guarantors when they have assumed obligations under an indemnity or a combination

of guarantee and indemnity. Both English law and Roman-Dutch law converge

harmoniously on indemnities and Caney’s the Law of Suretyship describes such a

situation as undertaking liability as surety and co-principal debtor.17

The indemnities that the guarantors undertook in the deed are “continuing

obligations” and that gives an indication that they survive the termination of the

principal debt even on prescription, as is evident on the facts.

Thus, one sees that any link between the liability under the overdraft agreement and

liability under the guarantee has been severed. Thus, I take the view that even if

People’s Bank is unable to enforce the overdraft agreement, the guarantee and

indemnity remain enforceable. The combination of all these matters demonstrates a

clear and unanswerable case that the obligations of the guarantors under the

guarantee are primary, separate and independent.

For the foregoing reasons, I proceed to set aside the judgment of the Commercial High

Court dated 07.12.2006 and order that the judgment is entered as prayed for in the

plaint dated 06.06.2001. I direct the learned Commercial High Court Judge to enter

decree in accordance with this judgment.

The appeal is thus allowed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

16 Ibid fn1. 17 See Caney’s the Law of Suretyship, 5th Edition at page 55.