Page 1 of 11

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application under and in terms of Articles 17 and 126 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Hetti Arachchige Thisaru Tharinda, No. 694/1/A, Waduwegama, Malwana.

PETITIONER SC/FR Application 241/2019

Vs.

1. Captain Gihan Perera

General Sir John Kotelawala Defence Academy, Kandawala Road, Rathmalana. 2. Lt. Commander Dissanayake,

Squadron Commander, General Sir John Kotelawala Defence University, Kandawala Road, Rathmalana. 3. Brigadier Chandra Jayaweera,

Dean, Faculty of Defence and Strategic Studies, General Sir John Kotelawala Defence University, Kandawala Road, Rathmalana. 4. General Sir John Kotelawala Defence

University, Kandawala Road, Rathmalana. 5. Air Vice Marshal Sagara Kotakadeniya,

Vice Chancellor, General Sir John Kotelawala Defence University,

Page 2 of 11

Kandawala Road, Rathmalana. 6. Lt. Colonel P. S. Subath Sanjeewa,

Registrar, Kotelawala Defence Academy. 7. Hon. Attorney General,

Attornery General’s Department, Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

Before: P. Padman Surasena J.

Sobhitha Rajakaruna J.

M. Sampath K. B. Wijeratne J.

Counsel: Pulasthi Hewamanne with Linuri Munasinghe for the Petitioner.

Shavindra Fernando, PC with Nimesha Wanaguru for the 1st and 2nd Respondents.

Ganga Wakista Arachchi, DSG for the 7th Respondent.

Written Submissions: Petitioner - 25.11.2021

1st Respondent - 25.05.2022

2nd Respondent - 25.05.2022

7th Responsent - 04.05.2023

Argued on: 14.02.2025

Decided on: 03.07.2025

Page 3 of 11

Sobhitha Rajakaruna J.

The Petitioner claims that the purported assault and torture inflicted by one or more

officers of the General Sir John Kotelawala Defence University (‘KDU’) violates his

fundamental rights guaranteed under the Constitution. The Petitioner asserts that the

alleged physical assault, torture and ill-treatment are violative of Article 11 and the

discriminatory treatment because of such circumstances is in violation of Article 12(1) of

the Constitution. Among other reliefs sought, the Petitioner seeks compensation for the

injuries sustained and loss of future opportunities.

On 28.04.2021, the learned Counsel for the Petitioner informed this Court that the

Petitioner is willing to confine his Application to the alleged violations under Article 11

only against the 1st and 2nd Respondents. This Court granted leave to proceed on the same

date under Article 11 only against the 1st and 2nd Respondents.

Summary of the facts narrated by the Petitioner.

At the time material to the instant Application, the Petitioner was an Officer Cadet to

serve in the Sri Lanka Army and for enlistment as an Officer Cadet of the KDU. The

Petitioner states that he was unemployed when he filed this Application.

On 28.07.2017, the Petitioner participated in a routine physical training (‘PT’) session at

KDU with his troop, ‘Charlie.’ During the session, the Physical Training Instructor

directed him to perform push-ups using one hand, which he allegedly attempted for the

first time. Upon the instructions of the Troop Commander of the ‘Golf’ Troop, the

Petitioner was ordered to continue with the exercise regardless of the Petitioner

complaining of discomfort. While doing so, the Petitioner dislocated his left shoulder,

leading to a seven-day hospitalization at the Military Hospital. As a result, he has been

assigned to sedentary duties.

The Petitioner contends that, despite being assigned sedentary duties, he was compelled

to participate in PT sessions after resuming work on 05.08.2017. He claims that Flight

Lieutenant Jude Ranasinghe who is the Troop Commander of ‘Charlie’ Troop, ordered

him from time to time to attend PT, resulting in his shoulder dislocating two or three

additional times. The Petitioner further alleges that around December 2017, Jude

Ranasinghe threatened to demote him to a junior batch if he failed to be reclassified as

physically fit.

Page 4 of 11

The Petitioner affirms in his affidavit annexed to his Petition that the 1st Respondent on

21.02.2019 flapped his beret and questioned him as to how he met the Dean of the Faculty

of Management without keeping the 1st Respondent informed. Thereafter, on 22.02.2019,

the 1st Respondent asked the Petitioner to give a written explanation for failing to follow

the chain of command. Later that same day, the 1st Respondent ordered the Petitioner to

lie down and stay in a dip position using the injured hand, during which the 1st Respondent

allegedly struck the Petitioner’s thigh area several times with what is believed to be a pace

stick. The Petitioner states that due to severe pain, he collapsed and his shoulder painfully

subluxated again.

On 23.02.2019, the Petitioner reportedly experienced a blackout and collapsed onto the

road leading to the parade grounds. The Petitioner states that following a referral from the

Army Hospital, he was taken to the Judicial Medical Officer on 26.02.2019. In the

meantime, on 27.02.2019, the Petitioner has made a complaint to the Human Rights

Commission. As a subsequent development, the Petitioner has been served with a letter,

marked ‘P10’, notifying him of his discharge from the KDU and service with effect from

07.05.2019. The Petitioner contends that his discharge was arbitrary, capricious and

malicious, noting that other Cadet Officers who sustained injuries during the course were

permitted to continue their degree programs.

Statements of Objection of the 1st and 2nd Respondents.

The 1st Respondent, who was the Petitioner’s Troop Commander, acknowledges that he

was informed of the Petitioner’s medical condition and was aware of the Medical Boards

the Petitioner had attended. Despite knowing that the Petitioner was medically unfit and

classified under the ‘Sedentary Duties’ category, the 1st Respondent admits he did not

exempt the Petitioner from participating in parades, which were mandatory for all Officer

Cadets.

The 1st Respondent refutes allegations that the Petitioner was forced to participate in PT,

emphasizing that Officer Cadets at KDU, including those engaged in academic activities,

are subject to strict military discipline standards. The 1st Respondent states that the

Petitioner consistently disregarded the rules and regulations of KDU, acting disobediently

despite repeated warnings. The 1st Respondent contends that the Petitioner’s disobedient

Page 5 of 11

behavior and breaches of discipline occurred on multiple occasions and that the Petitioner

is now attempting to portray clean hands upon an injury caused to him.

Three affidavits affirmed by T. Viraj Madumal Fernando, D. Prabath Dilhara Alwis and

T. M. A. Dilshan Kumara Rathnayake, are annexed to his Statement of Objections. The

1st Respondent asserts that these affidavits corroborate the facts he presented to this Court.

T. Viraj Madumal Fernando, an Officer Cadet, was receiving treatment at the Army

Hospital (from 07.02.2019 to 28.02.2019), during the period the Petitioner was an in-house

patient. He affirms in his affidavit that the Petitioner threatened to seek revenge against

the 1st Respondent. Additionally, T. M. A. Dilshan Kumara Rathnayake, another

inpatient during a similar period, stated in his affidavit that the Petitioner asked him to

apply force to his thigh to create marks, purportedly to display to those investigating the

Petitioner’s health condition.

The 2nd Respondent claims to have acted responsibly and provided appropriate care and

attention to the Petitioner’s needs whenever necessary. The 2nd Respondent alleges that

the Petitioner consistently disregarded the chain of command and violated the rules and

regulations governing Officer Cadets. He further asserts that the Petitioner overlooked his

duty to follow the command of superior officers, which is an obligation after enlisting in

the Military to maintain impeccable disciplinary standards.

In addition to the above, it is noted that both the 1st and 2nd Respondents have stated that

neither Officers nor Cadet Officers carry ‘pace sticks,’ which are used for measuring

distances and similar purposes, except for drill instructors who hold ranks below that of

an officer

Motion filed on behalf of the 4th Respondent- KDU

The 4th Respondent, filing the motion dated 05.08.2019, informs this Court that;

i. the Petitioner, by letter marked ‘4R2’, sought permission to discharge himself

from the service based on his medical unfitness.

ii. subsequently, the Petitioner was presented before a medical board by which his

disability was assessed as 20% (Medical Board Proceedings marked ‘4R1’ is

annexed thereto).

Page 6 of 11

iii. thus, a decision was taken to discharge the Petitioner from the Army with effect

from 07.05.2019 and also to pay an amount of compensation, subject to the

submission of the required documents by the Petitioner.

iv. the Petitioner failed 07/10 modules in semester one, 06/11 in the second

semester and all modules in the third semester (Documents marked ‘4R3A’ to

‘4R3D’ are annexed thereto).

The stand taken by the Attorney General

Written submissions have been submitted on behalf of the Attorney General in addition

to the oral submissions presented by the learned Deputy Solicitor General (‘DSG’) during

the hearing of the instant Application. The Attorney General, based on the circumstances

of this case, has taken the view that the Petitioner’s application is misconceived in law and

there is no basis on which the Petitioner can seek redress in terms of a violation of Article

11 against the 1st and 2nd Respondents.

It is stated that the Petitioner had failed to submit the detailed medical report pursuant to

the Medico-Legal Examination Form marked ‘P8’. A query has been raised regarding how

the Petitioner, still an Officer Cadet as of 23.02.2019, came into contact with the Chief

Judicial Medical Officer of the National Hospital of Colombo to contrive the said ‘P8’.

Further, it is claimed that neither the Petition nor the Counter Affidavit contains any

evidence disputing the medical findings related to the Petitioner’s ‘recurrent left shoulder

dislocation,’ which led to his discharge. The 1st Respondent, as per the document marked

‘1R3’, has assumed duties at the KDU only on 02.02.2018 and this was after the Petitioner

suffered the injuries of the dislocation of the shoulder, on 28.07.2017.

The learned DSG submits that the Petitioner is bound to follow the required chain of

command and the relevant code of conduct as described in the document marked ‘P2’.

However, the Petitioner was found to have violated the chain of command and has

disobeyed the code of conduct on several occasions. Moreover, it is argued that the

Petitioner intentionally orchestrated the incident to initiate this legal action, aiming to

secure a position as a day scholar, fully aware that he faced discharge from the Army on

Page 7 of 11

medical grounds. The Attorney General has emphasized the following provisions of

Clause 8 in the Agreement marked ‘P2’ to support his submissions:

“That the Republic or any of its Officers or employees or the University or any of its Officers

or employees shall not be liable to pay any damages or compensation whatsoever to the Officer

Cadet/ Officer or to the Parent/Guardian or to any other person whomsoever for

himself/herself for and on behalf of the Officer Cadet/Officer or for and on behalf of the

Parent/Guardian in consequence of, the death of or any injury to, the Officer Cadet/ Officer

caused in the course, and within the scope, of his/her training at the University or of his/her

service training.”

Alleged Violation of Article 11 of the Constitution

The Supreme Court has constantly observed that the burden of proof in infringement of

fundamental rights under Article 11 of the Constitution is on the Petitioner. In the case of

Channa Pieris and Others v. Attorney General and Others (Ratawesi Peramuna Case) (1994) 1

Sri L. R. 1, Amerasinghe J. has held that ‘having regard to the nature and gravity of the

issue, a high degree of certainty is required before the balance of probability might be said

to tilt in favour of a Petitioner endeavouring to discharge his burden of proving that he

was subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment’. Giving due

reference even to the said case of Channa Peiris, Shirani Bandaranayake J. in Nandasena

vs. Chandradasa, O.I.C. Police Stattion, Hiniduma and Others (2006) 1 Sri L. R. 207 decided

that ‘when there is an allegation based on violation of fundamental rights guaranteed in

terms of Article 11 of the Constitution, it would be necessary for the Petitioner to prove

his position by way of medical evidence and/or by way of affidavits and for such purpose

it would be essential for the Petitioner to bring forward such documents with a high degree

of certainty for the purpose of discharging his burden’. Shiranee Thilakawardane J., in

Herath Mudiyanselage Yohan Indika Herath v. Ajith, Police Constable, Police Station,

Dummalasuriya SC/ FR/ 555/2009 SC Minutes of 18.02.2014 referencing the Torture Act

No. 22 of 1994, which aligns with Article 1 of the Torture Convention and citing the

precedent set by the two aforementioned cases, stressed the need for cogent and strong

evidence in order to establish the alleged torture that constitutes a breach of fundamental

rights.

The purported forensic evidence for torture submitted by the Petitioner is only a ‘Police

Copy’ of a Medico-Legal Examination form marked ‘P8’ signed by the Chief Judicial

Page 8 of 11

Medical Officer of the Institute of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology, Colombo. In the

cage to describe the internal injuries, it is written - “left shoulder dislocation with swollen left

upper arm” whereas in the cage under ‘others’ it is stated that - “evidence of torture and

intentional violence pro….”. In the clinical notes annexed to the said form, the Chief Judicial

Medical Officer has set down:

“Physical torture by one senior army officer called Cpt.Perera on several occasions. There is

evidence of physical injuries. The patient is psychologically disturbed and referred to forensic

psychiatrist at 2 pm today at IFMJ. He was referred to police post of NHSL and MLEF No.

1372/19 issued. I will attend to medico legal issues.”

Upon a careful perusal of the said document, marked ‘P8’ dated (26.02.2019), and its

accompanying annexure, it appears that the said Chief Judicial Medical Officer (at 8.20

am) or the officers of the Police post have recorded in the said clinical notes the

information solely conveyed to him by the Petitioner. Additionally, it is noted that no

evidence has been provided to demonstrate that the Chief Judicial Medical Officer or any

other medical officer from the National Hospital of Colombo issued a report based on a

physical examination of the Petitioner. Additionally, as pointed out by the learned DSG,

a reasonable doubt arises as to how the Petitioner was sent to the National Hospital of

Colombo while he was warded in ward 5 of the Army Hospital. No adequate material is

available to dispel such doubt.

The ‘internal injury’ listed in the said Medico-Legal Examination Form (‘P8’) issued on

26.02.2019 is “left shoulder dislocation with swollen left upper arm.” Anyhow, according to the

‘Medical Board Proceedings- All Ranks’ (‘4R1’), the date of the origin of the ‘recurrent left

shoulder dislocation’ was on 28.07.2017. Even the Petitioner's own document, marked

‘P4’, reveals that the recommendations were made to arrange a sedentary duty category

for the Petitioner on 04.08.2017 due to such dislocation. Lt. Meemamaduma, was

reportedly the Troop Commander during that time and against him, only the Petitioner

alleges that continued physical training was ordered despite his dislocation of the left

shoulder. It is noted that the said Lt. Meemamaduma has not been made a party in the

instant Application. Similarly, the Troop Commander (Charlie), Flt. Lt. Jude Ranasinghe,

whom the Petitioner claims harassed and ill-treated him until around December 2017, has

also not been named as a Respondent by the Petitioner. Significantly, the Petitioner has

filed the instant Application on 07.06.2019.

Page 9 of 11

The Petitioners’ contention is that he filed a complaint with the Human Rights

Commission on 27.02.2019. Since the recurrent dislocation was first documented in 2017,

it can be assumed that the Petitioner has made an application to the Human Rights

Commission prior to filing the instant Case, on the alleged assault by the 1st Respondent

using a pace stick or on the blackout claimed by the Petitioner. However, no medical

reasoning was given for such a blackout for this Court to assess that. In the affidavit, under

a specific sub-heading, the Petitioner has affirmed that the 1st Respondent repeatedly struck

his thigh area with what he believes was a pace stick. The website1 of The Army of

Australia (another Commonwealth country) illustrates that the pace stick is used to

measure the correct length of pace, and that the correct pace length is necessary not only

for ceremonial purposes, but also to reduce fatigue on long marches and set the standard

of accuracy required of soldiers.

Based on the foregoing, I take the view that no sufficient forensic evidence with a high

level of certainty has been submitted by the Petitioner to meet the required burden of proof

as mentioned in the aforesaid judgements upon the alleged violation of fundamental rights

under Article 11 of the Constitution.

It seems that the alleged assault occurred in the coffee room, located adjacent to the Dean’s

office. The Respondents state that the coffee room, part of the Faculty of Defence and

Strategic Studies office, is a communal space open to all and situated next to the Dean’s

office. The Petitioner relies on the following judgements to establish the purported torture;

1. Kandwalage Don Samantha Perera v. Officer-in-Charge, Police Station, Hettipola, SC FR

296/2014 SC Minutes 16th June 2020; 2. Pitakandalage Gamini Jayasinghe v. P.C.

Samarawickrama SC Application 157/91 SC Minutes 12.01.1994; 3. Sudath Silva v

Kodituwakku (1987) 2 Sri LR 119; 4. Deshapriya v. Captain Weerakoon. Commanding

Officer, Sri Lanka Navy Ship “Gemunu” and Others (2003) 2 Sri LR 99; 5. Ratnasiri and

Another v. Devesurendran Inspector of Police Slave Island and Others (1994) 3 Sri LR 127 and

6. Sriyani Silva v. Iddamalgoda, Officer-in-Charge, Police Station Paiyagala and Others (2003)

2 Sri LR 6. The violations of rights under Article 11 discussed in those cases were allegedly

committed by State law enforcement officers, including personnel of defence services.

After carefully reviewing the precedents cited by the Petitioner in the above cases, I

conclude that those opinions do not hinder the perspective I have adopted in this

1 <https://www.army.gov.au/about-us/history-and-research/traditions/pace-stick>

Page 10 of 11

Judgement. These cases all centred on complaints of physical violence by the respective

officers who were engaged in law enforcement, defence services or prison services,

including duties upon suspects under arrest.

In contrast, the instant Application concerns allegations of torture during PT which can

be assumed as part of military training. This does not imply that the fundamental rights

cannot be infringed through torture during PT conducted for officer cadets of the Army or

any other military forces. The prohibition of torture and other forms of ill-treatment

derives from the Geneva Conventions of 1949, their Additional Protocols of 1977, the

Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or

Punishment, and other international instruments. The term ‘torture’ referred to in Article

1 of the said Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading

Treatment or Punishment (Adopted on 10.12.1984) could be structured as follows;

1. Any act by which severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is inflicted

on a person;

2. The act must be intentionally inflicted;

3. The act must be instrumental for such purposes as:

a) obtaining from the individual or a third person information or a

confession, or

(b) punishing him/her for an act he/she or a third person has

committed or is suspected of having committed, or

(c) intimidating him/her or a third person, or

(d) coercing him/her or a third person, or

(e) for any reason based on discrimination of any kind.

What distinguishes torture from other forms of ill-treatment, which include

other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment and outrages upon personal

dignity, is the third–purposive – aspect.

It is widely recognized that the persons undergoing military training would invariably have

to face rigorous training which would require them to bear-up any physical or mental pain

under difficult conditions. That is normal and a pre-requisite of such training. If such

rigorous training is to be caught up under torture or other cruel or inhuman or degrading

treatment or punishment, no such rigorous military training could ever be given to the

members of the armed forces. However, the circumstances of this Case, in my view, do

Page 11 of 11

not permit me to classify the alleged assault with a pace stick on or around 22.02.2019 as

an act of torture within the scope of the aforementioned Convention and our domestic

law. Additionally, based on the special circumstances of this Case the recurrent dislocation

of the Petitioner’s left shoulder cannot be linked with the alleged acts leading to a violation

under Article 11. Moreover, the Petitioner has failed to provide compelling evidence

demonstrating that severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, was deliberately

inflicted by the 1st and 2nd Respondents for the purposes outlined in Article 1 of the

referenced Convention

In light of the above, I am not convinced that Petitioner’s fundamental rights under Article

11 have been infringed due to the alleged conduct of the 1st and 2nd Respondents, and

accordingly, I proceed to dismiss the instant Application without cost.

Judge of the Supreme Court

P. Padman Surasena J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

M. Sampath K. B. Wijeratne J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court