P a g e 1 | 17

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Appeal

from the Judgment dated 26/10/2018 in

Appeal No. CP/HCCA/KANDY/110A/2015

(F) in terms of Section 5C (1) of the Act No.

54 of 2006.

1. Karapperu Wijethunga Rajapaksha

Mudiyanselage Dhammika Kumara Wijethunga

Appearing by his Power of Attorney,

Kapilasena Wijethunga of

Dorakumbura,

Dunkolawatta.

2. Dugganna Wijeratna Wasala Mudiyanse

Ralahammilage Madewatta Wallawewe

Dammantha Kumari Dehigama of

Dorakumbura,

Dunkolawatta.

Plaintiffs

SC Appeal No: 135/2019 SC/HC(CA)/LA No. 422/2018 CP/HCCA/Kandy Case No. 110/2015 (FA) DC Matale No. L/5714/2003 Vs.

Gamadikari Mudiyanselage Undiyagedera Ranjith Ariyarathna of

No. 91, Viduhala Mawatha,

Aluvihara, Matale.

Defendant

AND BETWEEN

P a g e 2 | 17

Gamadikari Mudiyanselage

Undiyagedera Ranjith Ariyarathna of No. 91, Viduhala Mawatha,

Aluvihara, Matale.

Defendant-Appellant

Vs.

1. Karapperu Wijethunga Rajapaksha

Mudiyanselage Dhammika Kumara

Wijethunga

Appearing by his Power of Attorney,

Kapilasena Wijethunga of

Dorakumbura, Dunkolawatta.

2. Dugganna Wijeratna Wasala Mudiyanse

Ralahammilage Madewatta Wallawewe Dammantha Kumari Dehigama of

Dorakumbura, Dunkolawatta.

Plaintiff-Respondents

AND NOW BETWEEN

Gamadikari Mudiyanselage Undiyagedera Ranjith Ariyarathna of

No. 91, Viduhala Mawatha,

Aluvihara, Matale.

Defendant-Appellant-

Petitioner-Appellant

Vs.

1. Karapperu Wijethunga Rajapaksha

Mudiyanselage Dhammika Kumara

Wijethunga of

Dorakumbura, Dunkolawatta.

P a g e 3 | 17

2. Dugganna Wijeratna Wasala Mudiyanse

Ralahammilage Madewatta Wallawewe

Dammantha Kumari Dehigama of

Dorakumbura, Dunkolawatta.

Plaintiff-Respondent- Respondent-Respondents

In the matter of an application for Appeal

from the Judgment dated 26/10/2018 in

Appeal No. CP/HCCA/KANDY/110A/2015 (F) in terms of Section 5C (1) of the Act No.

54 of 2006.

1. Karapperu Wijethunga Rajapaksha

Mudiyanselage Dhammika Kumara

Wijethunga

Appearing by his Power of Attorney, Kapilasena Wijethunga of

Dorakumbura, Dunkolawatta.

2. Dugganna Wijeratna Wasala Mudiyanse

Ralahammilage Madewatta Wallawewe

Dammantha Kumari Dehigama of

Dorakumbura, Dunkolawatta.

Plaintiffs

SC Appeal No: 149/2019 SC/HC(CA)/LA No. 425/2018 CP/HCCA/Kandy Case No. 110A/2015 (FA) DC Matale No. L/5714/2003

P a g e 4 | 17

Vs.

Gamadikari Mudiyanselage

Undiyagedera Ranjith Ariyarathna of

No. 91, Viduhala Mawatha,

Aluvihara, Matale.

Defendant

AND BETWEEN

1. Karapperu Wijethunga Rajapaksha

Mudiyanselage Dhammika Kumara

Wijethunga of

Dorakumbura,

Dunkolawatta.

2. Dugganna Wijeratna Wasala Mudiyanse

Ralahammilage Madewatta Wallawewe

Dammantha Kumari Dehigama of

Dorakumbura, Dunkolawatta.

Plaintiff-Appellants

Vs.

Gamadikari Mudiyanselage

Undiyagedera Ranjith Ariyarathna of No. 91, Viduhala Mawatha,

Aluvihara, Matale.

Defendant-Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

P a g e 5 | 17

Gamadikari Mudiyanselage

Undiyagedera Ranjith Ariyarathna of No. 91, Viduhala Mawatha,

Aluvihara, Matale.

Defendant-Respondent-Petitioner

Vs.

1. Karapperu Wijethunga Rajapaksha

Mudiyanselage Dhammika Kumara

Wijethunga of

Dorakumbura, Dunkolawatta.

2. Dugganna Wijeratna Wasala Mudiyanse

Ralahammilage Madewatta Wallawewe

Dammantha Kumari Dehigama of

Dorakumbura, Dunkolawatta.

Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondents

Before: Justice A.H.M.D. Nawaz

Justice A.L. Shiran Gooneratne

Justice Mahinda Samayawardhena

Counsel: Hemasiri Withanachchi for the Defendant-Respondent-

Appellant in SC. Appeal No. 149/2019 and Appellant-

Petitioner-Appellant in SC. Appeal No. 135/2019.

P a g e 6 | 17

Samantha Ratwatte, PC with Madhurya Bandara and U.H.K.

Amunugama for the Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent in SC.

Appeal No. 149/2019 and Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent-

Respondents in SC. Appeal No. 135/2019.

Argued on: 13/09/2024

Decided on: 04/04/2025

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

[1] The Plaintiff and the Defendant in D.C. Matale Case No. L/5714/03 filed separate

appeals to the Civil Appellate High Court of Kandy. The appeal filed by the

Plaintiff-Appellant was allowed, while the appeal filed by the Defendant-Appellant

was dismissed. Dissatisfied with the Judgment of the Civil Appellate High Court,

the Defendant filed two separate appeals to this Court, bearing Case Nos. SC Appeal

149/2019 and SC Appeal 135/2019. When the said appeals were taken up for

hearing, the parties consented to consolidate both appeals. The Defendant will be

referred to as the Defendant-Appellant and the Plaintiffs as the Plaintiffs-

Respondents for the purpose of determining both applications. The parties have

agreed to abide by a single Judgment of this Court.

[2] By Plaint dated 26/02/2003, the Plaintiffs-Respondents filed D.C. Matale Case No.

L/5714/03 against the Defendant-Appellant and sought inter alia, a declaration of

title to the property more fully described in the schedule to the Plaint, to evict the

Defendant-Appellant from the said property and for the recovery of continuous

damages until delivery of vacant possession thereof.

[3] In their Plaint, the Plaintiffs-Respondents contended that the original owners of the

land in the schedule to the Plaint, by Deed of Transfer No. 7200 dated 24/07/1978

had transferred their rights to one Rajapakse Mudiyanselage Dharmakerthi and to

P a g e 7 | 17

the 2nd Plaintiff. The said Dharmakeerthi by Deed No. 10850 dated 28/09/1983 had

transferred his share to the 1st Plaintiff thus, the Plaintiffs-Respondents became

entitled to the four lands namely, Seeniyagahamulawatta, Anumathigedarawatta,

Rattewatta, and Sattayawatta, described as separate lands in the schedule to the

Plaint, amalgamated and used as one land, commonly known as Rattewatte. The

extent of Seeniyagahamulawatta is described in neli and Anumathigedarawatta,

Rattewatta, and Sattayawatta, are described in seers in the customary surface

measure.

[4] To buttress their paper title, the Plaintiffs-Respondents, in paragraph 07 of the Plaint,

contend that they are in undisturbed and uninterrupted possession of the lands for

over 10 years and have acquired prescriptive title to the exclusion of others.

[5] In paragraph 8 of the Plaint, the Plaintiffs-Respondents stated that on or about

15/11/2001, the Defendant-Appellant unlawfully entered the said land and having

erected a fence, had commenced possession thereof.

[6] In the Answer filed dated 07/11/2003, the Defendant-Appellant claimed that the said

Deed Nos. 7200 and 10850 were fraudulent documents, and the Plaintiffs-

Respondents had no right or interest in the land described as Rattewatta in the

schedule to the Answer.

[7] In paragraphs 9 and 10 of the Answer, the Defendant-Appellant claimed that one

Mudiyanse was the original owner of the said land and upon his death, his daughter

Dingiri Amma succeeded to his rights. Dingiri Ammas rights devolved on her

husband Mutubanda and her child Heenbanda Dharmakeerthi and together, by Deed

No. 6271 dated 19/03/1977 transferred their rights to one Karunaratne. By Deed No.

6864 dated 15/11/2001, Karunaratne transferred his rights to the land known as

Rattewatte in extent 0A. 03R. 10P., to the Defendant-Appellant, that is described

in the schedule to the Answer. In paragraph 11 of the Answer, the Defendant-

Appellant claims undisturbed and uninterrupted possession of the said land, for over

10 years.

P a g e 8 | 17

[8] In paragraph 13 of the Answer, the Defendant-Appellant by way of a claim in

reconvention, prayed that he be granted a declaration of entitlement to the property

described in the schedule to the Answer, delivery of vacant possession, and for

damages thereof. The Defendant-Appellant also prayed for a dismissal of the action

of the Plaintiff-Respondent.

[9] At the conclusion of the trial, the learned District Judge by Judgment dated

13/03/2015, dismissed the action of the Plaintiffs and the Defendants claim in

reconvention on the basis that, both parties failed to identify the subject matter. In

consideration of the claim in reconvention of the Defendant, the learned District

Judge was of the view inter alia, that the boundaries of Plan Marked V9C, which

the Defendant relied upon, and the boundaries disclosed in the schedule to the

Answer did not correspond to each other. The Court was of the view that the

boundaries which the Defendant relied upon cannot be ascertained due to the

superimposed Plan No. 808 dated 14/11/2001, prepared by Licensed Surveyor

Angammana was not led in evidence.

[10] Being aggrieved by the said Judgment, the Plaintiffs and the Defendant by Petitions

of Appeal dated 08/05/2015 and 08/05/2015 respectively, filed separate actions in

the Civil Appeal High Court of the Central Province exercising civil appellate

jurisdiction holden in Kandy (the Appellate Court). At that hearing too, both

parties consented to consolidate the two Appeals and to abide by one Judgment.

[11] The Civil Appellate High Court, after hearing and considering the submissions

tendered by both parties, by Judgment dated 26/10/2018, set aside the Judgment of

the District Court dated 13/03/2015, declaring that the Plaintiffs-Respondents had

established title to the property more fully described in the schedule to the Plaint

and were co-owners of the land depicted in Plan X. The Appeal of the Defendant-

Appellant was dismissed.

[12] By Order dated 31/05/2019, this Court granted leave to appeal on the following

questions of law;

P a g e 9 | 17

1. Did the Civil Appellate High Court err in law in reversing the findings against

the Plaintiff when on fact the Plaint referred to four distinct lands which could

not be identified by the Commissioner in the preparation of the Plan X.

2. Did the learned Civil Appellate High Court Judge err by holding that the land

depicted as Lot No.1 in Plan No.8026 (X) was the land claimed by the Plaintiff,

without appreciating the variance with the boundaries and the extent of the land

depicted in the said plan when compared the same with the land described in the

schedule to the plaint.

3. Have the learned Civil Appellate High Court Judge misdirected themselves by

not appreciating the Plaintiff failure to prove in terms of the Section 68 of the

Evidence Ordinance the due execution of the Deeds No. 7200 (P2) and No.

10859 (P3) produced and marked by the Plaintiffs subject to proof of the said

deeds at the trial and repetition of the said comment made by the Defendant at

the closure of the case of the Plaintiffs.

4. Had the learned Civil Appellate High Court Judge erred in law by holding that

the Defendant had not raised any issue challenging the execution of the said

Deeds without taking cognizance that an issue had been raised under Issue No.

10 on behalf of the Defendant challenging the said purported Deeds No. 7200

and No. 10850?

5. Did the High Court err in law by granting the Prayers (a) and (b) to the Plaint

which embraced the rights in four distinct lands?

6. Did the High Court err in law by the grant of Prayer (b) when in fact the court

held that the Plaintiffs are co-owners?

7. Has the High Court erred in law by not taking into account that the Deeds D3,

D4, D5, and D6 deal with a fractional share of the land Rattewatta thereby

making the Defendant a co-owner of the said land?

P a g e 10 | 17

As reflected in journal entry dated 16/07/2020, in addition to the above, the

following consequential questions of law were also permitted to be raised.

8. (i) Is it not possible to put a deed subject to proof of its execution without there

being a specific issue on its due execution based on a position taken up in the

pleadings.

(ii) was there no position taken up by the Defence in the pleadings or issues,

which required the Plaintiff to prove execution strictly in terms of Section 68 of

the Evidence Ordinance.

9. (i) if a Defendant to an action claims title to a particular land giving the

boundaries of a land claimed by the Plaintiff. Can such a Defendant dispute the

corpus?

(ii) Does the Defendant claim the 3rd land described in the schedule to the Plaint

by describing the same boundaries in the schedule to his answer in addition to

referring to a plan?

10. Does the Judgment of the High Court of Civil Appeal cause no failure of justice

not affect the substantial rights of the Defendant-Respondent-Appellant

(Petitioner) in view of all the circumstances of the case?

Identification of the corpus.

[13] As noted earlier, the learned District Judge dismissed the action brought by the

Plaintiffs and the claim in reconvention of the Defendant on the basis that the

subject land was not identified.

[14] The Plaintiffs-Respondents relied on Plan No. 8026, prepared by W.D.

Dassanayake Licensed Surveyor, marked X, to assert their claim to four separate

lands described in the schedule to the Plaint. The four lands as described earlier in

this Judgment were referred to as contiguous and consolidated lands. In the said

Plaint or in the issues raised at the trial court, the Plaintiffs did not refer to the land

P a g e 11 | 17

described in the Plaint, commonly known as Rattewatta, the name specifically

used to describe the 3rd land to the schedule. The Plaintiffs-Respondents relied on

title Deeds marked P2, P3, P4, P5, P6, P10, and P14 to prove title.

[15] Surveyor Dassanayake in his report dated 27/01/2004 marked X1, observed no

existing demarcations on the ground to identify four separate lands. The Plaintiff's

action was confined to the land shown as Lot 1 in Plan X in extend 0A 02R

19.06P, sometimes commonly known as Rattewatta. It is also revealed that by

superimposition of Defendants Plan No. 808 on Plan No. 802, a separate portion

of land was identified in the southern boundary, which the Defendant claimed

rightful ownership since 24/07/1978.

[16] Defendants Plan No. 808 marked V1, surveyed on 14/11/2001, was prepared by

Licensed Surveyor Angammana. V1 was superimposed on Plan X, and the

portion of land identified by the Plaintiffs was marked as Lot 1. The portion of

land identified to the south of Lot 1, Hunupaindakarayagewatta and Welewatta, is

not described in any of the four lands in the schedule to the Plaint.

[17] Plan No. 10658 made by Licensed Surveyor J.M. Jayasekara marked D9A, was

superimposed on Plan No. 808 and has identified the said portion of land to the

south as Lot 2 in extent 0A 0R 31.0P. Lots 1 and 2 in total is in extent 0A 3R 12P.

Surveyor Jayasekara states that, the Defendant claimed he was in possession of

Lots 1 and 2, which the Defendant referred to as Rattewatta, and that on

15/11/2001, the Plaintiff erected a fence demarcating the said Lots. The boundaries

of the land described as Rattewatta set out in the schedule to the Answer is in

extent 0A 3R 10P.

[18] The learned Counsel for the Defendant-Appellant citing the case of Ratnayake vs.

Kumarihamy1 contended that, according to the schedule to the Plaint, the total

extent of all four lands given in the customary surface measure consisting of 5

1 [2002] 1 SLR 65

P a g e 12 | 17

seers and 2 neli is equivalent to 1A and 3R, (This position has not been refuted

by the Defendant). It was also pointed out that Lot 1 in Plan X, which is claimed

by the Plaintiffs is only 02R and 19.6P and there is also no evidence of an

amalgamation of the other three lands.

[19] The land the Defendant refers to as Rattewatta includes Lots 1 and 2 (Lot 2

includes two lands) in extent 0A 03R 12.0P, which is around 3 perches less than

the land described as Rattewatta in the schedule to the Answer. In the said

premise it is argued that the schedule to the Answer describes the exact boundaries

as described in the 3rd land to the schedule, therefore contends that it is an

admission by the Defendant of the corpus and no further proof of the identity of

the land is required. However, going by the extent of the customary surface

measure of the 3rd land to the schedule described as Rattewatta, the extent of it is

far less than the land described in the schedule to the Answer.

[20] As noted above, the land described as Rattewatta in the 3rd schedule to the Plaint

in extent, 2 seers of Kurakkan, is one of four lands claimed by the Plaintiffs. The

Plaintiffs instituted this action and raised issues No. 1 and 2, concerning the

identity of the land. The Plaintiff led evidence on the basis that the lands in the

schedule to the Plaint were contiguous and amalgamated and sought a declaration

of title to the four lands described in the schedule.

[21] The Plaintiffs-Respondents position was that Lot 2, described as

Hunupaindakarayagewatta and Welewatta to the southern boundary of Lot 1 is not

the land in question to this action meaning, that it is not a part of the land

commonly known as Rattewatta in extend 0A 02R 19.6P. The 1st Plaintiff under

cross examination has admitted that Wellewatta is situated in the southern

boundary of the land described as Hunupaindakarayagewatta. In re-examination

the 1st Plaintiff stated;

"

.

P a g e 13 | 17

.

. ." (Vide pages 192,193)

Also stated that;

.

. (Vide pages 194)

[22] The evidence given by witness Hearth Banda and Suppiah Jayakumar, the husband

of the Plaintiffs predecessor in title Ganeshwara Ramanada, referred to the land

Rattewatta as a consolidation of several lots of land and commonly known as

Rattewatta which consists of one undivided block.

[23] However, the Surveyor was unable to say whether the land shown in Plan X

consisted of four lands.

:

?

: .

: ?

:

.

[24] Having taken into consideration the available evidence to establish the identity of

the subject matter, the Appellate Court held, thus

The extent given in the 3rd schedule to the Plaint and the extent of the land in

Plan X when considered, point to a fact that the land in dispute is more likely to

be Rattewatta than the four lands described in the schedules to the Plaint

P a g e 14 | 17

[25] To strengthen this position the Court was of the view that the Defendant whilst

giving evidence has admitted that the land in dispute is Lot 1 in Plan X, which

further confirms that there is no uncertainty as to the identity of the land, whereas

the Defendants claim was not based only on Lot 1 but also included the land to

the southern boundary in Plan X. When the land was surveyed, the Defendant

claimed his rights beyond the southern boundary of Lot 1 however, due to the

Plaintiffs insistence, the Surveyor limited the scope of the Commission only to

the land claimed by the Plaintiffs.

[26] The Appellate Court further held that;

The extent of the land in dispute according to Plan X is 2 Roods 19.6 Perches.

The extent of the land described in the 3rd schedule to the Plaint is two Seers of

Kurakkan sowing, which is approximately 2 Roods. Boundaries described in Plan

X are as same as the boundaries of Rattewatta. Therefore, it can be safely

concluded that the land depicted in Plan X is Rattewatta described in the 3rd

schedule to the Plaint as well as the schedule to the answer.

[27] It is observed that in arriving at the above finding, the Appellate Court failed to

appreciate the evidence of the Defendant in consideration of Plan No. 10658,

where the extent of the land described as Rattewatta was 3 Roods 12.0 Perches.

[28] The Plaintiffs sought a declaration of title and for ejectment of the Defendant from

the land claimed therein. Therefore, the land sought to be declared must be

identifiable, and clearly sets out the subject matter to be vindicated. In this action,

as so far as it could be ascertained by deeds, landmarks or witness evidence, no

new boundaries were created or an existing common boundary identified by the

trial Court. When an ambiguity or uncertainty in identifying correct boundaries or

limits between claimants of contiguous or amalgamated lands exists, the trial

Judge was correct to refrain from assigning the subject land to either party.

P a g e 15 | 17

[29] In a rei vindicatio action, identifying the corpus is crucial. Without precise

identification, courts cannot determine whether the claim of the parties aligns with

the land in dispute. As established in Jamaldeen Abdul Latheef vs. Abdul Majeed

Mohamed Mansoor2, a Plaintiff must prove both ownership and the existence of

the property in question. As held in the above case;

"To succeed with the rei vindicatio, the owner must prove on a balance of

probabilities, first, his or her ownership in the property. Secondly, the property

must exist, be clearly identifiable and must not have been destroyed or

consumed

It was further stated that;

The identity of the subject matter is of paramount importance in a rei vindicatio

action because the object of such an action is to determine ownership of the

property, which objective cannot be achieved without the property being clearly

identified. Where the property sought to be vindicated consists of land, the land

sought to be vindicated must be identified by reference to a survey plan or other

equally expeditious method.

[30] If the lands boundaries, extent, or location remain uncertain, the claim must fail,

regardless of the strength of the title. Courts rely on survey plans, deeds, and

witness testimony to establish identity. If the court fails to identify the land in

dispute with certainty, it may lead to complications in enforcement of the final

judgment, as an unclear decree may be impossible to execute. Therefore, in a rei

vindicatio action, proving title alone is insufficient, the evidence should precisely

define the land being claimed.

It is obvious that ownership cannot be ascribed without clear identification of

the property that is subjected to such ownership, and furthermore, the ultimate

objective of a person seeking to vindicate immovable property by obtaining a writ

2 [2010] 2 SLR 333

P a g e 16 | 17

of execution in terms of Section 323 of the Civil Procedure Code will be frustrated

if the fiscal to whom the writ is addressed, cannot clearly identify the property by

reference to the decree for the purpose of giving effect to it. It is therefore essential

in a vindicatory action, as much as in a partition action, for the corpus to be

identified with precision. (Jamaldeen Abdul Latheef vs. Abdul Majeed Mohamed

Mansoor3)

[31] In Iluppengamu Appuhamylage Martin Appuhamy and others vs. Iluppengamu

Appuhamylage Milrad Chandrawathie and others4, it was held that;

... If the land to be partitioned as described in the schedule to the plaint has not

been properly identified, the Plaintiffs action shall fail. In such a situation the

necessity to investigate title does not arise. Title shall be investigated on a properly

identified parcel of land. The Court shall not first investigate title and then look

for the land to be partitioned. It shall happen vice versa.

[32] With little or no appreciation of the evidence led by the Defendant in its totality,

on Plan No. 10658 and the disparity created on the metes and bounds disclosed

therein, the Court concluded that the; Identity of the land is not in dispute. Both

the Plaintiff and the Defendant admitted that the land in dispute is shown as Lot 1

of Plan No. 8026 marked X. To the contrary, there was no agreement between

the parties regarding the identity of the subject land.

[33] Therefore, I am of the view that when there was a stark variance in the extent of

the land to be declared, the Appellate Court erred in allowing the Appeal.

[34] Accordingly, I answer the questions of law No.1 and No. 2 on which leave to

appeal has been granted in the affirmative.

[35] It is noted that by Order dated 31/05/2019, this Court granted leave to appeal on

seven questions of law. Subsequently, as reflected in the journal entry dated

3 (n2) 4 SC Appeal 172/2015, decided on 21.05.2021

P a g e 17 | 17

16/07/2020, three additional questions of law were also permitted to be raised, in

response to concerns expressed by the parties that certain consequential questions

had not been recorded. These additional questions were duly recorded at the

instance of Court, and it appears that this step was not taken before the same bench.

In any event, having considered the totality of the pleadings and the evidence, and

in light of the view taken regarding the identification of the corpus, I find that in

deciding on the rest of the questions quoted earlier in this judgment need not be

considered and I answer the said questions accordingly.

[36] For these reasons, the Judgment dated 13/03/2015 of the District Court is hereby

affirmed and the Judgment dated 26/10/2018 of the Civil Appeal High Court is set

aside and accordingly relief c in the prayer of the petitions of appeal is granted.

reliefs d, e and f are denied. Therefore, the appeal is partially allowed. No

order for costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J.

I agree

Judge of the Supreme Court

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

I agree

Judge of the Supreme Court