Page 1 of 15

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application under and in

terms of Articles 126 read with Article 17 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

Attanayakage Don Susil Attanayake

No. 234/A, Kudamaduwa,

Siddamulla, Piliyandala.

PETITIONER

Vs.

1. W.M.J. Sudath Bandara (Deceased),

Chief Inspector of Police, Officer in Charge, Kiriella Police Station, Kiriella. 2. Chanaka Weerasinghe,

Sub Inspector of Police, Kiriella Police Station, Kiriella. 3. PS. No. 42837 Silva,

Kiriella Police Station, Kiriella.

S.C. (F.R.) Application No. 233/2020

Page 2 of 15

4. PS. No. 40284 Pushpakumara,

Kiriella Police Station, Kiriella. 5. PC No. 81053 Embuldeniya,

Kiriella Police Station, Kiriella. 6. PSD No. 42590 Chandrasiri,

Kiriella Police Station, Kiriella. 7. J.I. Ajith Kumara

Assistant Superintendent of Police, Ratnapura District II. 8. C.D. Wickramaratne,

Acting Inspector General of Police, Police Headquarters, 311, Olcott Mawatha, Colombo. 9. The Honourable Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12. 10. Welikadage Chaminda Perera,

Chief Inspector of Police, Officer in Charge, Kiriella Police Station, Kiriella.

RESPONDENTS

Page 3 of 15

Before : Janak De Silva, J.

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

Sampath K.B. Wijeratne, J.

Counsel : Thishya Weragoda for the Petitioner

Madhawa Tennakoon, DSG for the Respondents

Written submissions : 15.05.2024 by the Petitioner 27.11. 2024 by the Respondents Argued on : 08.07.2025 Decided on : 18.09.2025

Janak De Silva, J.

At all times material to this application, the Petitioner was an Inspector of Police attached

to the office of the Senior Deputy Inspector General of Police (Western Province) and had

been in service for about 17 years. He holds a Bachelor’s degree in Commerce and

Master’s degree in Geographical Information Systems and Remote Sensing from the

University of Sri Jayewardenepura.

On 25.02.2020, he along with four others, were arrested by the 1st to 6th Respondents and

produced before the Magistrate of Ratnapura. The B report named the Petitioner and the

other four persons as suspects to an offence under Section 6 of the Antiquities Ordinance

No. 09 of 1940 as amended (Ordinance).

Page 4 of 15

The Petitioner claims that his arrest is unlawful. Leave to proceed has been granted under

Articles 12(1) and 13(1) of the Constitution.

Version of the Petitioner

The father-in-law of the Petitioner is well-known in the Kiriella village and had been a

Justice of the Peace, President of the Village Council and Treasurer of the Funeral Aid

Society. He was also a renowned landed proprietor.

The Petitioner’s wife inherited various properties from her father including a land named

Galapallahena situated in the Hindurangala Grama Niladhari division containing 6 acres in

extent.

There is a small area of about 2 perches of that land which was used by the Petitioner and

his wife whenever they visited the land. Although this land was situated in Kiriella, it fell

within the police division assigned to Eheliyagoda Police Station, and not Kiriella Police

Station.

A conflict began when a neighbour, T.A. Seneviratne, first obtained permission to light oil

lamps on the property from the Petitioner’s father-in-law. In or around 2012, while the

Petitioner’s father-in-law was in hospital, Seneviratne and other villagers unlawfully

constructed a Buddhist shrine on the land. The owners, viewing it as a meritorious act,

initially did not object to it.

In 2018, when Seneviratne attempted to expand the construction to add a lavatory and a

room for a priest, the Petitioner strongly objected. Upon the Petitioner's complaint, the

Grama Niladhari officially verified the wife's ownership to the land and declared the

structures to be illegal. Thereafter, steps were taken to demolish the unauthorized

constructions except the shrine room after the Petitioner made a complaint at the

Eheliyagoda Police Station.

Page 5 of 15

The villagers had filed a complaint at the Kiriella Police Station following this demolition,

upon which the Petitioner was requested to present himself at the Kiriella Police Station

for an inquiry. However, the Petitioner had informed the 1st Respondent that the land in

question fell within the Eheliyagoda Police division, whereupon the 1st Respondent had

taken necessary steps to refer the matter to the Eheliyagoda Police Station. However, the

1st Respondent was displeased that the Petitioner did not present himself at the Kiriella

Police Station.

In 2019, the said Seneviratne, along with some other villagers again tried to build a

foundation on the land. Upon becoming aware of this, the Petitioner had immediately

filed a complaint with the Eheliyagoda Police. During the inquiry into this complaint, the

Eheliyagoda Police could not find any evidence to support the claim and/or title of the

villagers to the land. Thereafter, the Divisional Secretary also verified the ownership of the

Petitioner and his wife to the said land. Later, an illicit electricity connection to the shrine

obtained by the villagers was transferred back to the Petitioner’s wife’s name.

On 25.02.2020, when the Petitioner and four others tried to conduct a Bhairava Poojawa

on the said land, the villagers had verbally abused them while levelling accusations that

they were attempting to excavate antiquities, and purportedly made phone calls to the

Kiriella Police Station.

Since the abuse was becoming intense, and as the Kiriella Police Station was closer in

proximity, the Petitioner too had made phone calls to the Kiriella Police Station. He was

then advised to remain at the location. Later, officers of the Kiriella Police Station (4th to

6th Respondents) had arrived at the location at which point the villagers had started

physically assaulting the Petitioner and those with him. The 1st Respondent also arrived at

the location.

Page 6 of 15

The 4th to 6th Respondents had thereafter taken the Petitioner and his associates to the

Kiriella Police Station, stating that the matter would be better resolved there. At the police

station, the 1st Respondent had instructed a Police Sergeant (3rd Respondent) to put the

Petitioner and his associates in the remand cell. The Petitioner’s objection regarding this

was ignored and his complaint concerning the villagers’ assault was not entertained.

Moreover, the Petitioner and the others were not informed that they were being arrested

prior to being taken to the Police Station. Neither were they provided the reason for their

arrest. Further, requests for dinner and medicine, as well as the Petitioner’s renewed

request to file a complaint against the villagers’ physical assault were denied by the

Respondents.

Thereafter, proceedings were instituted against the Petitioner and his associates in the

Magistrate’s Court of Ratnapura for an offence under Section 6 of the Ordinance. The B

Report filed before the Magistrate by the 1st Respondent included facts that were not only

false, but false to the knowledge of the 1st Respondent such as statements that the

Petitioner and his associates were excavating in search of antiquities or archaeological

valuables and that the excavation took place at a Buddhist temple named ‘Namaluwa’.

The 1st Respondent falsely and maliciously reported facts with the objective of

incarcerating the Petitioner indefinitely, knowing that there was no provision for bail

under the Ordinance. However, the 1st, 2nd, 4th, 5th, and 6th Respondents did not take any

steps to arrest the villagers who assaulted the Petitioner and the others in front of them.

It was incumbent on the 1st Respondent to conduct an inquiry on the conduct of the

villagers.

The Petitioner was falsely kept in remand prison. The report of the Department

Archaeology tendered to the Court on 10.03.2020 led to the discharge of the Petitioners

and release of the motor vehicle, as there was no excavation. However, a sword in

Page 7 of 15

possession of an associate of the Petitioner was retained under the Knives Ordinance, for

prosecution.

The 1st Respondent out of malice took the extraordinary step of reporting the arrest of

the Petitioner to all superior authorities including the Inspector General of Police.

However, upon his release, the 1st Respondent only notified the Director of Western

Province South Crime Division, and not all other superior authorities who were informed

of his arrest. Consequently, the wrongful arrest of the Petitioner was given wide media

publicity and has negatively affected his career and personal life.

The 1st Respondent has requested and obtained a copy of the deed of the land from the

wife of the Petitioner. However, it was neither returned nor produced in any Court.

The 1st Respondent should have notified the Eheliyagoda Police Station to handle the

matter as the land was under its territorial jurisdiction. He did not do so merely to satisfy

the demands of the villagers.

The Petitioner complained to the Senior DIG of the Sabragamuwa Province who directed

the 7th Respondent to inquire into the complaint. Such an inquiry has not been conducted.

The Petitioner was arrested without informing the charges against the Petitioner and

contrary to the law. The 1st Respondent failed to investigate the complaint of assault made

by the Petitioner.

Accordingly, the Petitioner claims that his fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 12(1)

and 13(1) of the Constitution have been infringed.

Version of the 1st Respondent

The fact that the Petitioner is a Police Officer was revealed only during the course of the

investigations.

Page 8 of 15

On 25.02.2020 around 21.50, an anonymous person called and informed that a group of

people were trying to commence an excavation at Namaluwa Bodhiya in order to search

for antiquities.

Soon thereafter, the 1st Respondent sent a team of Police Officers to investigate the

matter. The villagers kept calling the personal mobile number of the 1st Respondent

complaining about this incident. Therefore, the 1st Respondent also went to the scene

with another Police Officer in his personal vehicle.

After arriving at the scene, the 1st Respondent realized that the villagers had behaved in

an aggressive manner. The Petitioner and others who were involved in the incident were

handed over to the 1st Respondent by the villagers with the equipment allegedly used by

them.

In view of the circumstances, the 1st Respondent had reasonable grounds to believe that

the Petitioner and his crew were trying to excavate the questionable land for antiques and

archaeological valuables. Therefore, he arrested the Petitioner and the other suspects for

allegedly excavating for antiquities. The Petitioner was informed of the reasons for his

arrest.

All actions of the 1st Respondent were made bona fide. On 25.02.2020, the Petitioner

complained to the Police mentioning the names of the villagers who were involved in

assaulting him at the scene of the incident. The 1st Respondent conducted an inquiry into

this complaint and produced the suspects before the Magistrates Court.

The 7th Respondent commenced an investigation after the complaint made by the

Petitioner.

Version of the 2nd Respondent

The 2nd Respondent reiterates the contents in the affidavit of the 1st Respondent. He

accompanied the 1st Respondent in his personal vehicle to the scene.

Page 9 of 15

Article 13(1)

Admittedly, the Petitioner and other suspects were acquitted and discharged from the

proceedings in Magistrate Court of Ratnapura Case No. 45384A. Nevertheless, whether

an infringement of Article 13(1) has occurred is not dependent on the final outcome of

the criminal proceedings.

As Wanasundera, J. held in Joseph Perera Alias Bruten Perera v. Attorney-General and

Others [(1992) 1 Sri LR 199 at 236]:

“The principles and provisions relating to arrest are materially different from those

applying to the determination of the guilt or innocence of the arrested person. One

is at or near the starting-point of criminal proceedings while the other constitutes

the termination of those proceedings and is made by the judge after hearing

submissions from all parties. The power of arrest does not depend on the

requirement that there must be clear and sufficient proof of the commission of the

offence alleged. On the other hand, for an arrest a mere reasonable suspicion or a

reasonable complaint of the commission of an offence suffices.”

In Channa Peiris and Others v. Attorney General and Others [(1994) 1 Sri. L. R. 1 at 27],

Amarasinghe J. held that:

“The procedure generally established by law for arresting a person without a

Warrant are set out in Chapter IV B (Sections 32-43) of the Code of Criminal

Procedure. Where a person is arrested without a warrant otherwise than in

accordance with these provisions, Article 13(1) of the Constitution will be violated.”

Hence the legality of an arrest without a warrant depends on whether the provisions in

Chapter IV B (Sections 32-43) of the Code of Criminal Procedure has been complied with.

Page 10 of 15

Section 32 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Code) specifies several instances where any

Police Officer may without an order from a Magistrate and without a warrant arrest any

person.

In Mohamed Razik Mohamed Ramzy v. B.M.S.K. Senaratne and Others [S.C.F.R.

Application No. 135/2020, S.C.M. 14.11.2023 at pages 41-42] my learned brother

Kodagoda, P.C., J. after examining the scope of Section 32(1)(b) of the Code held as follows:

“[…] for a peace officer to be authorized by law to arrest a person (suspect) for

having committed a cognizable offence, one of the following should have

occurred–

(i) the peace officer should have by himself formed an objective opinion that

the suspect has been concerned in the commission of a cognizable offence;

(ii) the peace officer should have either directly received a complaint or must

be aware that a complaint has been made against the suspect, and he

should have formed the objective opinion that such complaint against the

suspect (that he has been concerned in committing a cognizable offence) is

reasonable;

(iii) the peace officer should have either directly received information or should

be aware that information has been received against the suspect, and he

should have formed the objective opinion that such information is credible

and gives rise to the allegation that the suspect has been concerned in the

commission of a cognizable office(sic); or

(iv) the peace officer should have developed reasonable suspicion that the

suspect has been concerned in the commission of a cognizable offence.”

(emphasis added)

Page 11 of 15

The 1st Respondent has affirmed that an informant had given a call to the Kiriella Police

Station and informed of an attempt to excavate in search of treasure near Namaluwa

Bodhiya. The telephone entry has been produced as 2R2. This corroborates the version of

the 1st Respondent. However, the arrest of the Petitioner and others did not take place

based on this complaint.

According to the entry made by the 1st Respondent in the Minor Offences Information

Book (2R3), the 1st Respondent had observed several items to be used for a poojawa at

the scene. However, he had then recorded that the villagers believe that there is an

ancient treasure buried on the site. Unfortunately, the rest of the entry is missing from

the judges’ dockets. An examination of the original docket confirmed that the position is

the same in it as well.

However, the 1st Respondent states that he arrested the Petitioner and his crew as he had

reasonable grounds to believe that they were trying to excavate the land for antiques and

archaeological valuables. Hence, the 1st Respondent relies on (iv) above to justify the

arrest of the Petitioner.

Upon an examination of the matters pleaded by the 1st Respondent, it appears that his

reasonable suspicion was founded on the following facts:

(1) There were several items to be used for a poojawa at the scene.

(2) The villagers believe that there is an ancient treasure buried on the site.

Observation (1) has been explained by the Petitioner in that he and his associates were to

perform a Bhairava Poojawa at the site to ward off evil spirits. This assertion of the

Petitioner is corroborated by Kongahawattage Saman Kumara and Namini Achchige Don

Tharindu Dilshan. Both of them conduct various traditional and customary rituals and rites

including Bhairava Pooja for a considerable period of time.

Page 12 of 15

According to Dokras [Dr. Uday Dokras, Vajrayāna Shiva Bhairava worship in “India” and

Indonesia1], Bhairava (Sanskrit: भैरव lit. 'frightful') or Kala Bhairava is a Shaivite and

Vajrayāna deity worshipped by Hindus and Buddhists. In Shaivism, he is a powerful

manifestation, or avatar, of Shiva associated with annihilation. In the Trika system

Bhairava represents the Supreme Reality, synonymous to Para Brahman. Generally, in

Hinduism, Bhairava is also called Dandapani ("[he who holds the] Danda in [his] hand"),

as he holds a rod or Danda to punish sinners, and Svaśva, meaning "whose vehicle is a

dog". In Vajrayana Buddhism, he is considered a fierce emanation of Boddhisatva

Mañjuśrī, and also called Heruka, Vajrabhairava, and Yamantaka. He is worshipped

throughout India, Nepal and Sri Lanka as well as in Tibetan Buddhism.

There is symbolic evidence that Bhairava is considered to be associated with warding off

evil spirits. The rectangular blocks of stone which stand on each side of the steps at the

entrance to ancient Buddhist shrines in Sri Lanka are known as Guardstones. Many of

these Guardstones have Bhairava upon their faces.

Nevertheless, it is widely known that Bhairava Pooja is also performed prior to excavation

for treasure. In this context, the reasonable suspicion the 1st Respondent claims to have

entertained may be justified.

However, when other circumstances associated with the incident are taken into

consideration, this justification disappears. In particular, the allegation made by the

Petitioner that the 1st Respondent carried out the arrest and produced the Petitioner

before the Magistrates Court of Ratnapura with malice is substantiated.

1 https://www.academia.edu/94593013/Shiva_Bhairava_worship_in_India_and_Indonesia (last accessed on 05.09.2025)

Page 13 of 15

In Mohamed Razik Mohamed Ramzy [supra. at 47] my learned brother Kodagoda, P.C., J.

held as follows:

“To enable the Magistrate to determine whether criminal proceedings against the

suspect should be initiated and whether it would be expedient to detain the suspect

in remand custody, the Report submitted under section 115(1) should contain one

or more specific allegations that the suspect being produced has committed one

or more offences, and the report along with the summary of statements must

contain material based upon which the Magistrate can determine whether it is

expedient to detain the suspect. If the officer in charge of the police station on

whom the statutory duty is cast to submit the report along with the summary of

statements is to move the Magistrate to consider placing the suspect in remand

custody, he must place before the Magistrate sufficient material to substantiate

the allegation contained in the report that the suspect has committed one or

more offences.” (emphasis added)

Nevertheless, the 1st Respondent did not provide the Magistrate with a summary of

statements of the suspects, including the Petitioner, to enable him to consider the

allegation contained in the report that they had committed the offence identified in the B

report. This deprived the learned Magistrate of the version of the Petitioner.

Soon after the arrest of the Petitioner, the 1st Respondent conveyed this information in

writing to ASP (II) Ratnapura, SP Ratnapura, DIG Ratnapura, SDIG, Sabaragamuwa

Province, Police Spokesperson, OIC (Information Room), Director of Western Province

South Crime Division and HQI, Mirihana. However, after the Petitioner was acquitted and

discharged, he conveyed this information only to the Director of Western Province South

Crime Division.

Page 14 of 15

The 1st Respondent was aware of the dispute between the Petitioner and the villagers

over the land in issue. He had previously unsuccessfully tried to conduct an inquiry into

this dispute which was prevented by the Petitioner informing him that the land falls within

the police division of the Eheliyagoda Police.

As a corollary, the 1st Respondent was aware that the incident occurred outside his area

of responsibility.

For all the foregoing reasons, I have no hesitation in concluding that the 1st Respondent

infringed the fundamental rights of the Petitioner guaranteed by Article 13(1) of the

Constitution.

Article 12(1)

This guarantees the equal protection of the law. I have concluded that the 1st Respondent

has infringed the fundamental rights of the Petitioner guaranteed by Article 13(1) of the

Constitution. Ipso facto, the 1st Respondent has infringed the fundamental right of the

Petitioner guaranteed by Article 12(1).

What remains is to determine the compensation the Petitioner should be awarded.

However, the 1st Respondent passed away pending the determination of this application.

Hence, no compensation can be awarded against him.

The 2nd to 6th Respondents were members of the police party that arrested the Petitioner.

However, there are no circumstances on which I could reasonably impute to any one of

them the malicious intent of the 1st Respondent.

Any compensation ordered against the State has to be paid from taxpayer money.

Therefore, I am not generally inclined to order the State to pay compensation for the

infringement of any fundamental right of a citizen or person unless there is evidence that

the State, through executive or administrative act or omission is responsible for the

Page 15 of 15

infringement. There is no such evidence in this case. The actions of the 1st Respondent

appear to be solely guided by his malice towards the Petitioner.

However, the circumstances of this case are such that not granting any compensation to

the Petitioner will not be just and equitable.

Accordingly, I direct the State to pay the Petitioner a sum of Rs. 50,000/= as compensation

and a further Rs. 25,000/= as costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Sampath K.B. Wijeratne, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT