SC APPEAL 133/2016 JUDGMENT Page 1 of 16

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

Leave to Appeal made in terms of

Section 9 of the High Court of the

Provinces [Special Provisions] Act

No. 19 of 1990 and Section 34D of

the Industrial Disputes Act (as

amended).

Jathika Sevaka Sangamaya,

(On behalf of P. Titus Jayantha)

No. 416, Kotte Road,

Pitakotte.

APPLICANT

-VS-

Sri Lanka Transport Board,

No.200, Kirula Road,

Colombo 05.

RESPONDENT

AND

Sri Lanka Transport Board,

No.200, Kirula Road,

Colombo 05.

RESPONDENT- APPELLANT

-VS-

SC Appeal No. 133/2016 SC/HC/LA 133/2013 HC Kurunegala Case No. 37/2012 LT LT Kuliyapitiya Case No. 46/60/2010

SC APPEAL 133/2016 JUDGMENT Page 2 of 16

Jathika Sevaka Sangamaya,

(On behalf of P. Titus Jayantha)

No. 416, Kotte Road,

Pitakotte.

APPLICANT-RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

P. Titus Jayantha.

Kudagammana,

Giriulla.

APPLICANT-RESPONDENT-

APPELLANT

-VS-

Sri Lanka Transport Board,

No.200, Kirula Road,

Colombo 05.

RESPONDENT-APPELLANT-

RESPONDENT

BEFORE : S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

A.H.M.D. NAWAZ, J.

MAHINDA SAMAYAWARDHENA, J.

COUNSEL : Chathura Galhena with Menuja Gunawardena for the Applicant-

Respondent-Appellant.

Yuresha De Silva for the Respondent –Appellant- Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 28th April 2021.

SC APPEAL 133/2016 JUDGMENT Page 3 of 16

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS : Applicant-Respondent-Appellant on the 03rd of

January 2017.

Respondent –Appellant- Respondent on the 30th of

January 2017.

DECIDED ON : 9th July 2021.

S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

Background of this Appeal

This is an appeal filed against the judgment of the Provincial High Court dated

03/09/2013.

Jathika Sevaka Sangamaya i.e. Applicant-Respondent-Appellant (hereinafter

sometimes referred to as Applicant) filed this action on behalf of P. Titus Jayantha

(hereinafter sometimes referred to as Appellant) since he was a member of the said

trade union instituted the above action bearing No. LT Kuliyapitiya 46/60/2010 by

application dated 27/09/2004 under Section 34D of the Industrial Disputes Act (as

amended) against the Respondent –Appellant- Respondent (hereinafter sometimes

referred to as Respondent) praying for a judgment in favour of the Appellant against

the termination of service of the Appellant on the alleged ground of vacation of post

and claimed for re-instatement with back wages and/ or any other reliefs. The

Respondent filed answer dated 17/01/2005 and admitted the termination and stated

that the Appellant has vacated his post due to non-reporting to work from 17/08/2004

to the date of termination which was 27/08/2004.

The Appellant stated that, he joined the Sri Lanka Transport Board (Respondent)

on 29/06/1991 as a bus conductor and on 01/09/2002 he was promoted to the post

of depot route inspector- 4th Grade attached to the Giriulla Bus Depot. As per the

evidence of the Appellant there was a General Election on 02/04/2004 and with the

change in the ruling party certain members of the Giriulla Bus Depot have threatened

the Appellant and his party members to not to report to work. Thereafter, the Appellant

SC APPEAL 133/2016 JUDGMENT Page 4 of 16

has made a complaint to the Police on 09/04/2004 and the reference number was CIB

(2) 137/85 (A3) and requested to allow him to report back to work. Further, the

Appellant had lodged a complaint (A4) on 27/04/2004 to the Deputy Commissioner of

Labour requesting him to allow, to report back to work and on the same day the

Appellant has lodged another complaint to the Giriulla Police Station under the

reference number. CIB (1) 243/572. Pursuant to the above complaints made by the

Appellant, a settlement was entered between the parties and the officers of the

Respondent and agreed to allow the Appellant to report back to work from

01/06/2004.

The Appellant was stabbed by a person with a sharp piece of glass on

20/06/2004 and he was admitted to Dambadeniya District Hospital where he was given

in-house treatment for 11 days until 30/06/2004. The Appellant had tendered five

medical reports of his illness including documents marked as A7, A8 and A9. 1st

medical certificate (A7- vide page 173) was issued for a period of ten days from 20th

to 30 June 2004. The 2nd medical certificate (A8-vide page 174) was issued till 14th July

2004 and 3rd medical certificate was issued for another two weeks up to 28th July 2004.

Then 4th medical certificate (vide page 102) was issued from 29th to 31st July 2004.

Finally, 5th medical certificate (vide page 103) was issued for 5th to 16th August 2004.

The Respondent admitted the receipt of the aforementioned medical

certificates and granted leave accordingly. The Appellant was required to report to

work on 17th August 2004 and he failed to do the same hence, the Respondent on 23rd

August 2004 sent a telegram message to the Appellant informing him to report to

work. The Appellant had failed to respond to the aforementioned telegram message

and failed to tender any medical certificates. Then, a letter dated 27th August 2004

(A11) was sent to the Appellant by the Depot Manager of the Giriulla Depot informing

that, to report to work within 7 days from the issuance of the letter ‘A11’ and if not,

this will result in the Appellant to vacation of post, voluntarily. The Appellant did not

inform his response to the Employer and the Respondent issued a notice of vacation

of post on the Appellant by letter dated 6th September 2004 (A 12) upon the expiration

SC APPEAL 133/2016 JUDGMENT Page 5 of 16

of 3 weeks from the failure to work by the Appellant. The Respondent pleaded for a

dismissal of the action of the Appellant.

Decision of the Labour Tribunal

The main contention of the Respondent was that the Appellant did not obtain

leave and hence as per disciplinary regulation he had vacated his post, voluntarily. But

the Appellant stated that, he never had an intention to vacate his post and he tried to

restore back to work from the very inception of the said political obstructions occurred

soon after the elections in April 2004.

At the conclusion of the case, the learned President of the Labour Tribunal

delivered his order on 31/05/2011 and decided the case in favour of the Appellant

stating that there was a constructive termination of service of the Appellant by the

Respondent by relying on the dissenting judicial pronouncement in Nandasena v Uva

Regional Transport Board (1993) 1 SLR 318 and awarded a sum of Rs. 221,250/- as

compensation which is equal to 30 months of salary of the Appellant. The learned

President stated in his order as follows.

“මෙෙ විනිශ්චය සභාවට ඉදිරිපත් වූ සාක්ෂි අනුව ඉල්ලුම්කරුට ස්ව කැෙැත්මෙන් මස්වය

අෙහැර යාමම් මේෙනාවක්ෂ තිබුණ බවට කරුණු අනාවරණය මනාවන අෙර ඉල්ලුම්කරුට

වගඋත්ෙරකාර ගිරිඋල්ලල ඩිමපෝමේ මස්වකමයකු විසින් සිදු කරන ලද ශාරීරික හානිය මහ්තු

මකාට මගන මස්වයට වාර්ො කර රාජකාරි වල නිරෙ වීමම් මනාහැකියාවක්ෂ උද්ගෙ මේ ඇති

බව අනාවරණය මේ. මෙෙ ෙත්වය නන්දමස්න එදිරිව ඌව ප්‍රාමද්ශීය ගෙනාගෙන ෙණ්ඩලය

1993 SLR 318 නඩුමේදී ගරු ොක්ෂ ප්‍රනාන්දු විනිසුරුතුො ප්‍රකාශ කර ඇත්මත් ොවකාලික

මලස මස්වයට මනාපැමිණීෙ මස්වය අෙහැර යාෙක්ෂ මනාවන බවයි. “

The English translation of the above paragraph as follows;

“Evidence presented to the tribunal does not reveal that the applicant had any

intention of leaving the service voluntarily and that the applicant was unable to

report for duty and engage in duties due to the physical damage caused to him

by an employee of the Giriulla Depot. In the case of Nandasena v. Uva Local

SC APPEAL 133/2016 JUDGMENT Page 6 of 16

Transport Board 1993 SLR 318, Hon. Mark Ferando J. has stated that temporary

absenteeism is not a vacation from service.”

Decision of the High Court

Being dissatisfied with the order of the Labour Tribunal, Respondent appealed

to the Provincial High Court of Kurunegala. The Judge of the Provincial High Court of

Kurunegala delivered his judgment on 03/09/2013, and allowed the appeal while

setting-aside the order of the learned President of the Labour Tribunal on the basis

that the Appellant had voluntarily vacated the post as pleaded by the Respondent.

The High Court relied and referred to the case of Building Materials

Corporation vs Jathika Sewaka Sangamaya (1993) 2 SLR 316 wherein Supreme

Court held that, long absence without obtaining leave or authority is evidence of

desertion or abandonment of service. Further, High Court has quoted from the

assertion of Senanayake J, in Jayawardane vs ANCL (CA 562/87) which reads as

follows.

“No employer could indefinitely, kept a post vacant without any information from

the worker of his inability to come to work, especially. Where the employer has

given an opportunity for the applicant to tender any explanation or inform the

employer about his inability to report to work.”

Case before this Court

Being aggrieved by the said judgment of the Provincial High Court of

Kurunegala, the Appellant filed this case before this court and leave was granted on

the following questions of law stated in paragraph 18 (i, iii, iv) of the petition dated

14/10/2013. Those are reproduced verbatim for easy reference;

i. Did the Provincial High Court misdirect itself on the proof and evidence

regarding the vacation of post by the petitioner?

SC APPEAL 133/2016 JUDGMENT Page 7 of 16

iii. Did the Provincial High Court misdirect itself by failing to consider the

analysis of the learned President of the Labour Tribunal regarding the

Petitioner’s reasons for the absence of work?

iv. Did the Provincial High Court misdirect itself in applying the decided cases

into the instant case?

Heard the submissions of both Counsel and perused the materials before this Court

including the Judgments of the Labour Tribunal and the Civil Appellate High Court.

Vacation of Post

Having particular regard to the attendant circumstances of the instant

application, this court is called upon to determine whether a voluntary and intentional

vacation of post on the part of the Appellant has been established by the Respondent.

The Appellant was an employee attached to a government institution namely

Sri Lanka Transport Board. The Appellant was employed for a long period of time and

he was involved in trade union activities had adequate knowledge about the work

environment, Law and rules & regulations. As per section 21 (1) of the Disciplinary

Rules of Sri Lanka Transport Board, in the event of an employee of the Sri Lanka

Transport Board fails to report to work for 3 days, steps should be taken to send a

Telegram to the last known address, informing the employee to report to work or to

inform reasons for the failure to report to work and in this matter, it is proved that the

Respondent had complied with the said requirement on 23/08/2004 by sending a

telegram message. Then, ‘A11’ letter was sent to the Appellant by the Depot Manager

of the Giriulla Depot complying with the procedure stipulated in the Disciplinary Rules.

Due to the failure on the part of the Applicant to respond the aforementioned

notifications, the Notice of Vacation of Post had been sent by the Respondent on

06/09/2004.

SC APPEAL 133/2016 JUDGMENT Page 8 of 16

The concept of vacation of post was examined by Justice Jayasuriya in the case

of Nelson de. Silva v Sri Lanka State Engineering Corporation (1996) 2 Sri LR 342

at 343 as follows;

“The concept of vacation of post involves two aspects; one is the mental element,

that is intention to desert and abandon the employment and the more familiar

element of the concept of vacation of post, which is the failure to report at the

work place of the employee. To constitute the first element, it must be established

that the Applicant is not reporting at the work place, was actuated by an intention

to voluntarily vacate his employment.”

When discussing the above, Jayasuriya J was guided by the decision of the

Supreme Court in The Superintendent of Hewagama Estate v Lanka Eksath

Workers Union SC 7-9/69 [S.C minutes 02.02.1970] and referred to the said

decision in his judgment as follows;

“The learned President of the Labour Tribunal hold on the facts that there was no

abandonment of employment by the workman as the workman in question had

no intention of abandoning his employment. The learned President correctly

applying the legal principles observed that the physical absence and the mental

element should co- exist for there to be a vacation of post in law. Besides, he held

on this issue the Tribunal ought to be guided by the common law of the land

which is the Roman Dutch Law and consequently the English doctrine of

frustration, relied upon by the learned Counsel, has no application whatsoever to

the situation under consideration. An appeal preferred by the employer against

this order of the learned President of the Labour Tribunal was considered by the

Supreme Court in The Superintendent of Hewagama Estate Vs. Lanka Estate

Workers Union and the order of the learned President was affirmed in Appeal.”

Kulatunga J in Wijenaike v Air Lanka Ltd. (1990) 1 Sri L.R. 293, referred to

the principle of Vacation of Post and emphasised that physical absence alone is

SC APPEAL 133/2016 JUDGMENT Page 9 of 16

insufficient and that the party seeking to establish a vacation of post must prove that

the physical absence co-existed with the mental intent.

As established above, the concept of vacation of post involves two aspects;

Physical element and mental element. These elements must co-exist with each other

for the employer to establish that there is vacation of post by the employee;

Kalamazoo Industries v Minister of Labour & Vocational Training (1998) 1 SLR

235.

The physical element was proved with the absence to report to work but the

Appellant denied the mental element. Hence the issue here is to identify what was the

mental element of the Appellant (The Employee) and whom should be satisfied with

the reasoning?

It has been an established principle in Industrial law that the right to Hire and

fire an employee is vested with the Employer provided that the grounds on which an

employee is fired is just and reasonable. Hence a reasonable person should take an

objective view by considering the evidence that lies before him. In order to understand

who a reasonable person should be, it is sufficient to equate him to the man on the

Clapham bus-the proverbial reasonable man we often meet in law

It could be seen that in order for a reasonable person to uncover both the

physical and mental element as to the Vacation of Post by the employee they need to

be attributed with knowledge of all relevant background facts and information. Such

facts in this case would be: 1) whether the employee obtained leave for the days he

did not report to work? 2) whether he had communicated his reason for not reporting

to work within a stipulated time period?

The learned President of the Labour Tribunal held that, no mental element

established on the part of the Appellant in vacation of post. It is pertinent to note that

the learned President of the Labour Tribunal relied on the dissenting judgment of Mark

Fernando, J in Nandasena v Uva Regional Transport Board (supra) and stated that,

though there is a physical element the mental element of the Appellant to vacate his

post was not proved. The learned President of the Labour Tribunal without taking into

SC APPEAL 133/2016 JUDGMENT Page 10 of 16

consideration of the information a reasonable person should have held that the mental

element was not proved due to the surrounding circumstances and due to the threats

of the Appellant’s life he was compelled to keep out of work. The Learned President of

the Labour Tribunal has arrived at this decision by considering the past hinderances

that had caused the Appellant not to report to work. However, it should be taken into

consideration that in those situations the Appellant had lodged complaints to the

police and the Commissioner of Labour with regard to the hinderances caused by other

employees, which clearly demonstrate the intention of the Appellant to continue his

work at the Respondent Board. It should be noted that with regard to the present

period of time in which the Appellant had not reported to work and for which the

Appellant is now claiming that he did not report due to fear of life had not followed

any of the previously followed procedure to bring it to the notice of any relevant

authorities nor the employer. Further the learned President of the Labour Tribunal

considered and decided that the application of Rule 21 of the Disciplinary Rules of Sri

Lanka Transport Board into this situation is not just and equitable hence decided that

the termination based on vacation of post was not justified.

The learned Judge of the Provincial High Court of Kurunegala did not agree

with the order of the learned President of the Labour Tribunal and set aside the order

of the learned President of the Labour Tribunal stating that, the Respondent had

informed the Appellant to report to work by a telegram on 23/08/2004 and by a letter

on 27/08/2004 within seven days but the Appellant did not respond to any of those

messages and having received the letter for vacation of post-dated 06/09/2004, the

Appellant filed this application before the Labour Tribunal, Kuliyapitiya.

The learned Judge of the Provincial High Court of Kurunegala relied on the

dictum in Nelson De Silva v Sri Lanka State Engineering Corporation (supra) to

identify the intention of the employee to not to abandon the employment. It was

stated that “a reasonable explanation may negative the intention of the employee to

abandon his employment”. It was observed by the learned Judge of the Provincial High

Court of Kurunegala that the Appellant had not challenged the notice of vacation of

SC APPEAL 133/2016 JUDGMENT Page 11 of 16

post issued on 06/09/2004 with bona fide, satisfactory explanation and the Appellant

even after receiving the telegram message and a letter requesting him to return to

work did not make any response to the Respondent. Hence, it was obvious that the

Appellant had not shown his intention to return to work.

Given the importance of the case of Nandasena v Uva Regional Transport

Board (supra) as the Learned President of the Labour Tribunal relied on the dissenting

judgment pronounced by Justice Mark Fernando, it is pertinent to consider the said

judgment in its entirety to see if the Learned President of the Labour Tribunal has been

correctly influenced by the said judgments.

As per the facts of the case provided in the Sri Lanka Law Reports at pages 318

& 319, Nandasena was employed by the Uva Regional Transport Board as a bus

conductor attached to the Embilipitiya Depot. On 3/4/1984 he was interdicted on two

charges namely, assault and conspiracy to assault the Depot Manager on 26/3/1984.

and failing to reveal to the respondent the correct facts relating to the incident of

26/3/84. After a domestic inquiry he was found guilty of the second charge of

misleading the Board by concealing the truth and/or making a false statement relating

to the incident of assault which took place on 26/3/1984. Consequently, he was held

to be not a fit and proper person to hold employment under the Board. On 26/12/84

the Personnel Manager informed the appellant of the result of the domestic inquiry

and indicated that the punishments meted out were disentitlement to salary during

the period of interdiction and a disciplinary transfer to a new station of which he will

be informed subsequently. On 31/12/84 he was informed that his new station was the

Ratnapura Depot with effect from 1/1/1985.

On 2/1/1985 Nandasena wrote to the Personnel Manager asserting his

innocence and that he was not at Embilipitiya on the day of the incident and stating

that the unlawful deprivation of wages and transfer constituted a constructive

termination of his services and he would be appealing against the order of 26/12/84.

He asked for stay of the transfer pending the appeal. He called for a reply on or before

15/1/1985. On 11/1/85 the Personnel Manager replied that he had no power to stay

SC APPEAL 133/2016 JUDGMENT Page 12 of 16

the transfer citing the Board’s rule 14 which provided that upon an appeal being made

a punishment transfer would not be stayed. Nandasena wrote again to the Personnel

Manager on 21/1/1985 asking for a reconsideration and that pending the result of the

appeal he be transferred to the Godakawela Depot as this was within the limit of his

free travel pass whereas Ratnapura was not and would involve him in additional

expenses. The Personnel Manager did not reply.

On 8/2/1985 the Depot Manager Ratnapura issued a vacation of post notice

giving seven days to explain his absence. On 10/2/85 the Nandasena replied he was

awaiting the Personnel Manager's final decision. On 22/2/85 the Depot Manager

Ratnapura informed the Appellant that he was deemed to have vacated his post on

5/1/85 by failing to report for work on or after that date. On 28/2/85 Nandasena wrote

to the Personnel Manager seeking reinstatement and a posting to either Kahawatta or

Godakawela pending the result of his appeal. On 1/4/85 the Personnel Manager

replied rejecting the appeal and reiterating the position set out in the letter of

11/1/1985. On 28/2/1985 the appellant made an application to the Labour Tribunal in

respect of the termination of his services. The Board took up the position that

Nandasena had been transferred to Ratnapura as a punishment upon being found

guilty of serious misconduct. The transfer order continued to be operative despite

Nandasena’s appeal and upon his failing to report for work at the Ratnapura Depot he

was properly deemed to have vacated his post. The notes of inquiry of the domestic

hearing were not produced before the Labour Tribunal and the application by the

appellant to have them so produced was objected by the Uva Regional Transport

Board and disallowed by the Tribunal. Nandasena appealed to the Court of Appeal and

Court of Appeal dismissed his appeal stressing that "the facts leading to the

disciplinary transfer was not the issue to be determined by the Tribunal."

Mark Fernando J, in his dissenting judgment discussed about the question

whether the appellant's failure to report for work amounted to a repudiation of the

contract of employment; or whether it was a transgression only justifying disciplinary

action short of dismissal; or whether it was a bona fide challenge to a disputed order;

SC APPEAL 133/2016 JUDGMENT Page 13 of 16

or whether it was a justifiable or permissible response to a wrongful or unreasonable

punishment. His Lordship identified that, “recognition of an employee's right to refrain

from complying with a transfer order would result in serious abuse, in that there would

be non-compliance with every transfer order. It is contended in reply that non-

recognition of a limited right of bona fide challenge of an improper transfer order would

enable an employer to dismiss an employee for frivolous reasons, with impunity, by

falsely finding him guilty of some trumped-up charge; and then, without imposing the

desired punishment of dismissal, to subject him to a vexatious punishment transfer. The

employee will then be in a dilemma: if he proceeds on transfer, he thereby acquiesces

and accepts his guilt; if he does not, he will be deemed to have abandoned his post….”.

Further, his Lordship identified that, there was a failure to address the issue of

misconduct by the Labour Tribunal and Court of Appeal before giving their judgments

because, the disciplinary inquiry notes and findings of the domestic inquiry was not

produced before them or the witnesses who gave evidence at the disciplinary inquiry

would not be called to testify before the Tribunal. (Ibid page 328). Hence, his Lordship

arrived to a conclusion that,

‘’the punishment transfer was unjustified; the refusal to proceed on transfer was

based both on a bona fide challenge of the transfer order as well as on

circumstances which arguably supported a stay or a variation; that refusal was

therefore at most a technical breach not motivated by an intention to repudiate

the contract, or to abandon his post, or defy the employer; it did not warrant

termination.’’

Goonewardena J, (with Wadugodapitiya J agreeing) in his majority judgment in the

said case held that,

“There is no material to say that the disciplinary order of transfer was unjustified

or constituted arbitrary punishment. Even assuming the transfer was invalid the

employee must obey it. He could appeal against the order but he cannot refuse to

carry it out. He must comply and complain. The failure to report at the Ratnapura

Depot was a deliberate and calculated act of disobedience and a virtual

SC APPEAL 133/2016 JUDGMENT Page 14 of 16

repudiation of his contract. The appellant of his own volition secured his own

discharge from employment under the Board by vacating his post.”

The majority view in the Nandasena case has set out the dictum that an

aggrieved employee as was in the above case should comply with the decision of the

employer and then follow the necessary appeal procedures to contest such decision.

This is because in appeal if the decision is held in favour of the employee, he would be

entitled to reasonable compensation he has suffered during that time period but by

not complying with the orders of the employer’s he would cause irremediable losses

to the employer. Further it could be seen that the Learned President of the Labour

Tribunal has wrongfully relied on this case as the dissenting judgment of the Justice

Mark Fernando is not the ratio decidendi in that case thereby not an opinion for the

Labour Tribunal to follow.

It was further observed in the majority decision in Nandasena v Uva Regional

Transport Board (Supra) that,

“I however incline to the view, one which learned Counsel for the respondent

strenuously contended for, that rather than the respondent Board terminating his

employment under it, the appellant of his own volition secured his own discharge

from employment under the. Board by vacating his post, which according to the

disciplinary rules binding on him had to be the result of his being absent from

work without having obtained leave and failing to show justification for such

absence. There is no doubt in my mind that the appellant conducted himself in a

way which resulted in his discharge from employment, forcing upon the Board a

step he compelled it-to take, leaving it no other choice.”

The Indian Supreme Court in Jeewanal Ltd v Their Workmen (1961) 1 L.L.J.

517 (SC) observed the following:

“If an employee continues to be absent from duty without obtaining leave and in

an unauthorised manner for such a long period of time .... an inference may

SC APPEAL 133/2016 JUDGMENT Page 15 of 16

reasonably be drawn from such absence that due to his absence he has

abandoned service"

This Court taking into consideration of the above observations of the Indian Supreme

Court in the case of Building Materials Corporation v Jathika Seveka Sangamaya

(1993) 2 SLR 316, held that long absence without obtaining leave or authority is

evidence of desertion or abandonment of service. In that case also, the Applicant,

employee had been absent for a long period from work. The Court held that the

workman had failed to satisfy the employer that he was in fact ill and that he was not

fit to report for work. The Supreme Court held that it was clear that the employee by

his conduct had severed the contract of service.

This Court in the above-mentioned case observed the following:

“An intention to remain away permanently must necessarily be inferred from the

Employee's conduct and I hold that long absence without obtaining leave or

authority is evidence of desertion or abandonment of service.

As observed above where an employee endeavours to keep away from work or

refuses or fails to report to work or duty without an acceptable excuse for a reasonable

period of time such conduct would necessarily be a ground which justifies the

employer to consider the employee as having vacated service. In the circumstances, I

am of the view that the Respondent has in this case proved that the Appellant was

absent without leave from 17/08/2004 for a period of approximately 21 days and that

it is reasonable on the facts established in this case to draw the inference that the

Appellant had no intention to report for work at the Giriulla depot. Further, there is no

evidence produced before the Court to prove that the Appellant was subject to fear of

life between the period from 17th August 2004 to the 06th September 2004 in which

period he was absent for work.

If Appellant did have a fear of life, he could have complained to the Police,

Higher authorities in the Sri Lanka Transport Board, Human Rights Commission,

Ombudsman or Courts Etc. There is no evidence presented in this regard by the

Appellant before the Labour Tribunal other than a mere statement. However, in regard

SC APPEAL 133/2016 JUDGMENT Page 16 of 16

to the aforesaid mental element on the part of the Appellant to abandon his

employment has not adequately considered by the learned President of the Labour

Tribunal in his order and hence it is liable to be judicially reviewed before this Court.

Hence, I am of the view that the Respondent has proved and submitted evidence

regarding the vacation of post by the Appellant and the Appellant has failed to prove

judicially acceptable reasons to his absence for report to work sufficiently.

In view of the facts and above-mentioned judicial pronouncements made in this

regard, I am of the view that the learned Judge of the Provincial High Court had

correctly arrived at the conclusion that the learned President of the Labour Tribunal

had failed to consider the relevant material and had set aside the Order of the Labour

Tribunal on the basis that the Appellant had not shown any intention to return to work.

In the circumstances, I dismissed the appeal of the Appellant and uphold the judgment

of the learned Judge of the Provincial High Court dated 03/09/2013.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

A.H.M.D. NAWAZ, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

MAHINDA SAMAYAWARDHENA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT