==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Ipitakaduwa Gamage Sarath,

“Ruwan”, Wewahamanduwa,

Mathara.

Substituted Plaintiff-Appellant-

Appellant

SC/APPEAL/07/2021

SP/HCCA/MA/03/2018(F)

DC MATHARA 11792/L

Vs.

1. Hellakala Gamage Siril,

Adikaramwatte,

Wewahamanduwa,

Mathara.

2. Hellakala Gamage Sugathadasa,

Adikaramwatte,

Wewahamanduwa,

Mathara. (Deceased)

2a. Rupaningal Lalani Indrani,

Adikaramwatte,

Wewahamanduwa, Mathara.

2b. Hellakala Gamage Cyril,

Edirisooriyage Hena,

Wewahamanduwa, Mathara.

Substituted 2nd Defendant-

Respondent-Respondents

3. Talpe Merenchige Lalith De

Silva, Walgama, Matara.

Defendant-Respondent-

Respondents

2

SC/APPEAL/7/2021

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Sampath K.B. Wijeratne, J.

K.M.G.H. Kulatunga, J.

Counsel: Janaka Prathapasinghe for the Plaintiff-Appellant-

Appellant.

Rushdhie Habeeb with K.U.S. Dissanayake for the 1st and

2nd Defendant-Respondent-Respondents.

Written submissions:

by the Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant on 19.07.2021.

by the 1st and 2nd Defendant-Respondent-Respondents on

20.05.2021.

Argued on: 05.03.2026

Decided on: 17.03.2026

Samayawardhena, J.

The plaintiff instituted this action in the District Court of Matara in 2009

against three defendants seeking, inter alia, a declaration of title to the

land described in paragraph 2 of the plaint (being Lot 4 of the final

partition plan marked P1 at the trial), the ejectment of the defendants

therefrom, the permission to erect a wall on the northern boundary of

her land, damages and costs.

The case was fixed for ex parte trial against the 1ˢᵗ and 3ʳᵈ defendants.

The 2ⁿᵈ defendant is said to be the owner of Lot 3 of the said plan, which

lies immediately to the north of Lot 4.

The 2ⁿᵈ defendant filed answer admitting that he is in possession of Lot

3. He also asserted that he had acquired title to Lot 4 by prescriptive

possession. On that basis, he sought dismissal of the plaintiff’s action.

At the trial, a surveyor and the plaintiff gave evidence, and on behalf of

the plaintiff documents P1–P15 were marked. None of them were marked

3

SC/APPEAL/7/2021

subject to proof at the time of marking them in evidence or when the

plaintiff closed her case reading them in evidence. The 2ⁿᵈ defendant

neither gave evidence nor called any witness to establish his prescriptive

claim over Lot 4.

At the hearing before this Court, learned counsel for the 2ⁿᵈ defendant

candidly admitted that the 2ⁿᵈ defendant has no claim over Lot 4, as he

had failed to establish prescriptive title to that Lot. He further accepted

that no evidence had been led in support of the plea of prescription and

that even the 2ⁿᵈ defendant himself had not given evidence.

However, quite strangely, the District Judge dismissed the plaintiff’s

action on a hypothetical ground. In the judgment, the District Judge

states that he observes that the plaintiff had abandoned her principal

reliefs for a declaration of title to Lot 4 and the ejectment of the

defendants therefrom, and had confined herself only to the relief

permitting her to erect a wall on the northern boundary separating Lots

3 and 4 (මෙෙ අවස්ථාව වන විට පැමිණිලිකාරිය සිය පැමිණිල්මල් “අ” සහ “ආ” මේද යටමේ

ඉල්ලා ඇති සහන අතහැර දො ඇති බව ො හට නීරීක්ෂණය වන අතර ඇය රැඳී සිටින්මන් “ඇ”

යන්න සහනය ෙත බව පැහැදිලිව මපනී යයි). The District Judge made these

observations on assumptions drawn from certain answers given by the

plaintiff during cross-examination under pressure. It is relevant to note

that the plaintiff was a 75-year-old lady, brought up in a village

environment, at the time she was giving evidence. She commenced giving

evidence on 19.12.2013 and concluded her evidence only on 24.04.2017.

This speaks volumes of the ordeal she had to undergo during this period.

The evidence of a witness must be read contextually and as a whole. The

Court cannot select isolated answers given during cross-examination

and proceed to assume facts which the witness never intended.

The District Judge then proceeds to state that, since the northern

boundary between Lots 3 and 4 had not been established by the plan

marked P2, the plaintiff’s action must fail.

4

SC/APPEAL/7/2021

Regrettably, the High Court of Civil Appeal of Matara, on appeal, affirmed

this judgment.

A previous bench of this Court granted leave to appeal on the following

questions of law:

(1) Did the District Court and the High Court completely misdirect

themselves in interpreting the plaintiff’s action as an action for

definition of boundaries when in fact it was mainly an action for

declaration of title?

(2) Did the District Court and the High Court fail to consider that the

2ⁿᵈ defendant set up the defence of prescriptive possession in

respect of the property described in paragraph 2 of the plaint,

namely Lot 4 of plan P1?

The following two questions of law were raised on behalf of the 2ⁿᵈ

defendant:

(3) Has the plaintiff withdrawn her reliefs for declaration of title and

ejectment, leaving the District Judge to consider only the

boundary dispute as reflected in paragraph (c) of the prayer to the

plaint?

(4) Has the plaintiff failed to comply with sections 41 and 46(2)(a) of

the Civil Procedure Code so as to render the plaint liable to

rejection in limine?

The plaintiff’s entitlement to Lot 4 emanates from the final partition plan

P1 prepared in 1956. The final decree of partition was not produced as it

had decayed due to lapse of time, but Land Registry extracts relevant to

the registration of the final decree of partition were marked P4. According

to P4, Lot 4 had been allotted to Haththotuwa Gamage Don Gunasekera.

By deed of transfer marked P6 he transferred the land to the mother of

the plaintiff. After the demise of her mother (as evidenced by the death

certificate marked P12) the land devolved upon her five children

including the plaintiff (whose birth certificates were marked P7–P11). The

5

SC/APPEAL/7/2021

other siblings gifted their rights to the plaintiff by deed of gift marked

P13. As I have already stated, none of these documents were marked

subject to proof and the District Judge accepted the devolution of title of

the plaintiff.

As I have held in several cases, including Pinto v. Fernando [2024/25]

BLR 474, the standard of proof in a rei vindicatio action is that of a

balance of probabilities, as in any other civil action. The expression “strict

proof of the plaintiff’s title” used in Pathirana v. Jayasundara (1955) 58

NLR 169 does not mean that the plaintiff in a rei vindicatio action is

required to establish title beyond a reasonable doubt or to any high

degree of proof. That expression was employed to distinguish the nature

of proof required in a declaration of title action arising from a contractual

relationship between the parties, such as that of lessor and lessee, from

a rei vindicatio action proper which is founded upon ownership of the

property. In a rei vindicatio action, the plaintiff is required to establish

that he has “sufficient”, “superior”, or “better” title than that of the

defendant. If such title is established on a balance of probabilities, the

plaintiff is entitled to succeed. No rigid rule can be laid down as to the

circumstances in which the Court should hold that the plaintiff has

discharged this burden. The question whether the plaintiff has proved

title must be determined upon a consideration of the totality of the

evidence led in the case, including the evidence adduced by the

defendant. The observation in Wanigaratne v. Juwanis Appuhamy (1962)

65 NLR 167 that “the defendant in a rei vindicatio action need not prove

anything, still less his own title” should not be misconstrued as

precluding the Court from taking into consideration the defendant’s

evidence or his claim when evaluating the evidence to come to a correct

conclusion. A rei vindicatio action is not an action in rem but an action

in personam. Accordingly, the decree entered in such an action binds

only the parties and their privies.

The plaintiff in this case has established her title to Lot 4 even beyond

the standard of proof expected of a plaintiff in a rei vindicatio action.

6

SC/APPEAL/7/2021

Above all, when the 2ⁿᵈ defendant now states that he has no claim over

Lot 4, the plaintiff becomes entitled to judgment for declaration of title

and ejectment.

Let me now briefly consider why the District Judge patently erred on the

question of identification of the land. In the instant case, the plaintiff

claimed title to Lot 4 of the final partition plan marked P1, while the 2ⁿᵈ

defendant claimed prescriptive possession of that same Lot. The plaintiff

also produced another plan marked P2, which had been prepared in

connection with an attempt at settlement before the Mediation Board and

which appears to have unnecessarily complicated matters. Plan P2 is

wholly redundant when plan P1 is available. Plan P1 is more than

sufficient to identify the land claimed by the plaintiff. There is no

indispensable requirement in a rei vindicatio action that the plaintiff

must obtain a commission to prepare a plan for the purposes of the case.

Where a plan already exists identifying the land in dispute, there is no

necessity to obtain a commission to superimpose that plan on a new plan

unless there is a genuine dispute as to the identity of the corpus. How

can there be a dispute as to the identification of Lot 4 when the 2ⁿᵈ

defendant claims that he acquired Lot 4 by prescription?

Ultimately, the District Judge dismissed the plaintiff’s action on the basis

that plan P1 had not been properly superimposed on plan P2. That

reasoning is wholly misplaced. The boundaries of Lot 4 are already

clearly identified in the final partition plan marked P1, and there was

therefore no necessity to superimpose P1 on any other plan for the

purpose of identifying the corpus. The boundaries of Lot 4 in plan P1 can

readily be demarcated on the ground with the assistance of a surveyor

and thereafter the plaintiff can erect a wall or fence around Lot 4 as she

pleases.

I answer the 1ˢᵗ and 2ⁿᵈ questions of law in the affirmative and the 3ʳᵈ and

4ᵗʰ questions of law in the negative.

7

SC/APPEAL/7/2021

The judgment of the District Court and the judgment of the High Court

affirming it are set aside. The District Judge is directed to enter judgment

in favour of the plaintiff as prayed for in paragraphs (අ) and (ආ) of the

prayer to the plaint, namely the declaration of title to Lot 4 in plan P1

and the ejectment of the defendants therefrom.

The 2ⁿᵈ defendant shall pay taxed costs in all three Courts to the plaintiff.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Sampath K.B. Wijeratne, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

K.M.G.H. Kulatunga, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court