1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

SC.CHC.APPEAL.NO.49/2012

CHC Case No. HC(Civil) 559-2010(MR)

ESTEEL (Private) Limited

Spur Road II

Industrial Processing Zone (IPZ)

Katunayake

PLAINTIFF

- VS -

East Link Engineering Company

(Private)

No. 241/31, Kirula Road

Colombo 5

DEFENDANT

AND NOW BETWEEN

East Link Engineering Company

(Private)

No. 241/31, Kirula Road

Colombo 5

DEFENDANT – APPELLANT

- VS -

ESTEEL (Private) Limited

Spur Road II

SC.CHC.APPEAL.NO.49/2012

2

Industrial Processing Zone (IPZ)

Katunayake

PLAINTIFF – RESPONDENT

Before : E. A. G. R. Amarasekara, J.

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J.

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J.

Counsel : Harith de Mel with Ms. Hasini Rupasinghe instructed by Shiranthi

Gunawardena Associates for the Defendant – Appellant

Chandana Liyanapatabendi, PC, with Heshan Thambimuttu instructed by

H. Chandrakumar de Silva for the Plaintiff – Respondent.

Argued on : 30.10.2024

Decided on : 16.06.2025

E. A. G. R. Amarasekara, J.

This Appeal is made by the Defendant – Appellant, East Link Engineering Company (Private),

[Hereinafter referred to as the “Defendant” or “Appellant”] against the Judgement of the

Commercial High Court of Colombo under CHC Case No. HC (Civil) 559-2010 (MR) that

decided to grant the relief prayed for in the Plaint dated 24.06.2008 filed by the Plaintiff –

Respondent Company, ESTEEL (Private) Limited [Hereinafter referred to as the “Plaintiff” or

“Respondent”].

The Respondent instituted this action against the Appellant in the Commercial High Court of

Colombo under CHC Case No. HC (Civil) 559-2010 (MR) on 24.06.2008 to recover Euros

SC.CHC.APPEAL.NO.49/2012

3

25,756.56 or its equivalent in Sri Lankan Rupees with legal interest. In the Plaint dated

24.06.2008, among other things, the Respondent stated the following:

• Both the Appellant and the Respondent are companies duly incorporated in Sri Lanka.

• There was a contractual relationship between the Parties whereby the Appellant

purchased goods from the Respondent and the Respondent supplied goods on credit

basis.

• The Appellant ordered goods manufactured by the Respondent by way of purchase

orders annexed to the Plaint.

• The Respondent raised the invoices annexed to the Plaint in respect of the goods so

ordered by the Appellant and some invoices were raised to recover cost of tax paid by

the Respondent for exporting the goods in question.

• The Respondent, thereafter, delivered the goods so ordered to the Appellant as evinced

through the Advices of Dispatch annexed to the Plaint. Some goods were delivered to

the Appellant on 18.10.2007 and some were delivered to the Appellant on 21.09.2007.

• As at 02.06.2008, the Respondent had sold and delivered to the Appellant on credit and

the Appellant accepted the goods to the value of 25,759.56 Euros as set out in the

document marked X2 and annexed to the Plaint.

• The Appellant, even though was obliged to pay, failed and neglected to pay the

aforesaid sum of 25,759.56 Euros when demanded to pay.

The Plaint also contains averments to indicate that the Appellant admitted its indebtedness

towards the Respondents where the Appellant undertook to settle the outstanding balance. In

this regard, the Respondent, in its Plaint, had referred to certain email communications between

Parties. The Plaint had further referred to the letter of demand dated 10.03.2008 sent by the

Respondent’s lawyer and to the reply dated 14.03.2008 received in that regard where, while

denying the claim, it was stated in reply that ‘goods sold and supplied by the Respondent’

were of inferior quality and highly priced. The reply of the Respondent through its lawyer to

SC.CHC.APPEAL.NO.49/2012

4

the said reply to the letter of demand also had been tendered with the Plaint which denied the

said allegation of inferior quality and high pricing.

Based on the above, the Respondent had prayed for a Judgement for the recovery of the said

Euros 25,759.56 or its equivalent in Sri Lanka Rupee, together with legal interest from the date

of the Plaint till the date of the decree and, thereafter, on the aggregate amount till the payment

in full.

The Appellant by its Answer dated 20.11.2008 (Copy filed in English is dated 16.02.2009),

among other things, took up the position that;

• The Appellant and Respondent are duly registered companies as stated in the Plaint.

• The Commercial High Court has the jurisdiction to adjudicate the matter.

• The Appellant was the agent for sales and distribution in Sri Lanka of the Respondent

from 1998 for selling and distributing of 19” Electronic steel Cabinets manufactured

by the Respondent.

• The contract or agreement between the Appellant and the Respondent contained the

following conditions;

o In the event of termination of the sales and distributorship Agency given to the

Appellant for whatever reason, the goods which were not yet sold and

possessed by the Appellant at the time will be taken back by the Respondent

and pay its value.

o A grace period was available to pay the purchased value of the goods of the

Respondent to enable the Appellant to sell and recover monies from its

customers.

o The Appellant was allowed to pay the Respondent’s money after collecting

from its customer from the inception.

o The Appellant could not order the required number of spare parts in some items

for its customers’ requirement, but the minimum amount was determined by

the Respondent at its discretion.

SC.CHC.APPEAL.NO.49/2012

5

o The expenses of advertising and promoting the good of the Respondent to be

borne by the Appellant.

o No VAT or any other tax was charged by the Respondent for the goods

purchase on credit by the Appellant.

• Contrary to the agreement or contract, the Respondent had added 15% VAT in the

invoices annexed to the Plaint and amounts stated in those invoices are incorrect and

therefore illegal and, in any event, the Respondent was not entitled to charge VAT;

further the Appellant had not received these invoices of the Respondent.

• On 13.10.2007, the Appellant had paid to the Sri Lanka Customs a sum of Rs. 1,370,909

being custom’s duty and VAT on behalf of the Respondent. The said amounts have to

be reduced from the money to be paid for the goods.

• On or about 17.01.2008, the Respondent, without a valid reason, unreasonably illegally

and contrary to the Agreement stopped issuing goods to the Appellant on credit

whereby opportunities of selling the available goods were prevented by the Respondent.

• The Appellant had sold goods to its customers on credit and has to recover more than

10,000 Euros from them. The Respondent was aware of the above fact.

• As at the date of the Answer, the Appellant was in possession of the goods of the

Respondent to the value of 10842/02 Euros and the Appellant is ready and willing to

hand over the unsold goods to the Respondent at any moment.

• In the said backdrop, the Respondent is not entitled to claim the monies of the invoices

annexed to the Plaint and no cause of action has accrued to the Respondent to sue the

Appellant.

• In light of the above, the Appellant denied its liability but, has admitted that it had

issued the purchase orders marked X3A2 and X3A3 annexed to the Plaint. The

Appellant has further admitted that the sending of the email letter and reply letter

marked X4 and X8 respectively annexed to the Plaint, but denied that the Appellant had

accepted to pay monies to the Respondent.

SC.CHC.APPEAL.NO.49/2012

6

Hence, the Appellant prayed for the Respondent’s action to be dismissed.

The trial commenced on 9 admissions and 22 issues as decided on 24.06.2009. During the trial,

the Respondent called 2 witnesses, the Marketing Manager and Warf Clerk, and produced

documents marked P1 – P12. Objections to P2, P3 and P5 appear to have been reiterated at the

close of the Plaintiff’s case but P5 had not been objected when it was first marked (vide page

183 of the brief); there is no document marked such as P3 what has been originally objected

were P3B1 to P3B5 and P3C1 to P3C3 (vide page 183 of the brief). There are other markings

such as P3A1 to P3A3. Thus, reiteration of objections to P3 does not clearly indicate any

document marked at the trial. P5 is a prepared account sheet. The amount contained in that can

be ascertained by other documents. The Appellant called 1 witness, the Goods and Supplies

Officer, and tendered documents marked V1 – V27.

Among the admissions made, inter alia, the incorporation of the Parties as limited liability

companies, the jurisdiction of the Court, purchase orders marked X3(A1), X3(A2) and X3(A4)

[P3A1-P3A3 at the trial], X4 email (P4 at the trial), receipt of X7, the letter of Demand (P7A

at the trial), Sending of X8, reply of the Appellant’s Attorney (P8 at the trial), Receipt of X9(a)

in reply to X8 (P9A at the trial), and issuance of X1, X2 and publishing of X3 which are

annexed to the Answer are found.

The learned Judge of the Commercial High Court of Colombo delivered his Judgement, dated

09.02.2012, holding that the Respondent is entitled to the reliefs prayed for in the prayer to the

Plaint.

The following paragraphs quoted from the Judgment reveals why the learned High Court Judge

held in favour of the Respondent’s claim for money recovery based on goods sold and delivered

and rejected the claim of the Appellant of sole distributorship and purported terms of that

distributorship agreement.

(quote)

‘[The] defendant company does not deny delivery of goods. Nor does the defendant company

states that it made the payments. As seen from email correspondence marked P4 and P5, when

the plaintiff company stated in detail with invoice numbers and the amount due totaling Euros

25,759.56 in relation to the goods sold, the defendant company has not disputed them, but

SC.CHC.APPEAL.NO.49/2012

7

promised payment later and moreover requested the plaintiff company to supply the balance

goods ordered by them. In business matters, it amounts to an admission of the liability. Since

payments were not forthcoming, the plaintiff company has sent a formal letter of demand (P7A)

to the defendant company, and in reply (P8), the defendant company for the first time taken up

the position that the goods sold and supplied by the plaintiff company were of "inferior quality

and highly priced" and therefore the same could not be sold. This standpoint is obviously not

tenable.

Conversely, the defendant company in the answer has taken up the position that it is the sole

distributor of the plaintiff company's products in Sri Lanka, and in terms of that Agreement

which has now been terminated by the plaintiff company, the plaintiff company allowed the

defendant company to collect money from the customers to pay the plaintiff company the price

of goods, and no VAT was charged by the plaintiff company for the goods delivered to the

defendant company, and there are goods in the possession of the defendant company worth of

Euros 10,840.02 and the plaintiff company has failed to take them back.

It is interesting note that, even though the defendant company now speaks of sole

distributorship agreement, no such Agreement was produced at the trial. It is not the position

of the defendant company that the said Agreement is misplaced or destroyed or could not be

listed and therefore could not be produced in evidence. Simply, there is no such written

Agreement. Needless to emphasize that when the plaintiff and the defendant are two companies,

i.e., juristic persons and not natural persons, unless there is a written Agreement, how can such

an Agreement be given effect to? Where are those conditions which the defendant company

now speaks of such as nonpayment of VAT by the defendant company, return of unsold goods

etc? In fact, as seen from V19 and V20, the defendant company has paid certain taxes. More

importantly, if the defendant company was the sole distributor, what is the benefit or

commission which it gets? The submission of the defendant company that the plaintiff did not

claim VAT from the defendant company in lieu of commission as the distributor is not proved

to the satisfaction of the court notwithstanding that in some invoices (vide V4-V18) issued

during a certain period not relevant to this case marked by the defendant company during the

course of the cross examination of the plaintiff's witness VAT has not been added.

Even in the reply marked P8 to the letter of demand of the plaintiff company, the defendant

company does not speak about a Distributorship Agreement or Principal-Agent relationship.

SC.CHC.APPEAL.NO.49/2012

8

If I may repeat, in that reply sent by a firm of lawyers on behalf of the defendant company,

what has been stated is "the goods sold and supplied by you were of inferior quality and highly

priced and our client was not able to sell the goods as it has been the practice to sell the goods

and to settle you." Here, "the goods sold and supplied by you" is of particular importance. This

is contrary to the position the defendant company has taken up at the trial. Reference in V1-V3

that the defendant company is the distributor is not sufficient to establish Distributorship

Agreement between the parties which would govern the transaction under consideration in this

case. Court is unaware under which circumstances V1-V3 have been issued.' (unquote)

What is quoted above clearly show that the learned High Court Judge observed the purchase

orders and invoices raised on them and the correspondence between the Parties referring to

them and the acceptance of the indebtedness by the Appellant. The learned High Court Judge

had further observed that even in the reply to the letter demand, even though the Appellant had

taken a new stance that the goods were of poor quality and highly priced, it refers to goods sold

and supplied. It is observed that there was no reference to any existing authorized distributor

agreement or Principal and Agent relationship up to the moment of replying the said letter of

demand. It is also observed that in one of the emails marked P6, it is stated on behalf of the

Appellant: “We will pay only for what we buy now. Other we will pay later.” All these facts

indicate that there was sufficient material before the learned High Court Judge to establish the

position of the Respondent.

With regard to the new position taken up in the Answer stating that the relationship was a

Principal and Agent relationship or an Agreement of Distributorship containing the terms and

conditions referred to in the Answer, the learned High Court Judge correctly has observed that

there is no written agreement in that regard. In fact, an agreement of such nature may come

into existence after a verbal discussion or through trade practices. However, as per the

evidence, one party being a BOI approved investment, where there may be restrictions on local

dealings, it is highly unlikely that there will be oral agreements. The evidence indicates that

there was a limit of 10% for selling of products locally. Nonetheless, if it is considered that

there is a possibility of having verbal agreements between such parties, there is no acceptable

evidence to establish an offer and acceptance relating to the terms and conditions referred to as

part of the said distributorship agreement by the Appellant. One who gave evidence on behalf

of the Appellant was a goods and supplies officer, not the CEO or a member of the Board of

Director, not even the General Manager. He does not reveal that he took part in any discussion

SC.CHC.APPEAL.NO.49/2012

9

where such agreement was reached. His evidence does not reveal that by conduct the decision-

making bodies or any person with such authority of both companies came to such an agreement

with the conditions that the Appellant asserts. Thus, the said distributorship agreement seems

to be mere afterthought that came into existence at the time of filing Answer. It is true that in

V1-V3 there is a reference to the Appellant as a distributor but that does not establish that there

was a distributorship agreement containing the terms and conditions relied by the Appellant in

its Answer. Those might have even been issued or made for some other commercial purpose

for such as commercial promotions. Those do not establish the terms and conditions relied

upon by the Appellants in the alleged distributorship agreement against its own admissions

shown through communications between parties.

The witness for the Respondent, in his evidence, has explained why in certain invoices, amount

of tax is not mentioned - vide pages 210 and 211 of the brief. It must also be noted that the

Appellant’s witness who spoke about the distributorship agreement gave his evidence before

the High Court Judge who wrote the Judgment.

In Alwis v Piyasena Fernando (1993) 1 Sri L R 119, it was stated: “It is well established that

findings of primary facts by a trial Judge who hears and sees witness are not to be lightly

disturbed on appeal.”

In Mahawithana v. Commissioner of Inland Revenue (1962) 64 NLR 217, it was indicated

when should a Court with Appellate powers reconsider the correctness of inferences made by

a forum below by stating: "It would seem following these dicta, with which I most respectfully

agree, that it is open to this court to reconsider the correctness of the inference drawn by the

Board of Review as to the assessee's intention, only- (as) if that inference has been drawn on

a consideration of inadmissible evidence, or after excluding admissible and relevant evidence,

(b) if the inference was a conclusion of fact drawn by the Board but unsupported by legal

evidence, or (c) if the conclusion drawn from relevant facts is not rationally possible, and is

perverse and should therefore be set aside."

Hence, this Court does not see sufficient material to see the decision of the learned High Court

Judge as perverse or not rationally possible or not supported by legal evidence or one made

considering irrelevant matters or not considering relevant matters.

SC.CHC.APPEAL.NO.49/2012

10

This is a direct appeal made from the Judgment of the Commercial High Court. This Court

cannot hold that the learned High Court Judge erred or misdirected himself in deciding in

favour of the Respondent. Hence this Appeal is Dismissed with costs.

Appeal Dismissed.

………………………………………………

Judge of the Supreme Court

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J.

I agree.

………………………………………………

Judge of the Supreme Court

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J.

I agree.

………………………………………………

Judge of the Supreme Court