==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the maƩer of an Appeal under SecƟon 5C of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990, as amended by Act No. 54 of 2006.

SC Appeal No: 49/2023 SP/HCCA/MA No. 06/2016 (F) DC Matara Case No: 8039/L

1. Nalini Perera nee Samarasinghe, Millakandeniya, Maramba, Akuressa. 2. Amarawathie Wijeywantha nee Samarasinghe, DigalawaƩe, Maramba, Akuressa. 3. Sumanawathie Abeywickrema nee Samarasinghe, KandalagewaƩa, Henagama, Akuressa. 4. Ranjith Mahasen Samarasinghe, DigalawaƩe, Maramba, Akuressa. 5. Sahan Dhaja Samarasinghe, ColombawaƩe, Maramba, Akuressa. 6. Nilanthi Samarasinghe, Maramba, Akuressa. PLAINTIFFS Vs. Amara Ponnamperuma nee Jayasinghe, No. 126, Richmond Hill Road, Galle. DEFENDANT And Amara Ponnamperuma nee Jayasinghe, No. 126, Richmond Hill Road, Galle.

2

DEFENDANT – APPELLANT Vs. 1. Nalini Perera nee Samarasinghe, Millakandeniya, Maramba, Akuressa. 2. Amarawathie Wijeywantha nee Samarasinghe, DigalawaƩe, Maramba, Akuressa. 2A. Amara Wijeywantha 2B. Thamara Wijeywantha 2C. Samara Kumari Wijeywantha

DigalawaƩe, Maramba, Akuressa. 3. Sumanawathie Abeywickrema nee Samarasinghe, KandalagewaƩa, Henagama, Akuressa. 4. Ranjith Mahasen Samarasinghe, DigalawaƩe, Maramba, Akuressa. 5. Sahan Dhaja Samarasinghe, ColombawaƩe, Maramba, Akuressa. 6. Nilanthi Samarasinghe, Maramba, Akuressa. PLAINTIFFS – RESPONDENTS And Now Between 1. Nalini Perera nee Samarasinghe, Millakandeniya, Maramba, Akuressa. 1A. Waragoda Mudalige Dhammika Lalini

Wijesekera nee Perera, 230, Sri Dhammawansha Mawatha, Walpola, Matara 1B. Waragoda Mudalige Nihal Dharmasiri Perera,

Millakandeniya, Maramba, Akuressa. 1C. Waragoda Mudalige Kalinga Perera,

3

ThalgahakanaƩa, Maramba, Akuressa. 1D. Waragoda Mudalige Maheswari

Wijesiriwardhena nee Perera, 9, 6th Cross Lane, WergampiƟya, Matara. 1E. Waragoda Mudalige Prasad Perera,

Millakandeniya, Maramba, Akuressa. 1F. Waragoda Mudalige Sujeewa Perera,

Millakandeniya, Maramba, Akuressa. 2. Amarawathie Wijeywantha nee Samarasinghe, DigalawaƩe, Maramba, Akuressa. 2A. Amara Wijeywantha,

DigalawaƩe, Maramba, Akuressa. 2B. Thamara Wijeywantha,

DigalawaƩe, Maramba, Akuressa. 2C. Samara Kumari Wijeywantha,

DigalawaƩe, Maramba, Akuressa. 3. Sumanawathie Abeywickrema nee Samarasinghe, KandalagewaƩa, Henagama, Akuressa. 4. Ranjith Mahasen Samarasinghe, DigalawaƩe, Maramba, Akuressa. 5. Sahan Dhaja Samarasinghe, ColombawaƩe, Maramba, Akuressa. 6. Nilanthi Samarasinghe, Maramba, Akuressa. PLAINTIFFS – RESPONDENTS – APPELLANTS Vs Amara Ponnamperuma nee Jayasinghe, No. 126, Richmond Hill Road, Galle. DEFENDANT – APPELLANT – RESPONDENT

4

Before: S. Thurairaja, PC, J Yasantha Kodagoda, PC, J Arjuna Obeyesekere, J Counsel: Manohara De Silva, PC with Riad Ameen, Harithriya Kumarage and Sajith Nawaratne for the PlainƟﬀs – Respondents – Appellants Sanjaya Kodituwakku for the Defendant – Appellant – Respondent Argued on: 28th July 2025 WriƩen Tendered by the PlainƟﬀs – Respondents – Appellants on 28th August Submissions: 2023 and 4th September 2025 Tendered by the Defendant – Appellant – Respondent on 1st September 2023 and 1st September 2025 Decided on: 19th March 2026 Obeyesekere, J (1) The PlainƟﬀs – Respondents – Appellants [the PlainƟﬀs] insƟtuted acƟon in the

District Court of Matara [the District Court] on 29th April 1993 against the Defendant – Appellant – Respondent [the Defendant] seeking, inter alia the following relief:

(a) A declaraƟon that Deed of GiŌ No.47 dated 08th December 1991 aƩested

by Bathigama Arachchige Wilbert, AƩorney-at-Law [P1 / Deed No. 47] is not a document signed by Bandusena Samarasingehe Gunapala Siriwardane alias BerƟe Samarasinghe [BerƟe Samarasinghe] and that Deed No. 47 is a forged document; (b) A declaraƟon that Deed No. 47 be struck oﬀ the register maintained at the

District Registrar’s Oﬃce, Matara; (c) A declaraƟon that the PlainƟﬀs are enƟtled to the property described in the

Schedule to the Plaint in the manner prayed for in the prayer to the plaint; and (d) To eject the Defendant from the said land and to handover vacant

possession to the PlainƟﬀs.

5

(2) By its judgment delivered on 24th August 2015, the District Court granted the

reliefs prayed for by the PlainƟﬀs. The Defendant thereaŌer invoked the appellate jurisdicƟon of the Civil Appellate High Court of the Southern Province holden in Matara [the High Court]. By its judgment dated 17th October 2019, the High Court allowed the appeal and set aside the judgment of the District Court. (3) Aggrieved, the PlainƟﬀs sought and obtained leave to appeal from this Court on

16th February 2023 on two quesƟons of law which I have re-produced in paragraph 92 of this judgment. The principal submission of the learned President’s Counsel for the PlainƟﬀs and the learned Counsel for the Defendant was focused on the applicable law relaƟng to the admission of expert handwriƟng evidence.

BerƟe Samarasinghe – the ‘laird’ (4) It is admiƩed that the property that is the subject maƩer of this acƟon was owned

by BerƟe Samarasinghe. Known as “Ǐගල වලɩව” [Deegala Estate], it was approximately 52 Acres in extent and situated in Akuressa. The land consisted of tea, coconut and paddy plantaƟons and a large bungalow which was occupied by BerƟe Samarasinghe. (5) BerƟe Samarasinghe was an only child. His mother had passed away a few days

aŌer he was born. His father had remarried and the 1st – 4th PlainƟﬀs are the children from his father’s second marriage. The 5th and 6th PlainƟﬀs are the children of another child from the second marriage who had passed away at a relaƟvely young age. The PlainƟﬀs are thus BerƟe Samarasinghe’s half-brothers, half-sisters, nephew and niece. (6) It is admiƩed that the said property was iniƟally owned by Don David Gunapala

Siriwardena, the maternal grandfather/granduncle of BerƟe Samarasinghe. It is said that BerƟe Samarasinghe grew up with his grandfather/granduncle at the Deegala Estate, and that his grandfather/granduncle had subsequently giŌed the enƟre property to BerƟe Samarasinghe. The PlainƟﬀs did not live at Deegala Estate but had lived with their parents in a much smaller property situated about quarter of a mile from Deegala Estate. (7) Having been educated at Richmond College, Galle, BerƟe Samarasinghe was a

bachelor and had lived a carefree luxurious life in the large bungalow. It was in evidence that he had many employees to care for his needs, had a wide circle of

6

friends including several lawyers, maintained the bungalow in a manner that beﬁƩed estate bungalows of that era and was dependent on the income earned from the said property to maintain his lavish lifestyle. Departure from Deegala Estate and the death of BerƟe Samarasinghe (8) During the insurrecƟon in 1988-1990 which gripped the Southern Province,

BerƟe Samarasinghe had feared for his personal security. Thus, not wanƟng to live in Akuressa due to security concerns, in July 1988, he had moved in with the Defendant, who was his mother’s brothers daughter, and her husband at their house situated in Galle. During this period, with the consent of BerƟe Samarasinghe, Deegala Estate had been used by the Army and the Police and they had been staƟoned at the Estate. It is not in dispute that despite leaving his house, BerƟe Samarasinghe conƟnued to visit Deegala Estate and managed the plantaƟons on the property through his employees. Even though the insurrecƟon had been suppressed by the end of 1990, BerƟe Samarasinghe could not immediately return to his home in Akuressa as it needed repairs aŌer occupaƟon by the Army and Police personnel. Hence, he had conƟnued to live in the house of the Defendant. (9) BerƟe Samarasinghe passed away on 21st December 1991 whilst living with the

Defendant. The PlainƟﬀs state that having been informed by the Defendant of his death, they had aƩended to the funeral arrangements of BerƟe Samarasinghe and the funeral had been held at Deegala Estate. The seven day almsgiving too had been held at Deegala Estate and the PlainƟﬀs had met the costs. The PlainƟﬀs state that BerƟe Samarasinghe had taken all his belongings including his valuable documents with him to the Defendant’s house and for that reason, the PlainƟﬀs had visited the house of the Defendant a few days aŌer the almsgiving and asked for the personal documents of BerƟe Samarasinghe from the Defendant but had been informed that the documents cannot be traced. The PlainƟﬀs state further that approximately a week aŌer the demise of BerƟe Samarasinghe, the 4th PlainƟﬀ had spoken to the Defendant with regard to the ﬁling of a testamentary case pertaining to the estate of BerƟe Samarasinghe, but had not received any response. It is perƟnent to note that at that stage the Defendant had not referred to the existence of a Deed of GiŌ in her favour having been executed by BerƟe Samarasinghe.

7

(10) Since BerƟe Samarasinghe did not have any immediate family and there was no

evidence that he had leŌ a last will, and on the basis that they are the lawful heirs of the estate of BerƟe Samarasinghe, the PlainƟﬀs had ﬁled a testamentary acƟon in the District Court of Matara on 8th January 1992. Deegala Estate too had been included in the inventory among other assets. The Defendant, who unƟl then had kept silent with regard to the property, had intervened in the testamentary case by ﬁling a peƟƟon dated 24th February 1992 in which she disclosed for the ﬁrst Ɵme the existence of Deed No. 47 which is said to have been executed thirteen days before the death of BerƟe Samarasinghe and by which BerƟe Samarasinghe is said to have giŌed Deegala Estate to the Defendant subject to his life interest. The Defendant had accordingly sought an order from Court to exclude Deegala Estate from the inventory of the testamentary case. (11) The PlainƟﬀs claim that:

(a) Although he was 69 years of age, BerƟe Samarasinghe had never been hospitalized for any illness, was relaƟvely in good health and therefore was not living in anƟcipaƟon of death which warranted a disposal of his most valuable asset by way of a giŌ; (b) BerƟe Samarasinghe needed the income from Deegala Estate for his

livelihood and would therefore have retained it without giŌing it; (c) Even if BerƟe Samarasinghe intended to pass on property aŌer his death, being a bachelor dependent on the income generated by the property, he would not giŌ his most valuable asset thereby being unable to mortgage or sell the asset in whole or in part in order to raise funds to meet his lavish lifestyle; (d) If BerƟe Samarasinghe intended the Defendant or anyone else to receive

the property aŌer his death, then he would have executed a last will; and (e) The fact that BerƟe Samarasinghe did not execute a last will demonstrates

that he was not expecƟng to die any Ɵme soon and that testamentary disposiƟon was not in his contemplaƟon. (12) I must state that these are only argumentaƟve claims of the PlainƟﬀs and that

one would never know what was on the mind of BerƟe Samarasinghe two weeks prior to his death. However, viewed holisƟcally, these are circumstances which

8

are probable and those that can have a bearing on the ulƟmate decision in this case, which should reﬂect the truth. Is Deed No. 47 a forgery – proceedings before the Magistrate’s Court (13) The PlainƟﬀs state that upon perusing Deed No.47, they realised that the

signature of BerƟe Samarasinghe on Deed No. 47 was diﬀerent to his regular signature. SuspecƟng that the signature of BerƟe Samarasinghe had been forged, the 4th PlainƟﬀ had on 7th March 1992, promptly made a complaint to the Galle Police. The said complaint resulted in an invesƟgaƟon by the Galle Police and the reporƟng of facts to the Magistrate’s Court, Galle under a ‘B’ Report.

(14) During the course of the invesƟgaƟon and through the Magistrate’s Court, the

Police obtained sample documents containing the signature of BerƟe Samarasinghe and forwarded them to the Government Analysts Department for comparison with the signature that was said to be of BerƟe Samarasinghe that appeared on Deed No. 47. The Defendant too sought an opinion from a reƟred Examiner of QuesƟoned Documents relaƟng to the authenƟcity and genuineness of the signature of BerƟe Samarasinghe that appeared on Deed No. 47 when compared with the signature of BerƟe Samarasinghe that appeared on the same set of documents that the Police had forwarded to the Government Analysts Department and another set of documents produced by the Defendant herself.

(15) The opinion of both the Government Analysts Department and the reƟred

Examiner of QuesƟoned Documents was that the signature that appeared on Deed No. 47 as being that of BerƟe Samarasinghe did not tally with the signature of BerƟe Samarasinghe that appeared on the sample documents. I have discussed in detail these two reports in paragraphs 29 to 36 of this judgment.

(16) It was only thereaŌer that criminal proceedings were insƟtuted in the

Magistrate’s Court, Galle in Case bearing No. 40234, against the Defendant and the two persons who had signed as witnesses to Deed No. 47. The Defendant was charged with forgery and cheaƟng, and the two witnesses were charged with aiding and abeƫng the Defendant to commit forgery and cheaƟng. I am at a loss to understand the reason for the prosecuƟon to have preferred these charges since in my view, the most appropriate charge would have been one of using as

9

genuine a forged document. Thus, it was clear from the incepƟon that the evidence available was not suﬃcient to prove those charges.

(17) Be that as it may, the learned Magistrate has only considered the expert report

of the Government Analyst’s Department and concluded that while the said report is relevant, the aƩendant circumstances do not support a ﬁnding that Deed No. 47 is a forgery. The Magistrate’s Court accordingly acquiƩed the accused. There was no appeal against the said judgment. Is Deed No. 47 a forgery – proceedings before the District Court (18) Soon aŌer the complaint to the Police, the PlainƟﬀs ﬁled acƟon in the District

Court of Matara, alleging that Deed No. 47 is a forgery and seeking the aforemenƟoned relief. The Defendant denied that Deed No. 47 was a forgery. Having raised admissions and issues, the PlainƟﬀs led the evidence of (a) the 4th PlainƟﬀ who was employed at the Bank of Ceylon where BerƟe Samarasinghe maintained an account and therefore was familiar with the signature of BerƟe Samarasinghe, (b) the Registrar and the Record Keeper of the Magistrate’s Court, Galle in order to produce the record of the Magistrate’s Court that contained the applicaƟons by both parƟes seeking the opinion of the Examiner of QuesƟoned Documents and the two Reports, (c) Mr. C. D. Kalupahana, the Examiner of QuesƟoned Documents who had signed P16, and (d) Mr. Arthur Sirimanne, the InvesƟgaƟon Oﬃcer. The Defendant gave evidence on her behalf and led the evidence of (a) Chrishantha Wickremasinghe, who was her brother-in-law and who had signed as a witness to Deed No. 47, (b) her 1st cousin who managed Deegala Estate during the period that BerƟe Samarasinghe was living in Galle, (c) her brother, (d) the AƩorney-at-Law who aƩested Deed No. 47, and (e) a medical doctor who had treated BerƟe Samarasinghe.

(19) The PlainƟﬀs also relied on the two reports prepared by the aforemenƟoned two

handwriƟng experts for the purposes of the Magistrate’s Court case, in support of their posiƟon that Deed No. 47 is a forgery. The PlainƟﬀs led the evidence of Mr. C. D. Kalupahana, Assistant Examiner of QuesƟoned Documents at the Government Analysts Department who had prepared the report upon the applicaƟon of the Police.

10

(20) By its judgment, the District Court held that Deed No. 47 is a forgery and granted

the PlainƟﬀs the relief claimed for. It is that judgment which resulted in an appeal being ﬁled in the High Court which led to the delivery of the judgment impugned in these proceedings.

(21) In order to give context to the ﬁndings of the District Court, the High Court and

the quesƟons of law that must be determined in this appeal, I shall ﬁrst consider the legal posiƟon relaƟng to the evidence of an expert and the manner in which a Court of law is required to act when considering the evidence of an expert. SecƟon 45 of the Evidence Ordinance (22) SecƟon 45 of the Evidence Ordinance provides as follows:

“When the Court has to form an opinion as to foreign law, or of science, or art, or as to idenƟty or genuineness of handwriƟng or ﬁnger impressions, palm impressions or foot impressions, the opinions upon that point of persons specially skilled in such foreign law, science, or art, or in quesƟons as to idenƟty or genuineness of handwriƟng or ﬁnger impressions, palm impressions or foot impressions, are relevant.

Such persons are called experts.”

“IllustraƟon (c) – The quesƟon is, whether a certain document was wriƩen by A. Another document is produced which is proved or admiƩed to have been wriƩen by A. The opinion of experts on the quesƟon whether the two documents were wriƩen by the same person or by diﬀerent persons, are relevant.” (23) An ’expert’ witness is permiƩed by law to give ‘opinion’ evidence, which

enƟtlement no other witnesses are permiƩed, because a Judge, though assumed to be learned in the law, and on men, maƩers and worldly aﬀairs, does not possess the competence to form an opinion on maƩers such as foreign law, science, art, handwriƟng and ﬁnger, palm or foot impressions. As a prelude to giving ‘opinion evidence’, an expert witness is called upon to give ‘factual evidence’ on maƩers of fact, such as his observaƟons, tests carried out by him, outcome of such tests, his analysis based on principles and criteria, and thereaŌer the conclusions reached together with the opinion reached by him.

11

(24) As illustraƟon (c) to SecƟon 45 requires, the expert must compare the impugned

document with one or more other documents, proved or admiƩed to have been wriƩen by the person concerned, and to state whether in his opinion, the two documents were wriƩen by the same person or by diﬀerent persons. (25) Referring to the expression “persons specially skilled”, E.R.S.R. Coomaraswamy in

his treaƟse The Law of Evidence [Volume 1] states as follows:

“The expression is, in this context, synonymous with the word, “expert”. Experts are persons who on account of special studies or experience, are conversant with maƩers of science and/or professional skill which are beyond the range of the tribunal. Such a person must be one, who from his circumstances and employment, possesses excepƟonal means of knowledge, has given the subject parƟcular consideraƟon, and is more than ordinarily conversant with its details. The term “expert” seems to imply both superior knowledge and pracƟcal experience in the art or profession.” [page 589-590] “The quesƟon whether a person is specially skilled or not is a quesƟon of fact, and the opinion of the expert is also a quesƟon of fact.” [page 590; emphasis added]

“The court has oŌen in the course of an inquiry to be informed on some maƩer, which is material to the decision, and which involves knowledge of a special, technical or scienƟﬁc character. This informaƟon can only be supplied by someone who is specially versed or skilled in the subject. Thus, common quesƟons of this nature that arise are: What is the law of a foreign country on some point? What are the symptoms of a parƟcular poison or of a parƟcular disease? Is one specimen of handwriƟng wriƩen by the same hand as another? Such specially skilled persons are called experts. An expert is a person who has specialized knowledge on any maƩer by reason of his special study or experience.” [page 588; emphasis added] (26) In Davie v Edinburgh Magistrates [(1953) S.C. 34 at 40], Lord President Cooper

referring to the funcƟon of an expert witness stated that, “Their duty is to furnish the judge or jury with the necessary scienƟﬁc criteria for tesƟng the accuracy of their conclusions, so as to enable the judge or jury to form their own independent judgment by the applicaƟon of these criteria to the facts proved in evidence.” [emphasis added]

12

(27) Coomaraswamy goes onto state as follows:

“When an expert is called to give evidence, the side calling the witness should elicit from him his qualiﬁcaƟons and experience in order to establish to the saƟsfacƟon of the court that he is a person who is specially skilled in the science in which he is called to give expert tesƟmony. … The court has to decide on the competency of a witness. It is the duty of the judge to decide whether the skill of any person in the maƩer on which evidence of his opinion is oﬀered is suﬃcient to enƟtle him to be considered an expert, and, therefore, competent to give evidence. Such competency must be challenged in the trial court.” [page 591] (28) I must perhaps state that of the two expert reports, one was prepared on an

applicaƟon made by the Police and has been signed by the then Examiner of QuesƟoned Documents and countersigned by his Assistant. The other report was prepared at the request of the Defendant by Mr. A.D.H Samaranayake, a reƟred Examiner of QuesƟoned Documents. While the credenƟals, qualiﬁcaƟons, experience and experƟse of those who prepared the ﬁrst report was led in evidence without any contest on the part of the Defendant, the credenƟals, qualiﬁcaƟons, experience and experƟse of Mr. Samaranayake was never in dispute. Reports of the Examiner of QuesƟoned Documents (29) Through the Registrar of the Magistrate’s Court, Galle, the PlainƟﬀs tendered the

‘B’ Report ﬁled in Case No. 40234 on 29th April 1992 [P12]. According to ‘P12’, Inspector of Police Arthur Sirimanne who (a) at that Ɵme was funcƟoning as the Oﬃcer-in-Charge of the Fraud Bureau, Galle, (b) had conducted the invesƟgaƟons into the complaint, and (c) gave evidence before the District Court, had moved the Magistrate’s Court that the original, duplicate and the protocol of Deed No. 47 be sent to the Government Analysts Department [Examiner of QuesƟoned Documents] for comparison of the seven signatures of BerƟe Samarasinghe that appeared thereon, with the signature of BerƟe Samarasinghe that appeared on a series of other documents, which in Police and Court parlance is referred to as ‘normal course signatures’. While the original, duplicate and the protocol of Deed No. 47 had been marked before the Magistrate’s Court as P1, P2 and P3, the documents that had been sent for purposes of comparison had been marked P4

13

– P15. It must be noted that P6 did not bear a signature of BerƟe Samarasinghe and hence had not been examined, even though it had been sent to the Examiner of QuesƟoned Documents. (30) I must state that the documents that were sent to the Examiner of QuesƟoned

Documents were re-marked before the District Court but that the markings that I have referred to in this judgment – i.e., P1 – P15 and V1 – V16 - are the markings given to such documents before the Magistrate’s Court and in the reports of the Examiner of QuesƟoned Documents. To avoid any confusion, in this judgment, I have italicised the marking given to such documents in the Magistrate’s Court. (31) With no objecƟon being raised by the Defendant who had been noƟced to appear

in the Magistrate’s Court either to the aforesaid applicaƟon of the Police or to the documents P1 – P15 , and having led the evidence of Mr. Sirimanne [referred to as primary evidence], the Magistrate’s Court had made an order that the said documents be forwarded to the Examiner of QuesƟoned Documents to determine:

(a) If the signatures on P1, P2 and P3 have been placed by one person; (b) If the signatures on P4 – P15 have been placed by one and the same person;

and (c) If the purported signature of BerƟe Samarasinghe that is said to appear on

P1, P2 and P3 are comparable with the signature of BerƟe Samarasinghe that appears on P4, P5, P7 – P15. (32) The report of the Examiner of QuesƟoned Documents [P16] dated 30th June 1992

has been signed by Mr. P. H. Manatunga, who was the Examiner of QuesƟoned Documents at that Ɵme and Mr. C.D. Kalupahana, Assistant Examiner of QuesƟoned Documents. While Mr. Kalupahana gave evidence before the District Court, their ﬁndings are as follows: (a) Documents marked P4, P5 and P7 – 15 have been signed by one person; (b) The signatures on P4, P5 and P7 – 15 are diﬀerent from the signatures that

appear on P1, P2 and P3, [;;ajfhka" we<jq wdldrfhka" fjs.fhka" mr;rfhka" iudkqmd;hkaf.ka" ksraudKhkaf.ka iy ,dlaIksl wx. w;ska fjkia lus olajk njhs]; and (c) The person who signed P4, P5 and P7 – 15 has not signed P1, P2 and P3.

14

(33) With P16 having put into serious doubt and thrown wide open the genuineness

of Deed No. 47, the Defendant moved on 3rd February 1993 that the same set of documents that were sent by the Magistrates Court to the Examiner of QuesƟoned Documents at the request of Mr. Sirimanne and on which P16 was based, be sent to Mr. A.D.H Samaranayake, a reƟred Examiner of QuesƟoned Documents, along with sixteen other documents that had been provided by the Defendant [V1 – V16] and the mandate and signature cards signed by BerƟe Samarasinghe at the Ɵme he opened bank accounts at People’s Bank and the Sampath Bank and which documents were in the custody of the said banks, and to call for a report on whether the signatures that appeared in P4 – P15, V1 – V16 and the documents at the two banks are similar to the signatures that appear on P1, P2 and P3. While the prosecuƟon had not objected to the said applicaƟon, what is important is that the Defendant did not have any issue either with regard to the genuineness of the sample documents that were sent to Mr. Samaranayake or the source from which such documents were obtained. (34) The report of Mr. Samaranayake, dated 10th May 1993 [P18], contains the

following conclusions:

(a) The signatures on P1, P2 and P3 bear evidence of tremor, hesitaƟon, penlights, added strokes, sudden changes in direcƟon and halts. These features are all inconsistent with genuine execuƟon; (b) The signatures on P1, P2 and P3 have all been signed on the same date –

i.e., 8th December 1991. The signatures on P4, P5, P7 – P15 and V1 – V16 have been signed over almost twenty years commencing from 1971. The signatures of BerƟe Samarasinghe on P1, P2 and P3 diﬀer from the signature of BerƟe Samarasinghe on P4, P5, P7 – P15, V1 – V16 and the documents kept in the custody of the People’s Bank and Sampath Bank in line quality, relaƟve size, speed, slope, proporƟons, formaƟons and characterisƟc features pertaining to the involuntary habits in the execuƟon of the individual leƩers of the signature ‘BerƟe Samarasinghe’; (c) The signatures on P4, P5, P7 – P15, V1 – V16 and the documents kept in the custody of the People’s Bank and Sampath Bank have all been signed by one and the same person; (d) The signatory to the signatures which read ‘BerƟe Samarasinghe’ on P4, P5,

P7 – P15, V1 – V16 and the documents kept in the custody of the People’s

15

Bank and Sampath Bank did not place the signatures ‘BerƟe Samarasinghe’ on P1, P2 and P3. (35) If the report of Mr. Kalupahana was damaging to the posiƟon of the Defendant,

the report of Mr. Samaranayake obtained at her insistence was damning. (36) Thus, both Mr. Kalupahana, the expert whose services were sought by the Police,

and Mr. Samaranayake, whose services were sought by the Defendant, had opined that what appeared on all three copies of Deed No. 47 as being the signature of BerƟe Samarasinghe did not tally with the signature of BerƟe Samarasinghe that appeared on the documents that had been obtained by the Police [i.e. P4 – P15]. Mr. Samaranayake went one step further when he stated that the signatures on the three copies of Deed No. 47 were not placed by the person who placed the signatures on the documents that the Defendant made available for comparison purposes [V1 – V16]. Furthermore, he had expressed the view that P1, P2 and P3 bore features that were inconsistent with genuine execuƟon, which is a clear feature of a forgery. (37) If I may reiterate, in terms of SecƟon 45, the opinion of the handwriƟng expert is

a relevant fact when the Court has to form an opinion as to the genuineness of handwriƟng but it is not conclusive evidence. The evidenƟary weight that must be aƩached to the evidence of an expert (38) The applicability of SecƟon 45 in the context of an expert in handwriƟng has

received the consideraƟon of our Courts for over one hundred years. (39) In the case of Soysa v Sanmugam [(1907) 10 NLR 355; at page 359] Chief JusƟce

Hutchinson, referring to the liƩle value that he saw in the evidence of a person who claimed that he was an expert in handwriƟng, ﬁrst admiƩed that, “I am perhaps prejudiced as to this by my belief that comparisons of handwriƟngs are a very untrustworthy guide”, and thereaŌer went on to state that, "I have known too many instances in which experts’ opinion as to idenƟty of handwriƟng have been proved to be mistaken to accept them as anything more than a slight corroboraƟon of a conclusion arrived at independently, never so strong enough as to turn the scale against the person charged with forgery, if the other evidence is not conclusive."

16

(40) Having referred to the above observaƟons of Chief JusƟce Hutchinson,

Jayewardene, A. J, in King v Perera [(1930) 31 N.L.R. 449; at page 451] thereaŌer referred to an English case decided about ten years prior to that [Wakeford v. Lincoln (Bishop) [(1921) 90 L. J. P. C. 174] and stated as follows:

“QuesƟons depending upon handwriƟng are in many cases doubƞul and in the past have given and in the future will give cause for great anxiety in Courts of JusƟce. If that were the only piece of evidence, their Lordships, although without doubt in their own minds as to the authenƟcity of the wriƟngs, would not willingly rest their judgment on a single fact as to which error might be possible.” (41) In GraƟaen Perera v The Queen [(1960) 61 NLR 522] the case against the 3rd

accused was dependent almost enƟrely on the idenƟty of his handwriƟng on the back of the impugned cheques. There was no evidence of any person who witnessed these endorsements, or who saw the 3rd accused write the parƟculars on the pay-in-slips. The only evidence was the evidence of the handwriƟng expert. (42) Having referred to Soysa v Sanmugam [supra], Sinnetamby, J cited Mendis v

Jayasuriya [(1930) 12 CLR 44] where according to Sinnetamby, J, Akbar, J. “took the view that the expert evidence should be used only in corroboraƟon of a conclusion arrived at independently, and not to convict a person on a charge of forgery if the other evidence is not conclusive. It would create some kind of suspicion but would not go beyond it.” [page 523; emphasis added] (43) Sinnetamby, J thereaŌer went on to state as follows [page 524]:

“While I would not go to the extent of saying that an expert's evidence would only aﬀord "some slight corroboraƟon of the conclusion arrived at independently" I would hesitate to act solely upon it. If there is other independent evidence in support of the conclusion reached, recourse need not be had at all to the expert's evidence. I think, the modern view is to accept the expert's tesƟmony if there is some other evidence, direct or circumstanƟal, which tends to show that the conclusion reached by the expert is correct; provided, of course, the Court, independently of the expert's opinion, but with his assistance, is able to conclude that the wriƟng is a forgery.” [emphasis added]

17

(44) Explaining the manner in which the trial Judge should proceed where the

prosecuƟon is relying on expert evidence relaƟng to handwriƟng, Sinnetamby, J stated as follows [pages 524 – 525]:

“The Judges of our Courts, as well as of the Indian Courts, have made it clear that it is the funcƟon of the Court, with the assistance of an expert, to decide on the similarity of handwriƟng, and that it is not proper to act solely on the opinion of the expert. A Court cannot, of course, without the assistance of an expert, come to an opinion on so diﬃcult a quesƟon; … At the same Ɵme the decision being the Judge's, he should not delegate his funcƟon to the expert. The opinion of the expert is relevant, but the decision must, nevertheless, be the Judge's. … In this case the Judge has accepted the handwriƟng expert's opinion, and had made no aƩempt, himself, to decide whether the grounds on which the opinion was formed are saƟsfactory. In the result, the Judge merely adopted the opinion of the expert and this, it seems to me, he was not enƟtled to do. A Court is not jusƟﬁed in delegaƟng its funcƟon of judging to an expert and acƟng solely on the laƩer's opinion.” (45) In Samarakoon v The Public Trustee [65 NLR 100], the issue before Court was

whether the last will produced by the appellant was a forgery. Responding to a submission that the District Judge aƩached too much importance to the evidence of the handwriƟng expert and accepted his opinion too readily, and that in doing so he acted contrary to the principles laid down in Soysa v Sanmugam [supra] and Mendis v Jayasuriya [supra] as to the manner in which expert evidence relaƟng to the idenƟty of handwriƟng should be considered by a Court and the value to be aƩached to such evidence, Weerasooriya, J, who had agreed with Sinnetamby, J in GraƟaen Perera v The Queen [supra] stated that:

“But, if I may say so with respect, some of the dicta in the two cases cited above appear to go too far in that they unduly minimise the value of expert evidence relaƟng to the idenƟty of genuineness of handwriƟng; and I would prefer to accept the (following) observaƟons of my brother Sinnetamby,J in the recent case of GraƟaen Perera v. The Queen [(1960) 61 N. L. R. 522] as seƫng out more correctly the manner in which such evidence should be regarded by a Court of law.” [page 114]

18

(46) In Charles Perera and another v Motha and another [(1961) 65 NLR 294; pages

295-296], Chief JusƟce Basnayake stated as follows:

“Under our law (Evidence Ordinance, SecƟon 5) "Evidence may be given in any suit or proceeding of the existence or non-existence of every fact in issue, and of such other facts as are hereinaŌer declared to be relevant and of no others." Opinions of persons as to the idenƟty or genuineness of handwriƟng are declared to be relevant facts by secƟons 45 and 47 of the Evidence Ordinance. The former secƟon declares that the opinions as to idenƟty or genuineness of handwriƟng of persons specially skilled in such quesƟons are relevant facts, while the laƩer secƟon declares that the opinion of any person acquainted with the handwriƟng of another that it was wriƩen or signed by that other is a relevant fact. In pracƟce the class of persons whose opinions are declared to be relevant under secƟon 45 are described "experts". As we are here concerned with the opinion of an "expert" on handwriƟng I shall conﬁne what I have to say to the opinions of "experts" on handwriƟng. In the ﬁrst place for the opinion of an "expert" on handwriƟng on the quesƟon of the idenƟty or genuineness of handwriƟng to be a relevant fact in a given case, it should be one in which the Court is called upon to form an opinion as to the idenƟty or genuineness of handwriƟng. Secondly the person who gives oral evidence as to the idenƟty or genuineness of handwriƟng must be one who is specially skilled in quesƟons as to the idenƟty or genuineness of handwriƟng. Whether he is a person specially skilled in such quesƟons is a quesƟon of fact to be decided by the Court. If he is not such a person his opinion would not be a relevant fact in the case. The fact which is declared to be relevant by secƟon 45 stands in the same posiƟon as any other relevant fact which the Court has to take into consideraƟon in forming its opinion as to the idenƟty or genuineness of the handwriƟng in quesƟon. It is important to remember that it is the Court that is called upon to decide the quesƟon of idenƟty or genuineness of handwriƟng and not the "expert". The expert's opinion is only a relevant fact to be taken into account in forming the opinion of the Court. Cases which have come up before us in appeal indicate a tendency on the part of Judges to regard the opinion of persons who describe themselves as handwriƟng experts as conclusive on the quesƟon of idenƟty or genuineness of

19

handwriƟng and not merely as a relevant fact, like any other such fact, to be taken into account in arriving at the Court's opinion as to the idenƟty or genuineness of the handwriƟng in quesƟon. A Court should guard against that tendency. The duty of forming the opinion as to the idenƟty or genuineness of the handwriƟng is on the Court and the Court alone. The expert's opinion on the points of idenƟty or genuineness of the wriƟng is a relevant fact in forming its opinion. The weight to be aƩached to such a fact would depend on the circumstances of each case. The standing of the expert, his skill and experience, the amount and nature of the materials available for comparison, the care and discriminaƟon with which he has approached the quesƟon on which he is expressing his opinion, the extent to which he has called in aid the advances of modern science to demonstrate to the Court the soundness of his opinion, are all maƩers which will assist the Court in assessing the weight to be aƩached to the fact of his opinion. The cross-examinaƟon of the " expert " by the opposing side, where it is properly directed, would also assist the Court in determining what weight it should aƩach to the fact declared relevant by secƟon 45.” [emphasis added] (47) Coomaraswamy has summarised the present posiƟon of the law in Law of

Evidence [at page 627] in the following manner:

“The correct posiƟon as to the value of the evidence of the handwriƟng expert seems to be that his evidence must be treated as a relevant fact and not as conclusive of the fact of genuineness or otherwise of the handwriƟng. His opinion is relevant but only in order to enable the judge himself to form his own opinion. It is not in the class of the opinion of the ﬁnger print expert.” (48) Therefore, an expert should draw the aƩenƟon of the judge to the details which

inﬂuenced him in reaching his decision, but the judge must not accept the expert’s opinion without making an aƩempt himself to decide whether the grounds on which the expert’s opinion is formed are saƟsfactory. The opinion of the expert is relevant, but the decision must, nevertheless, be that of the Judge. He should not delegate his funcƟon to the expert. (49) I must perhaps make one important point prior to moving on. That is relaƟng to

the posiƟon where both parƟes have tendered expert reports. As pointed out by

20

Coomarswamy, when handwriƟng experts have been produced by both parƟes and each supports the case of the party who has called such expert and each gives technical reasons for his opinion, expert evidence may be of liƩle help unless one of them is very convincing or is corroborated by other evidence. But where only one side has called an expert, who has given a report and gives oral evidence and his reasons in full, and there is no expert evidence to the contrary, a judge should not lightly prefer his own view of the documents and reject the expert evidence.

(50) The important point in this appeal is that even though there are two expert

reports produced by either party with the documents examined by Mr. Samaranayake for comparison with Deed No. 47 emanaƟng from the Defendant herself, both reports support the ﬁndings reached by the other expert and supports the case of the PlainƟﬀs. When two experts who have independently of each other arrived at the same opinion, and their integrity, advanced knowledge, special skills, experience and experƟse have not been impugned and their opinion remains unassailed, in my view, a Court of Law should not lightly brush aside such opinion. This, to my mind, is a signiﬁcant factor that must be borne in mind when evaluaƟng the impugned judgments. (51) The issue before Court is whether Deed No. 47 is a forgery by virtue of it having

been executed as the Donor by a person other than BerƟe Samarasinghe. That is why the purported signature of BerƟe Samarasinghe becomes criƟcal. Neither of the experts have been eye witnesses to the purported Donor having signed Deed No. 47. Their expert opinion in that regard is not direct evidence but indirect evidence of circumstanƟal value. It is therefore up to the Court to aƩach evidenƟal weight to such expert opinion evidence and arrive at an inference from such evidence.

(52) If such inference is that a person other than BerƟe Samarasinghe had signed as

the Donor, then Deed No. 47 becomes a forgery and therefore a nullity. When determining the evidenƟal weight to be aƩached to P16 and P18, the Court must take into consideraƟon the following, namely:

(a) that there are two expert reports, one augmenƟng the ﬁndings contained

in the other;

21

(b) the experƟse of the experts, their independence, the integrity of the

processes adopted by them and the fact that these processes have not been impugned; and (c) that there is no contrary expert opinion tendered to Court. These factors together with the suspicious circumstances surrounding the purported execuƟon of Deed No. 47 necessitates this Court to aƩach a high evidenƟal value to the expert opinions contained in P16 and P18. Burden of proof (53) This brings me to the next issue that I must consider, that being in a case such as

this which is civil in nature but involves an allegaƟon of forgery, whether proof of forgery must be established on a balance of probability, or as in a criminal case, beyond reasonable doubt, or perhaps something in-between, if such an ‘in-between’ exists. (54) English courts have taken the view that the standard of proof required for a

criminal oﬀence in civil proceedings is no higher than the standard of proof ordinarily required in civil proceedings, but that, within that standard, “the more serious the allegaƟon, the higher the degree of probability that is required.” (55) In LOLC Factors Limited v Airtouch InternaƟonal (Private) Limited and others [SC

(CHC) Appeal No. 20/2015; SC minutes of 3rd April 2024] Samayawardhena, J with whom my brother Thurairaja, PC, J has agreed, has engaged in an extremely useful discussion on this issue. In order to give context to the ﬁnal determinaƟon that I shall arrive at in this case, it is important that I re-produce the following passages from the said judgment, albeit lengthy:

“In a civil case the standard of proof is on a balance of probabiliƟes. What does this mean? In Miller v Minister of Pensions [1947] 2 All ER 372 at 374, Lord Denning declared:

That degree is well seƩled. It must carry a reasonable degree of probability, but not so high as is required in a criminal case. If the evidence is such that the tribunal can say: “We think it more probable than not,” the burden is discharged, but, if the probabiliƟes are equal, it is not.

22

Are there degrees of proof within the standard of proof of the balance of probabiliƟes? TheoreƟcally, the answer is in the negaƟve, but pracƟcally, such degrees do exist. In Bater v Bater [1950] 2 All ER 458, it was held that there may be degrees of probability within the civil standard of proof of balance of probabiliƟes; the degree of proof must be commensurate with the occasion and proporƟonate to the subject-maƩer………. Denning L.J. stated at page 459:

“The diﬀerence of opinion which has been evoked about the standard of proof in these cases may well turn out to be more a maƩer of words than anything else. It is true that by our law there is a higher standard of proof that is required in criminal cases than in civil cases, but this is subject to the qualiﬁcaƟon that there is no absolute standard in either case. In criminal cases the charge must be proved beyond reasonable doubt, but there may be degrees of proof within that standard. Many great judges have said that, in proporƟon as the crime is enormous, so ought the proof to be clear. So also in civil cases. The case may be proved by a preponderance of probability, but there may be degrees of probability within that standard. The degree depends on the subject-maƩer. A civil court, when considering a charge of fraud, will naturally require a higher degree of probability than that which it would require if considering whether negligence were established. It does not adopt so high a degree as a criminal court, even when it is considering a charge of a criminal nature, but sƟll it does require a degree of probability which is commensurate with the occasion. Likewise, a divorce court should require a degree of probability which is proporƟonate to the subject maƩer.”

The issue in Hornal v. Neuberger Products Ltd. [1957] 1 QB 247 was the standard of proof in a civil claim for fraudulent misrepresentaƟon. The Court of Appeal held that the trial judge’s approach on standard of proof was correct. Denning L.J. referred back to the views he had arƟculated in Bater v. Bater and stated at page 258:

[T]he standard of proof depends on the nature of the issue. The more serious the allegaƟon the higher the degree of probability that is required: but it

23

need not, in a civil case, reach the very high standard required by the criminal law.

Hodson L.J. fully concurred with those views, supplemenƟng them at page 264:

Just as in civil cases the balance of probability may be more readily Ɵlted in one case than in another, so in criminal cases proof beyond reasonable doubt may more readily be aƩained in some cases than in others.

Morris L.J. added at page 266:

It is, I think, clear from the authoriƟes that a diﬀerence of approach in civil cases has been recognized. Many judicial uƩerances show this. The phrase ‘balance of probabiliƟes’ is oŌen employed as a convenient phrase to express the basis upon which civil issues are decided. It may well be that no clear-cut logical reconciliaƟon can be formulated in regard to the authoriƟes on these topics. But perhaps they illustrate that ‘the life of the law is not logic but experience.’ In some criminal cases liberty may be involved; in some it may not. In some civil cases the issues may involve quesƟons of reputaƟon which can transcend in importance even quesƟons of personal liberty. Good name in man or woman is ‘the immediate jewel of their souls.’ But in truth no real mischief results from an acceptance of the fact that there is some diﬀerence of approach in civil acƟons. ParƟcularly is this so if the words which are used to deﬁne that approach are the servants but not the masters of meaning. Though no court and no jury would give less careful aƩenƟon to issues lacking gravity than to those marked by it, the very elements of gravity become a part of the whole range of circumstances which have to be weighed in the scale when deciding as to the balance of probabiliƟes. This view was denoted by Denning L.J. when in his judgment in Bater v. Bater he spoke of a ‘degree of probability which is commensurate with the occasion’ and of ‘a degree of probability which is proporƟonate to the subject-maƩer.’

In Thomas Bates & Sons v. Wyndhams (Lingerie) Ltd. [1981] 1 All ER 1077 at 1085, Buckley L.J. stated:

I think that the use of a variety of formulaƟons used to express the degree of certainty with which a parƟcular fact must be established in civil proceedings is not very helpful and may, indeed, be confusing. The requite

24

degree of cogency of proof will vary with the nature of the facts to be established and the circumstances of the case. I would say that in civil proceedings a fact must be proved with that degree of certainty which jusƟce requires in the circumstances of the parƟcular case. In every case the balance of probability must be discharged, but in some cases that balance may be more easily Ɵpped than in others.

A serious allegaƟon necessitates a higher standard of proof compared to a less weighty claim. In Re H and Others (Minors) [1996] 1 All ER 1, the case concerned the care of children under the Children Act 1989 of the United Kingdom. Whilst acknowledging the degrees of the balance of probabiliƟes, Lord Nicholls of Birkenhead in the House of Lords stated at pages 16-17:

The balance of probability standard means that a court is saƟsﬁed an event occurred if the court considers that, on the evidence, the occurrence of the event was more likely than not. When assessing the probabiliƟes the court will have in mind as a factor, to whatever extent is appropriate in the parƟcular case, that the more serious the allegaƟon the less likely it is that the event occurred and, hence, the stronger should be the evidence before the court concludes that the allegaƟon is established on the balance of probability. Fraud is usually less likely than negligence. Deliberate physical injury is usually less likely than accidental physical injury. A stepfather is usually less likely to have repeatedly raped and had nonconsensual oral sex with his underage stepdaughter than on some occasion to have lost his temper and slapped her. Built into the preponderance of probability standard is a generous degree of ﬂexibility in respect of the seriousness of the allegaƟon.

Although the result is much the same, this does not mean that where a serious allegaƟon is in issue the standard of proof required is higher. It means only that the inherent probability or improbability of an event is itself a maƩer to be taken into account when weighing the probabiliƟes and deciding whether, on balance, the event occurred. The more improbable the event, the stronger must be the evidence that it did occur before, on the balance of probability, its occurrence will be established. Ungoed-Thomas J. expressed this neatly in In re Dellow’s Will Trusts [1964] 1 W.L.R. 451, 455:

25

“The more serious the allegaƟon the more cogent is the evidence required to overcome the unlikelihood of what is alleged and thus to prove it.” In R (N) v Mental Health Review Board (Northern Region) [2006] QB 468, aŌer an exhausƟve review of earlier authoriƟes, the Court of Appeal ﬁrmly held that although there is a single civil standard of proof on the balance of probabiliƟes, its applicaƟon is ﬂexible. Richards L.J. at para 62 stated that this ﬂexibility is referable to the quality of evidence required rather than degrees of probability:

Although there is a single civil standard of proof on the balance of probabiliƟes, it is ﬂexible in its applicaƟon. In parƟcular, the more serious the allegaƟon or the more serious the consequences if the allegaƟon is proved, the stronger must be the evidence before a court will ﬁnd the allegaƟon proved on the balance of probabiliƟes. Thus the ﬂexibility of the standard lies not in any adjustment to the degree of probability required for an allegaƟon to be proved (such that a more serious allegaƟon has to be proved to a higher degree of probability), but in the strength or quality of the evidence that will in pracƟce be required for an allegaƟon to be proved on the balance of probabiliƟes. What I endeavored to demonstrate from the above discussion is that the civil standard of a balance of probabiliƟes is ﬂexible, to be applied with varying degrees of strictness depending on the gravity of the maƩer to be proved.” [emphasis added] (56) LOLC Factors was cited with approval by Surasena, J [as he then was] in AƩorney

General v Hemasiri Fernando [SC (TAB) 02/2023; SC minutes of 5th November 2024]. (57) It would thus be seen that the terms, “balance of probabiliƟes” and

“preponderance of evidence” denotes a need for Court to weigh and balance the evidence presented before Court by both sides – the PlainƟﬀ and the Defendant. That is of parƟcular relevance in deciding this appeal. (58) Taking into consideraƟon the above judicial dicta, I am of the view that the

PlainƟﬀs were not required to establish beyond reasonable doubt that the signature that appears on Deed No. 47 is not that of BerƟe Samarasinghe. While proof on a balance of probability was suﬃcient, what was required was for the

26

District Court to be saƟsﬁed of the quality of the evidence led by the PlainƟﬀ that Deed No. 47 was not executed by BerƟe Samarasinghe, as opposed to the evidence presented by the Defendant that Deed No. 47 was executed by him.

Judgment of the District Court (59) The District Court has at the beginning of its judgment correctly idenƟﬁed the

core issue in this case, that being whether Deed No. 47 has been executed by BerƟe Samarasinghe or else whether it is a forgery. Having done so, the District Court has thereaŌer proceeded to consider if the Defendant had proved the due execuƟon of Deed No. 47. (60) It was the posiƟon of the Defendant that BerƟe Samarasinghe was happy to stay

with them in Galle, even though he travelled to Deegala Estate regularly. It transpired in evidence that a party was held at the residence of the Defendant on 24th November 1991 to celebrate the birthday of BerƟe Samarasinghe and that at this party, BerƟe Samarasinghe had informed Chrishantha Wickremasinghe, the brother-in-law of the Defendant, that he was keen to giŌ Deegala Estate to the Defendant and to prepare the necessary paperwork. Deed No. 47 is said to have been executed fourteen days later on 8th December 1991 and BerƟe Samarasinghe passed away thirteen days thereaŌer on 21st December 1991. Although much haste was shown in execuƟng Deed No. 47, it had been submiƩed for registraƟon only on 16th January 1992.

(61) The District Court had expressed suspicion not only with the speed at which the

impugned deed had been executed, especially by a person who according to the Defendant was in good health and who had no apprehension of death at that Ɵme, but also with the fact that it was strange for someone who lived a luxurious life to part with his most valuable asset that brought him the income to maintain his lifestyle. The District Court had also agreed with the PlainƟﬀ that BerƟe Samarasinghe could well have executed a last will, if he had a genuine intenƟon of making available Deegala Estate to the Defendant, so that the Defendant could have beneﬁƩed aŌer his death. It must perhaps be menƟoned that the Defendant did not have any children, and that she was 51 years of age at the Ɵme Deed No. 47 had been purportedly executed in her favour.

27

(62) The District Court also expressed suspicion with the selecƟon of the AƩorney-at-

Law who notarially aƩested the execuƟon of Deed No. 47. It was in evidence that BerƟe Samarasinghe had cases before the Labour Tribunal and that he had associated several senior lawyers in Galle, including AƩorney-at-Law Mr. Thilina Panditharatne, with whom he had even exchanged correspondence [P4, P5 and P6] a few months prior to his death and whom BerƟe Samarasinghe is said to have met in the morning of 8th December 1991. BerƟe Samarasinghe however had not revealed to Thilina Panditharatne that he was intending to execute a deed that day or had already executed a deed. In spite of these connecƟons, Deed No. 47 had been aƩested before an AƩorney-at-Law who had been in pracƟce only since 1987 and who had up to that point only aƩested 46 deeds. The quesƟon had thus arisen as to why BerƟe Samarasinghe would retain the services of a junior AƩorney-at-Law without much experience and whom he had never met, when he had the opportunity of obtaining the services of a much senior and experienced AƩorney-at-Law, well known to him. (63) This suspicion was aggravated by three factors. The ﬁrst is that the said AƩorney-

at-Law in his evidence admiƩed that he knew one of the two witnesses to Deed No. 47, Chrishantha Wickremasinghe prior to the execuƟon thereof. Chrishantha Wickremasinghe, the other witness to Deed No. 47 and the Defendant were the accused in the Magistrate’s Court case ﬁled by the Police. The second factor is that, (a) the AƩorney-at-Law admiƩed that he did not know BerƟe Samarasinghe, (b) he had “met BerƟe Samarasinghe” only twice, once prior to the execuƟon of the deed and again at the Ɵme of the execuƟon, and (c) on both occasions he did not speak to the person who came before him claiming to be BerƟe Samarasinghe.

(64) The third and most important factor is that the AƩorney-at-Law admiƩed that

he did not check the idenƟty of the person who came before him to sign a deed to giŌ a property which had immense value at that Ɵme claiming to be BerƟe Samarasinghe and the owner of that property. The District Court has quite correctly taken serious note of this factor that the AƩorney-at-Law was unable to conﬁrm the idenƟty of the person who came before him and who signed as BerƟe Samarasinghe. This is not a mere omission in terms of the Notaries Ordinance, but goes to the root of the issue that was before the District Court.

28

(65) It is for this reason that the District Court had concluded as follows:

“tlS ish,q lreKq iuia:hla f,i .;al, §nrags iurisxy¶ hk wh" wdOqksl fkd;drsiajrfhl= f,i js;a;sldrsh yd ys;j;a §n;s.u¶ fkd;drsiajrhd §ls%Ydka; jsl%uisxy¶ hk idlaIslref.a y|qkajd osu u; fhdodf.k ;snSu" ne,q ne,aug nrm;< iel iys; njla Pks; lrhs' tfiau oevsf,i frda.s ;;a;ajhlao fkdue;sj isgshoS" urKh wfmalaId lrkakl= f,io lsisoq wjia:djl l%shd l< njla fmks fkdhk §nrags iurisxy¶" ;udf.a m%Odku yd jsYd,u foam, 1jk js;a;sldrshg ,sjsug fps;kd lsrsu yd th Tyq ush.sh oskg i;s follg muK fmr isoq lr ;snsuo" ;rula iel iys;h'” (66) Thus, the District Court expressed deep suspicion not only over the selecƟon of

a junior AƩorney-at-Law known to Chrishantha Wickremasinghe and the Defendant, but with regard to the necessity for a man who did not suﬀer from any serious illness to giŌ his most valuable asset and that too, just two weeks prior to his death. (67) The next factor that was considered by the District Court was the conduct of the

Defendant and Chrishantha Wickremasinghe which revolved around three circumstances that occurred soon aŌer the passing away of BerƟe Samarasinghe. The ﬁrst was that Chrishantha Wickremasinghe had not come either for the funeral or the almsgiving of BerƟe Samarasinghe. The District Court had noted that this is suspicious, since according to the Defendant, (a) BerƟe Samarasinghe had stood guarantee to a loan taken by Chrishantha Wickremasinghe, and (b) it is to him that BerƟe Samarasinghe turned to when he wanted to giŌ Deegala Estate. The second circumstance is that the Defendant did not disclose to the PlainƟﬀs the execuƟon of Deed No. 47 either at the funeral, the almsgiving that followed or any Ɵme thereaŌer. This becomes signiﬁcant when one considers the evidence of the PlainƟﬀs that they went to the house of the Defendant looking for the documents that BerƟe Samarasinghe is said to have brought with him to Galle, only to be told by the Defendant that they cannot trace the documents. This is the third circumstance considered by the District Court. To my mind, these three circumstances demonstrate the guilty mind of the Defendant and Chrishantha Wickremasinghe, arising from the intenƟon of preparing and the preparaƟon of Deed No. 47. (68) It is only aŌer the District Court formed the view that, taken as a whole, the

execuƟon of Deed No. 47 was suspicious, that it proceeded to consider the reports of the experts. This is clearly in line with SecƟon 45 where when the Court

29

has to form an opinion as to the genuineness of handwriƟng, which would include the placement of the signature, the opinions upon that point of persons specially skilled in the genuineness of handwriƟng are relevant.

(69) In my view, the learned District Judge was aware of the applicable legal posiƟon

in evaluaƟng the evidence in a case of this nature. This is borne out by the following passage:

“tls ishµ lreKq ;=, m%YaK.; Tmamqj ,shd iy;sl lsrsu ms<sn| oevs widudkH yd iel iys; njla u;=fjs' kuq;a by; mrsfjsIKsh idlaIs mukla §nrags iurisxy¶" Tmamqj ,shd iy;sl fkdlrk ,o njg ksYaps;j ks.ukh lsrSug m%udKj;a ke;' jsfYaIfhkau Tmamqfjs idlaIslrejka fofokd" idlaIslrejka f,i hus hus WK;d" fyda mlaI.d%ys;ajhla mej;sho §nrags iurisxy¶ w;aika ;enq njg idlaIs lshd we;s nejsks' meusKs,a, jsiska u;= lrk iel iys; lreKqj,g idfmalaIj §nrags iurisxy¶ wod< Tmamqfjys l;D njg yd tfia ,sjsug Tyqg wNsfm%arKhla jq njg js;a;sh fmkajd oSug W;aiy orhs' ta wkqj fndfydaoqrg meusKs,a, yd js;a;sh jsiska ta ms<sn| bosrsm;a jdpsl idlaIshg tfrysj jdpsl idlaIsh mj;s' lreKq tfia jsoaos by;ska idlpsPd l, wxl 47 ork Tmamqj ,shd iy;sl lsrSug wod, iuia; mrsfjsIKsh lreKqj, mek ke.s we;s iel iys; Ndjfha jdishg ;j;a m%n, n,meula l< yels idlaIsh jkqfha" me'16 fyj;a w;awl=re mrslaIl jdra:djhs'” (70) Thus, the District Court was saƟsﬁed that there existed circumstanƟal evidence

supporƟng a grave suspicion with regard to the genuineness of the signature on Deed No. 47 but was mindful of the evidence of the witnesses to Deed No. 47 as well. It is in that background that the District Court stated that P16 becomes relevant. (71) The District Court was also mindful that the report of an expert is a relevant fact

but is not conclusive, and that it is the funcƟon of the Court to examine the evidence and arrive at a conclusion. This is evident from the following paragraph of its judgment: “w;awl=re mrslaIl jdra;dj hkq hus lreKla iusnkaOj u;hla wOslrKhg we;s lr .eksu i|yd iyh jkakdjq jsfYaI{ u;hla usi" th ;SrKd;aul ks.ukh fkdjk nj wOslrKh kvq ;Skaoq j,os ms<s.;a ;;a;ajhhs' m%YaK.; w;aikla fyda w;awl=re ms<sn| wjidkd;aul ks.ukhlg t<Tsfuys,d wOslrKh i;=j mj;sk ldrah Ndrh w;awl=re mrslaIl fj; wkqfhdaPkh l, fkdyels nj" wOslrKhkays ms<s.;a u;h nj mdraYj jsiska bosrsm;a lr we;s kvq ;skaoq m%ldrju ukdj meyeos,sfjs' tkus hus ks.ukhlg t<efUkqfha wOslrKh nj;a jsfYaI{ u;h wOslrKh jsiska ta i|yd t<eTsfusos ie<lsug .kakd wkql=, lreKla nj;ah' jsfYaI{ idlsIslre hus u;hla oersug mokus jq lreKq olajd fkdue;s jsg yd" jsfYaI{ u;h bosrsm;a lsrsug mokus jq lreKq iefykafkaoehs ;srKh

fkdfldg" wOslrKh jsfYaI{ u;h ms<s fkd.; hq;=fjs'”

30

(72) Furthermore, the District Court was mindful that the documents that were used

for comparison purposes must be proved. The District Court has carefully considered the manner in which P 4 – P15, containing the normal course signatures of BerƟe Samarasinghe, had been collected by the Police for purposes of examinaƟon from the places where the documents were kept and their genuineness, and stated as follows:

“ta wkqj wxl 2719 Tmamqj yer fiiq ish,q f,aLK" tajd ;nd ;snsh hq;= Ndrldr;ajhkaf.ka" wOslrK ksfhda. u;" ;ud jsiska ,nd.;a njg yd w;awl=re mrslaIKh i|yd bosrsm;a l< njg §wd;ra isrsudkak¶ idlaIsos we;' wxl 2719 Tmamqjo bvus ldrahd,fhka ,ndf.k bosrsm;aj we;s f,aLKhls' fmd,sia idlaIslre jsiska ta iusnkaOj ,ndoS we;s idlaIsh" lsisjsgl;a m%;slafIam js fyda yn js fyda wNsfhda. jS fyda ke;' wdod, lreKq iusnkaOfhka jsuraYk meje;ajq fmd,sia ks,Odrshl= jYfhka tu ks,Odrs ;ekg wi;H fyda mlaI.%dys idlaIsosfus wjYH;djhla ;snq njgo fmks fkdhhs' jsuraYk isoql< fmd,sia ks,Odrsfhl= f,i Tyq ish ks, lghq;= ksis mrsos isoqlr we;s njg ks.ukh fkdlsrsug fya;=jlao ke;' Tyq jsiska w;awl=re mrslaIKh i|yd hjk ,o f,aLK" jsOsu;aj wod, f,aLK mej;sh hq;= Ndrldr;ajhka f.ka ,ndf.k" w;awl=re mrslaIKh i|yd" w;awl=re mrslaIl fj;" me'13 orK w;awl=re fldusiu m%ldrj hjd we;s njg tls idlaIs wkqj uekjska ;yjqrefjs' ta wkqj wod< f,aLK ksis Ndrldr;ajfhys ;snSu iy tu Ndrhkaf.ka wOslrK ksfhda. u;" fmd,sia ks,Odrska jsiska ,nd.eksu" w;awl=re fldusiu i|yd fhduq lsrsu" tls f,aLK mrslaId lr me'16 ork w;awl=re mrslaIK jdra;dj ,ensu hk wLKav l%shdoduh Tmamqjs we;' tu f,aLK lsisoq wjia:djl Tmamq lsrsfus Ndrhlg hg;aj ,l=Kq lro ke;' tu f,aLKj, we;af;a §nrags iurisxy¶ hk whf.a w;aik fkdjk njg lsisoq wjia:djl fhdaPkd js fyda ynjs ke;' §wd;ra isrsudkak¶ ks,Odrshdf.a idlaIs ynjs o ke;'” (73) Thus, the District Court was not only saƟsﬁed that the documents containing the

normal course signatures of BerƟe Samarasinghe were genuine, it was also saƟsﬁed that the said documents had emanated from the proper source. In other words, the District Court had no doubt with the integrity of the documents. (74) Having observed that at least three documents [P4, P5 and P9] had been

executed by BerƟe Samarasinghe a few months prior to Deed No. 47 while staying at the house of the Defendant, the District Court had stated that given the nature of the documents and the purpose for which they were prepared and signed, there is no reason to doubt that the signatures that were on P4, P5, P7 – P15 were not that of BerƟe Samarasinghe. In this regard, the District Court had observed as follows:

31

“tu f,aLK §nrags iurisxy¶ jsiska w;aika fkd;nk ,o f,aLK njg fyda tajdfha Ndrldr;ajh fyda ksis Ndrldr;ajfhka tls f,aLK ,ndf.k h:d mrsos w;awl=re fldusiu i|yd fkdhjk ,o njg fyda lsisoq yn lsrSula kvqfjsos js;a;sh jsiska u;=lr ke;' tu ishµ lreKq wkqj w;awl=re fldusiu i|yd imhd we;s me'4 isg me'15" f,i tu fldusifus i|yka iy ms<sfj,ska fuu kvqj i|yd me'22 isg me' 24" me'26 isg me'34 olajd ,l=Kq lr we;s f,aLKj, i|yka jkqfha §nrags iurisxy¶ hk whf.a w;aik njg ks.ukh lsrSug lsisoq ndOdjla ke;s w;r" tu f,aLKj, iaNdjh wkqju tajd tu ;eke;a;d jsiskau w;aika l, f,aLK njg yer t,eUsh yels wka wkqus;shla ke;' js;a;sh th yn fkdlsrSuo Bg idol imhhs'” (75) Although the Defendant stated that BerƟe Samarasinghe was happy during the

Ɵme he stayed with them in Galle, she thereaŌer claimed that he was not in the best of health at the Ɵme he passed away and that that may have aﬀected his signature on P1, P2 and P3. The District Court has rejected this contenƟon on the basis that the signature of BerƟe Samarasinghe on all sample documents ranging from 1971 to 1991 were similar, and that in any event, there cannot be a signiﬁcant variaƟon between the signatures of BerƟe Samarasinghe that appeared on P4, P5 and P9 signed a few months prior to his death and the signature on P1, P2 and P3 said to have been signed just thirteen days prior to his death. (76) The relevant conclusion of the District Court is as follows:

“me'4" 5 9 f,aLKj, Tyq w;aika ;nd we;af;a js;a;sldrshf.a ksjfia isgsk ld,isudj ;=, yd js;a;shg wkqj kus Tyq udkisl yd Ydrsrsl jYfhka msrsysfuka miqh' jsfYaIfhkau me'5 orK w;aik m%YaK.; w;aikg udi 5 lg wdikak ld,isudjla ;=,os ;nk ,oaols' tkus 1991.07.19 jk oskh' kuq;a 1988 ka miq ;nd we;s tls w;aika 3 mjd §nrags iurisxy¶ uq,a ld,fha mgka Ndjs;d lr we;s w;aikg iudk fjs' w;a wl=re mrslaIlg wkqj hus hus iajNdjsl jsp,khka yefrkakg fiiq .=Kdx.hkaf.ka th w;sYh taldldr njla yd iudk;djhla orhs' tfiakus §nrags iurisxy¶ m;ajqfjs hehs lshkq ,nk udkisl fyda Ydrsrsl oqraj,;d me'4" 5 9 w;aikaj,g n,fkdmeu iy me'1" 2" 3 f,aLKj, m%YaK.; w;aikaj,g muKla n,mEu" jsh fkdyelsh' th js;a;sfha ia:djrh ms<s.; fkdyels njg m;a lrk ;;a;ajhls'”

(77) It is only thereaŌer that the District Court proceeded to examine the evidence of

Mr. Kalupahana. Having saƟsﬁed itself that he is qualiﬁed and competent to give evidence on handwriƟng, a fact which had not been challenged by the Defendant, the District Court had stated as follows:

32

“i;H jYfhkau §nrags iurisxy¶ jsiska m%YaK.; f,aLK w;aika ;nk ,oafoa kus m%YaK.; w;aika 7ka tloq w;aikla fyda nrags iurisxyf.a njg ;yjqrej we;s wdoraY w;aika iu. .e,msh hq;=j ;snqKo tls m%YaK.; w;aika ish,a,u .e,ms ke;' rPfha ri mrslaIljre jk §lµmyk¶ uy;d §uk;=x.¶ uy;d" §iurkdhl¶ uy;d hk ;sfokdu iajdOsk rPfha ks,Orhka jk w;r Tjqka jsfYaI{ oekqfuka hqla; ;eke;a;kah' tfia fkdfjs kus Tjqka ri mrslaIl fomdra;fuska;=fjs fiajh lsug idudkH mrsmdgsh ;=, bvlao ke;' Tjqka ;sfokdu Tjqkaf.a jsfYaI{Ndjh" oekqu" w;aoelsus" m<mqreoao Ndjs;d lruska ,ndfok u;h mlaI.%dys u;hla njg fyda jeros u;hla njg lsisoq fhdaPkdjla fyda js;a;sfhka bosrsm;aj ke;' tfia mlaI.%dysjsfus wjYH;djhla Tjqkag jq njg fuu kvqfjsos fy,sorjsjo ke;' §lµmyk¶ uy;d osra> f,i yria m%YaKj,g NdPkh l<o js;a;sh Tyqf.a idlaIs yd u;h jeros njg fyda mlaI.%dys njg fyda wNsfhda. lrk njg fyda wju jYfhka fhdaPkd lr fyda ke;'” (78) Thus, the District Court was concerned that none of the seven signatures that

appeared on P1, P2 and P3 tallied with the signature of BerƟe Samarasinghe that appeared on the normal course documents. The District Court also expressed the view that all three experts [including Mr. P.H. Manatunga] were independent and qualiﬁed professionals and had no reason whatsoever to show parƟality towards one party. This was supported by the fact that the Defendant did not impugn their competence, independence or integrity during cross examinaƟon. (79) The District Court had carefully considered (a) the detailed process that had been

followed by Mr. Kalupahana in comparing the signature of BerƟe Samarasinghe that appeared on P 4- P15 with those in P1, P2 and P3, (b) the reasons aƩributed by Mr. Kalupahana for his conclusion, (c) the diﬀerences between the signatures as explained by Mr. Kalupahana, and concluded that his ﬁndings that the signatures that appear on P1, P2 and P3 are not that of BerƟe Samarasinghe has been scienƟﬁcally established. The speciﬁc ﬁndings of the District Court are as follows:

“by; mrsoafoka i|yka l< ,laIK wOslrKh jsiska w;awl=re mrslaIl ;ekf.a u. fmkajsu iys;j" me'54 f,aLKh mdol fldgf.k b;d meysos,sju ksrslaIKh lrk" m%Yak.; iy wdoraY w;aika w;r mj;sk fjkialus njg y|qkd.kakd ,laIkhkah' hus hus wdoraY w;aika w;r ld,hla iu. hus hus fjkialus yg f.k we;af;a jqjo iuia;hla f,i i<ld n,k l, tajdfhys yevh" iy ,dlaIKsl wx. fndfydaoqrg tldldrj mj;sk njg yd hus jsp,khka muKla isoqj we;s njg w;awl=re mrslaIljrhd m%ldY lrk u;h" tu w;aika mrslaId lsrsfuka wOslrKhgo ms<s.; yels fjs' ne,q ne,aug mshjs weig remuh jYfhka m%Yak.; w;aika iy wdoraY w;aika w;r iudklula fmks .sho" wl=frka wl=r jsYaf,aIKh fldg ne,Sfusoso" w;a wl=re jsYaf,aIK ksraKdhl mdol lrf.k ie,lSfusoso" wdoraY w;aikaj, iudkd;au;djh iy Bgu wdfjsksljq ,dlaIKsl wx." mr;rh" ksraudKh" we,jsu" wdos wx. hus iqµ jsp,khkag hg;aj tldldrj njla orhs' tys ieu l,aysu

33

iajNdjsl .,dhdula yd ;srKd;aul ,laIKj, fkdfjkia njla olajk nj w;awl=re mrslaIlf.a idlaIsfhys yrhhs' by; ishµ lreKq i<ld ne,sfusos w;awl=re fldusiu iu. bosrsm;a me'4" 5 iy me'7 isg 15 olajd jk f,aLKj, i|yka w;aika jk me'54 f,aLKfhys we;s wdoraY w;aika" me'1" 2" 3 f,aLKj, wXx.= m%YaK.; w;aika yd fkdieifok njg w;a wl=re mrslaIl ,nd fok ks.ukhg t<eUsug mdol jq meyeos,s m%udKj;a fya;= Tyqf.a idlaIsfhys imhd we;' ta wkqj me'4" 5 iy me'7 isg 15 olajd f,aLKj, w;aika ;nd we;s njg Tmamq js we;s §nrags iurisxy¶ hk wh" m%YaK.; me'1" 2" 3 f,aLKj, w;aika ;nd fkdue;s njg jk w;awl=re mrslaIljrhdf.a jsfYaI{ u;ho tu jsIhdkqnoaOj jsoHd;aulj t<U ks.ukhla njg ;yjqre js we;'” (80) The District Court has thereaŌer considered P18, the report prepared by Mr.

Samaranayake at the request of the Defendant and concluded that P18 too supports the conclusions contained in P16 prepared by Mr. Kalupahana and Mr. P.H. Manatunga. I must state that Mr. Samaranayake had passed away by the Ɵme the case was taken up before the District Court and even though the Defendant had iniƟally objected to the marking of P18, the report of Mr. Samaranayake had been admiƩed as evidence thereaŌer since P18 had been prepared at the request of the Defendant, who at that Ɵme was an accused in the Magistrate’s Court case. (81) There are two other circumstances that I have already referred to that provides

support to the view expressed in P16 and P18. The ﬁrst is that if Deed No. 47 was in existence thirteen days prior to the death of BerƟe Samarasinghe, there was no reason for the Defendant to have suppressed its existence when the PlainƟﬀs came to Deegala Estate soon aŌer the almsgiving to search for the documents or when the PlainƟﬀs made a Police complaint on 12th January 1992 that the brother of the Defendant is refusing them entry to Deegala estate or to have remained silent when the PlainƟﬀs informed the Defendant that a testamentary case would be ﬁled or to have refrained from disclosing its existence unƟl the ﬁling of the testamentary case. The second circumstance is that the Defendant was not able to provide a saƟsfactory explanaƟon for the signature on P1, P2 and P3 being diﬀerent from the signatures that appeared on all sample documents. Furthermore, the Defendant oﬀered no explanaƟon as for Mr. Samaranayake’s expert opinion that the signatures on P1, P2 and P3 purporƟng to be those of BerƟe Samarasinghe showing signs of tremor, hesitaƟon, penlights, added strokes, sudden changes in direcƟon and halts, which are all features inconsistent with genuine execuƟon of a signature.

34

(82) It is in the above circumstances that the District Court has correctly concluded

that the PlainƟﬀs have established on a strong balance of probability [meusKs,af,ys

tls ia:djrh by< ugsgul idlaIs jevsnr u; ikd:j we;'] that the signatures that appear on Deed No. 47 is not of BerƟe Samarasinghe. It is clear that the learned District Judge had a clear understanding of the law that needed to be applied and was aware of the piƞalls that must be avoided when dealing with a case where handwriƟng was in issue and resort had to be made to expert evidence to assist the Court to arrive at a determinaƟon. The judgment of the High Court (83) The High Court had recited the factual maƩers on which the parƟes were in

agreement and thereaŌer observed as follows: (a) AŌer the death of his mother, BerƟe Samarasinghe had been brought up by

his mothers family who had even given part of their name to him prior to giŌing Deegala Estate to him; (b) BerƟe Samarasinghe had a close relaƟonship with the relaƟves from his

mothers side; (c) There is not even an iota of evidence to show that BerƟe Samarasinghe had

a relaƟonship with the PlainƟﬀs who were his half brothers and sisters; (d) BerƟe Samarasinghe lived with the Defendant and her husband for two and

half years prior to his death, that “there is ample evidence to prove their inƟmacy with each other” as borne out by the many leƩers exchanged between them, that “This type of love on each other in a close inƟmacy is somewhat showing aﬀecƟon and aƩachment on each other may be treated by a man of servile sacriﬁce of all his desires and passions on one woman” and “in this situaƟon one can understand the circumstances under which BerƟe Samarasinghe had executed the impugned deed”; (e) Only the Defendant and her husband were there to look aŌer BerƟe

Samarasinghe during his troublesome period whereas the PlainƟﬀs failed to prove that they looked aŌer the desires of BerƟe Samarasinghe at any stage;

35

(f) For these reasons, BerƟe Samarasinghe giŌed Deegala Estate to the Defendant, knowing well that if a testamentary acƟon is ﬁled, it is the PlainƟﬀs who will be enƟtled to claim. (84) The evidence did not bear out the fact that the Defendant had an inƟmate

relaƟonship with BerƟe Samarasinghe and thus, the basic premise that appears to have been on the mind of the learned High Court Judge that Deed No. 47 was executed as a reﬂecƟon of the inƟmacy that BerƟe Samarasinghe had towards the Defendant is ill-founded. Thus, to my mind, the above circumstances do not support a view that the impugned deed had been signed by BerƟe Samarasinghe. (85) With regard to the selecƟon of the AƩorney-at-Law, the High Court had stated

that BerƟe Samarasinghe did not want to make it public that he had giŌed Deegala Estate and that is the reason for the non-selecƟon of an AƩorney-at-Law known to him. While such a conclusion is not supported by the evidence, the High Court has completely ignored the fact that the AƩorney-at-Law failed to even verify the idenƟty of the person who appeared before him. I have already stated that this was a criƟcal item of evidence that gave rise to a serious doubt with regard to the due execuƟon of Deed No. 47. I am therefore of the view that the High Court erred when it failed to address its mind to this issue. (86) The High Court had rejected in limine both expert reports on the basis that the

PlainƟﬀs failed to establish corroboraƟve evidence to prove that Deed No. 47 is a forgery. In doing so, the High Court has completely disregarded the circumstanƟal evidence that was relied upon by the District Court as corroboraƟng the two expert reports. Sadly, it appears that the High Court did not wish to deal with the two expert reports and adopted an easy path to conclude the case. (87) Although P18, prepared at the instance of the Defendant had contradicted the

case of the Defendant, the High Court appears to have brushed aside its ﬁndings on the basis that the Defendant would not have sought another opinion if she had a doubt that the signature on Deed No. 47 was not that of BerƟe Samarasinghe.

(88) The High Court had thereaŌer re-produced the headnote in Charles De Silva v

Ariyawathie De Silva and another [1987 (1) CALR 76; (1987) 1 Sri LR 261; hereinaŌer referred to as Charles De Silva] which reads as follows:

36

“(1) The Court was wrong in acƟng on the evidence of the handwriƟng expert

as:

(a) The genuineness of the comparison material on which he based his

opinion was in dispute and such material had not been duly proved; (b) The photographs used by the handwriƟng expert had not been

proved in Court; (c) Comparison specimens both adequate in number and of a suitable kind are essenƟal as the human hand will not reproduce the characters like a typewriter – the most suitable material being that which has been wriƩen at about the same Ɵme as the contested document on similar paper, in similar circumstances and with similar pen and ink, pencil or type wriƟng. (2) The Court could not reasonably have in mind the credibility and

demeanour of the witnesses. (3) There was suﬃcient direct and oral evidence to hold that the impugned

Will had in fact been signed by the deceased testator. Where there is no doubt of the mental capacity of the testator and no element of suspicion arises a Will will be held to be proved if the witnesses who speak to the due execuƟon and aƩestaƟon are believed by Court. If there are circumstances which excite the suspicion of the Court the propounder must remove it and saƟsfy the Court that the testator knew and approved of the contents of the Last Will.” (89) Although the High Court re-produced the headnote, it has neither discussed the

said judgment nor explained its applicability to the case before it. The High Court had thereaŌer concluded that the PlainƟﬀs have not discharged the burden of proof cast on them of establishing that Deed No. 47 is a forgery and had set aside the judgment of the District Court. (90) It must be noted that unlike in Charles De Silva, in this appeal, there was no

challenge to the genuineness of the “comparison material” submiƩed either to the Examiner of QuesƟoned Documents or to Mr. Samaranayake. Furthermore, in Charles De Silva, there had been no two expert reports, one supporƟng the other. Thus, the context in which Charles De Silva had been decided is wholly diﬀerent to the facts and circumstances of this appeal.

37

(91) Furthermore, the net result of the approach adopted by the learned High Court

Judge has been to bring to naught the evidenƟal value of the two expert reports, P16 and P18, without any valid reason whatsoever being assigned to such a course of acƟon. That, in my view, was erroneous and has caused a substanƟal miscarriage of jusƟce, which warrants the intervenƟon of this Court. QuesƟons of Law (92) It is in the above circumstances that leave to appeal was granted on the following

quesƟons of law:

“(1) Did the Civil Appellate High Court err in law by failing to idenƟfy any error

of fact or law in the District Court judgment when it overturned the judgment of the District Court? (2) Did the said Civil Appellate High Court err in law in failing to appreciate that

the raƟo decidendi in the Judgment in Charles de Silva v Ariyawathie de Silva and another had no relevance to this case?” (93) Simply put, to my mind, regreƩably though, it must be noted that the judgment

of the High Court is incoherent. The High Court, having correctly idenƟﬁed the issue before it, was required to consider if the District Court had properly evaluated the circumstanƟal evidence that was relied upon by the District Court in order to determine whether the judgment of the District Court is based on the evidence and is correct. The High Court was also required to bear in mind that this was not the usual case where there existed a report of an expert as one item of evidence. What was unique in this case was that there existed two expert reports and very importantly, one of these reports had been prepared at the instance of the Defendant, with the sample documents having been provided by the Defendant herself. Therefore, the High Court should have aƩached some evidenƟal value to the expert opinion contained in the two reports and thereaŌer considered the inferences arising therefrom. (94) In order to avoid the consideraƟon of these two reports, the High Court, to my

mind, has taken the easy path by staƟng that the PlainƟﬀs have failed to establish corroboraƟve evidence to prove the two expert reports. In doing so, the High Court has completely disregarded the items of circumstanƟal evidence that the

38

District Court had carefully considered and referred to in its judgment and the fact that such circumstanƟal evidence is supported by the conclusions of the two experts. Instead of idenƟfying the grounds on which the District Court may have erred, the High Court has referred to evidence which is of no signiﬁcance, before seƫng aside the judgment of the District Court. (95) However, what baﬄes me the most is the mere ciƟng of the headnote in Charles

De Silva and thereaŌer not making any comment on whether the said judgment has any applicaƟon or not with regard to the issues that the High Court was required to consider and leaving a whole host of issues that have been referred to in the headnote in Charles De Silva wide open and unanswered. Be that as it may, I shall now proceed to consider the second quesƟon of law, that being if the judgment in Charles De Silva is of any applicaƟon or relevance to the facts of this appeal. Judgment in Charles de Silva v Ariyawathie De Silva and another

(96) Charles De Silva was a case where a Last Will was sought to be challenged on the

basis that the signature of its author [the executant] had been forged. The District Court had held that the due and proper execuƟon of the Will had not been saƟsfactorily proved as it has not been shown in evidence to have been signed by its author. In appeal, the said judgment was set aside on three grounds. (97) The ﬁrst was that the specimen signatures used for purposes of comparison have

not been proved or admiƩed. In this regard, it was held as follows in Charles de Silva [page 271]:

“The report of the Examiner of QuesƟoned Documents marked 3D2 and dated the 25th of January 1974 has gone on the presumpƟon that the genuine signatures of the deceased are to be found in the documents 3D3 to 3D6 and thereaŌer accepƟng them as specimen signatures of the deceased, has, aŌer comparison of these with the signature found in the Last Will P1 come to the conclusion that the said Last Will P1 has not been signed by the same person who has signed the documents 3D3 to 3D6. He has also stated in his report and evidence the reasons for the conclusion he has thus arrived at: One important fact which has to be considered by Court is whether these other specimen signatures which had been sent to the Examiner of QuesƟoned

39

Documents were legally proved to bear the actual signatures of the deceased Seemon Appu since they had been allowed in evidence by Court only subject to being correctly proved: This important fact the 3rd Respondent has failed to prove as would have been normally required in a Court of law. ……… Thus it will be seen that the very foundaƟon and data on which the Examiner of QuesƟoned Documents has been called upon to give an opinion as to whether the Last Will P1 has been signed by the deceased being of no legal value as the correctness of the signatures found in 3D3 to 3D6 has not been proved, the report of his marked 3D2 will be of no assistance to Court and so also would be his oral evidence given at the trial.” (98) I have already stated that:

(a) The Defendant did not object when an applicaƟon was made in the Magistrate’s Court to forward the documents P1 – P15 to the Examiner of QuesƟoned Documents on which P16 was based; (b) The comparison material used to prepare P18 had been tendered to Court

by the Defendant herself; (c) The above documents were neither disputed nor marked subject to proof in the District Court. (99) Therefore, the data on which the Examiner of QuesƟoned Documents was called

upon to give an opinion in this appeal has a high probaƟve value as the correctness of the signatures found therein are admiƩed. In other words, there is no doubt that the signatures that appeared on the documents sent to the Examiner of QuesƟoned Documents are the genuine signatures of BerƟe Samarasinghe. This is consistent with illustraƟon (c) to SecƟon 45 of the Evidence Ordinance which requires the specimen documents to be proved or admiƩed to have been wriƩen or signed by the person concerned. (100) Thus, the ﬁrst ground on which the Court of Appeal set aside the judgment of the

District Court in Charles De Silva does not arise in this case. I must state that this maƩer has been speciﬁcally considered by the District Court, and that the High Court has not disagreed with this ﬁnding of the District Court. (101) The second ground on which the judgment of the District Court in Charles De

Silva was set aside was that the Examiner of QuesƟoned Documents had used photographs of the impugned signatures in comparing signatures which

40

photographs had not been proved. In this regard, the Court of Appeal held as follows in Charles De Silva:

“He has also stated in evidence that his evidence to Court is being given with the aid of the enlarged photographs of the relevant signatures that are with him. Here too we would say that the said photograph should have been duly proved in evidence before any reliance on evidence given with their aid could be accepted the fact that the signature in the Last Will P1 made by the photographer who did the said enlargement on the orders of Mr. Samaranayake. This also has not been done by the 3rd respondent and this error or defect also adds to the inability of Court to act on the report and evidence of Mr. Samaranayake.” [page 273] (102) In this appeal, Mr. Kalupahana had directly examined the quesƟoned documents

and the specimen documents when preparing his report P16. He had thereaŌer taken photographs of the enlarged signatures and these were marked as P52 and P52(A) without any objecƟon being taken thereto or the said photographs requiring any further proof. They were also presented to Court for the convenience of explaining his ﬁndings to Court and has received the speciﬁc aƩenƟon of the District Court, as borne out by the following passage:

“jsfYaI{ idlaIslrefjl= njg ms<s.; yels njg usg by;skao ks.ukh lr we;s §lµmyk¶ uy;d w;awl=re mrslaIKfhaos wkq.ukh lrk ,o l%ufjsoh meyeos,s lr we;' m,uqj tu w;aika Pdhdrem.; lr we;' tu PdhdrEm me'52" me'52w f,i ,l=Kq lr we;' flfia fj;;a ieioSfus ldrahh i|yd uq,a msgm;a fjka fjka jYfhkao iuqysljo mrslaId lrkq ,en we;' tysos ridhkd.drhla ;=," ksis wdf,dal ;;a;ajhka hgf;a wkajslaI" w;aldj wdosh Ndjs;d lruska jsYd,kh lruska mrslaId lrkq ,nhs' fuu mrslaIkh i|yd tfia w;awl=re fo.=Khla (200%) jsYd,kh lr ilik ,o f,aLKh me'54 f,i bosrsm;a lr we;' tu wdY%h lrf.k ;ud jsiska isoq lrk ,o w;awl=re mrslaIK l%shdj,sh iy tysos ;u ks.ukhg taug mdol jq ksrslaIK iy fya;= w;awl=re mrslaIljrhd jsiska meyeos,s lr we;' ” (103) The third ground on which the appeal was allowed in Charles De Silva was that

an adequate number of specimen signatures had not been used in comparing the signature of the author of the last will. This observaƟon was made since only three comparison specimens which had not been proved to have been those of the deceased testator were used. But in this appeal, P16 was prepared aŌer comparing the signature of BerƟe Samarasinghe on P4, P5, P7 – 15, which

41

documents had either been proved or admiƩed or were not disputed to contain the signature of BerƟe Samarasinghe. (104) Although the head note in Charles De Silva does not refer to it, the Court of

Appeal observed that (a) the Last Will has been signed with a ballpoint pen while the other specimen documents sent for comparison were not so signed by a ball point pen, but by using a fountain pen, and (b) the expert had opined that it would serve no valid purpose to compare them for there were bound to be signiﬁcant and diﬀerent features in the two sets of signatures due to the diﬀerent types of pens used for the wriƟng of the respecƟve signatures. (105) The learned Counsel for the Defendant referred to the fact that Deed No. 47 was

signed using a ball point pen. Mr. Kalupahana in his evidence has explained the types of pens used in each specimen material and has stated that the signatures in the comparison documents marked P4, P9 and P10 were placed using a ballpoint pen and signatures in the comparison documents marked P8, P14 and P15 were placed using a fountain pen. While comparison specimens of a suitable kind using both types of pens were available in adequate number in the instant case, what is important is that the expert was conscious that his ﬁndings may be aﬀected by the type of pen that is used to place the signature. (106) Thus, it is clear that the judgment in Charles De Silva had no applicaƟon or

relevance to the facts in this appeal, and that the ﬂaws that had been addressed to in that case as aﬀecƟng the credibility of the report of the expert did not arise in this appeal, either with regard to P16 or P18. (107) RegreƩably though, I must point out that this error would not have arisen had

the learned Judges of the High Court instead of copy-pasƟng the headnote of the published judgment in Charles De Silva, read and considered the enƟre judgment. Doing so would have impressed upon the learned Judges the signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the two cases, both in the evidence and the circumstances.

(108) The resulƟng conclusion arising in this appeal is that either the AƩorney-at-Law

who had aƩested the execuƟon of Deed No. 47 had been misled to believe by the two witnesses to the said Deed that the person who signed as BerƟe Samarasinghe [the executant] was in fact BerƟe Samarasinghe, whereas he was not, or that such AƩorney-at-Law was also a guilty parƟcipant to forgery and had given false evidence at the District Court trial. If the laƩer had occurred, it is a

42

serious act of professional misconduct on the part of the AƩorney-at-Law. It is a sigh of relief to know that the amendment introduced to the Notaries Ordinance by the Notaries (Amendment) Act, No. 31 of 2022 would signiﬁcantly reduce the opportunity that prevailed all this Ɵme to prepare forged deeds and that it would add the much needed sancƟty and integrity to notarially executed conveyances. Thus, it is unlikely that cases of this nature would arise in the future. Summary (109) In judicial proceedings, when a Notarially aƩested conveyance (such as the deed

of giŌ referred to in this judgment) is produced in evidence and proved according to law, it becomes a document that must be treated with a high degree of sancƟty, as reﬂecƟng the truth pertaining to the transacƟon referred to in such conveyance relaƟng to immovable property. Thus, a very high evidenƟal value must be aƩached to the contents of such conveyance. However, the duty to do so would arise only if the conveyance has been executed and aƩested according to law and there are no suspicious circumstances pertaining to its preparaƟon, contents, execuƟon and aƩestaƟon. (110) A report of an expert containing his opinion pertaining to handwriƟng and/or

signature of a person is admissible under and in terms of SecƟon 45 of the Evidence Ordinance. ParƟcularly if (i) the expert’s experƟse, (ii) the scienƟﬁc nature and the integrity of the examinaƟon of the suspect documentaƟon, (iii) the method adopted for the analysis of the ﬁndings, and (iv) the scienƟﬁc fooƟng on which the opinion had been arrived at, saƟsﬁes judicial scruƟny and such evidence has not been successfully impugned by the opposing party, such opinion evidence should not be treated lightly and must be judicially considered for the purpose of arriving at a judicial ﬁnding. (111) The expert opinion of one expert can be used to corroborate the expert opinion

of another expert. Considerable evidenƟal weight must be aƩached to such corroborated expert opinion. (112) Expert opinion evidence that the purported signature of the executant of a

conveyance is in fact not the signature of such executant, is a strong evidenƟal circumstance which can and must be used, when considering whether the conveyance is a forgery or not. A conclusion in that regard must be arrived at only

43

aŌer considering the totality of the body of evidence in the case, in which, the expert opinion should be a striking item. If the conveyance is a forgery, it must be concluded that it has not been executed in a lawful manner. (113) No evidenƟal value can be aƩached to a conveyance which in its enƟrety or part

thereof is a forgery, and thus must be rendered a nullity through judicial dictum. In such circumstances, the purported beneﬁciary of conveyance derives no rights or enƟtlements through such conveyance. Conclusion (114) In the above circumstances, I answer the two quesƟons of law in the aﬃrmaƟve.

The judgment of the High Court is set aside and the judgment of the District Court is aﬃrmed, to the extent of only issuing a declaraƟon of nullity of Deed No. 47 – i.e. the relief prayed for in the prayer to the plaint, except the relief prayed for in paragraph [we] of the prayer. Accordingly, in the eyes of the law, it would be deemed that by Deed No. 47, BerƟe Samarasinghe did not, during his lifeƟme, giŌ Deegala Estate to anyone. As there is no evidence of BerƟe Samarasinghe having executed a last will, the devoluƟon of Ɵtle would have to be determined in terms of intestate succession. (115) This appeal is accordingly allowed, without costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT S. Thurairaja, PC, J I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT Yasantha Kodagoda, PC, J I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT