==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of a Rule in terms of Section 42(2) of the Judicature Act No. 2 of 1978 against read with the Supreme Court (Conduct of and Etiquette for Attorneys-at-law) Rules 1988, against Jayathunga Patabendige Susil Priyantha Jayatunga, Attorney-at-Law.

S.C. Rule No.05/2024 The Registrar, Supreme Court of Sri Lanka, Supreme Court Complex, Colombo 12. Complainant Vs. Jayathunga Patabendige Susil Priyantha Jayatunga, Attorney-at-Law, No.294A, Kotupathgoda Road, Kumbuke West, Gonapola.

Respondent

BEFORE : A.L. SHIRAN GOONERATNE, J. ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J. K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J.

COUNSEL : J.P.S.P. Jayathunga, Respondent, appears in person,

Chathura Galhena with Devmini Bulegoda for the Bar Association of Sri Lanka.

S.C. Rule No. 05/2024

2

Nirmalan Wigneshwaran DSG, with Sureka Ahmed, SSC instructed by Rizni Firdouse, SSA for the Hon. Attorney General.

INQUIRED ON : 02nd October, 2025

DECIDED ON : 05th February, 2026

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

On 01.07.2024, a Rule was served on Jayatunga Patabendige Susil Priyantha

Jayatunga, Attorney-at-Law, (hereinafter referred to as the Respondent) and was

read out by the Registrar of this Court with a Sinhala translation. The

Respondent pleaded not guilty to the Rule. The inquiry into the Rule against the

Respondent commenced and concluded on 02.10.2025. This Court decided to

conduct contemporaneous hearing into SC Contempt of Court No. 1/24 and Rule

No. 5/24, since the acts attributed to the Respondent in both these instances are

almost identical.

During the inquiry into the Rule No. 5/24, the Registrar of the Supreme

Court and the Respondent presented their respective evidence under oath. The

Respondent was afforded an opportunity to tender his closing submissions, in

written form, after perusing the proceedings conducted on that day, but were

issued to him at a subsequent point by the Registry. This opportunity was

provided to the Respondent, with a view to provide him with sufficient time to

effectively address this Court of the defence put up by him as he was produced

from remand custody. The opportunity afforded by this Court to the Respondent

S.C. Rule No. 05/2024

3

was fully utilised by him in submitting several sets of written submissions from

time to time to the Registry of this Court.

The circumstances that led to the issuance of the said Rule on the

Respondent are set out below albeit briefly.

The Respondent filed a petition No. SC/SPL/LA/112/2023 on 20.04.2023

before this Court, by which he sought to impugn the judgment of the Court of

Appeal dated 09.03.2023, pronounced in Case No. COC/02/2023.

The petition SC/SPL/LA/112/2023 was to be supported on 30.01.2024

before a division of this Court for the consideration of granting Special Leave to

Appeal against the impugned judgment. The Respondent, being the Petitioner in

that application, appeared in person. During the process of supporting the said

petition, the Respondent sought further time to respond to certain clarifications

sought by this Court. The matter was accordingly re-scheduled to be resumed on

20.03.2024 before the same division of this Court.

The Respondent filed an additional petition dated 12.03.2024 in

SC/SPL/LA/112/2023, without obtaining leave of this Court, prior to filing of

same.

In that petition the Respondent alleged that;

a. the division of this Court, before which the petition of

SC/SPL/LA/112/2023 was supported, acted with strong malice

towards the Respondent,

b. the three Justices who constituted that division of this Court have

suppressed the truth and,

S.C. Rule No. 05/2024

4

c. therefore, are guilty of an offence under Section 289 of the Penal

Code.

The Respondent, further alleged that the said three Justices have;

a. misled and deceived Court,

b. acted in Contempt of Court,

c. been partial towards the 1st Respondent,

d. acted in breach of the Rules of Court and

e. accorded special treatment to the 1st Respondent, who is a

serving judicial officer.

Relevant particulars of the Rule in Rule No. 5/24, that was served on the Respondent, based on his said conduct, are as follows;

(a) By reason of the aforesaid conduct, you have acted in a manner which is contrary to Rule 50 of the Supreme Court (Conduct of and Etiquette of Attorneys-at-Law) Rules 1988 made under Article 136 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka,

(b) By reason of the aforesaid conduct, you have acted in a manner which is contrary to Rule 51 of the Supreme Court (Conduct of and Etiquette of Attorneys-at-Law) Rules 1988 made under Article 136 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka,

(c) By reason of the aforesaid conduct, you have acted in a manner which is insulting and degrading towards the Honourable Judges of the Supreme Court, Court of Appeal and the 1st Respondent in SC/SPL/LA/112/2023, and therefore acted in a manner which is contrary to Rule 53(i) of

S.C. Rule No. 05/2024

5

the Supreme Court (Conduct of and Etiquette of Attorneys-at-Law) Rules 1988 made under Article 136 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka,

(d) By reason of the aforesaid conduct, you have acted in a manner which is contrary to Rules 54 and 58 of the Supreme Court (Conduct of and Etiquette of Attorneys-at-Law) Rules 1988 made under Article 136 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka,

(e) By reason of the aforesaid conduct, you have acted in a manner which is contrary to Rule 56 of the Supreme Court (Conduct of and Etiquette of Attorneys-at-Law) Rules 1988 made under Article 136 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka,

(f) By reason of the aforesaid conduct, you have acted in a manner which would reasonably be regarded as disgraceful or dishonourable of Attorneys-at-Law of good repute and competency and you have conducted yourself in a manner which is inexcusable and such as to be regarded as deplorable by your fellows in the profession and have thus committed a breach of Rule 60 of the Supreme Court (Conduct of and Etiquette of Attorneys-at-Law) Rules 1988 made under Article 136 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, and,

(g) By reason of the aforesaid acts and conduct, you have conducted yourself in a manner unworthy of an Attorney-at-Law and have thus committed a breach of Rule No.61 of the said Rules, and,

S.C. Rule No. 05/2024

6

(h) By reason of the aforesaid acts and conduct, you have committed, deceit and/or malpractice within the ambit of Section 42(2) of the Judicature Act No.2 of 1978 which renders you unfit to remain as an Attorney-at-Law.

During the inquiry into Rule No. 5/24, the Respondent admitted the

several acts attributed to him in the said Rule and offered an explanation to his

conduct referred to therein. According to him, whilst acting in the manner

described in the Rule, he neither had any understanding that he was acting

contrary to law nor to morals, (“ ta lrk ,o ls%hdj iïnkaOfhka kS;shg mgyyeks nj fy`

iodpdrhg mgyeks njg ug wjfn`Ohla ;snqfk keye”) Thus, he attributed his acts to a

mental condition that said to have prevailed in his mind during that particular

point in time, which he preferred to describe as “ ta fj,dfj ysgmq udkisl;ajh”.

This he made by placing heavy reliance on an assessment made by the

Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist attached to National Institute of Mental Health,

Dr. C.T.K. Fernando, on his mental condition. Dr. C.T.K. Fernando, indicated his

findings of an assessment conducted on the Respondent in his report. The

Respondent tendered that report to Court as V1.

In his evidence the Respondent has described the status of his mind that

was prevalent during the relevant time to the Rule, as one which is “l,yldrS”

mSvdldrS” igkaldñ udkisl;ajhla”. These descriptions could be translated into English to

read as a mentality, which is “pugnacious, oppressive and aggressive”.

In support of his defence of insanity, the Respondent also relied two other

medical reports that were obtained from two other Consultant Psychiatrists. One

of the two Consultant Psychiatrist is attached to Polonnaruwa General Hospital

S.C. Rule No. 05/2024

7

while the other, apparently engaged in private practice in Colombo. These reports

were tendered to Court marked V2 and V3 respectively.

Thus, it is clear that the Respondent relied on the specific defence of

insanity and thereby invoked the applicability of the statutory provisions

contained in Section 77 of the Penal Code.

Section 77 of the Penal Code is a statutory provision drafted and inserted

into the Penal Code, in the spirit of Mac Naughten Rules, but “with some material

modifications” (vide Principles of Criminal Liability in Ceylon, Professor G.L.

Peiris, at p.133). Section 77 states thus; “[N]othing is an offence which is done by a

person who, at the time of doing it, by reason of unsoundness of mind, is incapable of

knowing the nature of the act, or that he is doing what is either wrong or contrary to

law.”

The position taken up by the Respondent is that he neither had any

understanding that he acted contrary to law nor he acted contrary to the morals

during the period of time relevant to the Rule due to his unsoundness of mind.

However, it must be noted here that he does not rely on the first scenario

described in Section 77 as he did not state that he was incapable of knowing the

nature of his acts by reason of unsoundness of mind. Instead, he clearly placed

reliance on the second scenario described in that Section which states “… by

reason of unsoundness of mind, is incapable of knowing … that he is doing what is either

wrong or contrary to law”. Thus, if the Respondent is to be exonerated from

imposition of any liability attached to his acts that are referred to in the Rule, he

must establish before this Court that he was incapable of knowing what he was

doing is either wrong or contrary to law, by reason of his unsoundness of mind.

He must establish that on a balance of probability, vide judgments of the Court of

S.C. Rule No. 05/2024

8

Appeal in Perera v Republic of Sri Lanka (1978-79) 2 Sri L.R. 84 Nandasena v

Attorney General (2007) 1 Sri L.R. 237 and the Court of Criminal Appeal in

Barnes Nimalaratne v Republic of Sri Lanka (1975) 78 NLR 51.

In this regard, the medical reports that were tendered before this Court

provide the most relevant and reliable evidence.

The medical report V1 indicates that the Respondent was assessed by Dr.

C.T.K Fernando on 02.04.2024, in the presence of Dr. W.W.L.I. Fernando, and at the

Forensic Psychiatry Clinic of the Prison Hospital. During the assessment, it was

revealed that the Respondent had no past history of presentation before any

psychiatric service. He also had no family history of any mental illnesses.

Dr. C.T.K Fernando states in that report that his assessment of the

Respondent revealed that he has “persecutory delusions against his wife mainly, but

he also developed persecutory delusions others are plotting against him.” In addition,

the Respondent was noted to have “grandiose delusion that he has superior

knowledge about law than any other individual”. Dr. C.T.K Fernando accordingly

concluded the assessment with a clinical interpretation that the Respondent has a

mental disorder identified as “bipolar affective disorder currently mania with

psychosis”.

The Respondent, in his written submissions, invited attention of this Court

to the dicta of a judgment of the Court of Appeal pronounced in Nandasena v

Attorney General (supra), where Ranjith Silva J has held, in relation to the nature

of the burden cast on an accused, who relied on the defence of insanity, that (at

p. 239) “ [I]t is the burden of the accused to prove that he was incapable of (1) knowing

the nature of the act (2) that he is doing what is either wrong or contrary to law”. But

the factors by which an accused might sought to discharge his burden must be

S.C. Rule No. 05/2024

9

clearly established and not merely set out in “vague or desultory fashion” and the

conclusions must not be based on inadequate material and must not be on

hearsay either, (vide judgment of Barnes Nimalaratne v Republic of Sri Lanka

(supra) at p. 55).

In order to consider the impact of “bipolar affective disorder currently mania

with psychosis” on the cognitive ability of the mind of the Respondent, it is

necessary to examine the medical report V1, in a more detailed manner. This is

because, it is for this Court to satisfy itself that the Respondent is entitled to the

relief afforded to a person of unsound mind in terms of Section 77 of the Penal

Code.

The Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist, who issued the said report on

02.04.2024, states under the heading “Mental State Assessment” that the features

that are referred to in his report are “suggestive of manic episodes”. In relation to

the responsibility of his actions, the Consultant is of the view that the

Respondent would have been of “unsound mind at the time of the alleged offence”.

Understandably, this is a finding on which the Respondent has now placed very

heavy reliance. However, it must be observed that in that report there is no

mention of an exact date of any admitted acts that are referred to in the Rule,

which indicated the position that it was probable that the Respondent was under

that mental condition during that specific time period.

The Rule was served on the Respondent only at a subsequent point of

time. Even if one were to act on V1, by giving the fullest weightage to its

findings, the mental illness of “bipolar affective disorder currently mania with

psychosis” that appears to have affected the Respondent at some point in time,

would occur only intermittently. The Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist described

S.C. Rule No. 05/2024

10

such instances as “manic episodes”. Thus, it is clear that there are intervals of clear

comprehension in between these “manic episodes” that might last for an

unspecified period of time. During the intervals that exists in between such

manic episodes, the Respondent could act as a reasonably prudent member of

the society. However, this is not the only evidence before Court on this point.

The Respondent also relied on two other medical reports issued by two

other Consultant Psychiatrists, whom he consulted on his own volition.

The document marked V2, was issued on 30.04.2024 by Dr. P.A.I.

Wijayanayaka, Acting Consultant Psychiatrist of Teaching Hospital Polonnaruwa, a

few days after he was assessed by Dr. C.T.K. Fernando. This six-page document,

consists of illegible handwritten notes made by the Consultant. However, it is

clear that it does not make any reference to a specific diagnosis or the Consultant

made a diagnosis of a particular mental illness consequent to the assessment

conducted on the Respondent. Nor did the Respondent invite attention of this

Court to any such specific reference made to that effect in that report. However,

the evidence of the Respondent indicated that, during that consultation, he was

verbally informed of by the said Consultant that he need not be treated for any

psychiatric illness.

The said alleged clearance of the Respondent of any mental impairment by

Dr. P.A.I. Wijayanayaka, prompted him to lodge a complaint to the Medical

Council against Dr. C.T.K Fernando, who issued V1. The Respondent, by a letter

dated 06.06.2024 and addressed to that Council, complained that although he

was cleared of any mental impairment by Dr. P.A.I. Wijayanayaka, when he

consulted the latter on 30.04.2024, who issued a finding, quite different to the one

made by Dr. C.T.K Fernando, indicating that he has “bipolar affective disorder

S.C. Rule No. 05/2024

11

currently mania with psychosis”. The Respondent, further alleged that the said

report was prepared by the Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist based on false

information attributed to him, which he did not provide during the assessment

session. Not only the Respondent challenged the validity of the medical report

V1, he has instituted a civil action against the said Consultant and the other

Psychiatrist, in the District Court Case No. DMR/620/24 on 12.06.2024, claiming

damages from them, in a sum of Rs. 100,000,000.00.

In that action, the Respondent referred to his causes of action accrued to

him against Drs. W.W.L.I Fernando and C.T.K Fernando on the basis, which he

describes as follows;

“ lS¾;su;a kS;s{jrfhl= jQ meñKs,slreg udkisl fr`.hla we;s njg fÉ;kdkaú;j

wmydi lsrSu” lS¾;shg ydks lsrSu” udkisl fr`.sfhl= f,ig idjoH u;hla ck.;

lsrSug bv ie,iaùu” meñKs,slre úiska mjrd mj;ajdf.k hk kvq bosrshg mj;ajdf.k

hdug wkHdldrhlska ndOd meñKùug ls%hd lsrSu” meñK,slref.a kS;s{ jD;a;sh

iodld,sl j wysñ lsrSug W;aidy lsrSu” ldhslj iy udkislj ksfr`.S mqoa.,hl= jQ

meñKs,slre udkisl fr`.sfhl= f,i yqjd oelaùu hkdoS jeros isÿ lsrSu u.ska ”

Despite the fact that the Respondent placing heavy reliance on the findings

contained in V1 to impress upon this Court that he is a person of unsound mind,

he continues to maintain the said action filed against the Consultant Forensic

Psychiatrist, by affirming to the said cause of action in his Plaint, and thereby

asserting that V1 was issued by the said Consultant to make him, an “eminent

lawyer” (lS¾;su;a kS;s{jrfhl= jQ meñKs,slreg) with sound mental health condition,

being branded as a person with a serious mental illness. The Respondent did not

explain this obviously irreconcilable inconsistency in his evidence presented

before this Court, in support of his defence of insanity.

S.C. Rule No. 05/2024

12

Remaining document to be considered by this Court is the one that was

marked V3 and with a title “Medical Report”.

This is a report issued by Dr. Jayan Mendis, a Consultant Psychiatrist, when

he was consulted by the Respondent at Nawaloka Hospital on 07.06.2024. In the

assessment of Dr. Mendis, the Respondent only “appears to be slightly disinhibited”

and found to be a “mildly overtalkative” person. However, Dr. Mendis was firm in

his opinion that “… no clear manic disturbance or depressive symptoms noted” on the

Respondent. The said assessment of Dr. Mendis significantly reduces the

probabilities of any manic episode occurring in the mind of the Respondent on

20.03.2024. Dr. Jayan Mendis’s assessment of the Respondent clearly indicated

that the latter had no significant mental impairment. That finding would

therefore excludes the prospect of the Respondent, though appears to be of a

“slightly disinhibited” nature and a “mildly overtalkative” person, having any

impairment on the cognitive ability of his mind, that made him incapable of

knowing that he is doing what is wrong or contrary to law, due to unsoundness

of mind.

The all-important question of fact that must be determined in this instance

is whether the Respondent has proved on a balance of probabilities that he was

incapable of knowing that what he is doing is either wrong or contrary to law,

when he did the acts indicated in the Rule on 20.03.2024, due to his specific claim

of having “bipolar affective disorder currently mania with psychosis”.

The inconsistencies in these medical reports, indicating different states of

his mind, have the effect of significantly reducing the weightage that could be

attached to the mental impairment referred to in V1. In view of the contents of

the other reports, particularly V3, there is no noticeable mental impairment. The

S.C. Rule No. 05/2024

13

Respondent, who now wishes to rely solely on V1 in support of his defence, a

medical report which he found in the past to be injurious to his good reputation

as a legal professional with sound mental health, a report that prompted him to

claim damages from its author by institution of civil action, has now become the

only item of evidence, in support of his claim of insanity.

This he said before this Court under oath. Similarly, the Respondent

affirmed in an affidavit, annexed to the Plaint, in the said action filed against Drs.

W.W.L.I Fernando and C.T.K Fernando that he is perfectly a sane person, who was

wrongly diagnosed by the two defendants as a person with a mental condition of

“bipolar affective disorder currently mania with psychosis”. Thus, the Respondent has

taken two diametrically opposite positions in these two situations, where he

vouched under oath of what he affirms therein is the truth.

Which of these two irreconcilable positions could be accepted by this

Court as the truthful statement of the Respondent?

This Court has no expertise to determine medically whether the

Respondent is of unsound mind, in terms of Section 77 of the Penal Code, when

the admitted acts of Contempt of Court were committed by him. It is for this

purpose the Court called for the expert opinion from the Consultant Forensic

Psychiatrist. Whilst placing strong reliance on V1, the Respondent similarly relies

on V2 and V3, which completely nullifies any indication of him having “bipolar

affective disorder currently mania with psychosis”. This Court is therefore not in a

position to make a positive pronouncement either way on this question whether

the Respondent actually suffers from an unsoundness of mind or that he is a

normal person, who now pretends to be of a person of unsound mind for tactical

reasons. The contradictory positions taken up by the Respondent on this vital

S.C. Rule No. 05/2024

14

issue made it impossible for this Court to determine the relative probabilities of

him having a manic episode during the acts done on 20.03.2024 in favour of the

Respondent.

In order to get over the two irreconcilable positions that has arisen with

regard to his defence, the Respondent sought to explain in his evidence before

this Court that he now realises that it was wrong for him to have challenged the

validity of V1. The Respondent, in spite of accepting the contents of V1 as one

that reflects his state of mind on the date specified in the Rule, nonetheless wants

to proceed with the action he already instituted against the Drs. W.W.L.I Fernando

and C.T.K Fernando, indicating that he has no intention of withdrawing that

action. Thus, the aforementioned conduct poses a serious credibility issue on the

truthfulness of evidence that was presented before this Court by the Respondent,

in support of the defence of insanity.

It is already noted that the assessment made by Dr. C.T.K Fernando in V1 is

clearly at variance with the one made by Dr. Jayan Mendis in V3. This difference

of opinions expressed by the medial experts, who are eminently qualified in the

field of Psychiatry, could have been due to limited accessibility to relevant

information. In fact, Dr. C.T.K Fernando noted that there was “unavailability of

collateral information from a family member” during the session conducted by him.

All three reports indicate that the assessment of the Respondent was made

totally on the information gathered during each of these three consultations.

Thus, the opinion of the experts would totally be dependent on the manner the

Respondent has presented himself before each of them, and conducted himself

during the respective assessment sessions, thus resulting in varying conclusions.

S.C. Rule No. 05/2024

15

In order to arrive at a finding on the question of fact that whether the

Respondent was incapable of knowing what he was doing is either wrong or

contrary to law, by reason of his unsoundness of mind, it is important to refer to

the circumstances leading up to the point of the issuance of the Rule, along with

the other circumstances that tends to indicate his mental state, subsequent to

those indicated in the said Rule, even though he admitted those acts.

The Respondent filed application No. CA Writ 635/2021 naming several

Respondents (including a Judge of the original Court, cited as the 1st Respondent

in that petition), and made several allegations against two sitting Justices of that

Court. Thereafter, he filed another application (COC/02/2023) against the said

1st Respondent, alleging Contempt of Court of Appeal, when the latter failed to

appear before that Court, at the time the application No. CA Writ 635/2021 was

mentioned before that Court. The Court of Appeal, by its order dated 09.03.2023,

refused to issue notice on the 1st Respondent judicial officer, in case No.

COC/02/2023.

The Respondent thereupon sought Special Leave to Appeal from this

Court in SC SPL LA 112/2023, impugning the said order made by the Court of

Appeal in COC/02/2023. The Respondent, after filing the petition in case No.

SC SPL LA 112/2023, appeared before this Court in person on 30.01.2024 in order

to support the said application. When this Court sought a clarification from him,

whether there was any direction made by the Court of Appeal directing the 1st

Respondent in CA Writ 635/2021 to appear before that Court personally, the

Respondent moved for time and to have the matter re-fixed and thereby

allowing him to make further submissions on the next date i.e., 20.03.2024.

S.C. Rule No. 05/2024

16

It is at that stage only the Respondent has filed the subsequent petition

along with an affidavit on 12.03.2024, making serious allegations against the

panel of three Justices before whom his application No. SC SPL LA 112/2023 was

partially supported.

On 20.03.2024, when case No. SC SPL LA 112/2023 was resumed before

the same panel of Justices, the Respondent made serious allegations against the

panel of Justices hearing his application in open Court. Learned SDSG, who

appeared for the Hon. Attorney General, having witnessed the acts of the

Respondent, moved this Court to issue show cause on the Respondent, why this

Court should not punish him for contempt of the Supreme Court.

The said chronology of events indicates that the circumstances under

which the offending conduct was carried out and the manner in which he

conducted himself in the well of the Court, in addition to the allegations made in

his petition addressed to this Court. The reason for his offending conduct on

20.03.2024, is attempted to persuade the three Judges not to resume the hearing

of his application in SC SPL LA 112/2023, and force them to recuse from

continuing with the hearing.

The intention of the Respondent, behind his conduct, is clearly reflected

from the narrative he provided to Dr. C.T.K Fernando, during his assessment on

02.04.2024, after a mere 13 days since 20.03.2024.

The Respondent has disclosed to the Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist that

(vide para 29 of V1);

“kvqj .;a;d iqmarsï fl`Ü tfla’ ;arS fnkaÉ mek,a tlla ;uhs ysáfha’ uu ta ;=ka

fokdg úreoaOj wmrdO kvqjla oeïud l,ska fld<U ufyaia;ard;a Widúh ^wxl 01&’ Bg

S.C. Rule No. 05/2024

17

miafia uf.a kvqj wyoaos uu lsõjd " Tn ;=uka,dg úreoaOj uu kvq od, ;sfhkafka

tal ksid uf. kvqj l;d lrkav neye fu Widúfha lsh,d"

This particular admission made to the Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist by

the Respondent made it implicitly clear that he was determined to compel the

three Justices to desist from resuming the hearing of the application No. SC SPL

LA 112/2023 on 20.03.2024, at whatever the cost. He has even taken the extreme

step of instituting a private Plaint in the Magistrate’s Court of Colombo against

the three Justices, and thereby expected to force them to recuse from taking part

in any further proceedings, which their Lordships would have done in any other

ordinary situation, in terms of applicable Judicial Ethics.

The said conduct of the Respondent therefore appears to be of a person,

who acted with a clear and a rational mind, especially in developing a strategy to

achieve his desired objective by creating a situation that would force the three

Justices to recuse themselves from further proceedings of the case and, executing

each of the stages of that strategy with meticulous care. If that in fact is the case,

then the Respondent has effectively designed a strategy in order to force the

three Justices not to proceed with the resumption of proceedings with the

unfounded and unsubstantiated allegation of bias.

Moreover, immediately after enlarging the Respondent on bail, he has

secured an interview with a private television presenter. During this interview,

he was afforded with yet another opportunity of repeating what he alleged in his

subsequent petition and to reach out to a larger population of television viewers

via audio-visual media. This action, in turn, has resulted in re-remanding the

Respondent.

S.C. Rule No. 05/2024

18

In view of this reasoning, it appears to this Court that it is more probable

than not, that the Respondent at all times material to the Rule No. 5/24, have

acted with a rational mind, which is not clouded by any mental condition that

qualified to diminish that ability. Clearly, there was no family history of mental

illnesses and prior to the incidents which resulted in presenting the charges, the

Respondent had no episodes of any mental incapacity at all.

Even if there was some temporary derangement, as assessed by Dr. C.T.K

Fernando, the evidence clearly supports a reasonable proposition that he may

have experienced such episodes with long time intervals in between them. But,

when he acted contemptuously towards this Court on 20.03.2024, and in the

absence of any material to satisfy to the contrary, it is more probable that he was

acting rationally and was not under any mental derangement, as confirmed by

Drs. P.A.I. Wijayanayaka and Jayan Mendis, Consultant Psychiatrists, who have

had the benefit and the opportunity of making personal assessments of the

Respondent, who provided them with an unrestricted flow of information.

In this regard, it must be noted that all three Consultants have assessed the

mental condition of the Respondent solely by interviewing him and without

having the benefit of any clinical reports obtained through investigative testing

procedures to assist them.

Furthermore, we derive support for aforementioned view from the

reasoning of the judgment of Dias J in The King v Jayawardene (1947) 48 NLR

497. This was a situation where the accused, in support of his plea of insanity,

has relied on the evidence that his father, brother and sister had been insane; he

himself in his childhood had suffered from epileptic fits, that when the detection

of his fraud and his arrest became imminent his mental condition deteriorated to

S.C. Rule No. 05/2024

19

the extent that he attempted to commit suicide and was subsequently

adjudicated to be of a person of unsound mind. But the evidence before Court

also proved that during the thirty years the accused had been a public servant, he

had displayed no signs of any mental aberration.

His Lordship, having considered the circumstances in support of the

defence of insanity by the accused, has held (at p. 503) that;

“[T]he modus operandi of the accused, as detailed by the learned Judge at

pages 51 and 52 of his judgment, clearly shows that the accused needed

considerable skill and mental acumen in order to falsify the books and

vouchers received by him during this period in order to deceive, not only

his station staff, but also the head office at Colombo. A person who was of

unsound mind and did not know the nature of his acts could not have

perpetrated this somewhat intricate fraud in the manner in which the

accused carried

Since Rule No. 5/24 was served on the Respondent of his conduct as an

Attorney-at-Law and thereby acted in violation of the Rules of the Supreme

Court (Conduct of and Etiquette of Attorneys-at-Law) 1988, made under Article

136 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, it is

opportune at this stage to examine whether his offending conduct warrants any

determination by this Court in respect of exercising its power conferred under

Section 42(2) of the Judicature Act No. 2 of 1978, which states “ [E]very person

admitted and enrolled as an Attorney-at-Law who shall be guilty of deceit, malpractice

crime or offence may be suspended from practice or removed from office by any three

Judges of the Supreme Court sitting together.”

S.C. Rule No. 05/2024

20

In the matter of a Rule against an Attorney-at-Law (2008) 1 Sri L.R. 275, it

has been held by S.N. Silva CJ (at p. 282) that “… an objection to the participation of

a Judge should be only on firm foundation. Any frivolous objection that is taken would

only impede the due administration of justice, which may even amount to contempt of

Court.” In this instance, the Respondent has not only objected the Justices for

participating in the proceedings on a concocted set of allegations but instituted a

private prosecution, alleging criminal conduct attributed to their Lordships, with

the sole purpose of securing that the matter would not be taken up for further

support.

We are in agreement with the submissions of the learned Deputy Solicitor

General, who assisted Court, made to the effect that “[T]he question of the

Respondent continuing to serve as an Attorney-at-Law is simply untenable – not only

because of his actions where he abused his privileged position as an Attorney-at-Law- but

also because of the danger to any clients that may retain him. His actions would seriously

prejudice his client’s interests.”

Dr A.R.B. Amerasinghe in his book titled Professional Ethics and Responsibility

of Lawyers, under the heading “[T]he Duty of Diligence” states (Chapter XIII, at

p.290); “[I]t is to be assumed that an attorney is mentally and physically fit to undertake

the work. Where his mental or physical condition materially impairs his ability to act for

his client in a persevering, industrious, assiduous, attentive and careful manner, whether

the disability is natural or self-induced, for example from the use of intoxicants or drugs,

an attorney should not undertake a matter”.

In this instance, the Respondent represented himself and did not represent

a client, who obtained his professional services and as such the duty of diligence

might not carry the weight it ought to carry if it was a private client. But the

persistent conduct of the Respondent to have the bench re-arranged to fit into his

S.C. Rule No. 05/2024

21

own liking, a clear act of attempted bench fixing, and adopting devious methods

in order to achieve that manifestly illegal objective, not only deserves the

strongest form of condemnation, but demands adequate punitive measures, not

only to indicate the strong desire of this Court not to leave room for any such

interference with its affairs and that it does not tolerate such conduct on the part

of the Respondent lightly, but also of any other person, who might entertain

similar intentions.

Dr A.R.B. Amerasinghe, in this regard, states (ibid, at p. 10); [T]here is a

general, overall, obligation imposed by a prohibition against conducting oneself “in any

manner” which would be regarded as ‘disgraceful’, dishonourable’, ‘deplorable’ or

‘inexcusable’ or ‘unworthy’.” Learned author further added that (ibid) that the

phrase “in any manner” connotes not only professional misconduct to things done

in the pursuit of the profession, but “… to conduct occurring in circumstances

unconnected with the practice of law.”

With this wider interpretation in mind, and having considered the conduct

now admitted by the Respondent with an explanation he was unable to satisfy

this Court with, we are of the considered opinion that the acts referred to in the

Rule are clearly qualifies to be termed as ‘disgraceful’, ‘dishonourable’, ‘deplorable’

or ‘inexcusable’ conduct on the part of the Respondent and thereby rendering him

unworthy to be invested with permission of this Court to practice law. The

Respondent was already suspended from practicing law by this Court at the

initial stage of these proceedings.

This Court therefore decides to disenroll Jayatunga Patabendige Susil

Priyantha Jayatunga as an Attorney-at-Law of this Court with effect from today,

i.e., 05.02.2026.

S.C. Rule No. 05/2024

22

Accordingly, we issue an order on the Registrar of this Court, directing her

that the name of the Respondent, Jayatunga Patabendige Susil Priyantha Jayatunga,

be struck off from the Register, that contain names of Attorneys-at-Law, who are

permitted to practice law within Sri Lanka.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

A.L. SHIRAN GOONERATNE, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT