Page 1 of 19

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

A. S. de. S. Haegoda,

No. 30/7, Stanley Tillakaratne

Mawatha,

Nugegoda.

Plaintiff

S.C. Appeal No. 60/2004

S.C. (S.P.L.) L.A. No. 140/2002

Vs.

C.A. No. 613/92(F)

D.C. Mount Lavinia Case No. 2175/L

M. Gunaratne Perera,

No. 131, Subadrarama Road,

Gangodawila,

Nugegoda.

Defendant

AND BETWEEN

M. Gunaratne Perera,

No. 131, Subadrarama Road,

Gangodawila,

Nugegoda.

Defendant Appellant

Page 2 of 19

Vs.

A. S. de. S. Haegoda,

No. 30/7, Stanley Thilakaratne

Mawatha,

Nugegoda.

Plaintiff Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

A. S. de. S. Haegoda

No. 30/7, Stanley Thilakaratne

Mawatha,

Nugegoda.

(Deceased)

Plaintiff Respondent Appellant

1(a). Ratnavali Chandrika Haegoda,

No. 30/7, Stanley Thilakaratne

Mawatha,

Nugegoda.

Substituted Plaintiff Respondent

Appellant

Page 3 of 19

Vs.

1. M. Gunaratne Perera

No. 131, Subadrarama Road,

Gangodawila,

Nugegoda.

(Deceased)

Defendant Appellant Respondent

1(a). Hewa Malaviarachchige Dona

Dayaseeli Dhammika,

No. 131, Subadrarama Road,

Gangodawila,

Nugegoda.

Substituted Defendant Appellant

Respondent

Before: Hon. P. Padman Surasena, J.

Hon. Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J.

Hon. Janak De Silva, J.

Counsels: Harsha Soza, P.C., with Srihan Samaranayake for Plaintiff Respondent

Appellant

Mohan Walpita with C. C. P. Balasuriya for Substituted Defendant

Appellant Respondent

Page 4 of 19

Written Submissions: 20.10.2004, 30.06.2006 and 18.07.2006 by Plaintiff

Respondent Appellant

16.11.2004, 18.07.2006 and 16.11.2006 by Defendant

Appellant Respondent

Argued on: 21.11.2023

Decided on: 21.03.2025

Janak De Silva, J.

The Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant (Appellant) instituted this action against the

Defendant-Appellant-Respondent (Respondent) seeking a declaration that he is entitled

to an undivided 1/8th share of the property described in the schedule to the plaint

including buildings bearing assessments Nos. 135 and 135A situated thereon and an order

of ejectment against the Respondent and all those holding the said property under him.

According to the Appellant, Vesta Wijeratne, who was the original owner of the corpus,

had by deed No: 104 dated 13.09.1971 (P1) gifted the corpus to her son Lakshman Gamini

Wijeratne subject to her life interest. This is admitted by the Respondent.

The Appellant claims that the said Lakshman Gamini Wijeratne had transferred an

undivided 1/8th share of the corpus, including buildings bearing assessments Nos. 135 and

135A situated thereon, to the Appellant by deed No. 03 dated 18th November 1982 (P2)

attested by Neelamani Malawisuriya, Notary Public.

According to the schedule to P2, the Appellant was granted an undivided 1/8th share of

Lot A depicted in plan No. 512 prepared by Walter E. Lucas, Licensed Surveyor dated 12th

December 1926.

Page 5 of 19

The Appellant admitted that the Respondent also had received a transfer of the corpus

from the said Lakshman Gamini Wijeratne by virtue of deed No. 4925 dated 13.12.1979

(P3) attested by M.D.C. Senaratne, Notary Public.

According to the schedule to P3, the Respondent was transferred a divided portion

consisting of Lot A depicted in plan No. 512 prepared by Walter E. Lucas, Licensed

Surveyor dated 12th December 1926.

The Appellant claimed priority of title on the strength of his deed having been registered

in the correct folio in the Land Registry. It was his contention that although P3 was

registered earlier to P2, it was registered in the wrong folio in the Land Registry.

The Learned Additional District Judge of Mount Lavinia entered judgment as prayed for

by the Appellant.

Aggrieved by the said judgement, the Respondent appealed to the Court of Appeal which

set aside the judgment of the learned Additional District Judge and dismissed the action

of the Appellant with costs.

Special Leave to Appeal was granted on the following questions:

1. Did the Court of Appeal err in refusing the declaration of title to the Appellant in

respect of the 1/8th share in terms of Deed marked P2?

2. Did the Court of Appeal err in coming to a finding that the Appellant has failed to

prove the due execution of the Deed marked P2?

3. In any event can the Appellant seek relief by way of ejectment of the Respondent

in view of the interests of the Respondent as contained in terms of Deed P3?

I shall first address Question No. 2 as Question No. 1 will not arise unless the execution of

P2 has been proved.

Page 6 of 19

Due Execution

One of the grounds on which the Court of Appeal held against the Appellant was the

failure to prove due execution of P2.

Question No. 2 relates to authenticity. According to Coomaraswamy [E. R. S. R.

Coomaraswamy, The Law of Evidence, Vol. II, Book I (Stamford Lake Publication, 2022),

page 70], authenticity usually means proof that the document was written or executed

by the person who purports to have done so.

In Robins v. Grogan [43 N.L.R. 269 at 270] it was held that a document cannot be used in

evidence until its genuineness has been either admitted or established by proof which

should be given before the document is accepted by the Court. Where there has been no

admission as to the execution of a document which has been produced, it becomes

necessary to prove the handwriting.

According to Section 67 of the Evidence Ordinance, if a document is alleged to have been

signed or to have been written wholly or in part by any person, the signature or the

handwriting of so much of the document as is alleged to be in that persons handwriting

must be proved to be in his handwriting.

Sections 68 to 72 of the Evidence Ordinance explain how the due execution of certain

documents may be proved.

Section 68 of the Evidence Ordinance states that if a document is required by law to be

attested, it shall not be used as evidence until one attesting witness at least has been

called for the purpose of proving its execution, if there be an attesting witness alive, and

subject to the process of the court and capable of giving evidence.

The Appellant contended that the Court of Appeal erred in law in requiring proof of due

execution of P2 inasmuch as the Respondent had failed to challenge its due execution in

his answer. In any event, the Appellant contended that although P2 was marked subject

Page 7 of 19

to proof, it was not objected when read in evidence at the close of his case and as such it

must be considered as proved. Reliance was placed on the decision in Sri Lanka Ports

Authority and Another v. Jugolinija-Boal East [(1981) 1 Sri.L.R. 18].

The Respondent countered that for the Appellant to come within Section 7(1) read with

Section 7(4) of the Registration of Documents Ordinance No.23 of 1927 as amended

(Ordinance), he had to prove that P2 was executed in terms of Section 2 of the Prevention

of Frauds Ordinance read with Section 68 of the Evidence Ordinance. Accordingly, it was

submitted that the Appellant was obliged to call at least one of the attesting witnesses

[Bandiya v. Ungu (15 N.L.R. 263)]. Although the Notary Public who executed P2 was

called to testify by the Appellant, none of the attesting witnesses were called.

The Respondent conceded that the Notary Public is as much an attesting witness as the

two subscribing witnesses [Thiyagarasa v. Arunodayam (1987) 2 Sri.L.R. 184]. But in

order to do so, the Notary Public should have known the executant [Marian v. Jesuthasan

(59 N.L.R. 348); The Solicitor General v. Ahamadulebbe Ava Umma (71 N.L.R. 512 at 515

to 516)]. The Notary Public who executed P2 had stated in the attestation that she did

not know the executant.

No doubt that P2 was required by Section 2 of the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance to be

attested. Hence Section 68 of the Evidence Ordinance is engaged.

During the pendency of this appeal, the Supreme Court delivered a divided judgment on

the application of Section 68 of the Evidence Ordinance and the decision in Sri Lanka

Ports Authority (supra) to deeds in Kugabalan v. Ranaweera and Another [S.C. Appeal

No. 36/2014, S.C.M. 12.02.2021]. This was followed by a few other judgments which

either followed the majority or minority view in Kugabalan (supra). The resulting position

was not clear.

Page 8 of 19

In view of this position, Civil Procedure Code (Amendment) Act No. 17 of 2022 (Act) was

enacted and a new Section 154A was introduced to the Civil Procedure Code. In addition,

Section 3 (a)(ii) of the Act reads as follows:

3. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 2 of this Act, and the provisions

of the Evidence Ordinance, in any case or appeal pending on the date of coming

into operation of this Act

(a)

(ii) if the opposing party has objected to it being received as evidence on

the deed or document being tendered in evidence but not objected at the

close of a case when such document is read in evidence,

the court shall admit such deed or document as evidence without requiring further

proof: (emphasis added)

The Act came into operation on 23.06.2022. In this appeal, special leave to appeal was

granted on 17.09.2004 and arguments concluded, and judgment reserved on 21.11.2023.

Thus, this appeal was pending as at 23.06.2022 and the Act applies.

Although the Respondent objected when P2 was tendered in evidence, no objection was

taken when it was read in evidence at the close of the case for the Appellant. Therefore,

P2 must be admitted as evidence.

It is also observed that in any event, the vendor of both parties, namely Lakshman Gamini

Wijeratne has in paragraph 3 of his answer dated 25.03.1985 filed in D.C. Mount Lavinia

Case No. 815/ZL admitted that he transferred as undivided 1/8th share of the corpus

together with boutiques Nos. 135 and 135A to the Appellant by P2.

Page 9 of 19

According to Section 70 of the Evidence Ordinance, the admission of a party to an attested

document of its execution by himself shall be sufficient proof of its execution as against

him, although it is a document required by law to be attested.

I answer Question of Law No. 2 in the affirmative.

Declaration of Title

The Court of Appeal appears to have taken the view that the Appellant cannot maintain

an action for declaration of title to an undivided portion of the corpus and that his remedy

was to institute a partition action.

In Hevawitarane v. Dangan Rubber Co. Ltd. (17 N.L.R. 49) it was held that the owner of

an undivided share of land might sue a trespasser to have his title to the undivided share

declared, and for ejectment of the trespasser from the whole land.

This principle has been subsequently approved in Hariette v. Pathmasiri [(1996) 1 Sri.L.R.

358 at 362], Rosalin Hami v. Hewage Hami and Others [S.C. Appeal No. 15/2008, S.C. M.

03.12.2010], Punchiappuhamy v. Dingiribanda [S.C. Appeal No. 04/2010, S.C.M.

02.11.2015] and Pinto and Others v. Fernando and Others [S.C. Appeal No. 57/2016,

S.C.M. 11.09.2023].

In Geris Appu v. Silva (18 N.L.R. 219 at 221) Pereira J. held that there is no objection to

one co-owner suing another to have his title declared to a certain share of the property

owned in common, and for damages sustained by him by reason of the wrongful

enjoyment of his share by the other co-owners.

Accordingly, it is clear that the Appellant is entitled to maintain this action against the

Respondent to obtain a declaration that he is entitled to an undivided 1/8th share of the

corpus.

Page 10 of 19

Priority

The Appellant claims that although P2 was executed in 1982 after P3 was executed in

1979, P3 gets priority by registration.

Section 7(1) of the Registration of Documents Ordinance No. 23 of 1927 as amended

(Ordinance) reads as follows:

7(1) An instrument executed or made on or after the 1st day of January, 1864,

whether before or after the commencement of this Ordinance shall, unless it is duly

registered under this Chapter, or, if the land has come within the operation of the

Land Registration Ordinance, 1877, in the books mentioned in section 26 of that

Ordinance, be void as against all parties claiming an adverse interest thereto on

valuable consideration by virtue of any subsequent instrument which is duly

registered under this chapter or if the land has come within the operation of the

Land Registration Ordinance, 1877, in the books mentioned in Section 26 of that

Ordinance.

The legal effect of due registration in terms of the Ordinance has been expounded on

several previous instances.

In examining the effect of registration under Ordinance No. 8 of 1863, the previous legal

regime, Clarence, J. in Silva v. Sarah Hamy [(1883) Wendts Reports 383 at 384],

explained the legal position as follows:

When an owner of land conveys it to A for value, and subsequently executes

another conveyance of the same land in favour of B also for value, it is true that at

the date of the second conveyance the owner has nothing left in him to convey, but,

by the operation of the Ordinance, Bs conveyance overrides As, if registered before

it. Unless the Ordinance has this effect, it has none at all, and this seems the actual

construction of the enactment (emphasis added).

Page 11 of 19

In Massilamany v. Santiago (14 N.L.R. 292) it was held that the only effect of registration

was to give priority to the subsequent deed. The earlier deed is not affected in any way,

save that it has to take second place.

In Lairis Appu v. Tennakoon Kumarihamy (61 N.L.R. 97 at 105) Sinnetamby, J., held that:

Our Registration Ordinance provides for the registration of documents and not

for the registration of titles. If it had been the latter, then, from whatever source

the title was derived, registration by itself would give title to the transferee. When,

however, provision is made only for the registration of documents of title, the

object in its simplest form, is to safeguard a purchaser from a fraud that may be

committed on him by the concealment or suppression of an earlier deed by his

vendor. The effect of registration is to give the transferee whatever title the

vendor had prior to the execution of the earlier unregistered deeds. (emphasis

added).

Accordingly, priority by registration is received only where the source of title is one and

the same person. In this appeal, both P2 and P3 have been executed by Lakshman Gamini

Wijeratne.

In order to obtain priority based on due registration, P2 should have been registered in

the correct folio. The burden of proving that P2 is registered in the correct folio and that

P3 is registered in the wrong folio was on the Appellant.

The Appellant led the evidence of an officer for the Land Registry who gave evidence at

length. He testified that the name of the land in question in this case is "Ganelanda" and

that the correct prior registration reference for deed P2 is M 743/36. That is, it is

registered in the Land Registry Office Division M, Volume 743 and Folio 36. P1 the

common source deed from which the rights set out in both P2 and P3 originate was also

registered in Division M, Volume 743 and Folio 36. But P3 on the face of it said to have

Page 12 of 19

been registered as M 745/36. Learned Additional District Judge of Mt. Lavinia found that

it was registered in Volume 1251 and Folio 92.

In Diyes Singho v. Herath (64 N.L.R. 492 at 494), it was also observed that the question

of whether an instrument has been duly registered, as required by the Ordinance, is a

mixed question of law and fact. The Respondent did not seek to assail this finding on the

mixed question of fact and law. Neither did the Court of Appeal.

The Respondent has in the written submissions submitted priority by registration applies

only to paper title and not any rights derived otherwise such as prescriptive title. One of

the important limitations on the consequences of registration was explicitly adverted to

in Appuhamy v. Goonetilleke (18 N.L.R. 469) where it was held that prescription is a mode

of acquisition independent of any documentary title which the possessor may at the same

time has, and although documentary title may be defeated by the operation of the

Registration Ordinance, the other remains unaffected.

Hence where a party derives title from both a deed as well as prescription, although his

deed may have been registered later, his prescriptive title remains unaffected if he can

establish prescriptive title against the other party who claims priority by registration.

However, the Respondent did not claim any prescriptive title against the Appellant in the

answer. Neither was any issue raised on any alleged prescriptive title of the Respondent.

Special Leave to Appeal was not granted on any question dealing with the prescriptive

rights of the Respondent. In these circumstances, I am not inclined to consider any issue

of the Respondents prescriptive rights.

Valuable Consideration

One of the grounds on which the Court of Appeal held against the Appellant is the failure

to prove that there was valuable consideration passing in respect of P2.

Page 13 of 19

In Fernando v. Fonseka (1 C.L.R. 82) it was held that the term 'valuable consideration' is

a well-known term with a well-defined meaning it is money, marriage or the like, which

the law esteems as an equivalent given for the grant.

The Appellant submitted that the Respondent had not raised the absence of valuable

consideration for P2 either in his answer or by way of an issue.

In Diyes Singho v. Herath (64 N.L.R. 492) it was held that although no issue was raised by

either party in respect of the passing of valuable consideration for the subsequent

instrument, the absence of such an issue could not have the effect of absolving the

plaintiff from proving that valuable consideration was given.

In the attestation clause in P2, Neelamani Malawisuriya, Notary Public who attested P2

clearly states that no consideration passed before here. She confirmed this during her

testimony.

In Diyes Singho (supra) it was held that proof of the existence of a statement in the deed

by the Notary that consideration was paid is not sufficient to establish the truth of the

payment of such consideration. Similarly, in Munasinghe v. Vidanage and Another (69

N.L.R. 97) the Privy Council held that the statements of the Notary in the attestation

clause of a deed of sale are admissible evidence, and may well be important evidence,

regarding consideration, but are not conclusive.

However, the position appears to be different when a vendor makes a statement in the

relevant deed on the passing of valuable consideration. In Perera v. Premawathie (74

N.L.R. 302) it was held that, the statement of the vendor contained in the deed that she

had received the full consideration for the transfer was sufficient to prove that the

interest that passed on the deed was for valuable consideration. The court was mindful

that the impugned deed in that case is more than seventy years old and that the parties

and the witnesses to the deed are all dead. The Court sought to distinguish the decision

Page 14 of 19

in Diyes Singho (supra) on the basis that there the Court was not considering the effect

of a statement contained in the deed by a vendor who was dead. Nevertheless, there is

no evidence on the record as to whether the said Lakshman Gamini Wijeratne was alive

at the time the trial in this action was proceeding.

In Nambuwasan v. Deonis Appu and Others (65 N.L.R. 353) it was held that where a

transaction embodied in a deed is on the face of it a sale, the deed itself constitutes prima

facie evidence of passing of valuable consideration. Weerasooriya S.P.J. opined that in

Diyes Singho (supra), the Court had not given its mind to whether, apart from the

statement of the notary regarding the passing of consideration, the deed itself did not

constitute prima facie evidence of what is purported to be, namely a deed of sale.

However, Weerasooriya S.P.J. went on to hold that even where a transaction embodied

in a deed is on the face of it a sale, and notwithstanding a statement in the attestation

that consideration passed, it is open to a Court to hold that the surrounding circumstances

negative a genuine sale and point to the transaction being merely a colorable one.

Thus, the position is that the statement in the attestation clause of a deed of sale on

whether valuable consideration passed or not is not conclusive on that issue. Similarly,

the statement of the vendor in the deed that valuable consideration was received is also

not conclusive. A court must consider all the attendant circumstances before concluding

whether or not there was valuable consideration.

In this action, there is the following evidence on the payment of consideration. On page

1 of P2, there is a statement by the vendor, Lakshman Gamini Wijeratne that he accepted

a sum of Rs. 17,000/= which was the consideration for P2. In this regard, it is observed

that the consideration for P3 executed 3 years earlier for the full corpus is Rs. 25,000/=.

Moreover, the Appellant testified that he had bought the corpus from said Lakshman

Gamini Wijeratne [Appeal Brief pages 115 and 127]. He stated so for the second time [at

page 127] during his cross-examination. Moreover, the counsel for the Respondent cross-

Page 15 of 19

examined the Appellant [Appeal Brief page 131] premised on the fact that he had bought

the corpus. Nevertheless, the Counsel for the Respondent failed to challenge this part of

the evidence of the Appellant during cross-examination.

The established common law rule is that where a party intends to lead evidence that will

contradict or challenge the evidence of an opponents witness, it must put that evidence

to the witness in cross-examination. It is essentially a rule of fairness. A witness must not

be discredited without having had a chance to comment on or counter the discrediting

information. It also gives the other party notice that its witness evidence will be

contested and further corroboration may be required.

In Browne v. Dunn [(1893) 6 R 67] it was held that if in the course of a case, it is intended

to suggest that a witness is not speaking the truth upon a particular point, his attention

must be directed to the fact by cross-examination showing that the imputation is

intended to be made, so that he may have an opportunity of making any explanation

which is open to him, unless it is otherwise perfectly clear that he has had full notice

beforehand that there is an intention to impeach the credibility of his story.

The legal effect of the failure to do so was considered in Edrick De Silva v. Chandradasa

De Silva (70 N.L.R. 170 at 174) where H.N.G. Fernando, C.J., observed that where the

plaintiff has in a civil case led evidence sufficient in law to prove a factum probandum, the

failure of the defendant to adduce evidence which contradicts it adds a new factor in

favour of the plaintiff. There is then an additional "matter before the Court", which the

definition in Section 3 of the Evidence Ordinance requires the Court to take into account,

namely that the evidence led by the plaintiff is uncontradicted [See Gnanapala

Weerakoon Rathnayake v. Don Andrayas Rajapaksa and Another (S.C. Appeal No.

120/2009, S.C.M. 01.08.2017 at page 5)].

Page 16 of 19

However, in MMBL Teas (Pvt) Ltd. v. British Ceylon Produce Export (Pvt) Ltd. [S.C. Case

No. SC/CHC/35/2008, S.C.M. 17.12.2021] Aluwihare, PC, J., (at page 17) was of the view

that failure to challenge evidence by cross examination by itself may not be sufficient to

hold that a particular fact had been proved within the meaning of Section 3 of the Evidence

Ordinance. It might, however, be a factor to be taken into account in accepting such

evidence. Once the evidence is received, independent of such reception, the court should

give its mind to the evidence so received, and consider whether such evidence is sufficient

to establish the fact, sought to be proved.

In Sarwan Singh v. State of Punjab [AIR 2022 SC 3652] the Supreme Court of India held

that it is a rule of essential justice that whenever the opponent has declined to avail

himself of the opportunity to put his case in cross-examination it must follow that the

evidence tendered on that issue ought to be accepted.

I have adopted this approach in Southern Group Team Holdings (Pvt) Ltd. v. Ceylon

Comany Group (Pvt) Ltd. [S.C. (C.H.C.) Appeal 11/2004, S.C.M.24.07.2024].

These authorities show that the failure to put ones case in cross-examination to the

witness on a material point allows a court to conclude that the evidence tendered on that

material point should be accepted. Whether that is sufficient by itself to hold that

material fact had been proved within the meaning of Section 3 of the Evidence Ordinance

depends on the facts and circumstances of each case. There may well be cases where it

is sufficient by itself. There may be other cases where court must give its attention to

other important evidence.

In this action, there was no issue raised whether there was valuable consideration for P2.

There was a statement made by the vendor in P2 that he received valuable consideration.

The Appellant testified, both in evidence-in-chief and under cross-examination, that he

had paid the consideration for P2. This part of his evidence was not challenged by the

counsel for the Respondent during cross-examination. All this evidence taken in

Page 17 of 19

conjunction establishes a strong foundation for a finding to be made that there was

valuable consideration for P2.

For the foregoing reasons, I hold that the Appellant has proved that valuable

consideration passed on P2.

Fraud

The Respondent has also drawn our attention to Section 7(2) of the Ordinance which

states that fraud or collusion in obtaining such subsequent instrument or in securing the

prior registration thereof shall defeat the priority of the person claiming thereunder.

The Respondent had, in the prayer to his answer, sought a declaration that P2 is a

fraudulent document. However, no issue was raised on P2 being a fraudulent document.

It is trite law that trial proceeds on the issues. In Hanaffi v. Nallamma [(1998) 1 Sri.L.R.

73] it was held that once issues are framed, the case which the court has to hear and

determine becomes crystallised in the issues and the pleadings recede to the background.

Moreover, special leave to appeal has not been granted on this ground.

For all the foregoing reasons, I hold that this is not a ground that the Respondent is

entitled to raise in now.

The Appellant has proved due execution of P2. He has also proved that there was valuable

consideration. According to P2, the Appellant is the owner of an undivided 1/8th share of

the corpus and is entitled to obtain a declaration to that effect.

I answer Question of Law No. 1 in the affirmative.

Co-ownership

In addition to the declaration of title, the Appellant sought an order of ejectment against

the Respondent and all those holding the corpus under him. This was granted by the

Page 18 of 19

District Court. The Court of Appeal took the view that the Appellant is not entitled to an

order of ejectment against the Respondent.

The Respondent by P3 obtained title to the full corpus. By P2, the Appellant obtained an

undivided 1/8th share of the corpus.

In Jayawardena v. Menike [S.C. Appeal 32/2009, S.C.M. 04.03.2010] it was held that

priority by registration applies to co-owned property as well. There the appellant was

entitled to obtain 1/2 share by priority as that was all what he received by the deed which

had priority.

Accordingly, in view of the priority of registration, the title of the Appellant to 1/8th

undivided share of the corpus takes priority over the title of the Respondent to the

corpus. But that only affects 1/8th undivided share of the corpus. The other 7/8th share of

the corpus received through P3 remains with the Respondent. Section 7(1) of the

Ordinance does not apply to the said undivided 7/8th share.

In Gunasekera v. Silva (58 N.L.R. 83) it was held that an order of ejectment will not be

made against a co-owner on the application of another co-owner. This was confirmed in

Waris Perera v. Pubilinahamy (66 N.L.R. 88 at 90), where H.N.G. Fernando, J. (as he was

then) held that it is trite law that until co-ownership is dissolved by partition or by

prescription, it is not open to one co-owner to exclude another from any particular

portion of the land.

Hence, the learned Additional District Judge of Mt. Lavinia erred in law in granting the

Appellant an order of ejectment ejecting the Respondent from the corpus. The Court of

Appeal was correct in law in setting that part of the judgment aside.

I answer Question of Law No. 3 in the negative.

Page 19 of 19

For the foregoing reasons, I allow this appeal in part. The Appellant is entitled to a

declaration that he is the owner of an undivided 1/8th share of the property described in

the schedule to the plaint. The order of ejectment he has sought must be rejected.

The judgment of the Court of Appeal dated 31.05.2002 is set aside to the extent specified

above. The judgment of the District Court of Mt. Lavinia dated 12.11.1992 is amended to

the extent set out above.

The learned District Judge of Mt. Lavinia is directed to enter decree accordingly.

Appeal is partly allowed with costs fixed at Rs. 50,000/=.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

P. Padman Surasena, J.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT