1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal in terms of Section 5(2) of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No 10 of 1996 as amended by High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) (Amendment) Act No 54 of 2006.

SC / Appeal / 11/2016

CHC/233/2013/MR Western Refrigeration (Private) Limited,

7/B, Panna Lal Silk Mills Compound,

78, LBS Marg, Bhandup (West),

Mumbai-400076, Maharashtra,

India.

Plaintiff Vs.

State Bank of India,

16, Sir Baron Jayathilake Mawatha,

Post Box No. 93, Colombo 1,

Sri Lanka. Defendant

AND BETWEEN

State Bank of India,

16, Sir Baron Jayathilake Mawatha,

Post Box No. 93, Colombo 1,

2

Sri Lanka. Defendant Appellant

Vs.

Western Refrigeration (Private) Limited,

7/B, Panna Lal Silk Mills Compound,

78, LBS Marg, Bhandup (West),

Mumbai-400076, Maharashtra,

India. Plaintiff Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

Western Refrigeration (Private) Limited,

7/B, Panna Lal Silk Mills Compound,

78, LBS Marg, Bhandup (West),

Mumbai-400076, Maharashtra,

India. Plaintiff Respondent Appellant

Vs.

State Bank of India,

16, Sir Baron Jayathilake Mawatha,

Post Box No. 93, Colombo 1,

Sri Lanka.

Defendant Petitioner Respondent

BEFORE : PRIYANTHA JAYAWARDENA, PC, J.

UPALY ABEYRATHNE, J.

NALIN PERERA, J.

3

COUNSEL : Gamini Marapana PC with U. Wickremasinghe for the Plaintiff Respondent Appellant

Milinda Jayathilake for the Defendant Petitioner Respondent

WRITTEN SUBMISSION ON: 06.05.2016 (Plaintiff Respondent Appellant)

06.05.2016 (Defendant Appellant Respondents)

ARGUED ON : 02.03.2017

DECIDED ON : 01.06.2017

UPALY ABEYRATHNE, J.

The Plaintiff Respondent Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Appellant) instituted an action in the Commercial High Court of Colombo against

the Defendant Petitioner Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the Respondent)

seeking inter alia a declaration that the corporate guarantee dated 14th January,

2008, furnished by the Appellant (Plaintiff) Company to the Respondent

(Defendant) is void ab initio and Non-Est (does not exist). The Respondent filed

the answer denying the averments contained in the plaint and praying for a

dismissal of the Appellant’s action. Furthermore, the Respondent in his answer, set

out a claim in reconvention and sought reliefs as prayed for in prayer (b) and (c) of

the answer.

4

Thereafter the Respondent by way of a Petition dated 22.08.2014 has

made an application under Section 416 of the Civil Procedure Code seeking inter

alia an order directing the Appellant to furnish a sum of Rs. 2,600,000/= as

security.

The Respondent has calculated the said amount of security on the

basis that in the event the Appellant’s action being dismissed and an order being

made for the Respondent to pay costs on the basis as set out in paragraphs 5 and 6

of the said Petition, the costs will amount to a minimum of approximately Rs.

1,100,000/- and, in addition, incidental expenses would amount to at least a sum of

Rs. 1,500,000/-.

The Appellant, in his Statement of Objections, has taken up the

position that the Respondent has made the said application with the intention of

oppressing and causing undue harassment and inconvenience to the Appellant and

the costs prayed for by the Respondent is excessive and not reasonable considering

the circumstances of the case.

The learned High Court Judge after hearing evidence of an employee

of the Respondent Bank has made the order dated 10th of December, 2015,

directing the Appellant to deposit a sum of RS. 1,250,000/- as security for costs in

terms of Section 416 of the Civil Procedure Code, on or before 01.02.2016.

Being aggrieved by the said order, the Appellant preferred an

application seeking leave to appeal to this court and leave to appeal was granted on

the following questions of law set out in paragraph 9 of the Petition dated

29.12.2015;

5

9. 1. Has the learned High Court Judge erred in law in arbitrarily granting a

sum of Rs. 1.25 Million as security for costs without considering

Section 417A of the Civil Procedure Code?

2. Has the learned High Court Judge erred in law in clearly ignoring the

amounts to be awarded as costs that were stipulated by the gazette

marked DP1?

3. Has the learned High Court Judge clearly ignored the provisions in

Section 214 of the Civil Procedure Code with regard to taxed costs?

4. Has the learned High Court Judge erred in law by awarding an

excessive amount as security of costs for the Respondent?

5. Has the learned High Court Judge misconstrued the provisions of

Section 416 of the Civil Procedure Code and the applicable case law?

The learned President Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the

amount claimed by the Respondents as costs of litigation had been simply

estimated by the representatives of the Respondent and the Respondent had not

made any attempt to have the amount taxed by the Registrar of the court. He

further submitted that in terms Section 416 of the Civil Procedure Code the court

has the discretion to make such an order and it should not be made as a matter of

course and such an order should not be made to oppress the Appellant.

Section 416 of the Civil Procedure Code reads thus;

416. If at the institution, or at any subsequent stage, of an action it

appears the court that a sole plaintiff is, or (when there are more

plaintiffs than one) that all the plaintiffs are residing outside Sri

Lanka, the court may in its discretion, and either of its own

6

motion or on the application of any defendants, order the

plaintiff or plaintiffs, within a time to be fixed by the order, to

give security for the payments of all costs incurred and likely to

be incurred by any defendants.

This Section clearly stipulates that ‘the court may in its discretion

make order to give security for the payments of all costs incurred and likely to be

incurred by the defendant. In doing so the court should not make such an order to

oppress the Plaintiff.

In the case of Scott vs. Mohamadu (1914) 18 NLR 53 it was held that

“An order under section 416 of the Civil Procedure Code requiring a plaintiff in an

action who resides out of the jurisdiction of the Court to give security for the

payment of the defendant's costs may be made on an ex-parte application. An order

for security under section 416 or section 417 of the Code should not be made as a

matter of course. The Court in the exercise of its discretion should be satisfied that

the aid of either section is not being oppressively invoked by the party moving.”

In the said case Pereira J observed that “As regards the merits of the

appeal, the order of the District Judge does not appear to be what may be called a

considered order, because he has given no reasons for it. Indeed, the respondent's

counsel expressed his belief that orders under sections 416 and 417 of the Code

were usually made by District Courts as a matter of course. If that is the practice,

the sooner it is discontinued the better. The provision of section 416 or 417 may in

many cases be oppressively invoked by a defendant. A discretion no doubt is given

to the Court, but the exercise of it should be sound and reasonable.”

In the case of Senanayake vs. De Croos - (1940) 41 NLR 189 the

court observed that “Section 416 is general in its terms and it is desirable that in

7

applying it, the Court should proceed in the exercise of its discretion on definite

principles. Litigants would otherwise be encouraged to make applications of this

nature in the great majority of cases. In making his order the Judge appears to have

been influenced by the poverty of the plaintiffs which he stresses. But the poverty

of a plaintiff is a misfortune, not a fault; and he will not be compelled to give

security merely because he is a pauper. That, at any rate, is a principle on which

Courts in England act. Cowell v. Taylor [ 31 Ch. D. 34.]; Cook v. Whellock [ 24 Q.

B. D. 658.]; Rhodes v. Dawson [ 16 Q. B. D. 548.].

In the case of Alahakon Vs. Tampo (2002) 3 SLR 299 the Supreme

Court observed that “Two questions arise. Did the circumstances justify the

exercise of that discretion, and, if so, was the amount ordered reasonable? Learned

counsel for the defendant sought to justify the order of the Court of Appeal on the

basis that it was common knowledge that in a matter of this nature legal fees would

exceed Rs. 10,000 for a day at the trial, and would range from Rs. 30,000 to Rs.

50,000 for each appeal. On the assumption that 15 to 20 dates of trial would be

required, he submitted that Rs. 300,000 was a fair assessment. He also contended

that an order under section 416 could only be made once, that thereafter the Judge

was functus, and accordingly, the Judge must assess the costs likely to be incurred

assuming the maximum number of dates of trial, two appeals, and even a possible

retrial. This would be an oppressive use of section 416, resulting in a possible

denial of the plaintiff's right to his day in court. The power conferred by section

416 is one to which section 4 of the Interpretation Ordinance (cap. 2) applies, and

may be exercised, from time to time, as the interests of justice require; the Judge is

not bound to estimate all likely costs in one attempt. I will assume that section 416

does extend to costs of appeal, although I doubt this. I cannot agree with learned

counsel that "incurred" costs must be construed as meaning or including all costs

8

actually incurred. It is "security" which is required to be furnished, in order to

create a fund from which an order for costs made by the court could be satisfied, if

such costs are not directly paid by the plaintiff. Accordingly, "incurred" costs

means that amount of costs which the court may finally award, regardless of what

the party may actually spend. Counsel conceded that, having regard to the amounts

prescribed in the second schedule to the Code, costs awarded by the trial court

could not exceed Rs. 40,000; and that even if costs in appeal were included, a sum

of Rs. 70,000 would still be on the high side. The Court of Appeal was clearly

wrong in ordering a prohibitively higher amount”.

On other hand in Section 417A of the Civil Procedure Code contained

express prohibition against awarding of payment of security for costs a sum

exceeding the aggregate of the sum stipulated in subsections (a) and (b). Section

417A reads thus;

417 A. The security for payment of costs fixed by order made under Section

416 or 417 shall in no case exceed the aggregate of the following:

(a) The total costs that can be ordered in an action of that category, at

the rate prescribed for the purpose of Section 214; and

(b) Five hundred thousand rupees to meet incidental expenses, such

as expenses that may be incurred in procuring the evidence and

attendance of witnesses living abroad.

Section 214 0f the code reads thus;

214. All bills of costs, whether between party and parties, or between

registered attorney and client shall be taxed by the registrar of the

court in either case according to such rates as may be prescribed. If

9

either party is dissatisfied with this taxation, the matter in dispute

shall be referred to the court for its decision, and the decision of the

court (except when it is the decision of the Court of Appeal) be liable

to an appeal to the Court of Appeal.

Hence, it is crystal clear that in terms of Section 417A (b) the court

has no discretion to exceed the amount prescribed therein, in making order in

relation to the incidental expenses, such as expenses that may be incurred in

procuring the evidence and attendance of witnesses living abroad. It should be an

amount within five hundred thousand rupees. It is clear that the security for

payment of costs for incidental expense should not exceed five hundred thousand

rupees under any circumstances.

The next question to be dealt with is regarding the cost that can be

awarded under Section 417A (a). It seems that the security for payment of costs

under this subsection has to be made at the rate prescribed under Section 214 of the

Code. According to Section 214 the bill of costs has to be taxed by the Registrar of

the court according to the rates prescribed for the purpose. Therefore, in the present

case before us, it is imperative on the part of the Respondent to initially have the

Registrar of the court to tax the total costs as estimated by the Respondent in terms

of Section 214 of the Code. Under the said category, the Respondent in paragraph

7 of his petition dated 22.08.2014, has sought costs of Rs. 1,100,000/-.

In paragraph 11 of the said petition the Respondent has averred that

the affidavit of Mr. K. C. M. Perera, the Deputy Manager (credit) of the

Respondent Bank, has filed with the said petition. The Respondent, with the said

affidavit dated 13.03.2015, has produced a gazette notification extraordinary

bearing No 994/7 dated 24.09.1997 containing Regulations made by the Acting

10

Minister in charge of the subject under Section 840 of the Civil Procedure Code

read with Section 214 of the said Code marked as ‘DP 1’. Said Regulations has

been cited therein as ‘the Civil Procedure (Costs) Regulations, 1977’.

In paragraph 13 of the said affidavit, it is averred that if the costs

estimated to Rs. 1,100,000/- are taxed at the prescribed rate for Taxing Costs set

out in the said regulations (marked ‘DP 1’) made under Section 214 of the Civil

Procedure Code for an Action exceeding Rs. 2,000,000/- in value, such taxed costs

will be as follows at the specified rate;

(a) For drafting of pleadings and appearance in court up to the date of trial

Rs. 20,000/-,

(b) For steps in preparation for trial (including listing of witnesses and

documents and summons to witnesses) Rs. 7,500/-,

(c) For Appearance at the trial, on the basis of eight dates estimated by the

Respondent: Rs. 7,500/ 8 = Rs. 60,000/-,

(d) For written submissions Rs. 7,500/-,

(e) For two incidental applications: Rs. 10,000/ 2 = Rs. 20,000/-.

According to the Respondent’s own estimate according to the said

Regulations marked ‘DP 1’ the total amount of the security for payment of costs in

terms of Section 417A (a) shall be Rs. 115,000/-. The Respondent’s contention

was that the aforesaid rates of taxing of costs which set out in the said Regulations

made on 22nd September 1997 came to effect approximately 18 years ago,

therefore it is just and equitable to enable the Respondent to recover taxed costs in

line with current actual costs. I am not inclined to agree with the contention of the

Respondent as the law on the matter in issue is crystal clear.

11

Even the learned President Counsel for the Respondent, in paragraph

74 of his written submissions tendered to the Commercial High Court dated

09.09.2015 has conceded that on account of costs which have been incurred as

prayed for and likely to be incurred as provided for by Section 416 and the

corresponding taxed costs for the actual costs as referred to in Section 417A (a) is

Rs. 115000/- and the maximum sum which may be ordered as security for

incidental expenses, in terms of Section 417A (b) is Rs. 500,000/. I regret to note

that the learned High Court Judge has failed to consider the above paragraph of the

written submission tendered to court by the learned President Counsel for the

Respondent.

The relevant Sections 416 and 417A has been judicially interpreted by

this Court. It has been held that an order for security for payment of costs should

not be made as a matter of course and that one of the considerations to which the

Court should direct its attention is whether claiming security for the payment of

costs has been selected by the party in order to harass the opposing party or to

make the recovery of costs difficult to him.

Another matter which should be most carefully considered is whether

the provisions of section 416 had been oppressively invoked by the Respondent, to

which the learned High Court Judge appears to have absolutely not directed his

attention. I am satisfied that the learned High Court Judge has erroneously

exercised his discretion and hence the said order is erred in law.

In the said circumstances, I hold that in terms of Section 416 and

417A to be read with Section 214 of the Civil Procedure Code and the Regulations

marked DP 1, the Respondent is entitled to an order from court directing the

Appellant to deposit a sum of Rs. 115,000/-, maximum of costs, likely to be

12

incurred by the Respondent and also a sum of Rs. 500,000/- to meet the incidental

expenses which also is the maximum amount that could be claimed under that

category. The Appellant is directed to deposit the said amount of Rs. 115,000/- and

Rs. 500,000/- to the credit of the case within one month from the date of pronounce

of this order in the Commercial High Court holden in Colombo. In the

circumstances the order of the learned Commercial High Court Judge dated

10.12.2015 is hereby set aside and the appeal of the Appellant is allowed with

costs. The Registrar of this court is directed to send the main record to the

Commercial High Court holden in Colombo. Learned High Court Judge is directed

to hear and conclude the matter expeditiously according to law.

Appeal allowed.

Judge of the Supreme Court

PRIYANTHA JAYAWARDENA, PC, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

NALIN PERERA, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court