IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Sri Lanka Mahaweli Authority,

No. 500, T.B. Jaya Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

Plaintiff

SC APPEAL NO: SC/APPEAL/101/2017

SC LA NO: SC/HCCA/LA/26/2017

HCCA ANURADHAPURA NO: NCP/HCCA/ARP/1076/2016

DC POLONNARUWA NO: 14798/M/12

Vs.

Dharshani Construction,

No. 42, Pothgull Road,

Polonnaruwa.

Under the sole ownership of

Amarasiri Masakorala,

No. 18, Habarana Road,

Polonnaruwa.

Defendant

AND BETWEEN

Sri Lanka Mahaweli Authority,

No. 500,

T.B. Jaya Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

Plaintiff-Appellant

2

SC/APPEAL/101/2017

Vs.

Dharshani Construction

No. 42, Pothgull Road,

Polonnaruwa.

Under the sole ownership of

Amarasiri Masakorala,

No. 18, Habarana Road,

Polonnaruwa.

Defendant-Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

Dharshani Construction,

No. 42, Pothgull Road,

Polonnaruwa.

Under the sole ownership of

Amarasiri Masakorala,

No. 18,

Habarana Road,

Polonnaruwa.

Defendant-Respondent-Appellant

Vs.

Sri Lanka Mahaweli Authority,

No. 500, T.B. Jaya Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent

3

SC/APPEAL/101/2017

Before: Murdu Fernando, P.C., J.

Achala Wengappuli, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Senaka De Saram for the Defendant-Respondent-

Appellant.

Rajitha Perera, S.S.C., for the Plaintiff-Appellant-

Respondent.

Argued on : 05.07.2021

Written submissions:

by the Defendant-Respondent-Appellant on

14.07.2017.

by the Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent on

16.08.2017.

Further written submissions:

by the Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent on

14.07.2021.

Decided on: 15.10.2021

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The plaintiff Mahaweli Authority and the defendant contractor

entered into a written agreement marked P2 to make

improvements to the spillway and tail canal of the Pimburattewa

tank in the Polonnaruwa District. In terms of clause 59.2(a) of

the agreement, the plaintiff terminated the agreement by letter

4

SC/APPEAL/101/2017

dated 01.03.2006 marked P10 on the basis that the defendant

had stopped work for more than 28 days without authorisation.

Clauses 59.1 and 59.2(a) of the agreement read as follows:

59.1 The employer or the contractor may terminate the

services under the contract if the other party causes a

fundamental breach of the contract.

59.2(a) Fundamental breach of contract shall include, but

shall not be limited to, the contractor stops work for 28

days when no stoppage of work is shown on the current

program and the stoppage has not been authorised by the

engineer.

By letter P10 the plaintiff also informed the defendant that in

terms of clause 60.1 of the agreement steps would be taken to

decide on “the payment upon termination and completion of the

balance work of the contract.”

Clause 60.1 reads as follows:

If the services of the contractor under the contract is

terminated because of a fundamental breach of contract by

the contractor, the engineer shall issue a certificate for the

value of the work done and materials ordered less advance

payments remaining to be recovered at up to the date of the

issue of the certificate and less the percentage to apply to

the value of the work not completed. Additional liquidated

damages shall not apply. If the total amount due to the

employer exceeds any payment due to the contractor, the

difference shall be a debt payable to the employer.

5

SC/APPEAL/101/2017

Clause 60.1 shall be read with “Contract Data” as agreed upon

by the parties which states “The percentage to apply to the value

of the work not completed, representing the employer’s [plaintiff’s]

additional cost for completing the works, is 25%.”

P10 further stated that the defendant would be informed of

when he would be required to be present at the site for the final

measurements in order to prepare the final payment bill

subsequent to termination.

Notwithstanding the defendant was informed of the date, he was

not present at the site inspection. The summary of the final

payment prepared ex parte is marked P12, whereby it was

calculated that the value of 25% of the incomplete work of the

defendant in terms of clause 60.1 of the agreement is Rs.

2,150,000.

Thereafter by the letter of demand dated 26.04.2006 marked

P14 the plaintiff demanded this sum from the defendant.

As the defendant failed to make this payment, the plaintiff filed

this action against the defendant in the District Court of

Polonnaruwa on 24.04.2012 seeking to recover the said sum

with legal interest. The defendant filed the answer seeking

dismissal of the plaintiff’s action and also made a claim in

reconvention to recover a sum of Rs. 3,000,000 from the plaintiff

for the termination of the agreement.

After trial, the District Court dismissed the plaintiff’s action on

the basis that the action is prescribed in terms of section 6 of

the Prescription Ordinance, as it was not instituted within six

6

SC/APPEAL/101/2017

years of the date of termination of the agreement. The District

Court also dismissed the defendant’s claim in reconvention.

Being aggrieved by this judgment, the plaintiff appealed to the

High Court of Civil Appeal. The High Court of Civil Appeal set

aside the judgment of the District Court and directed the District

Court to enter judgment as prayed for in the prayer to the plaint

on the basis that the cause of action accrued to the plaintiff

against the defendant on the date the demand was made by P14

and, as the action was filed within six years of the date of the

demand, the action is not prescribed in terms of section 6 of the

Prescription Ordinance.

This court granted leave to appeal against the judgment of the

High Court of Civil Appeal on the following questions of law:

(a) Did the High Court of Civil Appeal fail to consider that

the plaint filed on 24.04.2012 was prescribed in terms of

section 6 of the Prescription Ordinance?

(b) Did the High Court of Civil Appeal misinterpret section 6

of the Prescription Ordinance?

(c) Did the High Court of Civil Appeal fail to consider that

clause 60.1 of the agreement is part of the agreement

and not a separate ground which triggers a separate

cause of action upon termination of the agreement?

(d) Did the High Court of Civil Appeal misdirect itself when

it decided that the cause of action against the defendant

arose from the date the demand was made on

26.04.2006?

7

SC/APPEAL/101/2017

Both parties rely on section 6 of the Prescription Ordinance in

that the plaintiff’s position is that the prescriptive period of six

years starts to run from the date of the demand by P14 (which

was accepted by the High Court of Civil Appeal) whereas the

defendant’s position is that the prescriptive period of six years

starts to run from the date of the termination of the agreement

by P10 (which was accepted by the District Court). It is common

ground that if the plaintiff’s interpretation is accepted the cause

of action is not prescribed and if the defendant’s interpretation

is accepted it is.

Section 6 of the Prescription Ordinance reads as follows:

No action shall be maintainable upon any deed for

establishing a partnership, or upon any promissory note or

bill of exchange, or upon any written promise, contract,

bargain, or agreement, or other written security not falling

within the description of instruments set forth in section 5,

unless such action shall be brought within six years from

the date of the breach of such partnership deed or of such

written promise, contract, bargain, or agreement, or other

written security, or from the date when such note or bill

shall have become due, or of the last payment of interest

thereon.

Learned counsel for the defendant strenuously submits that in

terms of section 6 of the Prescription Ordinance, an action shall

be brought within six years “from the date of the breach” of the

agreement and, in terms of the letter of termination P10 read

with clause 59.2(a) of the agreement, the breach of the

agreement occurred on the date of the letter of termination since

8

SC/APPEAL/101/2017

discontinuing work for more than 28 days is a fundamental

breach as per clause 59.2(a). This is no doubt an interesting

argument in the literal application of section 6 but the legal

application of the section in my view does not support the

argument.

Let me explain. What is prescribed after the lapse of six years in

terms of section 6 of the Prescription Ordinance? It is none

other than the cause of action. Every action is based on a cause

of action and section 40(d) of the Civil Procedure Code mandates

the plaintiff to particularise his cause of action in the plaint.

What is a cause of action? According to section 5 of the Civil

Procedure Code, “cause of action is the wrong for the prevention

or redress of which an action may be brought, and includes the

denial of a right, the refusal to fulfill an obligation, the neglect to

perform a duty and the infliction of an affirmative injury.” What

is the cause of action the plaintiff says accrued to him in

paragraph 9 of the plaint? It is the recovery of the value of 25%

of the incomplete work calculated in a sum of Rs. 2,150,000 in

terms of clause 60.1 of the agreement. This sum which the

defendant is obliged to pay in terms of the agreement was not

paid notwithstanding a demand was made by P14 dated

26.04.2006.

The next question is when does the prescriptive period of six

years in terms of section 6 begin to run? Learned counsel for

the defendant claims that clause 60.1 is part of the agreement

which cannot be considered in isolation. I totally agree. Learned

counsel then develops his argument to say that a separate cause

of action cannot accrue to the plaintiff upon clause 60.1 when

9

SC/APPEAL/101/2017

the cause of action has already accrued to the plaintiff upon the

breach of the agreement which culminated in the termination of

the agreement by P10. I cannot agree.

An agreement can give rise to several causes of action at

different stages. The termination of the agreement under clause

59 gave rise to a technical cause of action but nothing flows

from it. It is the next step set out in clause 60 that gives rise to

a practical cause of action to either party. What is relevant is

the breach of the agreement giving rise to a cause of action

contemplated by section 6 of the Prescription Ordinance. The

question at what point such a breach takes place depends upon

the facts of the particular case.

In order for clause 60.1 to apply, the engineer shall prepare the

final bill after the site inspection with the participation of the

defendant. This is not possible at the termination of the

agreement in terms of clause 59.1 although clause 59.1 is linked

to clause 60.1.

The aforesaid argument of learned counsel would have

succeeded if liquidated damages was the remedy the parties

agreed upon after the breach of the agreement leading to its

termination. In such an event, there is no further step to be

taken to calculate damages as parties have already agreed pre-

determined damages at the time of entering into the agreement.

In the instant case, clause 60.1 expressly provides that apart

from the calculated damages, “Additional liquidated damages

shall not apply.”

10

SC/APPEAL/101/2017

Although the cause of action is the wrong (in terms of section 5

of the Civil Procedure Code), the wrong is the combination of the

right in the plaintiff and its violation by the defendant. In that

context, I must further add that even if the remedy is liquidated

damages, there shall be a demand and the refusal of that

demand to constitute a breach of contract for the purpose of

initiating the period of prescription.

Hence I take the view that the prescriptive period in the instant

action begins to run from the date of the demand by P14, which

is the date of the breach of the agreement insofar as the

plaintiff’s action is concerned.

For the aforesaid reasons, I take the view that the plaintiff’s

cause of action is not prescribed.

I answer the questions of law in respect of which leave to appeal

was granted in the negative.

The judgment of the High Court of Civil Appeal is affirmed and

the appeal is dismissed with costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Murdu Fernando, P.C., J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Achala Wengappuli, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court