Page 1 of 15

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In an application for Special Leave to Appeal under and in terms of Articles 128 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Hon. Attorney General on behalf of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Complainant

S.C. Appeal No. 122/2020 S.C. (S.P.L.) L.A. Application No. 50/2019 C.A. Appeal No. C.A. 71-72/2010 H.C. Gampaha Case No. 93/2004

Vs. 1. Ranasinghe Arachchige Kapila Nishantha Perera, 327/A, Gunarathna Mawatha, Makola North, Makola. 2. Suppiah Gamini.

Accused AND BETWEEN 1. Ranasinghe Arachchige Kapila Nishantha Perera, 327/A, Gunarathna Mawatha, Makola North, Makola. 2. Suppiah Gamini.

Accused-Appellant Vs. Hon. Attorney General, Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12.

Complainant-Respondent

Page 2 of 15

AND NOW BETWEEN Ranasinghe Arachchige Kapila Nishantha Perera, 327/A, Gunarathna Mawatha, Makola North, Makola.

Accused-Appellant-Appellant Vs. Hon. Attorney General, Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12.

Complainant-Respondent-Respondent Before: P. Padman Surasena, J.

Janak De Silva, J.

Achala Wengappuli, J.

Counsel:

Chamindi Arsecularatne with Himasha Silva for Accused-Appellant-Appellant

Dilan Rathnayake, S.D.S.G. for the Complainant-Respondent-Respondent

Written Submissions:

14.02.2024 by the Accused-Appellant-Appellant

22.01.2024 by the Complainant-Respondent-Respondent

Page 3 of 15

Argued on: 17.01.2024

Decided on: 07.10.2024

Janak De Silva, J.

The Accused-Appellant-Appellant (Appellant) and another person (2nd Accused)

were charged with possession and trafficking of 1.7 kg. of heroin.

They were convicted after trial and sentenced to life imprisonment by the learned

High Court Judge of Gampaha. Both appealed to the Court of Appeal.

The Court of Appeal in an ex-tempore judgment, held that it was not a well-

considered judgment and hence there was a violation of the principles of a fair trial.

The conviction and sentence were set aside and a re-trial ordered.

The 2nd Accused did not prefer any appeal. The Appellant preferred this appeal

against the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

Special leave to appeal was granted on the following questions of law:

1. Whether their Lordships of the Court of Appeal erred in law by ordering the

Petitioner and the Appellant to face a retrial 18 years after the commission

of the offence?

2. Whether their Lordships of the Court of Appeal erred in law by failing to

consider that the Appellant has already spent 8 years in remand custody

awaiting his appeal to be taken up and in the event of a conviction and

sentence being imposed at the retrial, the 8 years already spent by the

Appellant in remand custody would be in vain and cannot be compensated?

Page 4 of 15

At the conclusion of the argument, we directed the parties to file written

submissions covering the merits of the case as well to enable the Court to decide

the course of action to be taken in this case.

The Court of Appeal held that the learned trial judge had stated that the Appellant

had not proved his innocence and that there is a reference to the Lucas principle

which has no applicability to the case. It is for these reasons that it was held that

the judgment of the High Court was not well-considered and in violation of the

principles of a fair trial.

The Case for the Prosecution

At the trial, the prosecution led the evidence of four witnesses, PW1, PW2, PW4

and PW5 and marked several productions from P1 to P7, X1 to X5 and H1 to H6.

PW1 was the investigating officer who had at the time of the raid, worked for about

8 to 9 years at the Police Narcotics Bureau (PNB). He was the OIC, PNB in 2001

when the detection was made. He testified that on 20.12.2001 he was summoned

by the then Director, PNB and introduced to an informant and to get ready for a raid

in Makola. The informant said that drug dealers were due to bring some drugs to

the Kesel Pandura junction between 16.30 and 17.30.

He thereafter got a team of around 7 officers ready, inspected them and their

weapons, the informant, and the jeep they were travelling in to check whether any

illegal substances were present. Thereafter, he proceeded to Kesel Pandura junction

with the team and the informant and parked the jeep away from the junction to

avoid any visibility.

Page 5 of 15

Thereafter, PW1, PW2 and the informant proceeded on foot to the Kesel Pandura

junction. There was a bus stand and a three-wheeler park at the junction which was

a populated place. About half an hour later, two people came along Gunaratne

Mawatha to the main road. The informant pointed them out as the persons dealing

with heroin. The informant left the scene thereafter.

One of the persons was carrying a black tulip bag. PW1 and PW2 accosted them

and checked it. There were three parcels wrapped in brown coloured gum tape.

PW1 pierced all three parcels with a pin and a brown-coloured powder came out.

PW1 identified it as heroin from the smell. Thereafter, PW1 arrested the person.

The Appellant was identified by PW1 as the person who was carrying the black tulip

bag.

Afterwards, PW1 directed PW2 to search the other person. A black coloured

electronic weighing scale was recovered from him. It was similar to weighing scales

recovered during previous raids. Afterwards PW1 arrested that person as well. The

2nd Accused was identified by PW1 as the person from whose custody the electronic

weighing scales were recovered.

PW2 testified corroborating the evidence of PW1.

PW1 further testified on ensuring the sanctity of the chain of productions. This

evidence was corroborated by PW2, PW4 (Officer-in-charge of productions at the

PNB) and PW5 (Officer from the Government Analysts department).

Dock Statement of Appellant

The 2nd Accused did not give evidence. Appellant made a dock statement. According

to him, he was arrested at his home. At that time his father, mother and brother

were at home. The group that came to his house informed his mother that he is

Page 6 of 15

being taken away to record a statement. On the way, he was questioned about

another person (X). Later he was taken to Maligawatte and then to a house in

Kolonnawa. A search of that house was done but nothing was recovered.

Later he was taken to Modara and to the house of X about whom he was questioned

earlier. X was not at home. However, a parcel was recovered. Thereafter he was

brought to the PNB. He was again questioned about X. About two months later X

was arrested and remanded. He was in remand for about 4 months. Later he got

bail.

In The Queen v. Kularatne and Two Others [71 N.L.R. 529 at 531] it was held that

when an unsworn statement is made by the accused from the dock, the jurors must

be informed that such statement must be looked upon as evidence, subject however

to the infirmity that the accused had deliberately refrained from giving sworn

testimony. But the jury must also be directed that:

(a) if they believe the unsworn statement it must be acted upon,

(b) if it raises a reasonable doubt in their minds about the case for the prosecution,

the defence must succeed, and

(c) that it should not be used against another accused.

The mother and the brother of the Appellant were called to testify on behalf of the

Appellant. The mother testified that the Appellant was arrested at home and that

the brother was not at home at that time. Only the Appellant, his father and the

witness were present. Here there is a material contradiction between the dock

statement of the Appellant and the evidence of his mother. Even the brother of the

Appellant in his evidence stated that he was not there when the Appellant was

Page 7 of 15

arrested. The mother further testified that she did not see the Appellant for 7 years

after his arrest and only saw him again at the trial.

Evaluation of the Evidence

The learned trial judge did not make any adverse findings on the credibility of the

prosecution witnesses. It is observed that the learned trial judge had the benefit of

listening to and observing all the witnesses who testified at the trial on behalf of

the prosecution and the accused. Having had the benefit of observing the

demeanor and the deportment of all the witnesses, the learned trial judge is best

placed to make an enlightened decision on their credibility.

Moreover, the learned trial judge correctly observed that there were no

contradictions or omissions in the evidence presented by the prosecution. He went

on to hold that the evidence of the Government Analyst and the Police corroborate

each other.

In these circumstances, I see no error in his conclusion that the prosecution has

proved its case.

Upon a careful examination of the judgment of the learned trial judge, it is clear

that he does not state that the Appellant has not proved his innocence. In fact, he

has acknowledged at several places in the judgment (pages 53, 56, 59 and 62) that

the burden of proving the case beyond a reasonable doubt is on the prosecution.

Having done so, he has gone on to apply the Ellenborough dictum to the facts and

circumstances of the case.

Page 8 of 15

Ellenborough Dictum

In Rex v. Cochrane [1814 Gurneys Report 479] Lord Ellenborough held that:

"No person accused of crime is bound to offer any explanation of his conduct

or of circumstances of suspicion which attach to him, but nevertheless, if he

refuses to do so where a strong prima facie case has been made out and

when it is in his own power to offer evidence, if such exist in explanation of

such suspicious circumstances, which would show them to be fallacious and

explicable consistently with his innocence, it is a reasonable and justifiable

conclusion that he refrains from doing so only from the conviction that the

evidence so suppressed or not adduced would operate adversely to his

interest." (emphasis added)

This dictum has been applied in many cases in Sri Lanka. [See Inspector Arendstz v.

Wilfred Peiris [10 C.L.W. 121 at 123], R v. Seeder Silva [41 N.L.R. 337 at 344], King

v. Wickramasinghe [42 N.L.R. 313], King v. Peiris Appuhamy [43 N.L.R. 412 at 418],

King v. Endoris [46 N.L.R. 498], Queen v. Seetin [68 N.L.R. 316], Chandradasa v.

Queen [72 N.L.R. 160], Beddavithanu v. Attorney-General [(1990) 1 Sri.L.R. 275 at

278], Republic v. Ilangathilake [(1984) 2 Sri.L.R. 38], Aruna alias Podi Raja v.

Attorney-General [(2011) 2 Sri.L.R. 44]].

In The Attorney-General v. Potta Naufer and Others [(2007) 2 Sri.L.R. 144 at 202],

Amaratunge J. rejected the submission that there is no dictum called the dictum of

Lord Ellenborough; that the words attributed to Lord Ellenborough is a fabrication

by Wills; and that the views expressed by Lord Ellenborough is not a part of the law

of Sri Lanka.

Page 9 of 15

The burden of proving the case beyond a reasonable doubt is on the prosecution.

There is no burden on the accused to prove his innocence. The Ellenborough dictum

does not oust the burden on the prosecution to prove the case beyond a reasonable

doubt. It does not place a legal or a persuasive burden on the accused to prove his

innocence. However, where the prosecution is able to establish a strong prima facie

case and highly incriminating circumstances, an application of this dictum shifts the

evidential burden to the accused to explain away these highly incriminating

circumstances when he has both the power and opportunity to do so.

As Justice Abbott held in Rex vs. Burdett [(1820) 4 B. and A. 95 at 161, 162]:

"No person is to be required to explain or contradict until enough has been

proved to warrant a reasonable and just conclusion against him, in the

absence of explanation or contradiction; but when such proof has been

given, and the nature of the case is such as to admit of explanation or

contradiction, if the conclusion to which the prima facie case tends to be

true, and the accused offers no explanation or contradiction, can human

reason do otherwise than adopt the conclusion to which proof tends."

(emphasis added)

The learned trial judge held (at pages 58, 59 and 60) that the evidence tendered on

behalf of the prosecution established a strong prima facie case. In these

circumstances, it was incumbent upon the Appellant to explain away the

incriminating circumstances.

Moreover, the learned trial judge held (at pages 59 and 60) that the defence had

failed to explain away the highly incriminating circumstances. This is the correct

exposition of the law.

Page 10 of 15

Upon a careful examination of the judgment of the learned trial judge, it is clear

that he does not state that the Appellant had not proved his innocence. In fact, he

has acknowledged at several places in the judgment (pages 53, 56, 59 and 62) that

the burden of proving the case beyond a reasonable doubt is on the State.

However, the learned trial judge (at page 58) after holding that the prosecution has

established a strong prima facie case, stated that in these circumstances, the

burden is on the defence to prove their innocence. This is the only place in the

judgment where such a statement has been made.

Nevertheless, that comment must not be viewed in isolation detached from the

context of the whole judgment. The judgment must be considered as a whole. It

has at several places reiterated that the burden of proving the case beyond a

reasonable doubt is on the prosecution. Thereafter, the learned trial judge has

correctly applied the Ellenborough dictum to the facts and circumstances of the

case.

Admittedly there is a reference to the Lucas principle by the learned trial judge. The

Lucas principle explains the circumstances in which a lie uttered in or outside Court

by an accused may provide corroboration against him. As Lord Lane CJ held in R. v.

Lucas [(1981) 2 All ER 1008 at 1011]:

Statements made out of court, for example statements to the police, which

are proved or admitted to be false may in certain circumstances amount to

corroborationTo be capable of amounting to corroboration the lie told out

of court must first of all be deliberate. Secondly it must relate to a material

issue. Thirdly the motive for the lie must be a realisation of guilt and a fear of

the truthFourthly the statement must be clearly shown to be a lie by

Page 11 of 15

evidence other than that of the accomplice who is to be corroborated, that is

to say by admission or by evidence from an independent witness.

As a matter of good sense it is difficult to see why, subject to the same

safeguard, lies proved to have been told in court by a defendant should not

equally be capable of providing corroboration.

No doubt, the reference to the Lucas principle by the learned trial judge is out of

context. Nevertheless, I do not think that a judgment must be set aside for every

conceivable error in it. It may in fact be a herculean task to find a judgment which

is absolutely free from any error. In fact, this is acknowledged in the Constitution.

Jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal

Article 138 of the Constitution confers the jurisdiction on the Court of Appeal to

correct all errors in fact or in law committed by the High Court. However, the proviso

to Article 138 reads as follows:

Provided that no judgment, decree or order of any court shall be reversed or

varied on account of any error, defect or irregularity, which has not prejudiced

the substantial rights of the parties or occasioned a failure of justice.

The Court of Appeal is directed not to interfere with every judgment, decree or

order for any error. It has the jurisdiction to reverse or vary a judgment, decree or

order only where an error, defect or irregularity therein has prejudiced the

substantial rights of the parties or occasioned a failure of justice.

In Sunil Jayarathna v. Attorney-General [(2011) 2 Sri.L.R. 92] it was held that when

considering the proviso to Article 138(1) of the Constitution it is evident that the

judgment of High Court need not be reversed or interfered with on account of any

Page 12 of 15

defect, error or irregularity which has not prejudiced the substantial rights of the

parties or occasioned a failure of justice.

Furthermore, in Kiri Mahaththaya and Another v. Attorney-General [(2020) 1

Sri.L.R. 10 at 21] Aluwihare J. held:

An Accused would therefore only be entitled to relief if it is shown that the

irregularity complained of, had in fact prejudiced the substantial rights of the

parties or has occasioned a failure of justice. A mere statement to that effect

would certainly not be sufficient, but it must be shown as to how the failure

of justice resulted ...

This is the same approach taken in interpreting Section 334(1) of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act which reads as follows:

334(1) The Court of Appeal on any appeal against conviction on a verdict of

a jury shall allow the appeal if it thinks that such verdict should be set aside

on the ground that it is unreasonable or cannot be supported having regard

to the evidence, or that the judgment of the court before which the appellant

was convicted should be set aside on the ground of a wrong decision of any

question of any law or that on any ground there was a miscarriage of justice,

and in any other case shall dismiss the appeal:

Provided that the court may, notwithstanding that it is of opinion that the

point raised in the appeal might be decided in favour of the appellant, dismiss

the appeal if it considers that no substantial miscarriage of justice has

actually occurred. "

Page 13 of 15

In Mannar Mannan v. The Republic of Sri Lanka [(1990) 1 Sri.L.R. 280] a divisional

bench of this Court held that the proviso clearly vests a discretion in the Court and

recourse to it arises only where the appellant has made out at least one of the

grounds postulated in the enacting part of the sub-section. There is no warrant for

the view that the court is precluded from applying the proviso in any particular

category of "wrong decision" or misdirection on questions of law as for instance,

burden of proof. There is no hard and fast rule that the proviso is inapplicable where

there is a non-direction amounting to a misdirection in regard to the burden of

proof. What is important is that each case, falls to be decided on a consideration of

(a) the nature and intent of the non-direction amounting to a misdirection on the

burden of proof (b) all facts and circumstances of the case, the quality of the

evidence adduced and the weight to be attached to it.

The legally admissible evidence led by the prosecution has proved the charges

against the Appellant beyond reasonable doubt. An application of the Ellenborough

dictum then required the Appellant to explain away the incriminating

circumstances. The learned trial judge who had the benefit of observing the

demeanor and deportment of the Appellant during his dock-statement and the

evidence of his mother and brother did not believe them. An objective evaluation

of this evidence necessarily requires the trial judge to conclude that the Appellant

is guilty.

The two errors of the trial judge in his judgment makes no difference as the

conclusion is warranted by law. In these circumstances, there is no error, defect or

irregularity in the judgment of the learned trial judge which has prejudiced the

substantial rights of the parties or occasioned a failure of justice. Therefore, the

Page 14 of 15

Court of Appeal was wrong in setting aside the judgment of the High Court and

ordering a retrial.

In this appeal, the Appellant has invoked the appellate jurisdiction vested in Court

by Article 127(1) of the Constitution. This jurisdiction vests power in Court to

correct all errors of fact or in law committed by the Court of Appeal at its discretion.

Where the Court of Appeal has exceeded its jurisdiction conferred by Article 138 of

the Constitution by correcting an error or errors in fact or in law which has not

prejudiced the substantial rights of the parties or occasioned a failure of justice, this

Court has the power to remedy the excess of jurisdiction. We informed all parties

during the argument to address Court on the merits of the case and gave a further

opportunity to file post-argument written submissions as well.

I am mindful that we must give a fair hearing to any party before making any order

adverse to his interests. Only the Appellant has appealed against the judgment of

the Court of Appeal. The 2nd Accused did not appeal. Hence, Court cannot make any

order to the detriment of the 2nd Accused as he has not been afforded a hearing.

For the foregoing reasons, I hold that the Court of Appeal erred in law in setting

aside the judgment against the Appellant of the learned trial judge dated

26.03.2010. I set aside the ex-tempore judgment of the Court of Appeal dated

07.01.2019 in so far as the Appellant is concerned. I affirm the conviction and

sentence imposed on the Appellant.

Page 15 of 15

Appeal dismissed. No costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

P. Padman Surasena, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Achala Wengappuli, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court