1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application under and in

terms of Article 126 of the Constitution.

Niluka Dissanayake,

Attorney-at-Law,

No. 218, Basement,

Hulftsdorp Street,

Colombo 12.

On behalf of Captain Ambawalage Dammika

Senaratne de Silva of 74, Jayasumanarama

Road, Ratmalana.

Currently held at the Polhengoda Military

Police Headquarters.

Petitioner Vs. 1. Major Mahesh Kumara,

Sri Lanka Military Police Corps,

Military Police Headquarters,

Sri Lanka Army,

Polhengoda.

2. Colonel Etipola, SS,

Commanding Officer,

Military Police Headquarters,

Sri Lanka Army,

Polhengoda

SC/ FR Application No. 556/2009

2

3. Fernando

Officer of Sri Lanka Military Police

Military Police Headquarters,

Sri Lanka Army,

Polhengoda.

4. Provost- Marshal Dias

Officer of Sri Lanka Military Police

Military Police Headquarters,

Sri Lanka Army,

Polhengoda.

5. Colonel Ediriweera,

Commanding Officer,

Sri Lanka Army,

Alampilli Mulativu Camp,

Mulativu.

6. Army Commander,

Sri Lanka Army Headquarters,

Colombo 01.

7. Hon. Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondents

Before: B. P. Aluwihare, PC, J

Priyantha Jayawardena PC, J

P. Padman Surasena, J

3

Counsel: Saliya Pieris PC with Danushka Rahubedda for the Petitioner

Suharshi Herath, Senior State Counsel for the Attorney General

Argued on: 26th June, 2019

Decided on: 30th October, 2023

Priyantha Jayawardena PC, J

Petition

The instant application was filed by an Attorney-at-Law (hereinafter referred to as the petitioner)

on behalf of Captain Ambawalage Dammika Senaratne de Silva (hereinafter referred to as the

detainee), who was detained in military custody at the time of filing the instant application. The

petitioner stated that the detainee was serving as a Captain in the Sri Lanka Army at the time

material to the application.

The petitioner further stated that the 1st respondent is a Major of the Military Police of the Sri

Lanka Army, in whose custody the detainee was kept. The 2nd respondent is the Commanding

Officer of the Military Police. The 3rd and 4th respondents are officers attached to the Military

Police Headquarters, the 5th respondent is the Commanding Officer of Alampili Army Camp

(hereinafter referred to as the Army camp), where the detainee was serving and the 6th

respondent is the Commander of the Sri Lanka Army.

The petitioner stated that a soldier named Lance Corporal K.G. Saman Kumara (hereinafter

referred to as the deceased soldier) died of gunshot injuries on the 22nd of April, 2009 at the

Nandikal Army Camp, where the detainee was serving as the Officer Commanding. Further, the

5th respondent was the Commanding Officer of the said Army Camp at that time. However, the

deceased soldier was serving in a different Company at the time of his death.

4

The petitioner stated that in the log book at the Anuradhapura Army camp, which records the

deaths of officers and soldiers of the Army, the cause of death of the deceased soldier was recorded

as gunshot injuries sustained from the discharge of his own weapon.

The petitioner further stated that on the 30th of May, 2009 the detainee was ordered by the 5th

respondent to take the body of another soldier attached to his Company who died of gunshot

injuries, which were similar to the injuries suffered by Lance Corporal K.G. Saman Kumara a few

days earlier. However, when the detainee was returning to his camp, he was informed that he had

been relieved of his duties as the Officer Commanding from the camp.

Thereafter, due to the adverse environment at the Army Camp that arose after the deaths of the

said soldiers, the detainee requested the 5th respondent to relieve him from his duties at the said

camp and sought permission to report to the Regimental Headquarters at Panagoda.

The 5th respondent permitted the said request of the detainee, and accordingly, the detainee

reported to the Regimental Headquarters on the 10th of June, 2009. Thereafter, the detainee took

medical leave on the 13th and 14th of June, 2009 and reported back to duty on the 15th of June,

2009. On the same day, the detainee informed his mother via telephone that he was unable to come

home as he was facing a problem.

The petitioner stated that following the said telephone conversation, the detainees parents visited

the Regimental Headquarters on the 16th of June, 2009 to inquire about their son, and they were

informed that the detainee was arrested based on an anonymous letter received by the Army stating

that the detainee was responsible for the murder of the deceased soldier, named Lance Corporal

K.G. Saman Kumara. Further, they were informed that the detainee was taken to the Sri Lankan

Army Military Police Headquarters at Polhengoda.

The petitioner further stated that even though the relatives of the detainee attempted to visit him,

they were not given access to him. Thereafter, the mother of the detainee made a complaint to the

Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka (hereinafter referred to as the Human Rights

Commission) on the 3rd of July, 2009 requesting permission for the relatives of the detainee to

visit him. On the 7th of July, 2009 the Human Rights Commission requested the 1st respondent to

permit the relatives of the detainee to visit him. Thereafter, the relatives of the detainee visited him

at the Military Police Headquarters. The petitioner stated that during the said visit, the detainee

informed his relatives that he was falsely implicated for a crime that he did not commit because of

5

the animosity that the 5th respondent had with him. Further, the Military Police were trying to

forcibly obtain a confession from him.

Furthermore, it was stated that the detainees mother had received an anonymous telephone call

on the 21st July, 2009 alleging that the detainee was blindfolded and severely assaulted with clubs

while in the custody of the Military Police. Further, the said anonymous caller had informed her

that the 1st, 3rd and 4th respondents were responsible for the assault of the detainee. The petitioner

stated that the detainees mother complained to several authorities about the arbitrary and unfair

treatment of the detainee and requested to conduct a fair investigation into the incident.

The petitioner stated that a soldier named Hewapalliyaguruge Dilum Sanjeewa was forced to give

a statement stating that the detainee gave his weapon and asked him to shoot the deceased soldier,

and that he shot in the direction of the deceased soldier. However, as he missed the target, the

detainee took the weapon and shot at the deceased soldier.

The petitioner further stated that if the detainee committed the murder, he should have been handed

over to the civil authorities to take steps under the procedure established by law, as the offence of

murder is not an offence that comes within the purview of either the Army Act or the military law

and the regulations promulgated thereunder.

In the circumstances, the petitioner stated that the arrest and detention of the detainee without

reasonable grounds were unlawful, arbitrary and contrary to the procedure established by law and

are an infringement of the Fundamental Rights guaranteed to the detainee.

The petitioner prayed, inter alia, for a declaration that one or more of the respondents have

infringed the detainees Fundamental Rights guaranteed to him by Articles 11, 12(1), 13(1), 13(2),

and 13(3) of the Constitution, and to grant compensation in a sum of Rs. 1,000,000/-.

Leave to Proceed

The court granted leave to proceed for the alleged violation of Articles 12(1) and 13(2) of the

Constitution. It is pertinent to note that the court did not grant leave to proceed for the alleged

violation of Article 11 of the Constitution. Thus, the allegations regarding assault and torture will

not be considered in this judgment.

6

Objections of the 1st respondent

The 1st respondent filed objections and stated that the deceased soldier, Lance Corporal K.G.

Saman Kumara, served in Company A of the 20th Battalion of Sri Lanka Light Infantry, of which

the detainee functioned as the Officer Commanding at the time material to the instant application.

The 1st respondent further stated that the deceased soldier ran away from the said Company on the

16th of April, 2009 and reported to the Battalion headquarters on the following day. Thereafter, the

deceased soldier made a written complaint of sexual harassment committed by the detainee.

Further, as the deceased soldier refused to report back to the detainees Company, he was

transferred to Company D of the same Battalion.

The 1st respondent stated that Company D was moved to a different location on the 22nd of April,

2009 and to reach the said camp, it was necessary to pass Company A. Further, the death of the

deceased soldier occurred when he was passing the location where Company A was stationed.

The 1st respondent denied the allegations that access to the detainee was refused and that the

detainee was assaulted while in custody. The 1st respondent stated that an Order was made by the

Human Rights Commission requesting the relatives of the detainee to visit him, and the said Order

was complied with.

He further stated that the investigation carried out by the Military Police revealed evidence against

the detainee with respect to the murder of the deceased soldier. Hence, the Police was informed to

take over the investigation with regard to the death of the deceased soldier.

In support of the above statement, the 1st respondent produced a letter dated 3rd of July, 2009

addressed to the Deputy Inspector General of Police of the Criminal Investigations Department,

marked as 1R1 which contained the facts revealed during the investigation conducted by the

Military Police in respect of the death of the deceased soldier.

The 1st respondent stated that in terms of sections 47(1) and 131(2) of the Army Act No. 17 of

1949, a court martial may be held when an offence is committed by a member of the Army during

active service. It was further stated that as the alleged offence was committed by the detainee

during active service, the detainee was detained under section 35 of the Army Act and subsequently

handed over to the Police on the 6th of August, 2009 for further investigation.

7

The 1st respondent stated that the detainee was handed over to the Police after the investigation

conducted by the Military Police concluded. Thereafter, the Police produced the detainee and

Hewapalliyaguruge Dilum Sanjeewa in the Magistrates Court, and the learned Magistrate

remanded them. Later, they were released on bail by the High Court of Anuradhapura on the 18th

of January, 2010.

Objections of the 5th respondent

In addition to the averments contained in the objections filed by the 1st respondent, the 5th

respondent stated the following in his statement of objections;

The deceased soldier made a complaint of sexual harassment against the detainee on the 17th of

April, 2009 which was produced marked as 5R1. In the said complaint, the deceased soldier

stated that the detainee summoned him to his room in the night on the 15th of April, 2009 and

sexually harassed him. Further, the alleged sexual harassment commenced with the detainee

ordering him to massage his feet.

It was further stated that the cause of death of the deceased soldier was initially considered to be

an accidental discharge of his personal weapon, and hence, the letters and messages with regard to

his death were issued to that effect. A copy of the message sent by the 5th respondents battalion

informing the headquarters about the death of the deceased soldier and a copy of the convening

order of the Court of Inquiry appointed by his battalion to inquire into the death of the deceased

soldier dated 23rd of April, 2009 were produced marked as 5R2 and 5R3, respectively.

He further stated that as another soldier named R. Silva, attached to the detainees Company, also

died due to gunshot injuries on the 30th of May, 2009 in similar circumstances that the deceased

soldier died, the detainee was removed from his position as the Officer Commanding of

Company A with effect from the 1st of June, 2009.

The 5th respondent stated that a military investigation was initiated into the death of the deceased

soldier, Lance Corporal Saman Kumara. Subsequently, upon the request of the detainee on the 9th

of June, 2009 the detainee was transferred to the Regimental Headquarters of the Sri Lanka Light

Infantry at Panagoda.

8

The investigation conducted by the Army revealed a prima facie case against the detainee and

soldier, Hewapalliyaguruge Dilum Sanjeewa. Hence, he was handed over to the Criminal

Investigations Department for further investigations on the 6th of August, 2009. Thereafter, the

Police produced the detainee and the other soldier in the Magistrates Court in respect of the death

of the deceased soldier, and the learned Magistrate remanded both of them. Subsequently, the

detainee was released on bail by the High Court of Anuradhapura on the 18th of January, 2010. He

stated that a Court Martial can be held against the detainee under sections 47(1) and 131(2) of the

Army Act for the alleged offence of murder of the deceased soldier.

Counter Affidavit of the detainee

The detainee filed a counter affidavit and stated that he was not informed of the deceased soldiers

alleged complaint of sexual harassment dated 17th of April 2009, produced marked as 5R1. He

further stated that an allegation of sexual harassment by a Commissioned Officer on a Non-

Commissioned Officer is a serious offence under Military Law, which would have resulted in

immediate action being taken against him by the 5th respondent as his Commanding Officer.

In the circumstances, the detainee stated that the failure on the part of the 5th respondent to

immediately act on the alleged complaint of sexual harassment raises doubts about the veracity of

the said complaint. In view of the above, the said complaint marked 5R1 is either a forged

document or had been forcibly obtained from the deceased soldier prior to his death.

The detainee further stated that the 1st respondent assaulted him with pipes filled with sand and

forcefully tried to get him to confess that he shot the deceased soldier. Moreover, on the 20th of

June, 2009 the 1st, 3rd and 4th respondents blindfolded and assaulted him. The detainee stated that,

consequent to the assault, he was bleeding from the ear and the nose.

The detainee stated that he still has a difficulty in eating and his feet get numb when he tries to

run. He further stated that after he was released on bail, he obtained medical treatment from the

Army Hospital and the Kalubowila Government Hospital and produced medical records marked

as P15A, P15B and P15C as proof of the treatment given to him by the said hospitals.

9

Further, the detainee stated that the statement of the soldier, Hewapalliyaguruge Dilum Sanjeewa,

had been obtained under duress. Moreover, he is falsely implicated in the death of the deceased

soldier due to the animosity that the 5th respondent has with the detainee.

The detainee stated that he was illegally kept in detention for 52 days, where he was severely

assaulted by the officers of the Sri Lanka Military Police, including the 1st respondent.

Submissions on behalf of the detainee

The learned Presidents Counsel for the detainee submitted that the detainees Fundamental Rights

enshrined under Article 12(1) of the Constitution has been infringed as he was deprived access to

his relatives and lawyers until the intervention of the Human Rights Commission.

It was further submitted that the said detention in military custody for 52 days without either

producing the detainee before a Magistrate or handing him over to civilian authorities is a violation

of his Fundamental Rights guaranteed under Article 13(2) of the Constitution.

The learned Presidents Counsel for the detainee submitted that the words procedure established

by law in Article 13(2) of the Constitution requires a person arrested to be produced before a

Magistrate in a court of law. Thus, even though the initial arrest and detention were made under

section 35 of the Army Act, further steps should have been taken in accordance with the provisions

of the Constitution, which applies to every State institution.

Furthermore, it was submitted that under section 40(1) of the Army Act, the investigation against

the detainee should have been conducted without unnecessary delay after he was taken into

military custody and that steps should have been taken either to initiate proceedings against the

detainee under section 40(1)(b) of the Army Act or to have the charges against the said detainee

dismissed under section 40(1)(a) of the Army Act. In the alternative, to hand over the detainee to

the Police to take steps under the law.

The learned Presidents Counsel further submitted that this court has given a strict interpretation

to the term time limit in respect of producing persons detained before the nearest judge of a

competent court.

10

In support of the above submissions, the learned Presidents Counsel cited Selvakumar v

Devananda (SC/FR/150/93, Supreme Court Minutes 13th of July, 1994), where it was held;

if the victim of an unconstitutional arrest may run the risk of such grave harm

while in police custody, it seems to me that what a reasonable time for

production before a Magistrate must necessarily be given a strict interpretation

Thus, it was contended that the term without unnecessary delay stipulated in section 40 of the

Army Act should be given a strict interpretation.

Further, the learned Presidents Counsel cited the case of Sunil Rodrigo v De Silva (1997) 3 SLR

265, where the court held that the rights under Article 13(2) of the Constitution to produce a suspect

before a judge cannot be taken away unless expressly provided by the Constitution itself.

Moreover, the decision was taken by the Army headquarters to hand over the detainee to the Police

on the 3rd of July, 2009 marked as 1R1. Therefore, the Sri Lanka Army had no viable reason to

keep the detainee in custody after the said date. However, the detainee had been kept in military

custody until he was handed over to the Police on the 6th of August, 2009 when the instant

application was supported in the Supreme Court.

In the circumstances, it was submitted that the procedure established by law as set out in section

40 of the Army Act requiring steps to be taken without unnecessary delay had been violated by

the Army.

Furthermore, the learned Presidents Counsel submitted that military personnel are entitled to the

protection of Fundamental Rights enshrined in the Constitution. In support of the said submission,

the learned Presidents Counsel cited Channa Peiris v Attorney General (1994) 1 SLR 51 at 81,

where it was held:

Constitutional guarantees cannot be removed or modified except in accordance

with the Constitution. That, I believe is a proposition that commends itself to

general acceptance. I believe it is still a well-established and universally conceded

principle. One might say that it is axiomatic.

Moreover, it was submitted that in Edirisuriya v Navaratnam (1985) 1 SLR 100, it was held:

if it is intended to restrict the requirement of 13 (2) this must be specifically

done. Article 13 (2) cannot be restricted without a specific reference to it. .. In

11

the result, the Constitutional requirement that a detained person shall be brought

before the judge of the nearest competent court remains unaffected

In the circumstances, it was submitted that the Fundamental Rights of the detainee guaranteed

under Article 13(2) has been infringed by the 1st to the 6th respondents.

Submissions of the respondents

The learned Senior State Counsel for the respondents submitted that the arrest of the detainee was

made based on the findings of the preliminary investigation conducted by the preliminary Court

of Inquiry, which gave rise to a reasonable suspicion of murder of the deceased soldier by the

detainee.

It was further submitted that the arrest of the detainee was beyond a mere surmise of a general

suspicion, as the findings of the preliminary investigation report contained material to suspect the

commission of the offence by the detainee. Thus, the arrest of the detainee was lawful.

In support of the above submissions, she cited the case of Perera v Attorney General (1992) 1

SLR 99, which held;

. The power of arrest does not depend on the requirement that there must be

clear and sufficient proof of the commission of the offence alleged. On the other

hand, for an arrest, a mere reasonable suspicion or a reasonable complaint of the

commission of an offence suffices.

The learned Senior State Counsel contended that the detainee was detained by the Military Police

under section 35 and other relevant provisions of the Army Act, and as such, the detention in the

instant application is subject to the special procedure prescribed by law. Similarly, the operation

of Article 13 is subject to the restrictions stipulated in Article 15(8) of the Constitution for members

of the Armed Forces, in the interest of the proper discharge of their duties and the maintenance of

discipline among them.

In the circumstances, it was submitted that the detention by the Military Police is in accordance

with the provisions of the Army Act and there was no violation of Articles 12(1) and 13(2) of the

Constitution.

12

Were the Fundamental Rights guaranteed to the detainee by Articles 12(1) and 13(2) of the

Constitution infringed?

Was the arrest illegal?

The deceased soldier, Lance Corporal Saman Kumara, ran away from Company A on the 16th of

April, 2009 and reported to the Battalion headquarters on the 17th of April, 2009. He made a written

complaint on the 17th of April, 2009 against the detainee, stating that he was sexually abused by

the detainee on the 15th of April, 2009. Hence, he refused to report back to Company A where he

was attached to. Accordingly, he was transferred to Company D, which was situated close to the

Camp that he was serving previously. The deceased soldier was found dead on the 22nd of April,

2009 from gunshot injuries. On the 23rd of April, 2009 the Army appointed a Court of Inquiry to

investigate the death of the deceased soldier. The Court of Inquiry concluded by stating that the

deceased soldier died due to an actual discharge of his personal weapon.

By letter dated 17th of May, 2009 addressed to the 6th respondent, a group of soldiers from

Company A complained that the detainee committed the murder of the deceased soldier, as he had

complained against the detainee for sexually abusing him. Thereafter, on the 30th of May, 2009

another soldier attached to the same Company died due to gunshot injuries under similar

circumstances.

The detainee was removed from his appointment as the Officer Commanding in the said camp on

the 1st of June, 2009. Subsequently, upon a request made by the detainee, he was transferred to the

Regimental Headquarters of the Sri Lanka Light Infantry in Panagoda on the 9th of June, 2009.

The Military Police commenced investigating into the death of the deceased soldier on the 17th of

June, 2009 under section 40(1) of the Army Act. Further, on the same day the detainee and another

soldier named Hewapalliyaguruge Dilum Sanjeewa were arrested on suspicion of the death of the

deceased soldier on the same day. The said soldier, Hewapalliyaguruge Dilum Sanjeewa has given

a statement to the Military Police stating that the detainee requested him to ask the deceased soldier

to come to his room in the night on or around the 15th of April, 2009. When the deceased soldier

entered the detainees room, he heard the detainee asking him to massage his feet. After about half

an hour, he saw the deceased soldier leaving the detainees room. On the next day, the deceased

soldier ran away from the Company where he was attached to and reported to the Battalion

13

headquarters on the following day. When the detainee heard about it, he told him that he will not

let him eat rice in the Army, for what he did to me.

In his statement, he had further stated that, on the 22nd of April, 2009 he saw the detainee talking

to the deceased soldier but did not hear their conversation. Thereafter, the detainee asked him to

bring the detainees T-56 weapon and a bucket of water, stating that he wanted to go to the jungle

to relive himself. He further stated that he brought the detainees gun and handed it over to him.

Thereafter, they followed the deceased soldier, and the detainee gave the gun to him and ordered

to shoot the deceased soldier. However, as he missed the target, the detainee took the gun from

him and shot the deceased soldier, who fell to the ground.

The detainee alleged that he was illegally arrested and detained by the respondents and thereby,

his Fundamental Rights guaranteed by Articles 12(1) and 13(2) of the Constitution were infringed.

Article 15(8) of the Constitution states:

The exercise and operation of the fundamental rights declared and recognized by

Articles 12(1), 13 and 14 shall, in their application to the members of the Armed

Forces, Police Force and other Forces charged with the maintenance of public

order, be subject to such restrictions as may be prescribed by law in the interests

of the proper discharge of their duties and the maintenance of discipline among

them.

(emphasis added)

Thus, in terms of Article 15(8) of the Constitution, the Fundamental Rights guaranteed by Articles

12(1), 13 and 14 are subject to the restrictions as prescribed by the laws. The Army Act No. 17

of 1949 and the Army Disciplinary Regulations 1950 (hereinafter referred to as the Army

Disciplinary Regulations) are applicable to all military personnel, including the detainee. Hence,

the applicability of Articles 12(1), 13 and 14 of the Constitution are subject to the provisions of

the Army Act and the regulations promulgated thereunder.

Further, the detainee being an officer of the regular force is subject to the military law in terms of

section 34 of the Amy Act.

14

The detainee was detained under section 35 of the Army Act, which states as follows:

A person subject to military law who commits any military or civil offence may be

taken into military custody.

Further, under section 47(1) read with section 131(2) of the Army Act, a court martial can be held

against the detainee in respect of an offence of murder committed by an Army personnel.

As stated above, the evidence transpired during the investigation conducted by the Military Police,

established a prima facie case against the detainee and the soldier, Hewapalliyaguruge Dilum

Sanjeewa. Hence, the arrest of the detainee and Hewapalliyaguruge Dilum Sanjeewa in connection

with the death of the deceased soldier is justified.

Further, it is pertinent to note that, after the detainee was handed over to the Criminal Investigations

Department of the Police, the Police informed the Magistrates Court that there is evidence to

suspect the detainee and the soldier, Hewapalliyaguruge Dilum Sanjeewa, for the murder of the

said deceased soldier. Having considered the material filed in court by the Police, the learned

Magistrate remanded the detainee and the soldier, Hewapalliyaguruge Dilum Sanjeewa pending

further investigations in respect of the offence of committing murder of the deceased soldier.

An investigation commences where there is reason either to suspect the commission of the offence.

The sole purpose of the investigation is to gather evidence from which they could form an opinion

whether there is material to institute criminal proceedings. Hence, investigation officers are

conferred with the power that may be necessary for the discovery of evidence and arrest of the

suspects. Further, an investigation has a fact-finding character. At the conclusion of the

investigation, it needs only to decide whether there is sufficient material to suspect a particular

person or persons committing an offence. Furthermore, a preliminary investigation is not

concerned with the issue of actual guilt.

Moreover, a person can be arrested if a credible complaint is received or an information has been

received or if a reasonable suspicion exists of committing an offence.

In view of the facts revealed at the investigation carried out by the Military Police and the Criminal

Investigations Department of the Sri Lanka Police, I am of the opinion there were sufficient

material to arrest the detainee in respect of the offence of murder of the deceased soldier.

15

Further, the cases of Selvakumar v Devanada, Channa Pieris v Attorney General, Edirisyriya v

Navaratnam and Sunil Rodrigo v De Silva cited by the learned Presidents Counsel for the

detainee are not applicable to the instant application as the petitioners in those applications were

arrested by the Police under the Criminal Procedure Code and not by the Military Police under the

Army Act and the Regulations promulgated thereunder.

Therefore, I am of the view that the Fundamental Rights of the detainee enshrined under Article

12(1) of the Constitution has not been infringed by the respondents by arresting the detainee.

Whether the detention (confinement) is unlawful?

As stated above, the Military Police commenced the investigation with regard to the death of the

deceased soldier consequent to the aforementioned letter sent by the soldiers of the Camp A where

the deceased soldier and the detainee were serving. Once the investigations were concluded by the

Military Police, the evidence revealed that the detainee and soldier, Hewapalliyaguruge Dilum

Sanjeewa were responsible for the murder of the deceased soldier. Hence, the Criminal

Investigations Department was informed by letter dated 3rd of July, 2009 marked and produced as

1R1, the findings of the investigations carried out by the Military Police on the death of the

deceased soldier, Lance Corporal Saman Kumara. Further, as the said investigations found

evidence against the detainee and soldier, Hewapalliyaguruge Dilum Sanjeewa, the Police was

requested to take over the investigations with regard to the said death of the deceased soldier.

Thereafter, the detainee was handed over to the Criminal Investigations Department on the 6th of

August, 2009 for further investigations.

Moreover, the Police filed a B report in the Magistrates Court of Anuradhapura on the 7th of

August, 2009. In the said report, the Police has named the detainee and the soldier,

Hewapalliyaguruge Dilum Sanjeewa, as suspects is respect of the murder of the deceased soldier.

Further, the said report filed by the Police in the Magistrates Court stated that there is evidence to

suggest that the detainee and the soldier, Hewapalliyaguruge Dilum Sanjeewa, committed the

murder of the deceased soldier. Hence, the learned Magistrate remanded both of them as the

investigations were pending. Later, the detainee was released on bail on the 18th of January, 2010

by the High Court of Anuradhapura.

16

It was submitted by the learned Presidents Counsel for the detainee that the detention of the

detainee during the time of the investigation by the Military Police without producing him before

a Magistrate was a violation of his Fundamental Rights guaranteed under Article 13(2) of the

Constitution.

Article 13(2) of the Constitution states:

Every person held in custody, detained or otherwise deprived of personal liberty

shall be brought before the judge of the nearest competent court according to

procedure established by law and shall not be further held in custody, detained or

deprived of personal liberty except upon and in terms of the order made by such

judge in accordance with procedure established by law.

However, as stated above, the Fundamental Rights of the detainee enshrined under Articles 12(1),

13 and 14 of the Constitution are subject to restrictions prescribed in the military law. Section

18(2) of the Army Disciplinary Regulations states:

No officer or warrant office shall be kept in military custody, unless his

commanding officer is satisfied on investigation that it will be necessary to proceed

with the case and report it to the Commander of the Army.

(emphasis added)

Thus, it is evident that the detainee was kept in military custody during the course of the

investigation and thereafter, pending a review from his Commanding Officer as to whether or not

to proceed with the case against the detainee and soldier, Hewapalliyaguruge Dilum Sanjeewa. As

the evidence revealed that the detainee and the Army were responsible for the death of the deceased

soldier, the Army has sent a letter dated 3rd of July, 2009 marked 1R1 addressed to the Deputy

Inspector General of Police of the Criminal Investigations Department, to take over the

investigations in respect of the death of the deceased soldier. Thereafter, the detainee was handed

over to the Criminal Investigations Department on the 6th of August, 2009.

The material filed in this court shows that there was no undue delay on the part of the respondents

in handing over the detainee and soldier, Hewapalliyaguruge Dilum Sanjeewa to Police custody.

Further, there was no intentional violation of the Fundamental Rights of the detainee.

17

A similar view was expressed in Wijesinghe v Attorney General and Others (1978-80) 1 SLR

102 at 106 it was held;

Every wrong decision or breach of the law does not attract the constitutional

remedies relating to fundamental rights. Where a transgression of the law takes

place, due solely to some corruption, negligence or error of judgement, I do not

think a person can be allowed to come under Article 126 and allege that there has

been a violation of constitutional guarantees. There may also be other instances

where mistakes or wrongful acts are done in the course of proceedings for which

ordinarily there are built-in safe-guards or adequate procedures for obtaining

relief.

Therefore, I am of the view that the Fundamental Rights of the detainee enshrined under Article

13(2) of the Constitution has not been infringed by the respondents.

Accordingly, the application is dismissed without costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

B. P. Aluwihare PC, J

I agree Judge of the Supreme Court

P. Padman Surasena, J

I agree Judge of the Supreme Court