==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal under Section 5C of the

High Court of the Provinces (Special Provision) Act

No. 19 of 1990 as amended by Act No. 54 of 2006.

SC/Appeal No. 58/2019 Hemal Ashmore Peiris,

SC/HCCA/LA No.52/2017 No. 10, Austin Place,

HCCA/GPH/72/2010 (F) Colombo 08.

DC. Gampaha Case No.

766/L

PLAINTIFF

vs

Hewage Lionel Gunarathne,

Sirideranawatte,

No. 48/20, Randawana Road,

Yakkala.

DEFENDANT

And Between

Hewage Lionel Gunarathne, Sirideranawatte,

No. 48/20, Randawana Road,

Yakkala.

DEFENDANT-APPELLANT vs Hemal Ashmore Peiris, No. 10, Austin Place,

2

Colombo 08. PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT And Now Between

Hewage Lionel Gunarathne, Sirideranawatte,

No. 48/20, Randawana Road,

Yakkala.

DEFENDANT-APPELLANT-PETITIONER

vs Hemal Ashmore Peiris, No. 10, Austin Place, Colombo 08.

PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : Janak De Silva, J. Achala Wengappuli, J. M. Sampath K. B. Wijeratne, J. COUNSEL : Manohara De Silva, PC with Hirosha Munasinghe instructed by Anusha Perusinghe for the Defendant-Appellant-Appellant.

Sunil F.A. Coorey with Nilanga Perera instructed by Sithara Jayasundara for the Plaintiff-Respondent- Respondent. ARGUED ON : 26.09.2025 DECIDED ON : 06.03.2026

3

M. Sampath K. B. Wijeratne J.

Introduction

The Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as ‘Plaintiff-Respondent’)

instituted this action against the Defendant-Appellant-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as

‘Defendant-Appellant’) seeking a declaration of title to lot 5 depicted in Plan 1105 dated

July 02, 1984 (‘P2’) more fully described in the sixth schedule to the plaint, a declaration

that the Defendant-Appellant’had fraudulently taken possession of the said lot and

thereby had unjustly enriched himself, and damages.

The Defendant-Appellant in his answer sought dismissal of Plaintiff-Respondent’s action

on the ground that he had acquired prescriptive title to the aforesaid lot 5 in plan marked

‘P2’ by his undisturbed and uninterrupted adverse and independent possession for over

ten years.

After trial, the District Court delivered the judgment in favour of the Plaintiff-

Respondent, granting all the reliefs prayed for in the Plaint. The Defendant-Appellant

thereupon appealed to the Provincial High Court, where the learned judges of the High

Court affirmed the judgment of the learned District Judge, subject to the variation that the

derogatory words ‘තෘෂ්ණාව මුල්කරගෙන’ being deleted and substituted with the word

‘සිතාමතාම’ to bring consolation to the Defendant-Appellant. Being dissatisfied with the

said judgment, the Defendant-Appellant preferred the instant appeal to this Court.

Accordingly, this Court granted leave to appeal against the judgment of the Provincial

High Court on the following question of law;

“Did the learned judges of Provincial High Court and the learned District

judge have both erred by failing to hold that the Defendant had prescribed

to the land described in the schedule to the answer”1

1 Journal entry dated 01.03.2019.

4

Facts of the Case

The land more fully described in the 1st schedule to the Plaint was gifted to the Plaintiff-

Respondent by his father by deed of gift bearing No. 1481 dated October 26, 1969. The

devolution of title to the subject matter pleaded by the Plaintiff-Respondent was never

contested. The Plaintiff-Respondent has thereafter caused the said land to be surveyed and

sub divided into several lots upon plan No. 1105 dated July 20, 1984 with the intention of

selling some of the lots. Accordingly, Lots 1, 2 and 3 depicted in the said plan bearing No.

1105 were sold to the Defendant-Appellant by three separate Deeds; No 482, 483, and

484 all dated November 10, 1984 (‘P3’, ‘P4’ and ‘P5’) attested by R.K.S. Suresh

Chandra, Notary Public whilst entering into an agreement to sell Lot 4 (‘P6’) which he

eventually did by executing Deed No. 528 dated May 05, 1985. (‘P7’). The said lots 1,2,3

and 4 are described respectively in the 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th schedules to the Plaint.

In 2003, when the Plaintiff-Respondent re surveyed the land, it was revealed that lot 5

depicted in Plan No. 1105 more fully described in the 6th schedule to the Plaint was also

in the possession of the Defendant-Appellant in addition to the Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4 those

which were actually transferred to the Defendant-Appellant.

The Plaintiff-Respondent promptly informed the Defendant-Appellant who was working

abroad at the time through email communications that lot 5 which is actually belonging to

the Plaintiff-Respondent has been mistakenly fenced off together with Lot 4 which is

adjacent to Lot 5. The Defendant-Appellant while acknowledging that he only bought

four Lots namely lots 1-4 from Plaintiff-Respondent, assured Plaintiff-Respondent that if

a mistake has in fact been made with regard to the boundaries, he would take necessary

steps to resolve the issue amicably once he returned to Sri Lanka. The Defendant-

Appellant also expressed his willingness to buy from Plaintiff-Respondent if extra block

is included in the land that is possessed by him. The Plaintiff-Respondent thereafter

informed the Defendant-Appellant that he does not wish to sell Lot 5 and requested

Defendant-Appellant to dismantle the outhouse, which is encroaching on Plaintiff-

Respondent’s premises and rebuild it within his own premises. Subsequently, as no

amicable settlement could be reached between the parties, this action was instituted.

5

Analysis

Since this is a rei-vindicatio action, once the Plaintiff-Respondent establishes his paper

title to the portion of land in question the burden shifts onto the Defendant-Appellant to

prove his entitlement to possess the same. Thus, the crux of the matter in the instant case

is whether Defendant-Appellant effectively discharged his burden of proof of prescriptive

title under which he claims to be entitled to possess Lot 5.

Defendant-Appellant to succeed in his claim for prescriptive tittle, the onus is on him to

satisfy all ingredients set out in section 3 of the Prescription Ordinance No. 22 of 1871 as

amended. Section 3 of the Prescription Ordinance reads as follows;

Section 3- “Proof of the undisturbed and uninterrupted possession by a

defendant in any action, or by those under whom he claims, of lands or

immovable property, by a title adverse to or independent of that of the

claimant or plaintiff in such action […] for ten years previous to the

bringing of such action, shall entitle the defendant to a decree in his favour

with costs. […]”

In the instant case, Defendant-Respondent is the owner of the land adjoining to the

Plaintiff-Appellant. It was only in 2003, when a resurvey was conducted by the Plaintiff-

Appellant, that it was revealed that Defendant-Appellant had encroached into some

portion of Lot 5 owned by the Plaintiff-Appellant, which was not sold to the Defendant-

Respondent. Defendant-Respondent’s position is that though he has not paid any

consideration for Lot 5, he was in possession of the said Lot 5 together with Lot 1 – 4 as a

portion of land that he purchased and accordingly, has acquired prescriptive title. In the

light of the said facts the character in which the Defendant-Appellant entered into the

possession of Lot 5 prima facie appears to be that of a trespasser or a complete stranger as

it is clear that he was never in possession of said Lot on leave and license as claimed by

the learned Counsel for Plaintiff-Respondent but rather encroached into Plaintiff-

Respondent’s portion of land without his knowledge.

6

In such circumstances, the real question that arises is as to the point at which the

prescriptive period commences to run, and whether the Defendant–Appellant can be said

to have perfected title by way of adverse possession? In my view, the period during which

the prescription commences to run depends on the character in which one enters into the

possession of an immovable property. For example, if a person enters to a land of another

in the character of licensee or agent of the owner, such a person cannot acquire

prescriptive title to that property unless there’s some ‘overt act’ which demonstrates that

such a person has set aside his subordinate character and is possessing the property

adverse to or independent of the owner of the property. In the case of Maduanwela vs

Ekneligoda2 Bonser C.J. thus observed, “A person who is let into occupation of property

as a tenant or as a licensee must be deemed to continue to occupy on the footing on which

he was admitted, until by some overt act he manifests his intention of occupying in

another capacity. No secret act will avail to change the nature of his occupation.”.

Similarly, in Jayaneris vs Somawathie,3 Weeramantry J. stated, “The adverse aspect of

his possession cannot in other words remain a mere concept in the recesses of the agent's

mind but must so manifest itself that those against whom it is urged may see in it a

challenge to their claims. Even as possession qua co-owner cannot be ended by any

secret intention in the mind of the possessing co-owner, so also is possession through an

agent incapable of being affected adversely by an uncommunicated attitude or mental

state existing in the mind of that self-same agent.” If one is a co-owner, in order to

establish prescriptive possession, stronger evidence would be required to prove adverse

possession, the time from which he started to possess the corpus in a way that is

incompatible with the rights of other co-owners. Thus, in Corea vs Appuhamy,4 it was

held that, “A co-owner's possession is in law the possession of his co-owners. It is not

possible for him to put an end to that possession by any secret intention in his mind.

Nothing short of ouster or something equivalent to ouster could bring about that result”.

Hence, an inclusive possession of a co-owner alone would not grant him a prescriptive

title unless there are proof of circumstances from which a reasonable inference could be

drawn that such possession had become adverse at some point, ten years prior to the

bringing of the action.

2 3 NLR 213 3 76 NLR 206 4 [1911] 15 NLR 65

7

If a person who enters into a land belonging to another person not under leave and license

of the owner but as a total stranger/ trespasser, does his possession bear character of

adverse possession? I am of the view that if trespasser is to prove adverse possession that

entitles him to claim prescriptive title, it has to be exercised openly against the rights of

the true owner and only from such time that the true owner becomes aware of such

possession or could reasonably be expected to have become aware of such possession that

the prescriptive possession could commence to run. It is due to the inaction on part of the

real owner, that can extinguish his rights over his own property. If the true owner of the

property does not know the fact that another party is possessing it or reasonably could not

have been aware based on the facts of the case, it is not logical to concede to the

argument that Defendant-Appellant was in possession that is adverse to the true owner of

the property. This view has been endorsed by De. Abrew J. in the case of Punchiralage

Keerala vs Dingiribanda5 where his Lordship observed that, “In fact when a person

encroaches upon lands for which he has no title, he acquires status of a trespasser in

respect of the encroached area of the land. Trespasser starts possessing lands for which

he has no title and continues to possess the land secretly. As I pointed out earlier, to claim

prescriptive title in terms of Section 3 of the Prescription Ordinance claimant’s possession

should be an adverse possession. A person who possesses a land with secret intention

cannot claim that his possession is an adverse possession. Possession of a land by a

person with secret intention cannot be considered as an adverse possession in terms of

Section 3 of the Prescription Ordinance. Thus, a trespasser who violates the law of the

land and possesses the land cannot claim benefit of the law of the land.”

Samayawardhene J. in Athukoralalage Don Chandrasekera vs Athukoralalage Don

Sarathchandra and others6 also observed that, “Mere possession is not prescriptive

possession. It should be adverse possession known to the real owner. Adverse possession

should continue uninterruptedly for 10 years. For mere possession to become adverse

possession there should be an overt act for the real owner and the Court to understand

the starting point of prescriptive possession. It cannot be done stealthily. The 10-year

period begins to run from that point, not from the mere act of possession, as not every

instance of possession qualifies as prescriptive possession.”

5 SC/APPEAL/188/2011, SC Minutes of 18.07.2018 6 SC APPEAL NO: SC/APPEAL/30/2016, SC Minutes of 04.07.2024

8

As held by a number of decisions of the Supreme Court,7 a prescription is an illegality

made legal. Here law does not intend to confer any premium on the wrongdoing of a

person in wrongful possession but rather seeks to penalize a person who has slept on his

own rights. When boundaries are not demarcated properly, such encroachment can

happen intentionally or unintentionally. In the Sri Lankan context, it is a common issue

that property owners face. In the instant case, too, it appears that the boundaries had not

been properly demarcated at the time of the sale of Lots 1 – 3 and thereafter Lot 4.

The Plaintiff-Respondent in his evidence has stated;

ප්‍ර -එතගකාට ඒ මුල් අවස්ථාගේදී ගේ 4 ගවනි ගකාටසයි 5 ගවනි ගකාටසයි අතරින් වැටක් හරි යේිසි ගවන

ිරීමක් තිබුනාද?

උ -නැහැ මුකුත ගවන් ිරීමක් තිබුගන් නැහැ. ගකාටු විතරයි තිබුගන්. වැට ෙහද්දදී තමයි ගේක ගවලා තිගයන්ගන්.

තමුන ියන්ගන් තමුත් ඒ අයට ඉඩේ මුල් අවස්ථාගේදී ගදන ගකාට ගේ 4 යි 5 යි ියන ගකාටස් ගදක ගවත

ගවන්න ිසිම ආකාරයක සලකුණක් අර තමුත් ියන ආකාරයට ගකෝටු හිටවා හැගරන්න තිබුගන් නැහැ ියලා?

උ -ගකාටු විතරයි තිබුගන්.

(page 70 of the brief)

It is even doubtful whether the Defendant-Appellant himself was aware that he has

encroached on his neighbor’s land as evident in the email communications between the

parties., “If You are 100% sure that some extra block is included in my present block by

mistake then please make another deed for that block to my name including my youngest

son's name as my last will. Both of us can agree for a reasonable amount and close the

transaction. I was planning to leave my house and back land for my youngest son and

front for my eldest son. I think this way we can solve this problem.” (page No. 243 of the

brief) As I have already observed it is only in 2003, when a resurvey was done, it was

detected to the Plaintiff-Respondent and possibly to the Defendant-Appellant as well.

The conduct of the Defendant-Appellant itself casts doubt as to whether an inference of

adverse possession could be drawn. I am in complete agreement with the following

7 Corea vs Iseris Appuhamy (1911) 15 NLR 65 at 78, Kiriamma vs Podibanda [2005] BLR 9 at 11, Fathima Naseera vs Mohamed Haris (CA/818/96(F), CA Minutes of 11.07.2012, Sumanawathie vs Sirisena (CA/830/98(F), CA Minutes of 10.03.2014.

9

observation made by the learned High Court judge, where he has observed that “The

North-Eastern boundary of lot 5 has been marked in red colour which cut and crossed the

kitchen of the defendant according to P-9 commission plan. If the defendant was

possessing the lot No.5 along with the other lots as one land as show in "V-1" plan, his

metal foundation on the North Western boundary as shown in V-2 photograph need not

have stopped half way and it could have further extended if the defendant was in fact

possessing lot 5 with the firm knowledge and belief that lot No: -5 belongs to none but

him.”

Considering the totality of evidence, it cannot be said that the possession of Defendant-

Appellant has ripened into a prescriptive possession at any point of time. In such

circumstances, the learned President Counsel for the Defendant-Respondent has raised

the interesting argument that ut dominus possession (possession as one’s own) due to a

mistaken belief, can give rise to prescriptive title. However, such an argument based on

Roman law or Roman-Dutch law is clearly outside the purview of our law, as it is the

provisions of the Prescription Ordinance alone that govern the entire gamut of the law

relating to prescription. This is succinctly expressed by Bertram C.J. in Tillekeratne vs

Bastian8 where his Lordship stated that, “The Roman and Roman-Dutch law are only of

historical interest, as it is recognized that our Prescription Ordinance constitutes a

complete code: and though no doubt, we have to consider any statutory enactments in the

light of the principles of the common law, it will be seen that the terms of our own

Ordinance are so positive that the principles of the common law do not require to be

taken into account”

Thus, in our law possessor being ignorant of the true ownership of the corpus in question

or the fact that possessor held the corpus similar to possession ‘ut dominus’, is neither

sufficient nor necessary to establish a prescriptive title. Professor G. L. Peiris in Law of

Property Volume 1, 2nd Edition at page 110 has elaborated this as follows; “Adverse

possession was held at one time to entail possession ‘ut dominus’, but this view has not

found favour in several opinions by the Privy Council, and it may now be taken for

8 21 NLR 12

10

granted that possession ut dominus is not necessarily required in Sri Lanka for purposes

of prescriptive possession.”

In the said circumstances, the claim of prescriptive title to Lot 5 by the Defendant-

Appellant is not entitled to succeed.

Conclusion

I answer the questions of law upon which leave to appeal was granted in the Negative.

The appeal shall stand dismissed. The judgment of the High Court is affirmed. The

Plaintiff-Respondent is entitled to costs in all three Courts.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Janak De Silva, J. I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Achala Wengappuli, J. I agree. JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT