1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Seylan Bank PLC,

Registration No.PQ9

SC (CHC) 05/2009 Ceylinco Seylan Towers,

Case No. HC (Civil) 128/2000(01) 90, Galle Road, Colombo 3.

Plaintiff

Vs.

Premier Marketing Ltd,

456, Galle Road, Colombo 3

Defendant

AND NOW

In the matter of an appeal in terms of

Section 5(1) of the High Court of the

Provinces (Special provisions) Act No.10

of 1997 read with Articles 127 and 128 of

the Constitution.

Premier Marketing Ltd,

456, Galle Road, Colombo 3

Defendant –Appellant

Vs.

2

Seylan Bank PLC,

Registration No.PQ9,

Ceylinco Seylan Towers,

90, Galle Road, Colombo 3.

Plaintiff-Responden

Before: H.N.J Perera CJ,

Vijith K. Malalgoda, PC, J.

L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

Counsel: Maithree Wickremasinghe PC with Rakitha Jayathunga instructed by

Paul Rathnayake Associates for the Defendant –Appellant.

Avindra Rodrigo with Shamlie Jayathunga and Rasika Aluwihare for

the Plaintiff – Respondent.

Argued on; 11/09/2018

Decided on: 22/03/2019

3

L.T.B. Dehideniya J,

The Plaintiff-Respondent (hereinafter sometime called and referred to as the

Plaintiff) filed an action in the District Court which has subsequently been

transferred to the Commercial High Court of the Western Province, seeking to

recover the monies due to it from the Defendant-Appellant (hereinafter sometime

called and referred to as the Defendant), under the facilities that have been granted

by it to the Defendant. The Commercial High Court, after trial delivered the

judgement dated 17-10-2008 in favour of the Plaintiff.

The Defendant –Appellant have by its Petition dated 11-12-2008 appealed to this

Court praying for the following reliefs:

a) To set aside the said judgement of the Commercial High Court of the

Western province.

b) To award costs to the Defendant- Appellants.

c) To award such other and further relief as this court shall seem to meet to

the Defendant –Appellant.

In this case, the Plaintiff Bank granted overdraft/loan facilities to the Defendant

at the latter’s request and the Defendant agreed to repay the facilities with the

interest on demand. The parties have entered into an agreement dated 4th April

1996. The Plaintiff’s version is that the Defendant obtained several facilities

4

throughout for a period of time. The Plaintiff has made a demand for the sum of

Rs. 4, 571,173.62 being the amount payable by the Defendant and the relevant

interest by letter dated 20th October 1997. The Defendant denied the liability to

pay the said amount of money by the letter dated 26th November 1997.

Subsequent to the letter of denial, the Plaintiff reduced the liability of the

Defendant to Rs.4, 274,921.39 and pleaded that it was entitled to judgement for

the recovery of the said sum from the Defendant with an interest at 30% per

annum from 24th September 1997. The Defendant filed an answer on 26th March

1999 and denied the claim of the Plaintiff and pleaded, denying liability to pay

the sum demanded. The Defendant sought a dismissal of the Plaintiff’s action.

The District Court made an order transferring the action to the High Court

established under the Act No.10 of 1996. The High Court, after trial, has decided

the case in favour of the Plaintiff.

The Defendant argues in this case that, the upper limit of the facility which could

have granted by the bank as per the agreement was Rs. 1,250,000.00 and there is

no authority on the part of the Plaintiff to grant greater amount than the specific

upper limit to the Defendant.

At the trial the Plaintiff Bank called the Assistant General Manager

Mr.T.H.D.C.E De Silva who was the Manager of the Cinnamon Garden branch

when the parties entered into the agreement, as a witness. He submitted an

affidavit giving evidence in examination-in-chief. Thereafter, he has been cross-

examined and re-examined. The witness stated that the Plaintiff and the

Defendant entered into the agreement marked P3 to provide facilities to the

Defendant. The upper limit of the agreement was 1.25 million, but according to

this witness the bank can increase that upper limit.

5

In questioning this witness, it was put to the witness that the agreed rate of interest

is 25% and any increase of the interest has to be advised to the customer. When

he was questioned whether he has any document to show that such an increase is

advised, he answered in negative, but he volunteered to say that the bank in

certain circumstances includes the enhancement of the rate of interest in the bank

statements. He further stated that if the rate of interest has been increased, the

bank advice the customer. The Defence Counsel neither questioned the witness

on this statement nor he denied the statement that the bank advise the customer.

Therefore, this piece of evidence that the bank advises the customers on the

enhancement of the interest rate is unchallenged.

An unchallenged piece of evidence is a ‘matter before court’. In the case of Silva

v. Chandradasa de Silva 70 NLR 169 it was held:

When the Respondent’s counsel in the instant case called upon the

Election Judge to decide the matter of the Petitioner’s status upon a

consideration of the evidence on record at the close of the case for the

Petitioner, he did so without himself calling any evidence in disproof

of the status. In other words, the evidence on record remained

uncontradicted. But, nowhere in the judgement did the learned

Election judge refer to this circumstance as a ‘matter before the court’

and it is evident that he took no account of this circumstance in

reaching his conclusion. The failure to take account of this

circumstance was a non- direction amounting to misdirection in law

which vitiates the conclusion of fact which the Judge, ultimately

6

reached. That is a sufficient ground on which to set aside the order

dismissing the petition.

The evidence that has been led in the instant case that the interest had been

increased and the Defendant was advised accordingly can be accepted though

there is no documentary proof, because the oral evidence was not denied or

challenged.

What the Plaintiff argues in this case is that the Defendant did not call any

evidence and the evidence which was given by the Plaintiff was not contradicted,

and in such an instance not giving evidence becomes a ‘matter before court’.

The Defendant stated that, 25% is the interest which has been provided in the

agreement, and any other rate of interest can be charged only if it is notified and

the Plaintiff Bank has made no notification to that effect. Further, the Defendant

continues in his contention that, setting out a different interest rates in the bank

statement is not a method in accordance with the contract and the Bank

Statements produced by the Plaintiff Bank does not depict the interest rates. It is

apparent, that what the Defendant attempted to uphold throughout the case, was

that he is not liable to pay the claim demanded by the Plaintiff Bank, and

especially the rates of interest 28% and 30% are not relevant to the Defendant.

The court expects the Defendant to be diligent and attentive to protect the right

that he expects to vindicate. It is clear that, the Defendant has not in any manner

attempted to oppose the voluntary statement made by the witness. The silence

entertained by the Defendant at the instance where he needed to question the

stance of the Plaintiff amounts to an acceptance of the fact that, he was duly

7

advised by the Plaintiff Bank about the increased rates of interest and he is liable

to pay the claim of the latter.

This court further pays attention to the argument that was brought before at the

hearing. The Plaintiff argues that non payment of the money due to the Bank

becomes an unjust enrichment on the part of the Defendant. This was not pleaded

in the plaint or raised as an issue at the trial.

The principle of ‘unjust enrichment’ has roots in both Roman Dutch Law and

English Law. As far as the Roman Dutch Law is concerned, it has been stated in

Peiris v. Municipal Council, Galle 65 N.L.R. 555 AT 557,

Under the Roman law, an action would lie where one person had been

unjustly enriched to the detriment of another. Hence, different types of

condictiones and the actio de in rem verso were available, but no

general action based on undue enrichment existed.

In Roman –Dutch Law, the cases where an action would lie to recover

undue enrichment received extension. Many Dutch Jurists, considered

undue enrichment as a source of obligations and the various

condictiones by which such enrichment could be recovered are still part

of the modern law, though both in Roman and Roman Dutch Law, these

actions are essentially statements on the substantive law, cloaked under

terms of various actions.

8

The English Law approach to the principle of unjust enrichment is worthy to

consider here. In Banque Financiere de la Cite v. Parc (Battersea) Ltd (1999)

AC 221, 227, HL, Lord Steyn held that a Plaintiff must show three things to make

a claim under the ground of unjust enrichment.

1) The Defendant has been enriched.

2) The enrichment has been gained at the Plaintiff’s expense.

3) The circumstances of the enrichment are such that, it would be unjust to

let the Defendant keep the benefit.

This specifically refers to an instance which depicts the receipt of money and

service. In BP Exploration Co. (Libya) v. Hunt (1979) 1WLR 783, Robert Goff

J, held that,

Money has the peculiar character of a universal medium of exchange.

By, it is receipt, the recipient is inevitable benefited; and (subject to

problems arising from such matters as inflation, change of position and

the time value of money) the loss suffered by the Plaintiff is generally

equal to the Defendant’s gain, so that no difficulty arises concerning the

amount to be repaid.

In the present case, it is apparent to court that, the Plaintiff Bank has provided

money to the Defendant that constitute an amount of money out of the funds of

the Plaintiff. This becomes detrimental to the Plaintiff, if the Defendant evades

the payment of money. At a failure to payment, the Defendant incurs a benefit

9

which is undue and unjust. But, the Plaintiff has not pleaded unjust enrichment in

the plaint.

Even though the argument on the unjust enrichment is not considered, the other

evidence of the Plaintiff’s witness establishes the plaintiff’s case.

I see no reason to interfere with the findings of the learned High Court Judge.

Appeal dismissed with cost fixed at Rs. 25,000/-

Judge of the Supreme Court

H.N.J Perera CJ

I agree

Chief Justice

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC, J.

I agree

Judge of the Supreme Court