1 S C Appeal (CHC) 43 / 2012

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal in terms of

section 5(1) of the High Court of the

Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No.

10 of 1996, against a judgment

pronounced by the High Court

exercising its jurisdiction under section

2 of the said Act.

S C Appeal (CHC) No. 43/2012

HC Colombo (Civil) 276/2007/ MR

1. Chandra Gunasekera,

No. 29,

Albert Crescent,

Colombo 07.

2ND DEFENDANT - APPELLANT

-Vs-

People’s Bank,

No. 75,

Sir Chiththampalam A Gardiner Mawatha,

Colombo 02.

2 S C Appeal (CHC) 43 / 2012

PLAINTIFF - RESPONDENT

Diyagama Mudiyanselage Duminda

Gunasekera,

No. 20,

Albert Crescent,

Colombo 07.

Chandima Jayasanka Govinna,

No. 46/4,

1st Lane,

Nidharshana Mawatha,

Galavilawatta,

Homagama.

DEFENDANT - RESPONDENTS

Before: Buwaneka Aluwihare PC J

Prasanna Jayawardena PC J

P. Padman Surasena J

Counsel: Harsha Soza PC with Rajindh Perera for the 2nd Defendant -

Appellant.

Kushan D’ Alwis PC with Kaushalya Nawarathne and Gihini

Yapa for the Plaintiff - Respondent.

Argued on: 26 - 03 - 2019

3 S C Appeal (CHC) 43 / 2012

Decided on: 11 - 10 - 2019

P Padman Surasena J

The Plaintiff - Respondent (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the

Plaintiff) filed the plaint relevant to this case in the Provincial High Court

of the Western Province against three Defendants who are the 2nd

Defendant - Appellant (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the Appellant

or the 2nd Defendant), and the Defendant - Respondents (hereinafter

sometimes referred to as the 1st Defendant and the 3rd Defendant

respectively).

The said plaint has been filed on the basis that a cause of action has

arisen against the said Defendants to recover a sum of Rs. 10, 000,000

(Ten million Rupees) from them together with interest thereon. It is the

position of the Plaintiff that the Defendants are obliged in law to pay the

said sum of money upon a guarantee bond dated 29-11-1994 produced

marked P 5. The said guarantee bond is a personal guarantee executed

by the Defendants in favour of the Plaintiff for the money due to the

Plaintiff bank from Wang Lanka Apparels (Pvt) Ltd.

The Plaintiff has taken steps to recover this money from the Defendants

as the said Wang Lanka Apparels (Pvt) Ltd has defaulted the amount of

money payable by it to the Plaintiff.

After the conclusion of the trial, learned Provincial High Court Judge had

held1 that the Plaintiff bank is entitled to the judgment against the 2nd

Defendant as prayed for in paragraphs (a) and (b) of the prayer to plaint.

1 By his judgment dated 26th April 2012.

4 S C Appeal (CHC) 43 / 2012

Arguments advanced by the learned President’s Counsel for the 2nd

Defendant - Appellant are twofold. In essence, they are as follows.

I. The learned High Court Judge has erred when he failed to

appreciate the position of the Appellant that no money whatsoever

is due to the plaintiff Bank from the Defendants on the guarantee

bond referred to above (P 5). It was the position of the Appellant

that she has paid Rs. 19,400,000 (19.4 million) to the Plaintiff as a

full and final settlement of all claims of the Plaintiff bank.

II. The learned High Court Judge had erred when he had accepted the

statement of accounts produced marked P 9(a) as proof of the fact

that a sum of money was due to the plaintiff from the said Wang

Lanka Apparels (Pvt) Ltd. The learned President’s Counsel for the

Appellant based this argument on the strength of the judgment in

the case of Agostinu Vs Kumaraswamy2.

At the outset, it must be stated here that the Appellant at no stage has

disputed either the execution of the guarantee bond (P 5) or her signing

as a guarantor in favour of the bank for a total liability of Rs. 10,

000,000. Indeed the Appellant has recorded this fact as an admission in

the trial.

The Appellant has also not disputed the fact that the Plaintiff bank had

granted among other facilities a block loan3 of Rs. 5,000,000. It is the

outstanding unsettled amount of this loan that the Plaintiff has sought to

recover in this proceeding.

2 59 LLR 132. 3 Item No. 2 in the letter dated 29-08-1994 produced marked P 7.

5 S C Appeal (CHC) 43 / 2012

The Appellant while admitting that there were several credit facilities

granted in favour of the borrowing company, has taken up the position in

the trial that all monies due to the Plaintiff bank from the said borrowing

company Wang Lanka Apparels (Pvt) Ltd have been settled consequent

to a settlement reached between the said parties. It is therefore the

position of the Appellant that she was not liable to pay any further sum

to the Plaintiff bank upon the guarantee bond (P 5).

Although the Appellant had relied on many documents, none of those

documents point to the fact that the Plaintiff Bank had agreed with the

Appellant to include the credit facility of the block loan of Rs. 5000,000/=

(which is the subject matter of this case), in the settlement relied upon

by the Appellant. Thus, it would suffice for this Court to consider the

document produced from the file maintained by the Plaintiff Bank marked

2 V 6. It would be relevant to note that it was the learned Counsel who

appeared for the Defendants who had caused it to be produced when the

officer of the Plaintiff Bank was being cross-examined. Closer look at the

said document (2 V 6) shows clearly;

i. that the personal guarantee of the directors was in respect of the

block loan of Rs. 5000,000/= which is the first facility referred to in

the table thereof,

ii. that the Appellant’s endeavor was to get the mortgaged property

situated at Ottery estate at Dickoya released out of her personal

funds,

iii. that the Appellant had agreed to settle the aforesaid block loan of

Rs. 5,000,000/= in monthly instalments,

6 S C Appeal (CHC) 43 / 2012

iv. that there was a recommendation for the Plaintiff Bank to accept

Rs. 19,388,499.42 as a full and final settlement of the overdraft

facility.

Moreover, it is to be noted that the Appellant in the course of answering

the questions in cross-examination has stated as follows.

ප්‍ර : මහත්මියට තිබෙනවද එකම බේඛනයක් බහෝ ගරු අධිකරණයට ඉදිරිපත්ම

කරන්න ඔය ිලියන 19.4 බගව්බව් ඔය වැන් ලංකා සමාගබමන් අය විය යුතු

සියලුම පහසුකම් සම්ෙන්ධබයන් කියලා බපන්වන්න එක බේඛනයක්

තිබෙනවද ?

උ : බේඛනයක් නෑ. ෙැංකුබවන් කිව්වා.

It could therefore be seen that the repayment of the block loan relevant

to this case continued to be outstanding even after the settlement of Rs.

19, 400,000 (19.4 million) by the Appellant. It is to be further observed

that it is only to discharge the mortgage bonds produced marked 2V 1

and 2V 2 that the plaintiff has agreed to accept the said payment from

the Appellant. Further, it could also be seen that the Plaintiff Bank has

requested the Appellant to submit a viable repayment program through

the document produced marked P 12 for the re payment of the balance

debt of Wang Lanka Apparels (Pvt) Ltd.

Therefore, it is clear that the plaintiff bank had never agreed to accept

the said settlement of 19.4 million by the Appellant as a settlement of the

sum of money sought to be recovered upon the block loan relevant to the

instant case upon the guarantee bond (P 5).

7 S C Appeal (CHC) 43 / 2012

I would now turn to the second argument advanced by the Appellant. It

is the argument that the learned Provincial High Court Judge had

erroneously accepted the statement of accounts produced marked P 9(a)

as proof of the fact that a sum of money was due to the plaintiff from the

said Wang Lanka Apparels (Pvt) Ltd. In advancing this argument, the

learned President’s Counsel for the Appellant relied on the judgment in

the case of Agostinu Vs Kumaraswamy.4

Their Lordships in that case has held that ‘the only way of proving entries

in a banker’s book is by either producing the original or certified copies of

the entries therein as prescribed by section 90 C’ of the Evidence

Ordinance.

In evaluating the above argument, it would be necessary to first identify

the document, which must be proved in the instant case. The certificate

found at the bottom of the document admitted as evidence (P 9(a))

would be useful for the identification of the said document. The said

certificate states that it ‘is a true extract of the relevant entries relating to

the current account No. 205002 of Wang Lanka Apparels (Pvt) Ltd, as

appearing in the books of the People’s Bank’.

Thus, the original document which must be proved in the instant case

could be identified as ‘relevant entries relating to the current account No.

205002 of Wang Lanka Apparels (Pvt) Ltd., as appearing in the books of

the People’s Bank contained in ordinary books of the Bank made in the

usual and ordinary course of business kept in the custody of the Bank’.5

4 Supra. 5 Vide certificate provided at the bottom of P 9(a).

8 S C Appeal (CHC) 43 / 2012

It would be pertinent at this juncture to refer to some of the provisions

contained in the Evidence Ordinance regarding proof of documents.

Section 61 of the Evidence Ordinance provides that ‘the contents of

documents may be proved either by primary or by secondary evidence’.

Therefore, the above-mentioned document in the instant case may also

be proved either by primary or secondary evidence.

Section 62 states that ‘primary evidence means the document itself

produced for the inspection of the Court.’

In the instant case, the document admitted as evidence (P 9(a)) is not

the original document itself as reflected in the certificate found at the

bottom of it. (Said certificate states that it ‘is a true extract of the relevant

entries relating to the current account No. 205002 of Wang Lanka

Apparels (Pvt) Ltd, as appearing in the books of the People’s Bank’). As

the document (P 9(a)) is not the original document itself, it is clear in the

instant case that the original document itself as per section 62 has not

been produced.

Section 64 of the Evidence Ordinance states thus “documents must be

proved by primary evidence, except in the cases hereinafter mentioned”.

As no primary evidence has been adduced to prove the document relevant

to the instant case, the question I must focus on next is whether the

relevant document in the instant case, could be proved by secondary

evidence.

9 S C Appeal (CHC) 43 / 2012

In the run up to the above exercise it is important to note that some such

exceptions referred to in section 64 are found in section 65 of the Evidence

Ordinance. For the purpose of the case at hand, section 65(7) would be

relevant; it is as follows.

Section 65

“Secondary evidence may be given of the existence, condition, or contents

of a document in the following cases :-

1) ……

2) ……

3) ……..

4) ……..

5) ………

6) ………

7) When the originals consist of numerous accounts or other

documents which cannot conveniently be examined in court, and

the fact to be proved is the general result of the whole collection.”

It is interesting to note that section 65 has specifically provided that in

case (7) above, evidence could be given as to the general result of the

documents by any person who has examined them, and who is skilled in

the examination of such documents.6

It must be borne in mind that the block loan of Rs. 5,000,000/= has been

released to the borrower in November 1994 and the plaint in this case has

been filed in the year 2007. This means that the entries pertaining to this

loan account is recorded in the books maintained by the Plaintiff Bank

6 Last paragraph of section 65.

10 S C Appeal (CHC) 43 / 2012

over the period commencing from year 1994 to year 2007. If the trial

Court has to embark on any exercise of calculation of the remaining

current balance (sometimes with varying interest rates) of such complex

loan account spanning for such a long period, it would no doubt cause

serious inconvenience to Court. This Court has to underscore the

cumbersome nature of any such exercise by a trial Court. Such an exercise

would clearly be a situation described in section 65(7) of the Evidence

Ordinance.

Therefore, I am of the view that it is exactly to cater to that kind of

situation that section 65(7) has provided that evidence could be given by

any person who has examined such documents as to the general result of

such documents. Thus, I take the view that the relevant entries relating

to the current account No. 205002 of Wang Lanka Apparels (Pvt) Ltd., as

appearing in the books of the People’s Bank contained in ordinary books

of the Bank made in the usual and ordinary course of business kept in the

custody of the Bank could be proved by secondary evidence.

In the backdrop of the above conclusion, I must next embark on

examining the question whether the Plaintiff has proved the

aforementioned original document by secondary evidence as per the

relevant provisions of the Evidence Ordinance.

Section 63(1) of the Evidence Ordinance states as follows;

“Secondary evidence means and includes -

(1) certified copies given under the provisions hereinafter contained;

11 S C Appeal (CHC) 43 / 2012

(2) copies made from the original by mechanical process which in

themselves insure the accuracy of the copy, and copies compared

with such copies;

(3) copies made from or compared with the original;

(4) counterparts of documents as against the parties who did not

execute them;

(5) oral accounts of the contents of a document given by some

person who has himself seen it.“

As has been stated above, it is the statement of accounts produced

marked (P 9(a)) which has been produced in Court to prove the original

document which could be described as ‘relevant entries relating to the

current account No. 205002 of Wang Lanka Apparels (Pvt) Ltd., as

appearing in the books of the People’s Bank contained in ordinary books

of the Bank made in the usual and ordinary course of business kept in the

custody of the Bank’.7

Therefore, I would first consider whether the said statement of accounts

(P 9(a)) is a ‘copy made from or compared with the original’ document

to be proved in this case within the meaning of section 63(3).

Section 63(3) of the Evidence Ordinance states that a copy made from or

compared with the original would be secondary evidence.

The Evidence Ordinance itself has provided several illustrations to explain

further as to how section 63 must be put to use. The illustration (c) under

that section would be relevant to understand the underlying meaning of

the provision in section 63(3). It is as follows.

7 Vide certificate provided at the bottom of P 9(a).

12 S C Appeal (CHC) 43 / 2012

Illustration (c)

“A copy transcribed from a copy, but afterwards compared with the

original, is secondary evidence; but the copy not so compared is not

secondary evidence of the original, although the copy from which it was

transcribed was compared with the original”.

When scrutinizing the above illustration in the light of the provision in

section 63(3) of the Evidence Ordinance, it could clearly be seen that a

copy transcribed from and compared with the original would be secondary

evidence within the meaning of section 63(3).

The Chief Manager of the Special Assets Unit of the Plaintiff bank

Uttumalebbe Ali Mohomed testifying before the Provincial High Court has

confirmed in his evidence that the document marked P 9(a) was prepared

by him from the entries contained in the ordinary ledgers maintained and

kept in the custody of the Bank. It was on that basis that the said witness

has certified that the document marked P 9(a) is a statement containing

true extracts of the relevant entries relating to the current account No.

205002 of Wang Lanka Apparels (Pvt) Ltd, as appearing in the books of

the People’s Bank and that such entries are contained in the ordinary

books maintained in the usual and ordinary course of business kept in the

custody of the Bank.

On the above basis, it is not difficult to conclude that the document P

9(a) is a ‘copy made from or compared with the original’ document to be

proved in this case as P 9(a) clearly falls within the meaning of section

63(3) of the Evidence Ordinance. Such copy falls under the category of

secondary evidence (as per section 63) and hence is admissible under

section 65(7) of the Evidence ordinance.

13 S C Appeal (CHC) 43 / 2012

Although the above conclusion is sufficient to hold that the learned

Provincial High Court Judge is correct when he accepted the statement of

accounts produced marked P 9(a) as proof of the fact that a sum of

money was due to the plaintiff from Wang Lanka Apparels (Pvt) Ltd, I

would proceed to consider whether the document (P 9(a)) is also

admissible as secondary evidence under section 63(1).

Section 63(1) states thus ‘certified copies given under the provisions

hereinafter contained’. Section 90 C being a section appearing in the

Evidence Ordinance after section 63, would fall within the meaning of the

phrase “provisions hereinafter contained” appearing in section 63(1).

Section 90 C states as follows.

“Subject to the provisions of this Chapter a certified copy of any entry in

a banker’s book shall in all legal proceedings be received as prima facie

evidence of the existence of such entry, and shall be admitted as evidence

of the matters, transactions, and accounts therein recorded in every case

where, and to the same extent as, the original entry itself is now by law

admissible, but not further or otherwise.”

Before applying the provisions of the above section to decide on the

admissibility of a document under that section, one must be mindful of

the fact that the term “certified copy” referred to in this section has been

defined in the same chapter (chapter VI). It is as follows.

“Certified copy” means a copy of any entry in the books of a bank,

together with a certificate written at the foot of such copy that it is a true

copy of such entry; that such entry is contained in one of the ordinary

books of the bank, and was made in the usual and ordinary course of

14 S C Appeal (CHC) 43 / 2012

business; and that such book is still in the custody of the bank, such

certificate being dated and subscribed by the principal accountant or

manager of the bank with his name and official title.”

In the light of the above provisions, I must now examine whether the

document P 9(a) falls under the above definition of “Certified copy”.

It must be observed that the following certificate has been provided in

the document (P 9(a)) by the Chief Manager of the Special Assets Unit

of the Plaintiff bank.

“I, Uttumalebbe Ali Mohomed, Chief Manager - Special Assets Unit do

hereby certify that the foregoing statement is a true extract of the relevant

entries relating to the current account No. 205002 of Wang Lanka

Apparels (Pvt) Ltd., No. 86, Sea Beach Road, Colombo 11 as appearing in

the books of the People’s Bank and that such entries are contained in one

of the ordinary books of the Bank and were made in the usual and ordinary

course of business and that such books are still in the custody of the

Bank.”

The Defendants at no stage have challenged the skills of the Chief

Manager of the Special Assets Unit of the Plaintiff bank who has certified

to Court that the document (P 9(a)) is a document showing the general

result of all the entries in the originals consisting of numerous accounts.

Thus, I observe that the document (P 9(a)) certified as above by the

Chief Manager of the Special Assets Unit of the Plaintiff bank clearly is a

certified copy within the meaning of the term “certified copy” referred to

in section 90C as defined in chapter VI of the Evidence Ordinance.

15 S C Appeal (CHC) 43 / 2012

Therefore, I am of the opinion that the document (P 9(a)) is also a

‘certified copy’ within the meaning of section 63(1) of the Evidence

ordinance and hence becomes secondary evidence which is admissible

under section 65(7) of the Evidence ordinance.

For the foregoing reasons, I am of the opinion that the remaining current

balance of the loan account pertaining to the case at hand could be proved

by the document P 9(a) as secondary evidence of the ledgers maintained

by the Plaintiff Bank with regard to the loan relevant to this case, both as

a certified copy falling under section 63(1) and as a copy falling under

section 63(3).

Thus, I am of the opinion that the learned Provincial High Court Judge is

correct when he accepted the statement of accounts produced marked P

9(a) as proof of the fact that a sum of money was due to the plaintiff

from the said Wang Lanka Apparels (Pvt) Ltd.

The judgment in the case of Agostinu vs Kumaraswamy,8 is silent about

the definition of the term “certified copy” referred to in section 90C

appearing in chapter VI of the Evidence Ordinance. Although the said

judgment states, “The document produced is not a certified copy of the

entries in the bankers book; but a statement prepared with the aid of

those entries certified by the accountant of the bank”, it is not clear as to

the exact nature of the document produced in that case. Further, the said

judgment is not a judgment where the application of section 63(3) and

section 65(7) of the Evidence Ordinance has been considered. In those

circumstances, I am of the view that this Court should not incline to accept

the argument of the learned President’s Counsel for the Appellant on the

8 Supra.

16 S C Appeal (CHC) 43 / 2012

strength of the said judgment that it was erroneous for the learned

Provincial High Court Judge to have accepted the statement of accounts

produced marked P 9(a) as proof of the fact that a sum of money was

due to the plaintiff from Wang Lanka Apparels (Pvt) Ltd.

Thus, on the balance of probability of the evidence led in this case, I am

of the view that the learned Provincial High Court Judge is correct when

he had granted the Plaintiff the relief claimed by him in prayers (a) and

(b) of the plaint by his judgment dated 26th April 2012.

In these circumstances, I affirm the judgment of the Provincial High Court

dated 26th April 2012 and proceeds to dismiss this appeal with costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Aluwihare PC J

I had the benefit of reading the judgment of his Lordship, Justice Padman

Surasena. Although I am in agreement with the final conclusion reached

by his Lordship, with all due deference, I wish to disagree with the views

expressed by his Lordship regarding the admissibility of the document

marked P9 (a) and would like to set down my reasons for so doing.

The document marked and produced as P9(a), that was relied upon by

the Plaintiff Bank, sets out entries relating to the current account

17 S C Appeal (CHC) 43 / 2012

maintained by the Plaintiff Bank, of Wang Lanka Apparels (Pvt) Ltd during

the period stated therein. Being a statement of accounts relevant to the

impugned loan transaction, the Plaintiff produced P9 (a) in terms of

Section 90C of the Evidence Ordinance (under the Chapter “Banker’s

Books”).

At the hearing of the appeal, the Learned President’s Counsel on behalf

of the Appellant contended that the Learned Judge of the Commercial

High Court misdirected himself regarding the admissibility of P9(a) and

his contention being that the said document could not be admitted under

the provision of Section 90C. The Learned President’s Counsel further

contended that the Learned High Court Judge failed to apply the principle

laid down in the case of Agostinu v. Kumaraswamy 59 NLR 132,

regarding the proof of entries in bankers’ books.

I shall deal with the applicability of that case later in my judgment. I wish

to, however, at the outset address the circumstances under which

documents, that come within the definition of the term “banker’s books”

as defined in Section 90A, could become admissible.

The “bankers’ books” in terms of Section 90A of the Evidence Ordinance

(as amended) include, ledgers, day books, cash books, account books and

all other books used in the ordinary business of a bank and also

includes data stored by electronic, magnetic, optical or other means in an

information system in the ordinary course of business of a bank.

His Lordship Justice Surasena in considering the admissibility of P9 (a) has

referred to the general provisions relating to the admissibility of

documents under the Evidence Ordinance, namely Sections 61, 63 and

18 S C Appeal (CHC) 43 / 2012

Section 65 and has held that the document could be admitted as

secondary evidence under Section 65 (7) of the Evidence Ordinance.

Analysis of the Evidence Ordinance reveals, that the evidentiary

provisions in Chapter VI, (“Banker’s Books”) are stand-alone provisions

relating to documents dealing with bank transactions. Chapter VI is a

subject-specific evidentiary regime, which a party to a case can safely rely

on to produce documents falling within the meaning of “Banker’s books”

in section 90A without having to invoke the general provisions contained

in the Evidence Ordinance relating to documentary evidence, in particular

Sections 61, 63 and 65.

It would, in my view, be pertinent to refer to the historical background of

these provisions, so that any ambiguity as to the application of the

provisions in Chapter VI could be eliminated. In the scheme of the

Evidence Ordinance, the general rule is that the original document must

be produced to prove the contents of such document. The Evidence

Ordinance, however, provides certain exceptions to that rule. One such

exception is ‘public documents’ and the other is ‘banker’s books’. The

significance in the latter is that unlike public documents, banker’s books

are private documents. E.R.S.R. Coomaraswamy (Law of Evidence,

Vol II book I, at page 156) states;

“[N]evertheless, certain cogent, practical reasons have induced the

legislature to equate those private documents to the exceptional

position of public documents in the matter of their proof in the

Courts and to confer a limited immunity on the bankers.”

The immunity conferred on banker’s books is embodied in subsection 3 of

Section 130 of the Evidence Ordinance. Although not directly relevant to

19 S C Appeal (CHC) 43 / 2012

the present issue, for the sake of completeness, the provision is

reproduced below:

130 (3) - “No bank shall be compelled to produce the books

of such bank in any legal proceeding to which such

bank is not a party, except as provided by section

90D”.

The effect of this provision is that an original of a document, which falls

within the meaning of “banker’s books” can be produced under Section

90 D; effectively shutting out the mandatory application of the general

provisions. The rationale behind this provision is that any document which

falls within the meaning of “banker’s books” can be proved by producing

a certified copy as stipulated in Section 90C of the Evidence Ordinance.

The “stand-alone nature” of these provisions can be further gleaned from

the wording in Section 90C; which reads,

“Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, ‘a certified copy’

of any entry in a banker’s book shall in all legal

proceedings be received as prima facie evidence of the

existence of such entry, and shall be admitted as evidence of

the matters, transactions, and accounts therein recorded in

every case where, and to the same extent as, the original

entry itself is now by law admissible, but not further or

otherwise.” (emphasis added)

Thus, a “certified copy” of a document (banker’s books) in terms of

Section 90C,

20 S C Appeal (CHC) 43 / 2012

a) Constitutes prima facie evidence of the existence of

such entry, and

b) Shall be admitted as evidence of the matters stated,

as the original entry itself.

Furthermore, sub-section (6) of Section 65 which deals with the “cases in

which secondary evidence relating to documents may be given” removes

any conflict between the general provisions relating to admission of

documentary evidence and the special provisions referred earlier,

affecting the same matter.

Section 65 (6) reads thus;

Secondary evidence may be given […]

(6) “When the original is a document of which a certified copy is

permitted by this Ordinance or by any other law in force in Sri

Lanka to be given in evidence.

Chapter VI, has its roots in the English Bankers’ Books Evidence Act of

1879. Explaining the purpose of the said Act, Bankes LJ in Waterhouse

v. Wilson Baker (1924) AER at 775 stated that the Act was passed in

the interest of bankers in order to prevent the interference with their

business and needless exposure and trouble, and to facilitate the giving

in evidence of relevant material contained in their books. In the case of

Parnell v. Wood (1892) 66 L.T. 670, Lindley LJ stated that the Act

was passed mainly for the relief of bankers and to avoid inconvenience

to them by having to produce books in constant use in their

business (emphasis added).

21 S C Appeal (CHC) 43 / 2012

It is a very likely that Sir Fitzjames Stephen when drafting the Evidence

Ordinance for India and then Ceylon was mindful of the provisions of the

Bankers’ Books Evidence Act of England and decided to incorporate

parallel provisions of the said Act in our Evidence Ordinance for; such

provisions were lacking, in our jurisdiction at the time.

In his ‘commentary on the provisions of the Evidence Ordinance’,

explaining the evidentiary provisions relating to documentary evidence

(page 174-175) Sir Stephen comments “The provisions in the Act are all

made in order to meet real difficulties which arose in practice in

England, and which must of necessity arise over and over again, and

give occasion to litigation unless they are specifically provided for

beforehand.”

These comments taken alongside the provisions in the Evidence

Ordinance, clearly fortifies the argument that the provisions in the

Banker’s Books Chapter of the Evidence Ordinance operate independently

of the general provisions contained in the Evidence Ordinance relating to

proof of documents, in particular, Sections 63 and 65.

Argument on behalf of the Appellant with regard to the

admission of the document marked, P9 (a):

It was the contention of the Learned President’s Counsel that the

impugned document P9(a), was admitted in violation of the principle laid

down in the case of Agostinu v. Kumaraswamy (supra).

The only question that arose in that case was, whether entries in the

books of a banker have been proved in the manner prescribed in Section

90C of the Evidence Ordinance.

22 S C Appeal (CHC) 43 / 2012

In a brief judgement, Basnayake C.J. held that, “Section 90C does not

apply to the ‘statements produced’. The only way of proving

entries in a banker’s book is by either producing the original or

certified copies of the entries therein as prescribed by Section

90C” (emphasis added).

What was produced in Court in the case of Agostinu was a bare

statement, without any certification, and based on some entries which

had been certified by the accountant of the bank. It appears, then, that

although the original entries of the bank had been certified by the

accountant, the transcription of those entries that was produced in Court

carried no certification. Basnayake C.J. correctly held that the statement

was inadmissible in as much as it is a mandatory requirement under

Section 90C, that what is produced in Court should be certified as

stipulated in Section 90A of the Evidence Ordinance.

For clarity, the position in the case of Agostinu is reproduced below:

“The document produced is not a certified copy of the

entries in the banker’s book; but a statement prepared with

the aid of those entries certified by the accountant of the

bank.”

In the instant case, however, as opposed to the facts of the case of

Agostinu, the document marked P9(a) carries a certification to the

effect:

“I, Uttumalebbe Ali Mohamed, Chief Manager-Special Assets

Unit do hereby certify that the foregoing statement is a true

extract of the relevant entries relating to the current account

23 S C Appeal (CHC) 43 / 2012

No. 205002 of Wang Lanka Apparels (Pvt) Ltd., No. 86, Sea

Beach Road, Colombo 11 as appearing in the books of the

People’s bank and that such entries are contained in one of

the ordinary books of the Bank and were made in the usual or

ordinary course of business and that such books are still in the

custody of the Bank.”

Initially, P9 was marked subject to proof (proceedings of 08.03.2010).

Subsequently, however, U. Ali Mohamed, the very officer who placed the

certification at the foot of the document P9(a) had given evidence.

According to witness Mohamed, it was he who had the prepared

documents P9 and P9(a) with the aid of entries in the ledgers maintained

by the Bank. (Proceedings of 5.10.2010)

The above in my view is sufficient compliance with the certification

prescribed in Section 90A of the Evidence Ordinance and as such the

principle laid down in the case of Agostinu is not applicable to the instant

case.

I also must point out that the Appellant raised no objection when the

document was sought to be admitted in evidence by the Plaintiff Bank,

when witness Mohamed testified. Furthermore, every party if it is so

desired is afforded an opportunity to have the originals inspected, in terms

of Section 90E of the Evidence Ordinance, which right the Appellant could

have exercised before the trial Judge.

I am also of the view that this is a fit instance to apply the principle laid

down in the case of L. Edrick De Silva v L. Chandradasa De Silva, 70

24 S C Appeal (CHC) 43 / 2012

NLR 169. In the said case (at page 174) Chief Justice H.N.G Fernando

held:

“But where the plaintiff has in a civil case led evidence sufficient in

law to prove a factum probandum, the failure of the defendant to

adduce evidence which contradicts it adds a new factor in favour of

the plaintiff. There is then an additional “matter before the Court”,

which the definition in Section 3 of the Evidence Ordinance requires

the Court to take into account, namely that the evidence led by the

plaintiff is uncontradicted.”

When a party is afforded an opportunity to challenge any evidence

produced in Court, and does not exercise that right, it would be

reasonable for the Court to infer that the party did not do so, because the

party was not capable of challenging the same.

In conclusion, therefore, it is my considered view that P9(a) being a

document falling within the meaning of “Banker’s books” in Chapter VI,

need not be admitted as secondary evidence under any of the instances

in section 65 of the Evidence Ordinance, save for subsection (6) of that

section. Section 65 is exhaustive and secondary evidence can only be

produced in the instances referred to under that section. However, these

general provisions stand excluded by section 65 (6) which must be

interpreted as cross referring to special regimes within the Ordinance

namely, Chapter VI (Banker’s Books) and the provisions relating to public

documents (Section 74 and Section 78 of the Evidence Ordinance). The

reason being, on grounds of evidentiary policy, such documents are

elevated to the level of an original.

25 S C Appeal (CHC) 43 / 2012

For the reasons set out above, I reject the contention of the Learned

President’s Counsel for the Appellant that the document marked and

produced as P9(a) was wrongly admitted.

Apart from the foregoing, I agree with the conclusions reached by His

Lordship Justice Surasena that the Appeal should be dismissed with costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Prasanna Jayawardena, PC, J.

I have had the benefit of reading the draft judgments prepared by my brothers, Surasena J and Aluwihare, PC, J.

I am in respectful agreement with reasoning applied by Surasena J when he held that the sum of Rs.19,400,000/- paid by the defendant-appellant to the plaintiff-respondent bank was only a part-settlement of the amounts due then to the plaintiff-appellant bank from the defendant-appellant and that the plaintiff-respondent bank was entitled to have and maintain this action for the recovery of the balance monies which remained due and owing from the defendant-appellant after the sum of Rs.19,4000,000/- was paid. Accordingly, I am in respectful agreement with Surasena J’s conclusion that the judgment of the High Court must be affirmed and this appeal be dismissed.

However, I state with the great respect that I am unable to agree with the manner in which Surasena J has analysed the provisions of the law which relate to the admissibility of the document marked”P9(a)”.

It appears to me that this document was produced in evidence by the plaintiff-respondent bank as a certified copy of entries in a bankers’ book

26 S C Appeal (CHC) 43 / 2012

under and in terms of the provisions of Chapter VI of the Evidence Ordinance, which deal with “Bankers’ Books”.

In his separate judgment, Aluwihare,PC, J has admirably dealt with the principles applicable to the production of bankers’ books and certified copies of bankers’ books, under and in terms of the Evidence Ordinance. I am in respectful agreement with the views expressed by Aluwihare J on that subject.

In any event, as determined by both Surasena J and Aluwihare,PC, J, the learned High Court Judge correctly admitted the document marked “P9(a)” in evidence and regarded it as cogent evidence in support of the plaintiff-respondent’s cause of action seeking to recover the sum prayed for in the action from the defendant-appellant.

For the reasons set out above, I concur with my brothers that this appeal is to be dismissed, with costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

27 S C Appeal (CHC) 43 / 2012