1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

1. Union Bank of Colombo Ltd,

No. 15A, Alfred Place, Colombo 03.

Plaintiff

-Vs-

1. Emm Chem (Pvt) Ltd

No. 16, Flower Terrace, Colombo 07.

2. Kodduru Arachchige Don Adrin

Lakshman Perera, No. 25/4A, Jayapura Mawatha, Baddegana, Kotte South, Pitakotte.

3. Mailwaganam Surendran,

No. 53A, Maradana Road, Hendala, Wattala.

Defendants

AND NOW

In the matter of an Appeal to the Supreme Court from the judgment

SC Appeal No. CHC 22/11

case no: HC (Civil) 36/2007/MR

2

of the High Court of the Western Province Holden in Colombo (exercising Civil/Commercial Jurisdiction dated 01/06/2011) in terms of the provisions of the High Court of Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No.10 of 1996

1. Kodduru Arachchige Don Adrin

Lakshman Perera, No. 25/4A, Jayapura Mawatha, Baddegana, Kotte South, Pitakotte.

(2nd Defendant-Appellant)

-Vs-

1. Union Bank of Colombo Ltd,

No. 15A, Alfred Palce, Colombo 03.

(Plaintiff-Respondent)

2. Emm Chem (Pvt) Ltd

No. 16, Flower Terrace, Colombo 07. 3. Mailwaganam Surendran,

No. 53A, Maradana Road, Hendala, Wattala. (Defendant – Respondents)

3

Before:

Buwaneka Aluwihare PC. J

H.N.J. Perera J

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC. J

Counsel: Hiran De Alwis with Kalpa Virajith for the 2nd

Defendant- Appellant instructed by Prasanna

Ekanayake

Sandamali Munasinghe for the Plaintiff-Respondent

instructed by Nirosha Kannangara.

Argued on: 27/06/2017

Decided on: 07/03/2019

Aluwihare PC. J.,

The 2nd Defendant- Appellant (Hereinafter referred to as the 2nd Defendant) in this

case was the 2nd Defendant in the case originally filed at the Commercial High

Court. The initial case was filed by the Plaintiff-Respondent to recover a sum of Rs.

5, 162,341.53/= and the interest as claimed in the plaint dated 06/02/2007,

from the 2nd Defendant and the 3rd Defendant of the original case (hereinafter

4

referred to as the 3rd Defendant), who were the directors of the 1st Defendant

company.

At the request of the 2nd and 3rd Defendants, the Plaintiff-Respondent (Hereinafter

the “Plaintiff Bank”) extended certain credit facilities (including term loan

facilities, bank overdraft, lent and advanced monies etc.) to the 1st Defendant

company. The offer letter sent by the Plaintiff Bank in this regard dated 11/

03/1998 is marked “P5.” This Offer letter, inter alia, required a personal

guarantee from two directors for Rs. 7 million. The 2nd and 3rd Defendants, signed

and accepted the contract and executed a Joint and Several Personal Guarantee

(“P15”) on 16/03/1998.

In the year 2000, the 1st Defendant company began defaulting in its monthly

repayments which prompted the Plaintiff Bank to send reminders to settle the

overdue amounts. On 25th October 2000, by way of letter marked “P6”, another

director of the 1st Defendant Company appealed to the Plaintiff Bank “to consider

granting a suitable facility merely for survival of the organization so that we are

confident that we could commence settling your dues.” Considering this request,

the Plaintiff Bank sent another offer letter on 19/ 06/ 2001, marked “P7”,

restructuring the outstanding amount. The 2nd Defendant signed and accepted this

offer on 16/ 07/ 2001. Underneath his signature was also an assurance,

authenticated by his own signature, stating “We could settle according to our fax

dated 27/ 03/ 2001.”

5

However, the 1st Defendant company continued to fail in their timely repayments.

Subsequently, the Plaintiff Bank sent notices on 24/04/2002 and 08/07/2002 to

the 2nd and 3rd Defendants reminding them of the overdue payments and requiring

prompt settlement of the same. These letters are marked “P8” and “P9”. Again on

27/08/2002, through the letter of demand marked “P14”, the Plaintiff Bank

demanded the 1st Defendant Company to settle their outstanding amount. Similar

letters of demand were sent to the 2nd and 3rd Defendants which are marked as

“P14”, “P14(a)”, “P16”, and “P16(a)”. These letters were not responded to by the

Defendants and no attempts appears to have been made to settle the outstanding

sum, which gave rise to the cause of action in the Commercial High Court.

At the trial, the Plaintiff Bank abandoned their claim against the 1st Defendant

company and pursued only the claim against the 2nd and 3rd Defendants for the

recovery of the said sum on the strength of the guarantee bond executed on

16/03/1998 to pay all monies due and owing from the 1st Defendant company to

the Plaintiff Bank.

During the trial, the 2nd Defendant-Appellant resisted the claim on the basis that

the Plaintiff Bank’s cause of action has prescribed. He contended that, contrary to

what the Plaintiff Bank states, in 2001 the 1st Defendant company did not

reschedule the existing loan repayments but obtained a new credit facility. This

credit facility was provided by the Plaintiff-Bank without obtaining a personal

guarantee. The 2nd and 3rd Defendants only became sureties for the 1998 loan and

6

not for the loan obtained in 2001. Their guarantee bond having been executed in

1998, the claim for recovery of money in respect of the same in 2007 was

prescribed.

At the end of the trial, the learned High Court judge entered the judgment in the

favour of the Plaintiff Bank. The 2nd Defendant-Appellant aggrieved by the said

judgment invoked the appellate powers of this Court.

It is the contention of the 2nd Defendant-Appellant that the guarantee bond which

he executed along with the 3rd Defendant only extends to the 1998 loan. The

arrangement that took place in 2001 between the 1st Defendant Company and the

Plaintiff Bank was a new loan and not a continuation of the former. It was further

pointed out that for this last loan, (i.e., 2001) the Plaintiff Bank did not obtain any

personal guarantee nor was there any guarantee bond. The liability of the 2nd

Defendant-Appellant, therefore, if at all would only extend to the 1st loan obtained

in 1998. Even in respect of the said loan, the 2nd Defendant-Appellant disputed his

liability on two grounds; firstly, that the claim is prescribed and secondly that there

was no outstanding amount due from the Company. The 1998 loan, according to

the 2nd Defendant-Appellant, had been settled in full and the same is reflected in

the Bank ledgers (marked “P12”) As such, there was no liability accruing to the

2nd Defendant-Appellant to settle it as a surety. It was further submitted that the

Plaintiff-Bank has exploited the 1998 guarantee bond which was executed for a

specific loan and has extended its application for future uncertain monies.

7

The learned counsel for the 2nd Defendant, drew our attention to the case of Hatton

National Bank v Rumeco Industrial Limited (SC Appeal 99A/2009, SC minutes 8th

June 2011) and submitted that it has been held that guarantee bonds cannot be

enforced for future and antecedent debts. Even if that had been the case, it would

not help the Defendant since the 2001 credit facility was not a “new loan” but a

continuation of the former.

While there is no doubt about the accuracy of the said position of law, it must be

noted that the said position of law will apply to the present case, only if the 2001

credit facility was a ‘new loan’. If the 2001 credit facility was not a ‘new loan’ but

a continuation of the former, the position in the Rumeco case cannot be made

applicable to the present case. Concomitantly, if the 2001 credit facility was in fact

a continuation, then the 2nd Defendant-Appellant’s defence of prescription too will

become untenable.

As stated on page 713 of Paget’s Law of Banking (12th Edition) Courts must

consider the factual background known to the parties at or before the date of the

contract and ascertain the objective of the transaction when interpreting the

Guarantee Bond.

It is common ground that the 1st Defendant-Company obtained credit facilities in

the year 1998 from the Plaintiff Bank. It is also common ground that in or around

2000, the 1st Defendant Company defaulted in their payments. The arrangement

in 2001 takes place pursuant to the said act of defaulting and pursuant to the letter

8

of request forwarded by one director of the 1st Defendant company. In the said

letter, the director of the 1st Defendant-Company admitted that “a number of

Import Loans/Bills have fallen due and the Company Current Account with you

[the Plaintiff Bank] is also overdrawn excessively”. In the same letter, the 1st

Defendant-Company appealed to the Plaintiff-Bank to grant a “suitable facility

merely for the survival of the organization so that we [the 1st Defendant-company]

are confident that we could commence setting your dues in the following manner.”

Thereafter, the letter spells out three ways in which the 1st Defendant-Company

proposes to settle their dues, namely;

“(a) to pay a sum of Rs. 55, 000/= monthly out of the already accrued interest component for the first six months beginning in January 2001

(b) to pay monthly a sum of Rs. 55, 000/= together with reasonable amount from the capital of course at your discretion-commencing July 2001 till the completion of the outstanding.

(c) to continue to deposit whatever the collection of monies to our current account with you, to help reduce the overdrawn balance”.

Thus, it appears that although the said letter refers to ‘granting a facility’, what the

1st Defendant-company intended to seek was a series of ‘concessions’ to settle their

dues. The three methods quoted above could only be construed as proposing ways

to settle their outstanding amount. They do not disclose any intention to obtain a

‘new loan’. Moreover, it is inconceivable that a company—which by their own

admission—was “not in a position to import the requisite materials as the bank has

stopped granting any facilities, pending settlement of this outstanding” and “has

9

come to a grinding halt”, would venture to obtain further loans from the Plaintiff

Bank.

There is no dispute that it was the abovementioned request letter marked “P6” that

prompted the Plaintiff Bank to send a new offer letter in June 2001 marked “P7.”

In the said letter the Plaintiff Bank has clearly indicated that “We, the Union Bank

of Colombo, are pleased to restructure the outstanding pertaining to Emm Chem

(Pvt) Ltd on terms and conditions stipulated below.” According to the said letter,

the outstanding amount was restructured as “Term Loan 1” and “Term Loan 2”.

Even at the end of the letter “P7”, the Plaintiff Bank has stated “Please note that this

is the second re-schedulement of the outstandings and therefore request you to

strictly adhere to the rescheduled payments”.

It is also important to note that under the heading “Security”, the Plaintiff-Bank

has specifically referred to “personal guarantee for Rs. 7, 000, 000/= of Mr.

Lakshman Perera and Mr. Surenthiran together with net worth investments”. The

2nd Defendant-Appellant argued based on this reference that “P7” was a new and

distinct loan which required a new personal guarantee. In contrast, the Plaintiff-

Bank claimed that it was not a request for ‘fresh guarantee’ but a cross-reference

to the already existing guarantee bond executed in 1998. I am inclined to believe

that it was a cross-reference, as it specifically refers to the 2nd and 3rd Defendants

who were the sureties in the 1998 Guarantee Bond. If the Plaintiff-Bank was

requesting fresh guarantee, there would not have been any necessity to specifically

10

refer to the 2nd and 3rd Defendants’ names. The Plaintiff-Bank could have easily

followed the requirements in the Board Resolution marked “P4” which only

requires the signature of “any two directors of the company.”

Apart from these contentions, the 2nd Defendant-Appellant also sought to argue

that the 2001 facility was a new loan based on the ledger accounts marked “P12.”

In the said ledger account, there is an entry to the effect ‘full recovery of the loan

granted’. According to the 2nd Defendant-Appellant, this entry proves that the

1998 loan had been fully repaid and nothing was remaining. If the 1998 loan was

‘fully recovered”, the 2nd Defendant-Appellant argued that there could be no

continuation of the same. Thus, the 2001 loan could only be construed as a ‘new

loan’.

However, immediately underneath the said entry are two further entries to the

effect: “Term Loan 1” and “Term Loan 2”. When asked to explain the three entries,

Mr. Ned Gomez – Head of Operations of the Plaintiff-Bank, in his evidence stated

that the said entry “full recovery of the loan granted” was not made pursuant to

any physical money being deposited by the 1st Defendant company. Instead, it has

been made for accounting purposes and to cross-reflect that it was the same

outstanding amount of the aforesaid loan, that had been rescheduled as “Term

Loan 1” and “Term Loan II”. He also gave evidence that no cash was released with

regard to “Term Loan I” and “Term Loan II”. All these clearly indicate that,

contrary to what is claimed by the 2nd Defendant, the 2001 arrangement was not

11

a new loan. What the 2nd Defendant-Appellant attempts to characterize as a ‘new

loan’ is the amount which the 1st Defendant-Company was anyway duty bound to

repay.

Throughout trial, the two witnesses on behalf of the Plaintiff-Bank have

consistently maintained that no new loan was granted to the 1st Defendant-

Company and that the action was instituted to recover the outstanding amount

with interests of the same continuing loan.

The 2nd Defendant-Appellant’s position is that “Term Loan I” and “Term Loan II”

were two new loans granted to the 1st Defendant-Company and one for which the

Plaintiff-Bank never obtained fresh security. It would be difficult to believe that, in

the circumstances where there had been default and delay in paying the monies

that were due, the plaintiff bank would have even considered making the

restructured banking facilities available without security of the existing bank

guarantee.

All these factors cumulatively indicate that there was only one continuing loan—

i.e. the loan obtained in 1998. It was the same loan for which the 2nd Defendant-

Appellant along with the 3rd Defendant had signed a guarantee bond.

I now turn to the issue of prescription. The 2nd Defendant-Appellant claims that

the Plaintiff-Bank cannot maintain this action as the Guarantee Bond was entered

into in 1998 –9 years prior to the institution of the action. However, the material

point at which the time begins to run is not the date of the execution of the

12

guarantee bond, but “the date on which the payment became due” [ See. Hatton

National Bank Limited v Sellers Sports (Pvt) Ltd and others (SC Appeal (CHC) No.

6/97(F)) and Parr’s Banking Co. Ltd v Yates [1898] 2 QB 460, CA]

The Plaintiff-Bank instituted the action for recovery of money on 6th February

2007. As per the second offer letter “P7”, the rescheduled loan payments were to

be made by the 30th November 2001, which is well within the 6 year period under

section 7 of the Prescription Ordinance. Moreover, we have before us another

letter dated 24th April 2002, marked “P8” where it is stated that the Plaintiff-Bank

has further extended the time to April 2002 on the request of the 2nd Defendant-

Appellant. It states “As per Offer Letter dated 19/ 06/ 01, the balloon payment

was to be made by November 2001 but on your specific request we changed it to

April 2002.” This also indicate that the action has been instituted before the

expiration of 6 years. In any event, in terms of “P7”, the Plaintiff-Bank has reserved

the right to make demand to make the payment if circumstances arise. They sent

letters of demand dated 27th August 2002 to all the Defendants in the case. Having

failed to secure their payments at each of these points, the Plaintiff-Bank resorted

to legal action on 6th February 2007. It is clear that 6 years have not lapsed either

from the point at which the payment became due or from the day the letter of

demand was not honored. Therefore, the action is not prescribed.

The 2nd Defendant-Appellant also claimed that the Plaintiff Bank caused a material

variation of the initial loan agreement with the 1st Defendant-Company by

13

agreeing to provide further time to settle their outstanding amount by the second

offer letter marked “P7.” It was his contention that according to accepted legal

norms, granting such extension results in discharging the guarantor from the

guarantee.

Undoubtedly, equitable principles could intervene to protect a guarantor by

discharging him from liability under the guarantee in a number of situations when

there is evidence that his rights are prejudiced by the Creditor’s conduct. This

include, as correctly contended by the 2nd Defendant-Appellant, situations of

granting further time which amount to material variations of the initial contract.

(Paget’s Law of Banking, 12th Edn, p. 705). However, the mere fact of granting

further time does not at all times amount to a situation warranting discharge. The

material element is to see whether such extension/ variation of the contract was

arrived at without the consent or the knowledge of the guarantor. Additionally,

there must also be evidence demonstrating that such variations were substantial

and caused prejudice to the rights of the guarantor. In Bank of India v Trans

Continental Commodity Merchants Ltd. [1983] 2 Lloyd’s Rep 298, CA it was held

that an ‘irregular’ conduct will not per se amount to a material variation that

discharges the guarantor from his bond.

In the present instant the 2nd Defendant-Appellant claims that providing an

extension of time to settle the payments amount to a material variation that

discharged the guarantor. However, this change, as reflected in “P7” was arrived

14

with the full knowledge of the 2nd Defendant-Appellant. The 2nd Defendant-

Appellant was a director of the 1st Defendant Company and was one of the two

directors who authorized, signed and accepted the terms of the initial loan. He was

a director of the said company during the time the Company sent “P6” to the

Plaintiff-Bank requesting a re-structure of the outstanding amount. Moreover, he

has himself signed and accepted the second offer letter marked “P7” and has

assured by way of an extra line that “they could settle according to the fax dated

27/03/2001”. Furthermore, the Plaintiff-Bank has produced the document “P8”

which is a letter addressed to the 2nd Defendant-Appellant on 24th April 2002

reminding him to make arrangements to settle the overdue amount. In the said

letter it is clearly stated “As per Offer Letter dated 19/ 06/ 01, the balloon payment

was to be made by November 2001 but on your specific request we changed it to

April 2002. Further if you do recall the payment schedule was created by

consulting you and according to the inflow projected by you”. In these

circumstances, I do not think the agreement to extend time for settlement was

arrived outside the knowledge of the 2nd Defendant-Appellant. The variation was

mutually and openly agreed between the parties.

In this regard, it must be noted that it is the general practice of commercial banks

to “preserve the guarantor’s liability in the event of the bank giving time or any

indulgence to the principal debtor” (Paget’s Law of Banking, 12th Edn, page. 722)

This preservation, if intended, would be communicated clearly to the stake holders.

In this instant, the Plaintiff-Bank has made very clear reference to the existing

15

personal guarantee of Mr. Lakshman Perera and Mr. Surenthiran in the second

offer letter marked “P7.” This indicate that the 2nd Defendant-Appellant’s liability

was preserved when the loan was restructured in 2001.

Furthermore, I also make it a point to state that the 2nd Defendant-Appellant cannot

approbate and reprobate the status of the agreement arrived in 2001. If he

contends that the 2001 facility was a ‘new loan’, he cannot at the same time

maintain that there was a material variation of the former loan agreement. By

taking the position that the Plaintiff-Bank materially altered the contract by

granting an extension of time for repayment, the 2nd Defendant-Appellant has

inadvertently conceded that no new loan was obtained in 2001.

Additionally, the 2nd Defendant-Appellant disputed receiving the letter of demand

on the basis that the Plaintiff-Bank had sent it to the wrong address. Several

authorities were cited before us to illustrate that a cause of action would not accrue

to the creditor without first a demand being made. However, I observe that the

circumstances in the present case are somewhat different to those in the said

authorities. In L B Finance v Manchanayake (2000) 2 SLR 142, there was no

demand at all made by the plaintiff to honour the obligation to pay. In Seylan Bank

Ltd v Inter Trade Garments (Pvt) Ltd (2005) 1 SLR 80, the Supreme Court

concurred in Justice Nagalingam’s observation in Sivasubramaniam v Alagamuthi

(1950) 53 NLR 150 that “under our common law a demand is essential before it

could be said that a cause of action accrues to a creditor to sue the debtor”.

16

However, in Seylan Bank Ltd. case, there was no dispute that a written demand

was made. The question was to see at which point a cause of action would arise

when the contract does not stipulate a deadline for repayment—whether it was at

the point the loan was given or when the demand for repayment was made.

Accordingly, it was held that where there is no specific time for repayment, the

six-year period will not run till a demand is made from the debtor.

In the present case, the Plaintiff-Bank has expressly reserved the right to demand

repayment where necessary. This is reflected in both “P5” (the first offer letter sent

in 1998) and in “P7” (the second offer letter rescheduling the 1998 outstanding

amount). Accordingly, the Plaintiff-Bank did in fact make a demand. The letters

of demand, which the Plaintiff Bank sent to the 1st Defendant-Company, 2nd

Defendant-Appellant and the 3rd Defendant dated 27th August 2002 and are

marked “P14” and “P16”. The Registered postal receipts are also attached marked

“P14(a)” and “P16(a)”. I do not observe any ground to challenge the validity of

the demand that has been made. A working definition for a valid demand was

given in Re Colonial Finance, Mortgage, Investment and Guarantee Corp; Ltd

(1905) 6 SRNSW 6 where it was held that “ there must be a clear intimation that

payment is required to constitute a demand; nothing more is necessary, and the

word ‘demand’ need not be used; neither is the validity of a demand lessened by its

being clothed in the language of politeness. It must be of a peremptory character

and unconditional, but the nature of the language is immaterial provided it has

this effect”. (p.9) All these characteristics are reflected in the letters of demand sent

17

to the Defendants. The letter clearly intimates the total sum due to be paid, the

credit facility from which the payment stems, the liability of the Defendants and

the time before which the payment should be made.

The Defendant-Appellant claims that there was no letter of demand since it has

been sent to the wrong address. However, the Plaintiff-Bank has stated that they

forwarded all correspondence and letters to the Defendant-Appellant’s last known

residence in Nugegoda. In March 2001, the Defendant-Appellant had signed and

accepted “P7” (the offer letter) which was sent to the same address. As such, when

the Plaintiff-Bank sent the letter of demand by way of registered post in 2002 to

the same address, they had no reason to believe that the Defendant-Appellant may

have changed the address within one year. In those circumstances, I am unable to

agree with the 2nd Defendant-Appellant’s contention that there was no demand

giving rise to the present cause of action.

The final point raised on behalf of the 2nd Defendant-Appellant was that the

Plaintiff-Bank attempts to stretch the applicability of the 1998 Guarantee Bond to

future debts of the company. However, as I have already addressed, there was only

one continuing loan since 1998. In 2001, on the request of the 1st Defendant-

Company, the Plaintiff-Bank only rescheduled the outstanding amount and

granted further time to settle. They did not grant a new loan. In those

circumstances, the guarantee bond which the 2nd Defendant-Appellant signed in

1998 continues to be operative.

18

As a general rule, contracts of guarantee are strictly construed in favor of the

surety. As Lord Campbell said in Blest v Brown (1862) 4 De GF & J 367 at 376: “It

must always be recollected in what manner a surety is bound. You bind him to the

letter of his engagement. Beyond the proper interpretation of that engagement you

have no hold upon him. He receives no benefit and no consideration. He is bound

therefore merely according to the proper meaning and effect of the written

engagement that he has entered into.”

In terms of the guarantee bond marked “P15”, the 2nd Defendant-Appellant has

agreed to repay the “loan together with interest thereon at such rates or rates as

may be charged by [the Plaintiff-Bank] and all legal and other charges and

expenses whether taxable or not occasioned by or incidental to the enforcement of

this or any other security for the said Loan or the recovery thereof”.

In the letter of demand marked “P16”, the Plaintiff-Bank has demanded the 2nd

Defendant-Appellant to pay “a sum of Rupees Five Million One Hundred and Sixty

Two Thousand Three Hundred and Forty One and Cents Fifty Three (Rs. 5, 162,

341. 53) together with the interest thereon, all legal and other charges and

expenses up to the date of settlement in full.” The letter also specifies that the said

sum was due as at 20th August 2002 for having failed to settle their credit facility.

Accordingly, the Plaintiff-Bank has not used the Guarantee Bond in respect of any

‘new’ or ‘future’ debt. The Guarantee Bond remains valid and binding on the

19

sureties since the original loan obtained by the 1st Defendant-company was never

settled.

In the totality of the aforesaid circumstances, I see no reason to interfere with the

findings of the learned High Court Judge.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

JUSTICE H.N.J PERERA

I agree

CHIEF JUSTICE

JUSTICE VIJITH K. MALALGODA PC.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT