1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Special Leave to Appeal in terms of Article 154(P) of the Constitution read with Section 9 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990.

K.H. Dayananda, Revenue Inspector, Dehiwala – Mt. Lavania Municipal Council, Dehiwala

- Complainant

Vs.

Ceylon Electricity Board, No. 75/1, Aththidiya Road, Ratmalana

- Defaulter AND Ceylon Electricity Board, No. 75/1, Aththidiya Road, Ratmalana

- Defaulter/Appellant Vs. K.H. Dayananda, Revenue Inspector, Dehiwala – Mt. Lavania Municipal Council, Dehiwala

- Complainant/Respondent

SC Appeal 118/2013

SC/(Spl)LA 64/2013

HCMCA 106/2010

MC (Mt. Lav.) 4190/S/09

2

AND NOW BETWEEN Ceylon Electricity Board, No. 75/1, Aththidiya Road, Ratmalana

- Defaulter/Appellant/Appellant Vs. K.H. Dayananda, Revenue Inspector, Dehiwala – Mt. Lavania Municipal Council, Dehiwala

- Complainant/Respondent/Respondent

Before: Priyantha Jayawardena, PC, J

Murdu N.B. Fernando, PC, J

S Thurairaja, PC, J

Counsel: Uditha Egalahewa, PC with Ranga Dayananda for the Defaulter-Appellant-

Appellant.

W. Dayaratne, PC with R. Jayawardena for the Complainant-Respondent-

Respondent.

Argued on: 07th June, 2019

Decided on: 17th September, 2020

Priyantha Jayawardena, PC, J

Facts of the case

This is an appeal to have the judgment of the High Court of Western Province holden in Colombo

[hereinafter referred to as the “High Court”] affirming the judgment of the Magistrate’s Court

ordering to pay the Trade Tax and Service Charge imposed on the appellant set aside.

3

The complainant-respondent-respondent [hereinafter referred to as the “complainant”] is the

Revenue Inspector of the Dehiwala-Mt. Lavinia Municipal Council. The defaulter-appellant-

appellant [hereinafter referred to as the “appellant”] is the Ceylon Electricity Board.

The complainant had instituted proceedings against the appellant in the Magistrate’s Court of Mt.

Lavinia in terms of section 136(1)(b) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, No.15 of 1979 (as

amended), by filing a written report.

In the said report, the complainant had stated that the appellant had failed to pay Rupees Five

Thousand Seven Hundred and Fifty (Rs. 5,750/-) as the annual Trade Tax and Rupees Two

Thousand and Five Hundred (Rs. 2,500/-) as Service Charge for the year 2008 for using the

premises for commercial purposes situated within the administrative limits of the Municipal

Council in terms of section 247B of the Municipal Councils Ordinance No. 29 of 1947 as amended

by the Municipal Councils (Amendment) Act No. 42 of 1979 [hereinafter referred to as “Municipal

Councils Ordinance”].

Upon the receipt of summons, the appellant had appeared in the Magistrate’s Court and raised the

objection that section 247B of the Municipal Councils Ordinance was applicable only for premises

carrying on a trade and that the appellant was only using the premises under reference as a Regional

Engineer’s Office. The appellant had stated that in the circumstances, it is not liable to pay a Trade

Tax and prayed to be discharged from the aforesaid proceedings.

Responding to the said objections, the complainant had stated that the appellant was using the

premises under reference to conduct “trading activities”. The complainant had also stated that the

appellant had paid the Trade Tax and Service Charge for the said premises until the year 2007

without any objection.

Having heard the parties, the learned Magistrate had overruled the said objections raised by the

appellant and had delivered a judgment directing the appellant to pay a sum of Rupees Five

Thousand Seven Hundred and Fifty (Rs. 5,750/-) as Trade Tax and Rupees Two Thousand Five

Hundred (Rs. 2,500/-) as Service Charge and ordered the same to be recovered as a fine in terms

of section 247B (4) of the Municipal Councils Ordinance.

The appellant had deposited the aforesaid total sum of Rupees Eight Thousand Two Hundred and

Fifty (Rs.8,250/-) at the Magistrate’s Court of Mt. Lavinia but had filed an appeal in the High

Court to have the said judgment set aside, inter alia, on the following grounds:

4

a) the [judgment] of the learned Magistrate was contrary to law,

b) the learned Magistrate failed to analyse and interpret section 247B of the said Ordinance

according to law,

c) the learned Magistrate failed to take cognizance of the fact that the Regional Engineer’s

Office is merely an office and not a place where any business activity or industry or any

activity which yields any profit is carried out, and

d) the learned Magistrate erred in law by determining that the decision in Ceylon Electricity

Board v. A.D.A. Wijesuriya SC minutes 5th November, 2011 was not binding on him.

Having heard the parties, the High Court had affirmed the aforesaid judgment of the learned

Magistrate and dismissed the appeal. The said judgment of the High Court held inter alia that;

a. the said premises were liable to pay a Trade Tax and Service Charge as it came under Item

No. 02, i.e. storing office equipment in the premises, of the Regulations issued by Gazette

No. 1542 dated 19th March, 2008

b. the judgment in Ceylon Electricity Board v A.D.A. Wijesuriya SC Minutes 5th November,

2011 has no application to the instant appeal as it was a settlement entered according to the

facts and circumstances of the said case, and

c. the appellant failed to establish that it was not liable to pay the Trade Tax and Service

Charge on the premises in question.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid judgment of the High Court, the appellants sought special leave

to appeal from this court to have the said judgment set aside.

Having heard the submissions of the parties, this court granted special leave to appeal on the

following questions of law:

(a) Did the Hon. Provincial High Court judge misdirect herself in interpreting the section 247B

of the said Ordinance as applicable to the petitioner?

(b) Did the Hon. Provincial High Court judge err in law when she came to the finding that the

petitioner was carrying on a trading activity at the Regional Engineer’s Office, Ratmalana

which was liable to pay Trade Tax in terms of section 247B of the said Ordinance read

with the Government Gazette Notification bearing No. 1542?

On 20th September, 2013 this court, with the consent of the appellant, had directed the complainant

to produce material to show that the premises under reference are being used for a commercial

5

purpose. Consequently, the complainant had filed receipts issued to consumers by the appellant

for the payment of electricity bills and obtaining of electricity connections at the premises under

reference.

The applicability of the judgment delivered in Ceylon Electricity Board v A.D.A. Wijesuriya SC

Minutes dated 5th November, 2011 in respect of a previous settlement entered by the parties in

the Supreme Court relating to another matter will not be considered in this judgment as leave was

not granted in respect of the applicability of the said judgment in the instant appeal.

Submissions of the appellant

The learned President’s Counsel for the appellant submitted that in terms of section 247B of the

English language text [hereinafter referred to as the “English text”] of the Municipal Councils

Ordinance, a Municipal Council is conferred with the power to impose and levy a tax on “any

trade” carried on within its administrative limits.

However, section 247B of the Sinhala language text [hereinafter referred to as the “Sinhala text”]

of the Municipal Councils Ordinance states that the Municipal Council has the power to impose a

tax on any “කර්මාන්තය” carried on within its administrative limits.

The learned President’s Counsel submitted that the word “කර්මාන්තය” means an “industry” in the

English language and not a “trade”. Thus, it was submitted that there is an inconsistency between

the Sinhala and English texts of the said section.

It was further submitted that in terms of Article 23(1) of the Constitution, the text in the Official

language shall prevail over the text in the English language when there is an inconsistency. Thus,

Sinhala being the official language in terms of Article 18 of the Constitution, at the time of

enactment of section 247B of the said Ordinance, the Sinhala text of the Municipal Councils

Ordinance should prevail.

It was further submitted that section 247B of the said Ordinance only confers power on a Municipal

Council to impose and levy a tax on any “කර්මාන්තය”, meaning an industry in the English

language, carried on within its local limits of administration and not on a trade.

In the circumstances, the learned President’s Counsel submitted that a “කර්මාන්තය” (meaning an

industry) was not carried on at the premises under reference as it was not used to manufacture

6

goods. Thus, it was submitted that the appellant is not liable to pay a Trade Tax under section 247B

of the said Ordinance.

In support of the said submission, learned President’s Counsel for the appellant cited the case of

Crest Gems Ltd v The Colombo Municipal Council [2003] 1 SLR 370 which held:

“The activity of the petitioner is a trade or a “Veladama” in Sinhala and does not

fall within the meaning of the word “Karmanthaya”; since the petitioner does not

manufacture in the said place, no tax under section 247B could be levied.”

Moreover, the learned President’s Counsel for the appellant submitted that certain items including

Item No. 2 of the said Gazette are not industries (“කර්මාන්තය”) as stated in section 247B of the

said Ordinance. Thus, it was contended that the Regulations published in the said Gazette is ultra

vires the said section of the said Ordinance and must be struck down.

It was submitted that the High Court has erred in law in holding that the appellant was liable to

pay Trade Tax in terms of section 247B of the said Ordinance and the Regulations published in

the said Gazette in respect of Regional Engineer’s Office on the basis that a trading activity is

being conducted in the said premises.

Further, it was submitted that the notice issued by the complainant to the appellant to recover Trade

Tax should be declared null and void as an “industry” in terms of the Sinhala text of section 247B

of the Municipal Councils Ordinance is not being conducted at the Regional Engineer’s office.

Submissions of the complainant

The learned President’s Counsel appearing for the complainant submitted that even though the

appellant claimed that the said premises are being used as an administrative office, it had in fact

been used to generate income for the appellant. It was submitted that the said premises have been

used as an office where consumers of electricity can pay their bills and obtain new electricity

connections.

It was further submitted that, the Regulations published in the Gazette No. 1542 dated 19th March,

2008 had been published in terms section 247B of the Municipal Councils Ordinance. Hence, the

said Gazette is not ultra vires section 247B of the Municipal Councils Ordinance as amended.

7

Furthermore, it was submitted that, in terms of the Regulations published under section 247B of

the said Ordinance, the appellant’s premises under reference are subject to tax under Item No.2

which refers to an office storing and/or selling office equipment, Item No.68 which refers to offices

used for commercial purposes, and/or Item No.205 which refers to commercial entities which do

not pay licensed taxes or taxes for maintaining a commercial business.

In the circumstances, it was submitted that the said premises of the appellant fall within the Sinhala

text of section 247B of the Municipal Councils Ordinance and the Regulations published in the

Gazette No. 1542 dated 19th March, 2008.

The learned President’s Counsel for the complainant further submitted that there is no

inconsistency between the word “කර්මාන්තය” in the Sinhala text and the word “trade” in the

English text of section 247B of the said Ordinance. Thus, the premises of the appellant can be

taxed under section 247B of the said Ordinance under the Regulations published in the Gazette

No. 1542 dated 19th March, 2008.

Main issues to be considered in the instant appeal

The issues that need to be considered in this appeal are:

(a) whether the Sinhala text of 247B of the Municipal Councils Ordinance prevails over the

English text,

(b) whether the Sinhala text is applicable to the appellant if the appellant is not using the

premises under reference for a purpose within the meaning of the said section,

(c) whether there is an inconsistency between the Sinhala and English texts of section 247B of

the Municipal Councils Ordinance,

(d) whether the Regulations published under section 247B of the said Ordinance are ultra vires,

and;

(e) whether the appellant is liable to pay Trade Tax and Service Charges for the premises under

reference under section 247B of the Municipal Councils Ordinance.

8

Is there an inconsistency between the Sinhala and English texts of section 247B of the

Municipal Councils Ordinance?

In the Magistrate’s Court, the appellant had taken up the position that it was not liable to pay taxes

under section 247B of the Municipal Councils Ordinance as the premises under reference have

only been used as an administrative office and not as a place of business.

Further, the appellant submitted that section 247B of the Sinhala text of the Municipal Councils

Ordinance refers to a “කර්මාන්තය” which means an “industry” in the English language. Hence, it

was contended that the appellant is not engaged in an “industry” in the premises under reference.

Moreover, section 247B (1) in the Sinhala text of the Municipal Councils Ordinance confers power

on the Municipal Council to impose and levy a tax on a “කර්මාන්තය” while the English text

stipulates to levy a tax on any “trade”. Thus, it was contended by the appellant that there is an

inconsistency between the Sinhala and English texts of section 247B of the said Ordinance.

In the circumstances, it is necessary to consider which text shall prevail over the other.

The Municipal Councils Ordinance No. 29 of 1947 was enacted in the English Language. Section

247 of the said Ordinance was amended on 25th June, 1979 by introducing sections 247A, 247B,

247C, 247D and 247E by the Municipal Councils Ordinance (Amendment) Act No. 42 of 1979.

Thus, the provisions of the 1978 Constitution prior to being amended by the 13th Amendment apply

to the section 247 as amended.

The Amendment to section 247 of the said Ordinance does not stipulate which text shall prevail

over the other. However, at the time of the enactment of the aforementioned Amendment, the

Official Language of Sri Lanka was Sinhala in terms of Article 18 of the Constitution. Further,

Article 23(1) of the Constitution stated that the text in the Official Language should prevail in the

event of any inconsistency between any two texts. In light of the above, I am of the view that the

Sinhala text of the Municipal Councils Ordinance shall prevail over the English text.

Hence, the Sinhala text of the Municipal Councils Ordinance will be considered first in this

judgment.

9

What does “කර්මාන්තය” in section 247B mean?

The Sinhala text of the said section 247B (1) of the said Ordinance states:

“යම් මහ නගර සභාවක පාලන සීමා තුළ කර ගගන යම් කර්මාන්තයක් ගවනුගවන් බද්දක්

නියම ගකාට අය කිරීම් ඒ මහ නගර සභාව විසින් කල හැකිය.” [Emphasis added]

It was submitted by the appellant that the premises under reference were not used for the purposes

of a “කර්මාන්තය” which means for the purposes of an “industry”. Hence, the appellant is not liable

to pay the taxes imposed by the complainant as the Sinhala text prevails over the English text of

the section 247B of the said Act.

Thus, it is necessary to interpret the word “කර්මාන්තය” in section 247B of the said Ordinance.

Application of the principles of Literal Interpretation to interpret the word “කර්මාන්තය”

According to the principles of literal interpretation, if a word or phrase has not acquired a technical

meaning, it needs to be used in its literal meaning. This rule is generally applied when a word or

phrase has not been defined in the Statute itself.

Maxwell on The Interpretation of Statutes, 12th Edition, at page 81 states:

“The first and most elementary rule of construction is that it is to be assumed that

the words and phrases of technical legislation are used in their technical meaning

if they have acquired one, and otherwise in their ordinary meaning”.

[Emphasis Added]

The word “කර්මාන්තය” is not defined in the Municipal Councils Ordinance. Thus, it is necessary

to consider the ordinary meaning of the word “කර්මාන්තය” by applying the principles of literal

interpretation.

The “Buddhadasa Hewage Sinhala-English Dictionary”, at page 234, states that the word

“කර්මාන්තය” means “business”, “industry” and “trade” in the English language.

Further, in “සිංහල විශ්වක ෝෂය”, 6th Edition, compiled by the Department of Cultural Affairs and

published by the Department of Government Printing, at page 396, the word “කර්මාන්තය” is

defined as follows:

10

“ ර්මාන්තය යන පදයට විවිධ නිර්වචන ඉදිරිපත් ක ාට ඇත. ඇතැම් විට එය නිෂ්පාදන

කිරීම යන අර්ථකයන් කයකේ. තවත් විකට මිනිසාකේ සයලුම ආර්ි ටයුතු ර්මාන්ත

වශකයන් හැඳින්ීමට උත්සාහකෙන ඇත.

.........

මිනිසාකේ ආර්ි ටයුතු ඒවාකේ ස්වභාවය අනුව වර්ෙ ළ හැකිය: ප්‍රාථමි ර්මාන්ත

(primary industries), ේවිතීය ර්මාන්ත (Secondary industries) හා තෘතීයි ර්මාන්ත

(tertiary industries) වශකයනි.

.........

ප්‍රාථමි අිංශකයන් නිෂ්පාදනය ක කෙන ද්‍රවය උපකයෝගී ක ාටකෙන මිනිසාට අවශය

භාණ්ඩ ස ස් ෙන්කන් ේවිතීය අිංශයයි. .......... ප්‍රාථමි ටයුතුවලටත් ේවිතීය

ටයුතුවලටත් අවශය පරිවාෙ කස්වා සපයනු ලබන්කන් තෘතීයි අිංශය මගිනි. විදුලිය,

ෙෑස්, ජලය හා සනීපාෙක්ෂ කස්වාවන් ද ප්‍රවාහන, ෙබඩා කිරීම හා පණිවිඩ හුවමාරුව ද

කතාෙ හා සල්ලෙ කවළඳාම ද බැිංකු හා ෙක්ෂණ ටයුතු ද ොජය පරිපාලන හා ආෙක්ෂ

ටයුතුද වවදය, ඉිංජිකන්රු, නීතිඥ, සිංගීත, නැටුම්, කහෝටල්, සිංචාෙ යනාදී කවනත්

කපෞේෙලි කස්වාවන්ට අදාළ ටයුතු ද තෘතීයි අිංශකයහි ලා ෙැකන්. කමම අිංශකයන්

ඉටුවන අවශයතා ඉටුවන ආ ාෙය දැකිය කනාහැකි බැවින් කම්වා අදෘශය හා අස්පෘශය

ටයුතු වශකයන් සැලකක්.” [Emphasis Added]

In terms of the aforesaid definition, all economic activities are included in the word “කර්මාන්තය”.

Further, it lists three types of “කර්මාන්ත”: primary, secondary and tertiary. Accordingly, primary

industries collect raw materials, secondary industries use the said raw materials to manufacture

goods and tertiary industries provide services to assist and enable the primary and secondary

industries to conduct their activities. In the instant appeal, the appellant provides ‘Electricity’

which is a service listed as one of the several examples of tertiary industries in the aforesaid

definition.

When an Act or a Statute is interpreted by court, an interpretation shall not facilitate the flouting

of the intention of the legislation. On the contrary, an Act or a Statute should be interpreted to give

effect to the legislation. Further, an interpretation shall not be contrary to common sense and

justice.

Maxwell (supra) at page 28 states:

11

“In dealing with matters relating to the general public, statutes are presumed to

use words in their popular, rather than their narrowly legal or technical sense:

“loquitur ut vulgus, that is, according to the common understanding and

acceptation of the terms.”

Hence, the meaning of the Sinhala word “කර්මාන්තය” according to the common understanding of

the word “කර්මාන්තය” is wide and inclusive of distribution services such as electricity.

Application of the principles of Purposive Interpretation to interpret the word “කර්මාන්තය”

When a word has several meanings, the most appropriate meaning should be used to interpret a

word in a Statute by applying purposive interpretation in order to achieve the intention of the

legislator. Thus, it is necessary to consider how the word “කර්මාන්තය” has been used in the

Municipal Councils Ordinance to determine the intention of the legislator in using the said word.

According to the principles of purposive interpretation, the intention of the legislator in using a

particular word can be determined by examining the same or similar words used in an Ordinance

or Act as it would have the same or a similar meaning throughout the Ordinance or Act.

A similar view was expressed in Maxwell (supra) at page 282, where he states: “From the general

presumption that the same expression is presumed to be used in the same sense throughout an Act

or a series of cognate Acts, there follows the further presumption that a change of wording denotes

a change in meaning” [Emphasis Added].

Further, it states at page 286:

“In a leading modern case on the subject, Lord Reid said: “There is undoubtedly

a presumption that Parliament (or the draftsman) will use the same or similar

language throughout an Act when meaning the same thing …. [But] this

presumption is only a presumption and one must always remember that the object

in construing any statutory provision is to discover the intention of Parliament and

that there is an even stronger presumption that Parliament does not intend an

unreasonable or irrational result.” [Emphasis Added]

As stated earlier, the Municipal Councils Ordinance has not defined the word “කර්මාන්තය” in the

said Ordinance. However, the Sinhala text of section 247C of the said Ordinance states:

12

“කම් වෙන්තිකයහි ාර්ය සඳහා,

“ගවළඳ වයාපාරය” යන්නට, යම් කර්මාන්තයක් ගහෝ යම් නිෂ්පාදකයකුගේ ගහෝ තමා

කරන යම් ගනුගදනුවක්වක් නැතගහාත් ගස්වා සම්බන්ධගයන් ගකාමිස් මුදලක්

නැතගහාත් ගාස්තුවක් අයකරන යම් තැනැත්තකුගේ ගහෝ යම් ගවළඳ වයාපාරයක් ද

ස්වාධීන ගකාන්රාත්කරුවකුගේ වයාපාරයක්ද ඇතුළත් වන නමුත්, ගපෞද්ගලික

ගපාළකදී භාණ්ඩ, බඩු ද්‍රවය විකිණීගම් රක්ෂාව ගහෝ රජගයන් ආධාර දීමනා ගගවනු

ලබන්නා වූ නැතගහාත් කලින් එවැනි ආධාර දීමනා ගගවනු ලැබුවා වූ ද දැනට එවැනි

ආධාර දීමනා ගගවනු ගනාලබන්නා වූ ද යම් අධයාපන ආයතනයක් ගහෝ පාඨශාලාවක්

ගහෝ පවත්වාගගන යෑගම් රක්ෂාවක් ඊට ඇතුළත් ගනාගේ” [Emphasis Added]

In view of the above, even though the interpretation given to “ගවළඳ වයාපාරය” is only applicable

to the said section, the word “යම් කර්මාන්තයක් ” used in the aforesaid interpretation can be used

to interpret the word “යම් කර්මාන්තයක්” in section 247B(1) of the said Ordinance as having the

same meaning since the word “යම් කර්මාන්තයක් ” used in the Act should be given the same

meaning.

Further, in view of the aforesaid definition in section 247C, it is apparent that the legislator has

also made a distinction between the words “යම් කර්මාන්තයක්” and “යම් නිෂ්පාදකයකු”. It is

pertinent to note that the Municipal Councils Ordinance uses the word “නිෂ්පාදනය” and its variants

like “නිෂ්පාදකයකු” and “නිෂ්පාදිත” to refer to businesses, organizations and/or individuals engaged

in the manufacturing of products.

Thus, within the Sinhala text, the legislator in its wisdom has used different Sinhala words, i.e.

“කර්මාන්තය” and “නිෂ්පාදනය”, to change the meaning by using different words when and where

it is necessary. In view of the above, the meaning of the word “කර්මාන්තය” cannot be restricted

only to mean the manufacturing of goods when interpreting the provisions of the Municipal

Councils Ordinance.

Is there an inconsistency in the Sinhala and English texts of section 247B?

The English text of section 247B (1) of the Municipal Councils Ordinance reads as follows:

“A Municipal Council may impose and levy a tax on any trade carried on within

the administrative limits of that Council.” [Emphasis added]

13

Accordingly, the English text of the said section 247B (1) states that a Municipal Council has the

power to impose a tax on any “trade”.

As stated earlier, the “Buddhadasa Hewage Sinhala-English Dictionary”, at page 234, states that

the word “කර්මාන්තය” means, inter alia, “trade” in the English language. Further, the

‘Malalasekera English-Sinhala Dictionary’, at page 1065, states that the word “trade” means

“ගවළදාම” and “කර්මාන්තය” in the Sinhala language.

Accordingly, when a literal interpretation is applied, the word “trade” means “කර්මාන්තය” in

ordinary usage. Thus, I am of the view that the word “trade” is a translation of the word

“කර්මාන්තය”.

Moreover, the English text of section 247C of the Municipal Councils Ordinance states:

“For the purposes of this section,

“business” includes any trade or profession or calling or the business of a

manufacturer, or of any person taking commission or fees in respect of any

transaction or services rendered or the business of an independent contractor, but

does not include the occupation of selling articles, goods or materials at a private

fair or the occupation of maintain any educational establishment or school to which

grants from State funds are paid or to which such grants were earlier paid but at

present are not paid”. [Emphasis Added]

For the reasons stated above, the word “any trade” in the aforesaid definition in section 247C can

be applied to have the same meaning as the word “any trade” in section 247B(1) of the said

Ordinance. Thus, it is apparent from the above definition in section 247C that the legislator has

consistently used the word “trade” to mean “කර්මාන්තය” throughout the said Ordinance.

Moreover, the aforesaid section 247C of the Municipal Councils Ordinance defines a “business”

to include, inter alia, “any trade” or “the business of a manufacturer”. However, the appellant

submitted that the word “කර්මාන්තය” in the Municipal Councils Ordinance means “industry” and

not “trade”. In support of his submission, the Counsel for the appellant cited the Court of Appeal

case of Crest Gems Ltd v The Colombo Municipal Council (supra) at page 372 which held:

It has been submitted that the notices of the respondent seeking to recover from the

petitioner the tax under section 247B of the Municipal Councils Ordinance for

14

carrying on activities of maintaining an office for trading is ultra vires for the

reasons that the petitioner maintains an office only for buying and selling of

gems and jewellery. This activity is a trade or “velandama” in Sinhala and does

not fall within the meaning of the word “karmanthaya” since the petitioner does

not manufacture in the said place. [Emphasis Added]

In view of the above, the appellant contended that the word “කර්මාන්තය” in the Municipal

Councils Ordinance means an “industry” where goods are manufactured. If the said contention is

accepted, then the aforesaid word “business” as defined in section 247C would mean to include

“industry” or “business of a manufacturer”. Thus, I am of the view that the disjunction ‘or’ that

has been intentionally used by the legislator in between “any trade” or “the business of a

manufacturer” in the aforesaid section 247C would be rendered redundant.

In the circumstances, adopting the interpretation suggested by the appellant, that “කර්මාන්තය”

means ‘industry’ and not ‘trade’, would render the intention of legislator nugatory and thus, the

applicability of section 247B of the said Ordinance would be made redundant.

Due to the foregoing reasons, I am of the view that there is no inconsistency between the words

“කර්මාන්තය” and “trade” in Sinhala and English texts of section 247B of the Municipal Councils

Ordinance.

Thus, I am unable to agree with the judgment in Crest Gems Ltd v The Colombo Municipal Council

(supra) cited by the appellant.

Therefore, the appellant’s submission that the Municipal Council does not have an authority to

impose and levy a tax on the premises under reference as it is not used as a “කර්මාන්තය” within

the meaning of Section 247B of the Municipal Councils Ordinance is untenable in law.

Are the Regulations published under section 247B ultra vires?

The High Court has held that in terms of the Regulations issued under section 247B of the

Municipal Councils Ordinance published in the Gazette No. 1542 dated 19th March, 2008 the

premises under reference have been used for the collection of money for the services provided by

the appellant.

15

It was contended by the appellant that certain items specified in the said Gazette, including Item

No. 2 that was considered by the learned High Court judge, are ultra vires section 247B of the

Municipal Councils Ordinance as certain services referred to in the said items are not in respect of

industries but purely trading activities.

Section 289 (1) of the Municipal Councils Ordinance states:

(1) The Minister may make generally for the purpose of regulations giving effect

to the principles and provisions of this Ordinance and in respect of any matter for

which regulations are authorized or required by this Ordinance to be made or

required by this Ordinance to be prescribed. [Emphasis Added]

Thus, the Minister is vested with the power to promulgate regulations to give effect to the

principles and provisions of the said Ordinance.

The said Gazette No. 1542 dated 19th March, 2008 states that the premises referred to in the said

Gazette are subject to Trade Tax in terms of and under section 247B of the Municipal Councils

Ordinance.

The abovementioned Regulations are published by the Minister exercising his power vested in

terms of the aforementioned section 289 of the Municipal Councils Ordinance and the ‘Items’

specified in the said gazette are required to give effect to section 247B of the said Ordinance.

Therefore, the said Gazette comes within the scope and ambit of section 247B of the Municipal

Councils Ordinance and thus, is intra vires and valid in law. Hence, the items referred to in the

said Gazette are not ultra vires the said section.

Is the appellant liable to pay Trade Tax and Service Charges for the premises under

reference?

The material before court shows that the appellant is using the premises under reference not only

as the Regional Engineer’s Office but also as an office, which generates income to the appellant,

where consumers could pay their electricity bills and obtain electricity connections.

The High Court has held that the appellant’s premises were liable to be imposed and levied a Trade

Tax as it falls under ‘Item No. 2’, i.e. ‘an office used to store office equipment’, of the Regulations

16

issued in respect of section 247B of the Municipal Councils Ordinance by the Gazette No. 1542

dated 19th March, 2008.

The said Regulations published in the said Gazette also specify an office used for commercial

purposes under ‘Item No. 68’ as liable to pay taxes under section 247B of the Municipal Councils

Ordinance.

In the circumstances, I am of the view that the appellant’s premises are used for a commercial

purpose.

Thus, the appellant is liable to pay Trade Tax and Service Charges for the premises under reference

under Section 247B of the Municipal Councils Ordinance read with the Regulations published in

the Gazette No. 1542 dated 19th March, 2008.

Conclusion

In the foregoing circumstances, I am of the view that the two questions of law on which the court

granted leave to appeal should be answered as follows:

(a) Did the Hon. High Court judge misdirect herself in interpreting section 247B of the

Municipal Councils Ordinance as applicable to the appellant?

No.

(b) Did the Hon. Provincial High Court judge err in law when she came to the finding that the

appellant was carrying on a trading activity at the Regional Engineer’s Office, Ratmalana

which was liable to pay trade tax in terms of section 247B of the Municipal Councils

Ordinance read with the Regulations published in the Government Gazette bearing No.

1542?

No.

17

The appeal is dismissed for the aforementioned reasons stated above.

I order no costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Murdu N. B. Fernando, PC, J

I agree Judge of the Supreme Court

S Thurairaja, PC, J

I agree Judge of the Supreme Court