==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCISLIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA.

In the matter of an Application under Article 17 and 126 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

S.C. (FR) Application No.250/2020

1. Jayakodi Arachchilage Amarathunge 36A, Ashely Peris Mawatha, Kagalle. 2. Dahanayakage Chandrani Dahanayake 45/C1, Jesminwatta, Kiribathkumbura. 3. Manikin Gedera Dharmasena, 271/4, Samagi Mawatha, Pitipana Uthura, Homagama. 4. Polgaswatte Gamaralage Chandrawathie 1/50/1, Pansalagawawatta, Meneripitiya, Warakapola. 5. Sujeewa Sepali Kumarawadu, 55/10, 2nd Lane, Kandahena Watta, Depanama, Pannipitiya. 6. Liyana Arachchige Kithsiri, Weeramalyaya, Hidellana, Ratnapura. 7. Chandralatha Surangani Hettiarachchi Senanayaka, 177, Sarasawi Asapuwa, Hapugala, Wackwella, Galle. 8. Muhammad Musthafa Abdul Kaiyoon, 251, Police, Road, Sammanthurai. 9. Ranawaka Arachchige Pradeepika Ranawaka, 298A, Weera Mawatha Bangalawatta, Kottawa. PETITIONERS Vs. 1. I D Jayantha Kulathunga,

S.C.(FR) Application No. 250/2020

2

College of Technology, Puttalama Road, Kurunegala. 2. Nevil Edirisinghe, Department of Technical Education & Training, No. 557, Olcott Road, Colombo 10. 3. S. Parameswaran, Department of Technical Education & Training, No. 557, Olcott Road, Colombo 10. 4. H. M. T. K. Herath, Technical College, Halawata Road, Wariyapola. 5. A. K. Hettiarachchi, Technical College, Maddewatta, Matara. 6. R.D.D. Deshapriya, Department of Technical Education & Training, No. 557, Olcott Road, Colombo 10. 7. M. M. Hettige, Department of Technical Education & Training, No. 557, Olcott Road, Colombo 10. 8. H.M.R.D. Herath, Technical College, Pannala Road, Kuliyapitiya. 9. R.P.U. Rajapaksha, Technical College, Warellawatta, Yakkala, Gampaha. 10. W.M.D.M. Fernando, Department of Technical Education & Training, No. 557, Olcott Road, Colombo 10. 11. W.A.D.M.M. Wijesinghe,

S.C.(FR) Application No. 250/2020

3

Department of Technical Education & Training, No. 557, Olcott Road, Colombo 10. 12. Preethi Wijesinghe, Department of Technical Education & Training, No. 557, Olcott Road, Colombo 10. 13. T. Pasakararajah, Technical College, Manchatuduwa, Batticaloa, 14. A.A.D. Leelarathna, Department of Technical Education & Training, No. 557, Olcott Road, Colombo 10. 15. A.M.R.R.Abeykoon, Technical College, Anguruwella Road, Warakapola. 16. S.N.W.M.L.R. Ratnayaka, Techinical College, New Town, Anuradhapura. 17. K.K. Chandrika, College of Technical, New Town, Weerawila. 18. M.A.M.A.W.S. Amunugama, Department of Technical Education & Training, No. 557, Olcott Road, Colombo 10. 19. K.P.S.S. Abeywickrama, Technical College, Matale Road, Dambulla. 20. M. Somasorriyam Technical College, Main Road, Akkaraipattu. 21. S.K.K.A. De Silva, Technical College, Aruppala, Kandy. 22. P.K.K. Mahanama,

S.C.(FR) Application No. 250/2020

4

Department of Technical Education & Training, No. 557, Olcott Road, Colombo 10. 23. R.K. Nihal, Technical College, Puwakdandawa, Beliatta. 24. M. M. K. Weerawardana, Department of Technical Education & Training, No. 557, Olcott Road, Colombo 10. 25. K. D. Perera, Technical College, Vidyapura, Polonnaruwa. 26. H. R. P. M. Bandara, Technical College, Wewatenna, Bandarawela. 27. S. Thyagarajah, Hardy Advanced Technological College. Ampara. 28. R. A. Amarasiri Ranjana, Technical College, Yodha Ala Road, Hasalaka. 29. M. G. S. M. Jayawickrama Technical College, Kachcheriya Road, Kegalle. 30. H. A. S. Kumaralal, Technical College, Anguruwella Road, Warakapola 31. S. J. Basnayaka Technical College, New Town, Embilipitiya. 32. P. P. Kumari, Technical College, Gam Udawa Thammennagama, Anamaduwa. 33. K. G. Herath Banda Technical College, Aruppala, Kandy.

S.C.(FR) Application No. 250/2020

5

34. N. D. Thusith Weerawardana Technical College, Sirigala, Monaragala. 35. R. B. Guruge, Department of Technical Education & Training, No. 557, Olcott Road, Colombo 10. 36. Nihal Kithsiri Gamalathge. Technical College, M. C. Road, Matale. 37 U. I. W. K. Weerakotuwa, Technical College, Mahawanawela, Dehiattakandiya. 38. Anura Kumasaru, Technical College, Maddewatte, Matara. 39. C. W. Liyanage, Technical College, Godagama, Homagama. 40. R. M. G. Bandara, Technical College, Puttalama Road, Kurunegala. 41. K. M. S. Banda, Technical College, M.C. Road, Matale. 42. P. N. K. Malalasekara, Director General, Department of Technical Education and Training, 42A. S. C. Jagath, Director General, Department of Technical Education and Training, Above 1st to 42(A) Respondents All C/O Department of Technical Education and Training, Olcott Mawatha, Colombo 10. 43. Sarath Abayagunawardana,

S.C.(FR) Application No. 250/2020

6

Secretary of Skills Development, Employment & Labour Relations, 6th Floor, “Mehewara Piyasa”, Narahenpita, Colombo 05 43A. Prof. Kapila Perera, Secretary, Ministry of Education Ministry of Education, Isurupaya, Pelawaththa, Battaramulla. 43B. P.W. Rajapaksa Secretary to the State Ministry of SkillsDevelopment, Vocational Education, Research and Innovation.

State Ministry of Skills Development, Vocational Education, Research and Innovation. 3rd Floor, Sethsiripaya Stage 1, Battaramulla, Sri Lanka. 43C. M. N. Ranasinghe

Secretary to the State Ministry of Education, Ministry of Education, Isurupaya. Pelawatta, Battaramulla. 44. Dinesh Gunaeardana, Minister of Skills Development, Employment & Labour Relations, Ministry of Skills Development, Employment & Labour Relations, 6th Floor, “Mehewara Piyasa”, Narahenpita, Colombo 05. 44A. Prof. G.L. Peiris, Minister of Education, Ministry of Education, Isurupaya. Pelawatta, Battaramulla. 44B. Seetha Arambepola State Minister of Skills Development, Vocational Education, Research and

S.C.(FR) Application No. 250/2020

7

Innovation. 3rd Floor, Sethsiripaya Stage 1, Battaramulla, Sri Lanka. 44C. Susil Premajayantha, Minister of Education, Ministry of Education, Isurupaya. Pelawatta, Battaramulla. 45. Mr. Dharmasena Dissanayaka, Chairman, Public Service Commission. 45A. Mr. Jagath Balapatabendi Chairman, Public Service Commission. 45B. Sanath J. Ediriweera, Chairman, Public Service Commission. 46. Dr. Prathap Ramanujam, Member, Public Service Commission. 47. Mrs. V. Jegarasasingam Member, Public Service Commission. 48. Mr. S. Ranugge, Member, Public Service Commission. 49. Mr. D. Laksiri Mendis, Member, Public Service Commission. 50. Mr. Sarath Jayatillaka Member, Public Service Commission.

51. Mrs. Sudharma Karunarathna Member, Public Service Commission.

S.C.(FR) Application No. 250/2020

8

52. Mr. G. S. A. De Silva, Member, Public Service Commission. 53. M. A. B. Daya Senarath, Secretary, Public Service Commission. Above 45th to 53rd Respondents all C/O No.1200/9, Rajamalwatta Road, Battaramulla. 54. Hon. Attorney General Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12. 55. Mrs. Indrani Sugathadasa Member Public Service Commission. 56. Mr. Leelasena Liyanagama Member Public Service Commission. 57. Mr. T.R.C. Ruberu, Member Public Service Commission. 58. Mr. Dian Gomes, Member Public Service Commission. 59. Mr. W.H. Piyadasa, Member Public Service Commission. 60. Mr. Dilith Jayaweera, Member Public Service Commission. 61. Mr. V. Shivagnanasoni, Member, Public Service Commission. 61A. Mr. Suntharam Arumainayham, Member Public Service Commission

S.C.(FR) Application No. 250/2020

9

62. Mr. A. L. Mohamed Saleem, Member Public Service Commission Above 55th to 62nd Respondents all C/O No.1200/9, Rajamalwatta Road, Battaramulla. 63. S. M. Mohamed, Member, Public Service Commission. 64. N. H. M. Chitrananda, Member, Public Service Commission. 65. Dr. N. Selvakumaran, Member, Public Service Commission. 66. M. B. R. Pushpakumara, Member, Public Service Commission. 67. Dr. A.D.N. De Zoysa, Member, Public Service Commission. 68. R. Nadarajapillai, Member, Public Service Commission. 69. C. Pallegama. Member, Public Service Commission. 70. G.S.A. De Silva, Member, Public Service Commission, Above 63rd to 70th Respondents all C/O No.1200/9, Rajamalwatta Road, Battaramulla. RESPONDENTS

S.C.(FR) Application No. 250/2020

10

BEFORE : S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J. K.K. WICKREMASINGHE, J. ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J. COUNSEL : Boopathi Kahathuduwa for the Petitioners. Chula Bandara with Ms. Gayathri Kodagoda and Ms. Bhagya Gunawardane for the 2nd,3rd, 5th -7th, 10th, 11th, 14th -18th , 22nd, 31st, 35th, and 37th Respondents. M. Gopallawa, SDSG for 42nd – 70th Respondents.

ARGUED ON : 30th August, 2024

DECIDED ON : 12th March, 2026 ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

With their petition dated 10.08.2020, the nine Petitioners have collectively

invoked the jurisdiction conferred on this Court by Articles 17 and 126(1) of the

Constitution seeking multiple reliefs including relief in the interim, by alleging

an infringement of their fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 12(1) and

14(1)(g) by the executive and administrative actions of the 42nd to 53rd

Respondents.

The Petitioners are public employees belonging to the Sri Lanka Technical

Education Service. They currently hold appointments in Grade II – Special Cadre

of that service and in terms of Clause 9 of the Service Minutes of 15.08.1986 (P3),

they have satisfied the Efficiency Bar, which is required of an officer of the said

Cadre, in terms of the said Service Minute.

S.C.(FR) Application No. 250/2020

11

The 1st to 41st Respondents also joined the Sri Lanka Technical Education

Service as Special Cadre employees along with the Petitioners. However, the 1st

to 41st Respondents were appointed to their posts in the General Cadre by the

Public Service Commission, in the year 2017 on their applications. The 1st to 41st

Respondents currently hold positions of Vice Principals and Deputy Directors in

the said Service while some of them were given acting appointments for the

posts of Principals and Directors of Technical Colleges.

It is the position of the Petitioners that, in terms of the said Service Minute,

the 1st to 41st Respondents are required to sit for the special examination

stipulated by Clause 8 of the Service Minute, and in their failure to do so, they do

not satisfy the mandatory Efficiency Bar requirement as stipulated by Clause 7,

which they must satisfy prior to applying for any higher post. The said Clause in

fact specifically disqualifies such officers from being eligible to apply to a higher

post.

The Petitioners state that when applications were called to fill vacancies for

Grade 1 of the Sri Lanka Technical Education Service on 22.02.2019 (by Gazette

No. 2112 of 22.02.2019 – P6) they verily believed that they would score “excellent

marks” according to the eligibility criteria and have therefore tendered their

respective applications. On 03.07.2020, a new amended Marking Scheme (P7)

was introduced by the Public Service Commission, which was made applicable

to the applicants who tendered their applications on 22.02.2019, by amending the

notice published on that day.

On 10.07.2020, the Petitioners have received letters calling them for

interviews along with the 1st to 41st Respondents, although they did not satisfy

the eligibility criteria, in their failure to pass the Efficiency Bar after switching

S.C.(FR) Application No. 250/2020

12

over to General Cadre. The Trade Union, which the Petitioners are members of,

objected to calling of the 1st to 41st Respondents for the said interview on that

basis (P9). The interviews were held from 23rd to 26th July 2020 and the

Petitioners have presented themselves for the said interview, subject to their said

objection.

Therefore, the Petitioners alleged that their fundamental rights under

Articles 12(1) and 14(1)(g) were violated by the 42nd to 53rd Respondents as;

a. the Service Minute requires officers to pass the Efficiency Bar

examination after they receive appointments to the current

Grade, which is a pre-requisite to being considered for

promotion,

b. the Sri Lanka Technical College has not conducted the efficiency

bar examination, prescribed for Grade II - General Cadre

employees since 2017.

Additionally, since the 1st to 41st Respondents have not satisfied the

requirement imposed by Clause 7 of the Service Minute in order to be promoted

to the posts of Grade 1 of the Sri Lanka Technical Education Service, their

promotions are illegal.

The Petitioners further alleged that the 42nd and 43rd Respondents have

conducted interviews under the old Service Minute, whist having a new Service

Minute in force. Therefore, they alleged it was unlawful for these two

Respondents to have conducted interviews under the old Service Minute. The

Petitioners also state that, if applications are called afresh for the said post under

the amended Service Minute, their interest will not be prejudiced.

S.C.(FR) Application No. 250/2020

13

In view of the above, the Petitioners seek inter alia a declaration that their

fundamental rights under Article 12(1) and 14(1)(g) are violated, and a

declaration that the 1st to 41st Respondents have not satisfied the Efficiency Bar, a

requirement imposed on Grade II - General Cadre employees of the Sri Lanka

Technical Education Service. They accordingly take up the position that the 1st to

41st Respondents have not satisfied the necessary prerequisites in terms of the

Service Minute P3, to be promoted to Grade I of that Service. They further seek

their appointments to Grade I of that Service.

The 1st to 41st Respondents, in their joint Statement of Objections, have

taken the position that they have satisfied all the eligibility criterion set out by

Clause 7 of the Service Minute, which is a mandatory requirement for all officers

who are appointed to any post of any Grade in the Sri Lanka Technical

Education Service and must be fulfilled within three years of such appointment.

Therefore, the 1st to 41st Respondents assert that all of them have satisfied the

said requirement, well within three years after their initial appointment to the

Grade III of Special Cadre, along with the Petitioners. When applications were

called in 2016 to fill the posts of Grade II of General Cadre, they have applied

and were appointed to the said posts in February 2018, with effect from

26.12.2016.

When applications were called for the post of Grade I of Sri Lanka

Technical Service in February 2020, the 1st to 41st Respondents have tendered

their applications. They were called for an interview. The 1st to 41st Respondents

further assert that since 1986, as a policy, there was no requirement whatsoever

in the Department of Technical Education and Training which insists on an

employee to pass another Efficiency Bar examination, when he has once

completed such requirement, after his 1st appointment into the service. Therefore,

S.C.(FR) Application No. 250/2020

14

the 1st to 41st Respondents claim that the requirement of an Efficiency Bar

examination, in terms of Clauses 7, 8 and 9 of Service Minute were only imposed

on those officers who have been recruited directly into the Sri Lanka Technical

Service and placed at those three Grades.

The 42nd Respondent, being the Director General of the Department of

Technical Education and Training, supports the position of the 1st to 41st

Respondents when he stated that, in relation to the requirement of passing the

Efficiency Bar examination, in terms of Clause 7 of the Service Minute, these

Respondents have already satisfied that requirement when they passed the “sole-

Efficiency Bar examination” referred to in Clause 7 of the Service Minute, after they

were appointed to Grade III – Special Cadre. The 42nd Respondent therefore

asserts that there is no requirement for the 1st to 41st Respondents to pass the

Efficiency Bar examination once more, upon being promoted to Grade II. He

further asserts that the 1st to 41st Respondents were promoted from Grade III to

Grade II by way of an internal promotion scheme and not by way of fresh

appointments.

The Petitioners, in the counter affidavit, have sought to refute that position

by asserting that whenever an officer is appointed to a new post, Clause 7 applies

and that requirement is not confined to the time of recruitment only. This is

because the explanation to Clause 5 of the Service Minute states that the only

way an officer could be appointed from the Special Cadre to the General Cadre

or vice versa is by way of a “new appointment” and not by way of a “transfer”,

which in turn triggers the requirement that such an officer must pass the

Efficiency Bar examination once more after that new appointment.

S.C.(FR) Application No. 250/2020

15

When the matter is taken up for argument on 30.08.2024, learned Counsel

for the Petitioners, to be in line with what the Petitioners have averred in their

petition, has submitted that the plain reading of the Clauses 6 and 7 makes it

abundantly clear that the only way to change the cadre, which an officer was

taken in initially, is by taking a fresh appointment and therefore a Grade II

employee, who takes up a fresh appointment in the General Cadre after

switching from the Special Cadre, must satisfy the Efficiency Bar requirement in

that new post, if he is to be considered eligible to apply for any promotions in the

Sri Lanka Technical Education Service.

In view of the material presented before this Court by way of pleadings

and of the submissions made by the learned Counsel, it is necessary to examine

the employment history of the Petitioners as well as the 1st to 41st Respondents in

a more detailed manner.

The 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th and 8th Petitioners have initially served as

Assistant Instructors attached to Technical Colleges, under the Department of

Technical Education and Training of Sri Lanka. The Cabinet of Ministers, upon

being appraised by the Cabinet Memorandum No. 99/0719/12/001, taken a

decision on 11.06.1999 to absorb the Assistant Instructors, who were then serving

under the said Department to the posts of Instructors of Sri Lanka Technical

Education Service and to place them at Grade III – Special Cadre of that service.

Relevant Letters of Appointments were issued to the said set of Petitioners by the

Public Service Commission on 22.08.2000 (vide documents P1A, P1B, P1C, P1D,

P1E, P1F and P1H). The 7th and 9th Petitioners, who were selected from open

stream to be appointed as Lecturer Grade II, in the Special Cadre of Sri Lanka

Technical Education Service, after placing them at Grade III of that service (vide

P1G and P1H).

S.C.(FR) Application No. 250/2020

16

The Public Service Commission, by the letters issued on 06.03.2012 to that

effect, promoted the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 8th Petitioners to Grade II of Sri Lanka

Technical Education Service, whereas it decided to promote the 7th Petitioner and

9th Petitioner to Grade II on 16.03.2012 and 23.08.2012 respectively. The 5th

Petitioner was however promoted to the said Grade only on 13.06.2017. The

letters issued by the Public Service Commission promoting them to Grade II are

tendered to Court marked P2A to P2I, which also indicated that the terms and

conditions of employment as indicated in the already issued Letters of

Appointment are continued in addition to being subjected to the Service Minute.

Since the primary contention of the Petitioners, being the 1st to 41st

Respondents have failed to fulfil the eligibility criterion that qualifies them to

apply to Grade I appointment, when they failed to satisfy the Efficiency Bar

requirement in terms of Clause 7 of the Service Minute, after they were admitted

into the General Cadre of Grade II, it is necessary at this stage to examine the

validity of the said contention.

There is no dispute that the relevant Service Minute, applicable to the

Petitioners as well as 1st to 41st Respondents, was published in the Government

Gazette No. 415 of 15.08.1987. The said Service Minute was tendered to Court by

the Petitioners, along with their petition, marked P3.

Clauses 6 and 7 of the said Service Minute P3 reads as follows;

6’ YS% ,xld ld¾ñl wOHdmk fiajfha ta ta mka;sj,g flfrk m;alsrSï iy Wiia

lsrSï l=Y,;djh u; jk w;r” fcHIaG;dj fojk ia:dkfha ,d i<lKq ,efí’

ix,laIh- kj m;aùula ,nd.ekSfuka yer úfYaI fiajl ixLHdfjka iudkH

fiajl ixLHdjg fy` iudkH fiajl ixLHdfjka úfYaI fiajl ixLHdjg fy`

udreùï ,nd.; fkdyel’

S.C.(FR) Application No. 250/2020

17

7’ YS% ,xld ld¾ñl wOHdmk fiajfha ks,OdrSka i+|yd ld¾hlaIu;d lvbula we;’

YS% ,xld ld¾ñl wOHdmk fiajfha ´kEu ;k;=rlg m;a lrk ,o iEu

ks,Odrshl= úiskau tn÷ m;alsrSfï osk isg wjqreÿ ;=kla we;=<; wod<

ld¾hlazIu lvbfuka W;a;S¾K úh hq;=h’ kshñ; ld,h we;=<; ld¾hlazIu;d

lvbfuka W;a;S¾K ùug wfmdfydi;aùu” jegqma j¾Ol ú,ïnkhlsrSug

fya;=jk w;ru” bvoS we;s ld,mrsÉfPohg jeämqr f.k we;s ld,mrsÉfPoh

jegqma j¾Ol Å,ïnkh lrkq ,enQ ld, mrsÉfPhla f,i i<lKq ,efí’ ;jo

ld¾hlaIu;d lvbfuka W;a;S¾K jk;=re ljr fy` Wiia ;k;=rla b,aÆï

lsrSug tu ks,OdrSka kqiqÿiaika o jkjd we;’

Plain reading of Clause 7 of the Service Minute indicates that there is one

Efficiency Bar that must successfully be completed by the officers of the Sri

Lanka Technical Education Service, after being appointed for any of the three

Grades recognised by the said Minute. The relevant sentence of Clause 7 is clear

in this respect as it reads “ld¾hlaIu;d lvbula”. The words “ld¾hlaIu;d lvbula” is

deliberately used in Clause 7 denoting the requirement in a singular form. The

reference to a one Efficiency Bar requirement, is once more repeated as the said

Clause further when it used the term “ld¾hlazIu;d lvbfuka” twice more in its text.

This position is further reflected in the letters P8A to P8I, calling the Petitioners

for an interview and they were required to bring along the original certificates in

relation to satisfying the Efficiency Bar requirement. Once more, the terms used

in these letters in making reference to the Efficiency Bar were in singular

(“lvbu”). This is the reason why the 1st to 41st Respondents claim that the

requirement to satisfy the Efficiency Bar examination is a one-time requirement

and, having satisfied same, once at some level, it need not be satisfied thereafter,

upon being considered to be promoted to Class I.

Clause 16 of P3 imposes the requirement that the officers those who have

been absorbed into Sri Lanka Technical Education Service must complete the

S.C.(FR) Application No. 250/2020

18

Efficiency Bar, in terms of Clauses 8 and 9. The Petitioners have fulfilled this

requirement after they were absorbed into the Service as the letters issued by the

Public Service Commission (P4A, P4B and P4C) would indicate. These letters

indicate that the 5th, 7th and 8th Petitioners have tendered their post graduate

diploma certificates and teacher training certificate to have them exempted from

applicability of the Efficiency Bar, after their appointments were made to the

Grade III of the Sri Lanka Technical Education Service.

Even though the Petitioners assert in their petition that they were

promoted to Grade II of the Sri Lanka Technical Education Service, they did not

assert in the petition that they have satisfied the Efficiency Bar examination

requirement, whilst in Grade II, in terms of their own contention, which enabled

them to apply to be promoted to Grade I. But the Petitioners strongly relied on

the fact that the 1st to 41st Respondents, who were initially appointed to Grade III

– Special Cadre along with them, and promoted to Grade II – Special Cadre,

thereafter switched to Grade II – General Cadre, and thereby the have taken up

“new appointment” which triggers the explanatory note to Clause 6. The said note

states no transfers could be made within General and Special Cadres, unless by

taking it up as a new appointment. The Petitioners, in taking up this position

seek to differentiate the 1st to 41st Respondents, who were allegedly favourably

treated, despite specific provisions contained in the Service Minute, indicate to

the contrary.

The 1st to 41st Respondents collectively taken up the position by that it was

the general policy adopted by the Department of Technical Education and

Training not to insist on the Efficiency Bar requirement for any subsequent

promotions, after it was satisfied by an officer at some level. This claim was

accepted and confirmed by the Director General of the Department of Technical

S.C.(FR) Application No. 250/2020

19

Education and Training (the 42nd Respondent) in his affidavit. The 42nd

Respondent asserts therein that the “… Efficiency Bar in Clause 7 of the SLTES

Service Minute is the sole Efficiency Bar that an officer is required to pass in the

SLTES”. He further asserts that after satisfying the Efficiency Bar requirement,

the 1st to 41st Respondents were promoted to Grade II – Special Cadre along with

the Petitioners. The 1st to 41st Respondents were able to gain another “promotion”

to Grade II – General Cadre, “ … as permitted by Clause 12 of the SLTES Service

Minute.” He also asserted that “Although some of the Petitioners too had applied for

promotion to the Class II – General Cadre in such a manner, they had been

unsuccessful.”

This position, taken up by the 1st to 43rd Respondents, seems to be in line

with the relevant Clauses of the Service Minute as they provide to make

appointments to each of the three Grades not only from internally but also from

outside, including candidates other than the officers who are already in the Sri

Lanka Technical Education Service. Clause 12, (i)(b) allows an officer attached to

any institution under the Ministry of Higher Education who draws an annual

salary of Rs. 32,100.00 at the time of applying, could also be appointed to Grade I

of that Service. In such a situation, it is clear that such a new appointee must

comply with the Efficiency Bar requirement in terms of Clause 7. It is apparent

that those who are already in the service serving in Class II need not take the

Efficiency Bar once again, when Clause 7 refers to one Efficiency Bar.

This is also indicative from the Clause 12 which sets out the qualifications

for each of the Grades. Under Grade II, which is applicable to both General

Cadre and Special Cadre, an applicant who applies to Grade II from Grade III

must have completed five years satisfactory service in General or Special Cadre.

S.C.(FR) Application No. 250/2020

20

There is no reference made in that Clause imposing a requirement to fulfil the

Efficiency Bar requirement, in applying for the next level promotion.

The Petitioners, in their counter affidavits, have denied these assertions

and state that the only ‘promotions’ that could be granted to an officer in the

Service is a promotion either from Grade III to Grade II or from Grade II to

Grade I and not from Special Cadre to General Cadre or vice versa.

In this context, it is important to focus on the primary complaint of the

Petitioners that the 1st to 41st Respondents have not fulfilled the eligibility

criterion that enabled them to apply to be promoted to Class I of Sri Lanka

Technical Education Service.

The 1st to 41st Respondents, and the 42nd Respondent state that there in fact

was such a policy adopted by the institution, where an officer of the Sri Lanka

Technical Education Service needs to satisfy only “the sole” Efficiency Bar, which

in turn would satisfy the requisite eligibility criterion for a promotion from his

current Grade to a higher Grade in that Service.

It is evident that, after the promotion to Grade II from Grade III, that none

of the Petitioners claim that they have satisfied the Efficiency Bar requirement for

the second time, although they are insisting on the fulfilment of such a

requirement by the 1st to 41st Respondent, making reference to the Service

Minute. In the absence of a declaration to that effect and in the absence of any

documentary proof, it could be reasonably assumed that they too have not done

so, before applying to be promoted to Class I. The fact that they were called for

an interview in relation to selection of candidates for Class I, indicates that in

spite of the Service Minute requirement to that effect, the Petitioners were treated

as eligible candidates to be promoted to Class I of the Sri Lanka Technical

S.C.(FR) Application No. 250/2020

21

Education Service. This is why the Petitioners place heavy reliance on the

switching of Cadre by the 1st to 41st Respondents, by insisting that they have

received “new appointments” in the Service, and thus are needed to satisfy the

Efficiency Bar.

However, it must be noted that if the relevant Clauses of the Service

Minute are applied in the manner the Petitioners have asserted before this Court,

then they too had to be considered to have failed the said eligibility criterion in

applying for Class I of the said service.

Perusal of the Service Minute P3 revealed that the nature of the Efficiency

Bar requirement which the Petitioners had to satisfy after being appointed to

Class III of Special Cadre is set out therein at the Appendix “A”. The specific

subjects, which a candidate must take in, on a question paper set for a period of

three hours, includes the subjects of General Administration, Accounts,

Education and Second Language. Under the subject of General Administration,

the administrative procedures contained in the Establishment Code, the

Government Regulations and the Articles of the Constitution of the Republic

were included. Under the subject of Education, law relating to education,

administration and supervision were covered. Thus, it seems from this elaborate

scheme formulated by the Public Service Commission, that it has expected the

Efficiency Bar examination applicable to officers of the Class III of the said

Service to possess familiarity and competency in an array of important areas of

administration, which is necessary to effectively discharge the duties of the office

they hold. The Petitioners also claim that the Efficiency Bar is a stringent test.

In terms of the Service Minute, any employee, after being appointed to a

Grade in the Sri Lanka Technical Education Service must satisfy the Efficiency

S.C.(FR) Application No. 250/2020

22

Bar requirement within the stipulated time period of three years and, any failure

on his part to do so, would result in the suspension of salary increments. This

was already referred earlier on in this judgment in a different context. The failure

to fulfil this requirement acts as a bar for such an officer’s entitlement to apply

for higher Grades. The Efficiency Bar examinations are expected to be conducted

by the Department of Examinations, at regular intervals.

The Petitioners in their petition blame the Department of Technical

Education for its continued failure to hold the Efficiency Bar examination

applicable to the “new appointees” (1st to 41st Respondents) to the Class II –

General Cadre of the Sri Lanka Technical Education Service. The manner in

which the Department of Technical Education applied the different Clauses of

Service Minute P3, apparently not on the strictest of terms. The Petitioners

cannot claim that the “new appointees” must sit and pass the Efficiency Bar

examination after they were appointed to Grade II of General Cadre, when the

Petitioners themselves did not sit for the Efficiency Bar examination after their

respective appointment to Class II of Special Cadre. They too have received the

same benefit, as the 1st to 41st Respondents did, when the Department of

Technical Education and Training has adopted a policy, which stipulates that all

they need is to satisfy the “sole Efficiency Bar” in order to be promoted to a higher

Grade. If Clause 7 is not applied to the Petitioners to the last letter, then it would

not be strictly applicable to the 1st to 41st Respondents as well. The Strict

application of the explanatory note that insists no interchanges between different

Cadres unless as by way of a new appointment could not be taken as imposing a

mandatory requirement, which is different to any other requirements imposed

by Clause 7. The said Clause also insists that officers could apply to be promoted

to higher Grades, only on satisfying an elaborate scheme of testing the

S.C.(FR) Application No. 250/2020

23

administrative and other required skills of an officer to perform his job

responsibilities.

This Court in this application is not called upon to pronounce the merits or

the demerits of strict adherence to the provisions of a Service Minute to the ‘letter

of law’ and the desirability of the approach taken by the Department of Technical

Education, in respect of the Petitioners as well as the 1st to 41st Respondents, up

to their respective promotions to Class II. But, in view of the exemptions given to

some of the Petitioners by the Public Service Commission, in relation to the

“stringent” Efficiency Bar requirement that must be fulfilled after being

appointed to Sri Lanka Technical Education Service - Class III – Special Cadre, it

appears that it had not strongly insisted on the acquisition of the required

knowledge in the different subjects that is tested by that examination.

The Service Minute, by its Clause 9, permits the Efficiency Bar requirement

to be satisfied by acquiring a professional or academic qualifications in the

relevant field such as Post Graduate Degree/Diploma or Diploma in

Education/Technical Education or Teacher Training Diploma/Certificate of

Teacher Training. Thus, sitting for the Efficiency Bar examination conducted by

the Department of Education is not the only way available to an officer of the Sri

Lanka Technical Education Service by which he could satisfy the requirement

imposed by Clause 7 of the Service Minute.

The 5th Petitioner was exempted from the requirement of satisfying the

Efficiency Bar by the Public Service Commission with the acceptance of his post

graduate diploma (P4A) whereas the 7th Petitioner was exempted on the

acceptance of her Teacher Training Certificate. The 8th Respondent completed

S.C.(FR) Application No. 250/2020

24

his post graduate diploma and he too was exempted from the Efficiency Bar

requirement.

It must be highlighted that in terms of Clause 3 of the Service Minute P3,

all applicants to the Class I of the Service must have either a post graduate

degree or a post graduate diploma or an equivalent qualification to be promoted.

This was insisted on by the Service Minute as the basic qualification to be

considered for promotion to Class I. There is no complaint by the Petitioners to

the effect that the 1st to 41st Respondents have failed to qualify that requirement.

They only insist on the alleged failure to satisfy the Efficiency Bar requirement in

Class II, due to the switching done from Special Cadre to General Cadre. If that

being the case, the 1st to 41st Respondents too must possess, either a Post

Graduate Degree or a Post Graduate Diploma or an equivalent qualification,

which would qualify them to be called for an interview, in order to be considered

for promotion to Class I.

If the Efficiency Bar requirement is applicable as the Petitioners claim, then

those Respondents too are entitled to receive an exemption from that

requirement, as some of the Petitioners have. But this situation does not arise for

consideration in the instant application, as it indicates that not only the “policy”

referred to by the 1st to 41st Respondents as well as the 42nd Respondent, who

speaks of a “sole” Efficiency Bar which an appointee to Sri Lanka Technical

Education Service must satisfy, but the several Clauses of the Service Minute P3

also support adaptation of such an approach.

Clause 12 of the Service Minute contains provisions that are in line with

the said policy. The qualifications that are required in order to be appointed to

different Grades of the Service are set out in that Clause. In relation to the instant

S.C.(FR) Application No. 250/2020

25

matter, the qualifications that are set out therein for Grade II and Grade III are as

follows;

“ II jeks mka;sh- idudkH fiajl ixLHdj

iEu whÿïlrefjl=u my; oelafjk lafI;%hkaf.ka ,nd .;a ms<s.;a úYaj úoHd,hl

Wmdêhla

^w& bxcsfkare úoHdj ^wd& .Ks;h

^we& úoHdj ^wE& jdKscH úfYaI Wmdêh

^b& wd¾:sl úoHd úfYaI Wmdêh ^B& lDIsl¾uh

^W) rdcH fy` jHdmdr mrsmd,kh ^W!& bx.S%is

mYapd;a Wmdêhla fy` úfYaI Wmdê ämaf,`ud iy;slhla fy` iudk iqÿiqlï”

iy

wjqreÿ wgl b.ekaùfï iy$fy` mrsmd,k m<mqreoaola we;s whl= úh h;=h’

ke;fyd;a

^ii& ms<s.;a úYaj úoHd,hlska ,nd.;a Wmdêhla iys; Wiia wOHdmk wud;HxYh hgf;a

we;s ld¾ñl úoHd,hl wju jYfhka wjqreÿ wgl b.ekaùfï iy$ fy` mrsmd,k

m<mqreoao we;s wfhl= úh hq;=h’

ke;fyd;a

^iii& YS% ,xld ld¾ñl wOHdmk fiajfha iii jk mka;sfha idudkH fy` úfYaI fiajfha

ixLHdfõ hg;a msrsfihska wjqreÿ myl i;=gqodhl fiajd ld,hla iïmQ¾K fldg

awe;a;djQo ish ;k;=frys i:Sr lrkq ,en we;a;djQo whl= úh hq;=h’

II jeks mka;sh- úfYAI fiajl ixLHdj

iEu whÿïlrefjl=u-^i& ^w& kshñ; úIhfhka$ úIhhkaf.ka” ms<s.;a úYaj úoHd,hlska $

úYaj úoHd,j,ska Wmdêhla iy mYapd;a Wmdêhla fy` Wmdê ämaf,`ud iy;slhla fy`

iudk iqÿiqlï

iy

S.C.(FR) Application No. 250/2020

26

^wd& YS% ,xld ld¾ñl wOHdmk fiajfha III jk mka;sfha idudkH fy` úfYaI fiajl

ixLHdfõ hg;a msrsfihska wjqreÿ myl i;=gqodhl fiajd ld,hla we;a;djQo” ish

;k;=frys ia:Sr lr we;a;djQo wfhl= úh hq;=h’”

The required qualifications indicate that recruitment to Grade II – General

Cadre, is open to anyone who possess them. However, for an appointment to

Grade II – Special Cadre, only the officers who are already serving in the Sri

Lanka Technical Education Service Grade III with five years of satisfactory

service record could apply. Thus, it was essentially meant to ensure the

promotional prospects of the officers who are already in that Service. The 1st to

41st Respondents have switched over to Grade II - General Cadre from their

original Grade II – Special Cadre, by fulfilling the required qualifications. The

Petitioners do not dispute that fact either. They simply contend that the 1st to 41st

Respondents must be treated as “new appointees”, in order to disqualify them

from applying to Grade I.

The other contention advance by the Petitioners was that the Service

Minute P3 was amended by Gazette Extraordinary No. 2183/20 of 06.07.2020

(P10) and the 42nd and 43rd Respondents proceeded to conduct interviews under

the old Service Minute (P3). They further state in paragraph 22 of their petition

that “[T]he Petitioners state that whilst having a new Service Minute in force, it was

unlawful for the 42nd and 43rd Respondents to conduct interview[s] under the old Service

Minute. The Petitioners state that if the present interview process is cancelled and if fresh

applications are called under the new Service Minute they will not be prejudiced.”

The applications for the posts of Grade I of the Sri Lanka Technical

Education Service were called by the Public Service Commission on 22.02.2019 in

terms of the notice published in the Government Gazette No. 2112 of 22.02.2019

(P6). It spells out the applicable marking scheme as well, which provided prior

S.C.(FR) Application No. 250/2020

27

notice to the prospective applicants informing them of the basis on which the

marks would be given during the interview. This notice was amended by the

Public Service Commission with a publication of an amended marking scheme,

which is applicable to those who have applied on or before 15.03.2019 (P7).

Perusal of P8A to P8I indicate that the Petitioners were called for an interview to

be held on 26.07.2020, for the purpose of evaluating them to be promoted to

Class I of the Service. The amended Service Minute P10, was published by the

Public Service Commission on 06.07.2020.

It is correct to state that when the interviews were held on 26.07.2020, the

Public Service Commission has already taken steps to amend the Service Minute

of the Sri Lanka Technical Education Service, with substantial changes

introduced with such amendments. It appears that the Petitioners have mixed

feelings towards the changes introduced by the amended Service Minute and its

effect on their promotional prospects. Having accepted the new system

introduced by the amended Service Minute P10, as reproduced from their

petition, the Petitioners in their submissions have taken up the position that the

Service Minute 2020 is the Service Minute that should be followed and a Grade

promotion could be given to all the Petitioners to Class I of Sri Lanka Technical

Education Service, as they have satisfied all the requirements.

In the amended Service Minute P10, the opening statement makes it clear

that any action taken in terms of the earlier Service Minute P3 is not prejudiced

by the amendments introduced by same as it states “ FOLLOWING Service

Minute of the Sri Lanka Technical Education Service is substituted without prejudice to

any action taken or purportedly have been taken in terms of Service Minute of the Sri

Lanka Technical Education Service published in the Gazette Extraordinary No. 415

S.C.(FR) Application No. 250/2020

28

dated 15.08.1986 of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka and the amendments

made thereto from time to time.”

Therefore, it is clear that the Service Minute P10, has no effect on the

interviews that were called on 23.07.2020, although it was published just 17 days

prior to the scheduled interviews.

In view of the reasons set out in the preceding part of this judgment, it is

my considered view that the Petitioners have failed to establish to the required

degree of proof that their fundamental rights under Articles 12(1) and 14(1)(g)

were infringed by any of the Respondents, as alleged.

The petition of the Petitioners is accordingly dismissed. I make no order as

to costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

K. K. WICKREMASINGHE, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT