SC (CHC) No. 05/2010 JUDGEMENT Page 1 of 12

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

Appeal in terms of Section 754(1) of

the Civil Procedure Code and read

with the Provisions of the High

Court of the Provinces (Special

Provisions) Act No.10 of 1996

The Sampath Bank Limited

No.110, Sir James Peiris Mawatha,

Colombo 02.

PLAINTIFF

Vs

The Pay Phone Company (Pvt) Ltd.

No.367, R.A De Mel Mawatha, and

now at No.18, 5th Lane, Ratmalana.

DEFENDANT

AND NOW

The Pay Phone Company (Pvt) Ltd.

No.367, R.A De Mel Mawatha, and

now at No.18, 5th Lane, Ratmalana.

DEFENDANT-APPELLANT

SC (CHC) No. 05/2010

HC (Civil) 237/2003

SC (CHC) No. 05/2010 JUDGEMENT Page 2 of 12

Vs

The Sampath Bank Limited

No.110, Sir James Peiris Mawatha,

Colombo 02.

PLAINTIFF- RESPONDENT

BEFORE : S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

A.H.M.D. NAWAZ, J. AND

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

COUNSEL : The Defendant-Appellant is absent and unrepresented

Chandaka Jayasundera, PC with Ms. Vishmi Fernando instructed

by Senaka Hewawitharana for the Plaintiff-Respondent.

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS : Defendant-Appellant on 24th November 2014

Plaintiff-Respondent on 22nd April 2015

ARGUED ON : 1st November 2021

DECIDED ON : 9th June 2022

S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

The Sampath Bank Limited (Plaintiff-Respondent to this action) instituted the

present action against The Pay Phone Company (Pvt) Ltd. (Defendant-Appellant to this

action) in the High Court of Colombo (Civil) by way of Plaint dated 17th October 2003.

The Plaintiff-Respondent sought a judgement and decree against the

Defendant-Appellant to pay the Plaintiff-Respondent a sum of Rs. 3,554,729/08 and a

further sum of Rs. 2,802,778/08 from 28th May 2003 up to date of judgement and pay

SC (CHC) No. 05/2010 JUDGEMENT Page 3 of 12

interest at the rate of 17% on the aforesaid amount. Secondly, they sought a

judgement and decree against the Defendant-Appellant to pay the Plaintiff-

Respondent a sum of Rs. 690,371/02 and a further sum of Rs.646,250/62 from 28th May

2003 up to date of judgement and to pay interest at the rate of 28% on the

aforementioned aggregated amount.

Following the proceedings of the High Court, the Defendant-Appellant

instituted action before this Court by Petition dated 7th September 2007 appealing

against the Orders granted by the Learned High Court Judge on the 7th March 2007

which decided to proceed with the case as per Section 145 of the Civil Procedure Code,

and the decision dated 24th July 2007 which entered judgement in favour of the

Plaintiff-Respondent. The Defendant-Appellant further prays this Court to order trial

de novo from the inception and allow Defendant-Appellant to raise defences, grant

cost and other suitable remedies.

Facts

Upon the Plaintiff-Respondent filing Plaint with the reliefs prayed for as above

to recover certain monies lent to the Defendant-Appellant, the Defendant-Appellant

denied the claim and sought for a dismissal of the Plaint by the Plaintiff-Respondent.

The parties agreed on 3 admissions and 45 issues out of which 19 issues were raised

by the Plaintiff-Respondent and 26 by the Defendant-Appellant. Upon perusing the

record, I find certain events regarding the parties before the Commercial High Court

worth noting.

On 2nd May 2005 the Plaintiff-Respondent was not ready for the hearing as they

were unable to obtain the required documents as it was a Bank Holiday. On 24th

February 2006, a date was moved for further trial as the Plaintiff-Respondent’s lawyer

was not in the country on that day, On 26th August 2006 Plaintiff-Respondent moved

for a date on a personal difficulty of the counsel. Court refixed matter for trial on 7th

December and granted permission to the Plaintiff-Respondent to tender examination

on chief by affidavit on 7th November.

SC (CHC) No. 05/2010 JUDGEMENT Page 4 of 12

On 7th November 2006 the Plaintiff-Respondent’s first witness submitted an

affidavit as Evidence in chief. When the matter was called for cross examination the

counsel for the Defendant-Appellant was not prepared for the same stating the reason

that it was a calling date and not a trial date. On 7th December 2006 when the

Defendant-Appellant was asked to cross-examine the witness, Counsel for the

Defendant-Appellant stated that he was unaware that the matter was called for trial

hence is unprepared and moved for a further date. There were no representatives from

the Defendant-Appellant present. The Directors of Defendant-Appellant whose

signatures were in the affidavit were asked to come to court since the names were not

clearly mentioned and the Attorney at Law of the Defendant-Appellant was to be

present in court the next day due to a discrepancy of the address provided in her proxy.

The affidavit of the first witness of the Plaintiff-Respondent was given to the Counsel

of the Defendant-Appellant.

On 7th March 2007 all persons who were sent notice by court to be present were

absent. The Counsel that appeared for the Defendant-Appellant, Mr. Anusha

Wickramasinghe, stated his inability to act on behalf of the Defendant-Appellant as he

had not received any instructions from the Defendant-Appellant and could not

communicate with them. It was further submitted that he had informed Defendant-

Appellant company by letter requesting them to be present in court on March 7th. The

names of the Defendant-Appellant and counsel Seneviratne’s names were called in

court but they were absent despite having sent a letter to the address mentioned in

the proxy. The witness of the Plaintiff-Respondent was present for further evidence

and the Counsel for the Plaintiff-Respondent requested the court to decide as per 145

of the Civil Procedure Code, which was granted on the same date.

On 24th April 2007, Defendant-Appellant made an application to revoke the

proxy, accept new proxy, set aside Order on 7th March and for permission to take up

defences against Petition and Affidavit. On 26th April 2007 the Defendant-Appellant

requested court not to deliver judgment until the Defendant-Appellant was permitted

SC (CHC) No. 05/2010 JUDGEMENT Page 5 of 12

to present evidence with the reasoning that he couldn’t obtain services of an Attorney

at Law after the Attorney at Law who appeared previously withdrew. Court rejected the

application by Defendant-Appellant noting that previous Attorney at Law withdrew

since he was not properly instructed, and the Director of Defendant-Appellant and

Attorney at Law were not present even after being notified. The High Court Judge

specially noted that the Defendant-Appellant had sufficient time and more to obtain

services of an Attorney at Law. The learned Judge further noted that the Director of

Defendant-Appellant had signed Proxy to be revoked, two Affidavits compared to the

Petition as if signed by two different people when it was the same person, which was

admitted by Director of Defendant-Appellant. The Learned Judge noted that the

Defendant-Appellant was avoiding court proceedings and attempting to mislead

court. In terms of the proxies the High Court judge noted the discrepancies in the

revocation papers filed to revoke proxy of the Defendant-Appellant’s instructing

Attorney and decided not to consider such application.

On this date the learned High Court Judge mentioned that as per the affidavit,

the Plaintiff-Respondent had sought permission to provide for further evidence due

to certain information not having been produced and the Counsel for the Plaintiff-

Respondent requested for further date to provide evidence. A reference has been

made in the Journal Entries that the Plaintiff-Respondent tendered further affidavit and

Court fixed matter for judgement on 7th July 2007. The Defendant-Appellant claims

that these documents were not served on the Defendant-Appellant and that the

Defendant-Appellant was not given an opportunity to cross-examine the Plaintiff-

Respondent’s Witness on the purported further affidavit.

The case was fixed for judgement on 24th July on which date the Judgement

was delivered in favour of Plaintiff-Respondent.

On 18th July 2007, the Defendant-Appellant filed revocation of previous proxy with

written consent of the previous Attorney at Law and the Defendant-Appellant, and

filed new proxy of Mr. Ruwan Rodrigo, Attorney at Law and they moved to accept the

SC (CHC) No. 05/2010 JUDGEMENT Page 6 of 12

same. On 24th July, on the date judgement was pronounced, the Plaintiff-Respondent

was directed to file Objections against application by Defendant-Appellant for

revocation of proxy and appointment of new Attorney at Law on 3rd September 2007.

Subsequently no order was made regarding the revocation of proxy.

At this juncture it is important to note that the Defendant-Appellant has

followed a similar pattern in proceedings of this Court.

In terms of conduct pertaining to Attorneys at law, it is apparent by the above

facts that Counsel had withdrawn due to the failure of the client to instruct them

sufficiently. Further, the Defendant-Appellant had failed to procure services of an

Attorney at law when the Proxy of the previous Attorney at Law was revoked, albeit

having had sufficient time to do so. In the present Court, the Defendant-Appellant

revoked appointment of Mr. Ruwan Rodrigo, Attorney at Law in 2012. The proxy for

appointment of Attorneys of Paul Ratnayake Associates was filed in February 2013 and

revoked in September 2015. Thereafter, Mrs. R.A Lanka R. Dharmasiri, Attorney at Law

was appointed by proxy on 8th October 2015 and revocation of proxy was received by

this Court on 2nd August 2018. There have not been any proxies filed subsequently and

the Defendant-Appellant has since been absent and unrepresented.

Notices sent on numerous occasions have returned undelivered stating reasons

as that no such company exists at that address, and that the Defendant-Appellant has

left the place. This Court has noted on the 13th October 2020 that the Defendant-

Appellant is not diligently prosecuting the case and fixed this matter for argument

even in the absence of the Defendant-Appellant. On the date of argument, the

Defendant-Appellant was absent and unrepresented despite the attempts of this Court

to serve notice, all of which have returned undelivered. I have perused the record and

observe that the behaviour of the Defendant-Appellant does not appear to be isolated

incidents but rather a pattern of behaviour.

SC (CHC) No. 05/2010 JUDGEMENT Page 7 of 12

As the events before both the High Court and the present Court have been

established, I find it pertinent to address the grounds of appeal and prayer for appeal

as pleaded before this Court by the Defendant-Appellant

Relief Prayed for by the Defendant-Appellant

The Defendant-Appellant in the Petition has urged the grounds of appeal as:

a) The said judgment is contrary to law and evidence transpired in the said matter

b) The said judgment is contrary to the principles of natural justice wherein the

Appellant had not been afforded an opportunity to purge default

c) The said judgment is totally inconsistent with the applicable legal principles

and procedures specially the provisions of the Civil Procedure Code

d) The said Judgment is contrary to legal precedents created by our Superior

Court in similar circumstances and,

e) The said judgment had been entered contrary to the evidence transpired in the

Case and without affording the Appellant an opportunity to defend itself in a

meaningful manner.

However, I find that the above grounds lack specificity and have been left

purposefully vague. Despite allegations that the judgment is contrary to principles of

Natural Justice, there has been no elaboration as to the manner in which such a

violation has occurred. Despite urging this Court that the judgment is inconsistent with

relevant legal principles, the Civil Procedure Code, legal precedents, the grounds nor

the Petition in itself specifies which principles, which provisions of the Civil Procedure

Code or which cases establishing precedent the Defendant-Appellant refers to.

The Defendant-Appellant prays:

a) To set aside and/or vacate and/or vary the judgment dated 24 July 2007 in the

Commercial High Court Case No: 273/2003 (i)

b) To set aside the Order of Learned High Court Judge dated 7th March 2007 by

fixing the matter for judgment in terms of section 145 of the Civil Procedure

SC (CHC) No. 05/2010 JUDGEMENT Page 8 of 12

Code and permit the Appellant to defend the case by cross-examination notice

and leading evidence of the defence.

c) In the alternative direct the Learned High Court Judge to conduct an inquiry

into Appellant’s application to purge default in terms of Section 839 of the Civil

Procedure Code or

d) In the alternative direct the Learned High Court Judge to commence and

conduct a trial de novo

And to grant cost and such other further reliefs as to the Court shall meet.

As such any specificity can only be found in the prayer for relief as to which

provisions of the Civil Procedure Code the Defendant-Appellant relies on.

Section 145 of the Civil procedure Code states as follows:

“If any party to an action, to whom time has been granted, fails to produce

his evidence, or to cause the attendance of his witnesses, or to perform any

other act necessary to the further progress of the action, for which time

has been allowed, the court may, notwithstanding such default, proceed to

decide the action forthwith.”

As clearly enumerated above, the Defendant-Appellant had been granted sufficient

opportunity which they have failed to utilize, resulting in a justified exercise of this

provision by the High Court Judge. As such, there are no circumstances leading to the

granting of any specific relief as prayed for by the Defendant-Appellant.

The Defendant-Appellant prays for the High Court Judge to be directed to

exercise the powers under Section 839 of the Civil Procedure Code which states:

“Nothing in this Ordinance shall be inherent deemed to limit or otherwise

affect the powers of court save inherent power of the court to make such

orders as may be necessary for the ends of justice or to prevent abuse of

the process of the court.”

(Emphasis Added)

SC (CHC) No. 05/2010 JUDGEMENT Page 9 of 12

This Court recognizes that it is indeed possible to exercise powers under this

provision for the High Court to allow Defendant-Appellant to purge default. However,

it must be necessary for the ends of justice or to prevent abuse of the process of the

court. Indeed, in the present instance, allowing for this application would have been

for the High Court Judge to do the contrary in facilitating the abuse of process of the

court by the Defendant-Appellant in light of their conduct before both the High Court

in itself, as well as in the Supreme Court.

Despite praying for an opportunity to purge default, The Defendant-Appellant has

not mentioned the relevant provisions of the Civil Procedure Code for the same nor

discussed them at any point in the Petition or Written Submissions before this Court.

As such, I believe that since this application urges such an opportunity to purge default,

it is pertinent to emphasise Section 86(2) which states:

“Where, within fourteen days of the service of the decree entered against

him for default, the defendant with notice to the plaintiff makes

application to and thereafter satisfies court, that he had reasonable

grounds for such default, the court shall set aside the judgment and decree

and permit the defendant to proceed with his defence as from the stage of

default upon such terms as to costs or otherwise as to the court shall

appear proper.”

As per the above, it was incumbent upon the Defendant-Appellant to

satisfy the court that they had reasonable grounds for such default. Despite the

Application having been made for the same, the Defendant-Appellant had no

such reasonable grounds that would result in the court setting aside the decision

to proceed as per Section 145 of the Civil Procedure Code. I believe that given

the circumstances of failure to appear before the said court, it is reasonable for

the court not to allow purging of default, which would only have led to further

delay in proceedings.

SC (CHC) No. 05/2010 JUDGEMENT Page 10 of 12

Additionally, despite the Defendant-Appellant attempting to vaguely

invoke the powers of the court under Section 839 as above, I must emphasize

that such exercise of powers is discretionary. A Court has to be cautious in

exercising such powers and must only do so in circumstances that warrant the

same. Contrary to the request of the Defendant-Appellant, I find that refusal to

exercise inherent powers in a manner prayed for by the Defendant-Appellant is

indeed in the interest of preventing abuse of process of court.

In terms of existing precedent in similar circumstances which the

Defendant-Appellant avers to almost in the passing, I find that existing

precedent does not do any favours to the Defendant-Appellant.

In the case of David Appuhamy V. Yassassi Thero (1987) 1 SLR 253, it

was stated that:

“An ex parte order made in default of appearance of a party will not be

vacated if the affected party fails to give a valid excuse for his default.”

In further interpreting the above provisions, the case of Sanicoch Group of

Companies v. Kala Traders (Pvt) Ltd (2016) BLR 44 considered the standard set by

the above as follows:

“The above section requires the Defendant to satisfy court that the

Defendant had reasonable grounds for such default. To state very briefly

is that, the Defendant party need to satisfy court which would mean, to

meet the expectations or desires, to be accepted by as adequate in the

circumstances. What should or would be adequate needs to be only

reasonable grounds. It is well known according to case law that inquires

on application to set aside an ex-parte decree is not regulated by any

specific provision of the Civil Procedure Code but such inquiries must be

conducted consistent with rules of Natural Justice and the requirement of

fairness”

SC (CHC) No. 05/2010 JUDGEMENT Page 11 of 12

As such, the burden was upon the Defendant-Appellant to prove circumstances

justifying the Court exercising the above provisions, especially that of Section 839. The

case of Sanicoch Group of Companies v. Kala Traders (Pvt) Ltd refers to De

Fonseka Vs. Dharmawardena (1994) 3 SLR 49 in the Court of Appeal where it was

considered

“Section 839 of the Civil Procedure Code recognises the inherent power of

the Court to make an order as may be necessary for the ends of justice.

There is no error or illegality that has caused any prejudice to the

substantive rights of the parties.”

In light of the same, based on the circumstances outlined above, with special attention

to the conduct of the Defendant-Appellant themselves, I do not find that the refusal

to exercise the inherent powers of the court under the abovementioned sections

amounts to any miscarriage of justice.

It appears that the decision by the High Court Judge on the 7th March 2007 was

necessary in order to avoid any further delay and the appeal to the same does not

have any merit. In any case, the Petition has only been filed on the 20th of September

2007. This application is time barred as a period of over six months, a duration much

later than the appealable period, has elapsed since this Order by the learned High

Court Judge. As such this ground of appeal fails on its own merits

Pertaining to the appeal against the final order on 24th July 2007, for the

purpose of completeness, I perused the facts of this case and the final order, and I do

not find any illegality or irregularity in following the procedure. Under the

circumstances I find the Order of the Trial Judge is not void due to any unjudicial

conduct as alleged by the Defendant-Appellant.

As such the Defendant-Appellant has not succeeded in adducing sufficient valid

reasoning before either court to warrant vacating the decree by the previous court. As

the Defendant-Appellant has not prayed for any further specific relief, In the interest

SC (CHC) No. 05/2010 JUDGEMENT Page 12 of 12

of discouraging abuse of Judicial process by parties, I find that the decisions of the

High Court are justified in these circumstances.

Based on the above facts and circumstances and considering all matters

outlined in the Petition and Written Submissions by the parties, I dismiss this

application with cost. In addition to the above cost, I order Sum of Rupees Five

Hundred Thousand to be paid by the Defendant-Appellant as punitive cost, the money

to be deposited at the Commercial High Court of Colombo.

Appeal Dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

A.H.M.D. NAWAZ, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT