SC. Spl. LA. No. 57/2017

1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Special Leave to Appeal in terms of Article 127 read with Article 128 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. SC. Spl. LA. No. 57/2017 K. A. Shantha Udayalal CA. Appeal No. CA 25/2010 Accused-Appellant-Petitioner High Court of Gampaha Case No. 302/2004 Vs. The Hon. Attorney General Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12. Complainant-Respondent- Respondent

BEFORE : Sisira J. de Abrew, J.

Priyantha Jayawardena, PC, J. and

K. T. Chitrasiri, J.

COUNSEL : Indica Mallawaratchy for the Accused-

Appellant-Petitioner.

SC. Spl. LA. No. 57/2017

2

Shanaka Wijesinghe, DSG, for the Attorney

General.

ARGUED & DECIDED ON : 30.01.2018

Sisira J. de Abrew, J.

Heard both Counsel in support of their respective

cases.

We are inclined to grant leave in this case on questions

of law set out in paragraph 9 (a) and (b) of the petition of appeal dated

16/03/2017 which are set out below:-

(a). Have their Lordships erred by concluding that the trial

judges are empowered to utilize the police statements

of witnesses, inquest evidence and non-summary

evidence not produced at the trial for the purpose of

dissecting the case facts and evidence to ascertain the

truth at the trial?

(b). Have their Lordships erred by failing to consider that

the trial judge had perused, relied upon and compared

the police statement, inquest evidence and the non-

summary evidence with that of the substantive

evidence of the sole eye-witness at the time of writing

the judgment?

SC. Spl. LA. No. 57/2017

3

We have perused the judgment of the trial Judge and

we are of the opinion that the learned trial Judge has utilized the police

statement of the alleged eye witness, non-summary evidence and

inquest evidence which were not properly admitted in evidence. The

question that must be considered is whether the learned trial Judge is

permitted under the law to use the police statement, non-summary

evidence and evidence led at the inquest at the time of writing the

judgment when the said matters were not properly admitted in

evidence.

In this connection it is relevant to consider certain

judicial decisions of this Court. In Inspector of Police, Gampaha Vs.

Perera 33 NLR page 69, the Court observed the following facts: “Where

after examining the Complainant and his witnesses, the Magistrate

cited the police to produce extracts from the Information Book for his

perusal, before issuing process”. It was held that the use of the

Information Book was irregular.

In Wickramasinghe Vs. Fernando 29 NLR page 403,

the following facts were observed by Court. “Where a Magistrate

referred to the Police Information Book for the purpose of testing the

credibility of a witness by comparing his evidence with a statement

made by him to the police”. Court held as follows: “The use of the

Police Information Book was irregular”.

In Paulis Appu Vs. Don Davit 32 NLR page 335, the

following facts were observed by Court. “Where at the close of a case,

the Police Magistrate reserved judgment noting that he wished to

SC. Spl. LA. No. 57/2017

4

peruse the Information Book”. Court held as follows: “The use of

Information Book for the purpose of arriving at a decision was

irregular”. Considering the principles laid down in the above judicial

decisions, we hold that the trial Judge has no power to utilize the

statements made by the witness to the police, inquest evidence and

non-summary evidence when they were not properly admitted in

evidence.

In the present case, it is very clear that the learned

High Court Judge has used the police statement, non-summary

evidence and inquest evidence which were not properly admitted in

evidence. I therefore hold that the decision of the learned trial Judge to

peruse the said documents was wrong and contrary to law.

The learned Judges of the Court of Appeal have made

the following observations in their judgment dated 15/02/2017.

“However, the statement made to the police, inquest evidence and non-

summary evidence can be utilized by the learned trial Judge for the

purpose of guidance when dissecting the case facts and evidence to

ascertain the truth during the course of the trial and not rely upon the

above to form the judgment without considering the material facts”.

When I consider the above judicial decision, I am of the

opinion that the observation by the Court of Appeal Judges is wrong.

I would like to refer to a judicial decision in

Punchimahaththaya Vs. The State 76 NLR page 564 wherein the Court

held as follows: “Court of Criminal Appeal (or the Supreme Court in

appeal) has no authority to peruse statements of witnesses recorded by

SC. Spl. LA. No. 57/2017

5

the Police in the course of their investigation (i.e. statement in the

Information Book) other than those properly admitted in evidence by

way of contradiction or otherwise. Section 122(3) of the Criminal

Procedure Code which enables such statements to be sent for to aid the

Court is applicable only to Courts of inquiry or trial”.

The trial Judge when convicting the Accused has used

the police statement made by the witness and the evidence of the

witness given at the non-summary inquiry and the inquest proceedings.

This decision of the trial Judge is also wrong and contrary to law.

Considering all the above judicial decisions, I hold that

the decision of the learned trial Judge to peruse the said document was

wrong and contrary to law. For the above reasons, I also hold that the

judgment of the Court of Appeal is contrary to law.

Considering all these matters, we are unable to

permit the judgment of the Court of Appeal and the High Court to

stand. We therefore, set aside both judgments of the Court of Appeal

and the High Court. In view of the conclusions reached above, we

answer the above questions of law in the affirmative.

Having considered the evidence led at the trial, we

order a re-trial.

Learned High Court Judge of Gampaha is directed to

expeditiously conclude this case.

Registrar of this Court is directed to send a copy of this

SC. Spl. LA. No. 57/2017

6

judgment to the High Court and the Court of Appeal.

Registrar of the Court of Appeal is hereby directed to

send the original case record to the High Court of Gampaha.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME CORUT

Priyantha Jayawardena, PC, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

K. T. Chitrasiri, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Ahm