IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Captain M.B.A. Dissanayake,

No. 126/5A,

Old Puttalam Road,

Tisa Wewa,

Anuradhapura.

Petitioner

SC APPEAL NO: SC/APPEAL/15/2021

SC LA NO: SC/SPL/LA/147/2019

CA APPLICATION NO: CA/WRIT/299/2013

Vs.

1. General Jagath Jayasooriya,

Chief of Defence Staff,

Block 05, BMICH,

Colombo 07.

2. Lieutenant General R.M.D. Ratnayake,

Army Headquarters,

Colombo 03.

3. Brigadier D.D.U.K. Hettiarachchi,

Army Headquarters,

Colombo 03.

4. Colonel S.S. Waduge,

Army Headquarters,

Colombo 03.

2

SC/APPEAL/15/2021

5. Colonel H.G.P.M. Kariyawasam,

Office of Chief of Defence Staff,

Block 05, BMICH,

Colombo 07.

Respondents

AND NOW BETWEEN

Captain M.B.A. Dissanayake,

No. 126/5A, Old Puttalam Road,

Tisa Wewa, Anuradhapura.

Petitioner-Appellant

Vs.

1. General Jagath Jayasooriya,

Chief of Defence Staff,

Block 05, BMICH,

Colombo 07.

2. Lieutenant General R.M.D. Ratnayake,

Army Headquarters,

Colombo 03.

3. Brigadier D.D.U.K. Hettiarachchi,

Army Headquarters,

Colombo 03.

4. Colonel S.S. Waduge,

Army Headquarters,

Colombo 03.

5. Colonel H.G.P.M. Kariyawasam,

Office of Chief of Defence Staff,

Block 05, BMICH,

Colombo 07.

Respondent-Respondents

3

SC/APPEAL/15/2021

Before: Buwaneka Aluwihare, P.C., J.

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Faisz Musthapha, P.C., with Ranil Samarasooriya,

Thushani Machado, Didula Rajapaksha and Madhava de

Alwis for the Petitioner-Appellant.

Chaya Sri Nammuni, D.S.G., for the Respondent-

Respondents.

Argued on: 20.06.2022

Written submissions:

by the Petitioner-Appellant on 09.08.2022.

by the Respondent-Respondents on 15.06.2022.

Decided on: 05.09.2023

Samayawardhena, J.

Factual matrix

The Appellant was a captain in the Sri Lanka Army attached to the 5th

Sri Lanka National Guard at the time material to this appeal. Some

members of the 12th Gajaba Regiment of the Sri Lanka Army were

reportedly involved in the illegal activity of removing a large quantity of

gold from a safe in the Puthukudirppu area in the Northern Province

during humanitarian operations in March 2009. The Appellant was

indirectly implicated in this act. He is alleged to have been given some

gold in recognition of his knowledge of the illegal transportation of the

said gold on a subsequent occasion. The Appellant totally denies this.

A Court of Inquiry comprising the 3rd-5th Respondents as members had

been appointed to inquire into this matter and report. They found eight

Army personnel including the Appellant involved in this illegal activity.

4

SC/APPEAL/15/2021

At last, the Court of Inquiry recommended that a complaint be made to

the Special Investigation Bureau of the Criminal Investigation

Department of the Sri Lanka Police to conduct a formal investigation into

this matter and to produce suspects in Court to deal with them under

the normal law.

Thereafter, the 2nd Respondent, the Commander of the Army, upon the

evidence led before the Court of Inquiry, made the order dated

13.08.2012 that the Appellant (along with others involved in the act) be

decommissioned and disciplinary action be taken.

The Appellant filed an application in the Court of Appeal dated

01.10.2013 naming the Chief of Defence Staff, the Commander of the

Army, and the three members of the Court of Inquiry as the 1st to 5th

Respondents respectively, seeking to quash the aforesaid determination

of the Commander of the Army dated 13.08.2012 marked P3 by a writ of

certiorari.

The Respondents filed a statement of objections dated 20.07.2015 stating

inter alia that the Commander of the Army sent his opinion and

recommendation dated 18.10.2013 for the withdrawal of the commission

to the secretary of the Ministry of Defence to be communicated to the

President (R14); the commission of the Appellant was withdrawn by the

President by letter dated 28.11.2013 (R15); in terms of section 9(1) of the

Army Act, No. 17 of 1949, as amended, the officers shall be appointed by

commissions under the hand of the President; in terms of section 10 of

the Army Act, every officer shall hold his appointment during the

Presidents pleasure; in view of R15, the application to quash P3 is futile;

and the President has immunity under Article 35(1) of the Constitution.

On this basis, they sought dismissal of the Appellants application.

5

SC/APPEAL/15/2021

After hearing, the Court of Appeal dismissed the application of the

Appellant with costs.

The main basis of the judgment of the Court of Appeal is that although

the 1st Respondent has in P3 dated 13.08.2012 directed that the

commission of the Petitioner be withdrawn, no further action has been

taken thereon. Hence the question of quashing P3 by way of a writ of

certiorari does not arise. As I will demonstrate below, this finding of the

Court of Appeal is erroneous.

Thereafter the Court of Appeal stresses the pleasure principle embodied

in section 10 of the Army Act and concludes that in view of R15 since the

President has approved the withdrawal of the commission of the

Appellant, an order to quash P3 by a writ of certiorari is futile.

This Court granted leave to appeal against the Judgment of the Court of

Appeal on the following questions of law:

(a) Did the Court of Appeal fall into substantial error by failing to

consider that the decision contained in P3 could not have been

made on the basis of the findings of the Court of Inquiry?

(b) Did the Court of Appeal err by failing to appreciate that the

withdrawal of the commission of the Appellant stems from the

decision contained in P3?

(c) Did the Court of Appeal fail to appreciate that the determination

R15 made by the President does not preclude the grant of relief

prayed for by the Appellant?

(d) Did the Court of Appeal err in the application of the pleasure

principle inasmuch as the withdrawal of the commission had been

effected for cause in pursuance of the findings of the Court of

Inquiry?

6

SC/APPEAL/15/2021

The scope of the Court of Inquiry

The Army Courts of Inquiry Regulations of 1952 made by the subject

Minister in terms of section 155 of the Army Act are found in Chapter

357 in the Subsidiary Legislation of Ceylon 1956.

Regulation 2 thereof reads as follows:

A court of inquiry means an assembly of officers, or, of one or more

officers together with one or more warrant or non-commissioned

officers, directed to collect and record evidence and, if so required,

to report or make a declaration with regard to any matter or thing

which may be referred to them for inquiry under these regulations.

Regulation 16 states:

Every court of inquiry shall record the evidence given before it, and

at the end of the proceedings it shall record its findings in respect of

the matter or matters into which it was assembled to inquire as

required by the convening authority.

In terms of Regulation 15, there is no necessity to require the officer

under investigation to be present when proceedings are in progress and

also to allow the witnesses to be cross-examined unless such inquiry

affects the character or reputation of the officer. Regulation 15(1) reads

as follows:

Whenever an inquiry affects the character or the military reputation

of an officer or soldier, the officer or soldier concerned shall be

afforded the opportunity of being present throughout the inquiry. He

shall also be allowed to make a statement, to adduce evidence on

his behalf and to cross-examine any witnesses whose evidence is

likely to affect his character or his military reputation.

7

SC/APPEAL/15/2021

One cannot deny that this inquiry relates to the character and reputation

of the Appellant. Learned Presidents Counsel for the Appellant submits

that, out of the seven witnesses who testified before the Court of Inquiry,

three witnesses testified implicating the Appellant but the Appellant was

allowed to cross-examine only one witness and it was also confined to

only three questions.

There is no dispute that a Court of Inquiry is nothing but a fact-finding

inquiry. It is part of the investigation process. There is no accused tried

on a charge sheet before a Court of Inquiry. Hence a person cannot be

found guilty and punished either by the Court of Inquiry or upon the

recommendations or findings of the Court of Inquiry by another. Vide

Boniface Perera v. Lt. General Sarath Fonseka and Others [2009] BLR 44

at 46, Lokuhennadige v. Lt. General Sarath Fonseka and Others [2010] 2

Sri LR 85 at 93-94, Colonel Fernando v. Lt. General Fonseka and Others

[2010] 2 Sri LR 101, Lt. Harischandra v. Commander of the Army and

Others [2012] 1 Sri LR 416.

The true nature of the proceedings before the Court of Inquiry is

discernible when one reads the recommendation made by the Court of

Inquiry at the end of the proceedings. After identifying the officers who

have been involved in the illegal activity based on the evidence presented

before it, the final recommendation of the Court of Inquiry reads as

follows:

,

,

,

.

8

SC/APPEAL/15/2021

This conclusion of the Court of Inquiry itself indicates that no regular

and complete investigation was conducted by them.

The decision of the Commander of the Army is ultra vires

Upon receipt of the recommendation, what did the Commander of the

Army do? He ordered (not recommended or opined) inter alia that the

commission of the Appellant be withdrawn and disciplinary action be

taken. I must stress that this he did purely on the evidence led and the

findings made by the Court of Inquiry and not on any other basis.

12.

/

.

/

.

13. /

.

He cannot take such a decision on the evidence led and the findings made

by a fact-finding mission. This decision is ultra vires because the decision

maker did not have legal authority to make the decision.

The Army Commanders letter to the Secretary to the Ministry of

Defence

What did the Commander of the Army write to the secretary of the

Ministry of Defence to be communicated to the President by R14? The

relevant part of the letter (paragraphs 2 and 3) reads as follows:

9

SC/APPEAL/15/2021

2. This Officer was found guilty of fraudulently acquiring gold

jewellery belonging to internally displaced persons at

Puthukkudiyiruppu area while serving in 5 Sri Lanka National

Guard. A Court of Inquiry had been appointed to inquire into the said

incident and as per the findings of the Court of Inquiry dated 13

August 2012 it is recommended that the Officers Commission be

withdrawn.

3. Considering the above facts, I am of the opinion that further

employment of this Officer in service would not be in the best interest

of the Army. Therefore, as the Commander of the Army, I am

compelled to seek the direction of His Excellency the President

regarding the further employment of this Officer in service in terms

of the Army Discipline Regulations 1950.

It is a misrepresentation of facts to state that the Appellant was found

guilty of fraudulently acquiring gold jewellery belonging to internally

displaced persons at Puthukudirppu area while serving in the 5th Sri

Lanka National Guard. He was never found guilty of such an offence. He

could not have been found guilty without charges being framed against

him.

The Presidents decision is predicated on the Commanders letter

It is based on this letter that the President decided to withdraw the

commission of the Appellant. The relevant portion of the letter sent by

the secretary of the Ministry of Defence to the Commander of the Army

marked R15 reads as follows:

This has reference to your letter of even No. dated 18.10.2013.

His Excellency the President has approved the withdrawal of

commission of the following officer from the Sri Lanka Army

Volunteer Force with effect from 22.07.2010.

10

SC/APPEAL/15/2021

As stated on the face of the document, the Presidents decision was

entirely predicated upon the contents of the letter of the Commander of

the Army marked R14 quoted above. It was not an independent decision

of the President but purely an approval of the decision made by the

Commander of the Army. For all intents and purposes, the withdrawal of

commission was done by the Commander of the Army and the President

merely approved it.

The Pleasure Principle has no applicability

I agree with learned Presidents Counsel for the Appellant that the Court

of Appeal was not correct when it applied the pleasure principle to the

facts of this case. Although section 10 of the Army Act states that every

officer shall hold his appointment during the Presidents pleasure, it is

crystal clear that the President did not exercise his discretion on that

basis.

Regulation 2 of the Army Discipline Regulations and the discretion

of the Commander

Learned Deputy Solicitor General in drawing attention to Regulation 2 of

the Army Discipline Regulations of 1950 (Chapter 356) found in the

Subsidiary Legislation of Ceylon 1956 which states that The Commander

of the Army shall be vested with general responsibility for discipline in the

army, contends that the Commander was well within his powers when

he made the recommendation to the President regarding the service of

the Appellant and withdrawal of his commission. In this regard, the

learned Deputy Solicitor General strongly relies on the judgment of this

Court in Major K.D.S. Weerasinghe v. Colonel G.K.B. Dissanayake and

Others (SC/FR/444/2009, SC Minutes of 31.10.2017), which was cited

by the Court of Appeal in the impugned judgment. Learned Presidents

Counsel for the Appellant strenuously submits that the said judgment of

11

SC/APPEAL/15/2021

this Court is clearly distinguishable as the petitioner in that case unlike

in the instant case had pleaded guilty to all charges he faced in the

summary trial. I am inclined to agree with the learned Presidents

Counsel.

It is also important to note that the above-mentioned case was not a writ

application but a fundamental rights application whereby an officer of

the Army complained of violation of his fundamental rights guaranteed

under Articles 12(1) and 13(3) of the Constitution on the discharge of the

said officer from service by the Commander of the Army after a Court of

Inquiry. Malalgoda J. (with the agreement of Wanasundera J. and

Aluwihare J.) held:

Regulation 2 of the Army Disciplinary Regulations 1950 provides

that the Commander of the Army shall be vested with the general

responsibility for discipline in the Army and in the case in hand the

Commander acting under the above provision had sought a direction

from His Excellency the President regarding the further retention of

Petitioner. As revealed before us, the above conduct of the

Commander of the Army when seeking a directive from His

Excellency the President was an independent act and was done for

the best interest of the Army in order to maintain the discipline of the

Army.

It is on that basis Malalgoda J. held that there was no violation of Articles

12(1) and 13(3) of the Constitution.

However, in the instant case, as I have already stated, the decision P3

was made on findings of the Court of Inquiry, not in the proper invocation

of Regulation 2 of the Army Disciplinary Regulations. The direction

sought from the President by R14 was not an independent act of the

12

SC/APPEAL/15/2021

Commander but intrinsically interconnected with the findings of the

Court of Inquiry.

For completeness, let me also add that although Regulation 2 of the Army

Discipline Regulations of 1950 states that the Commander of the Army

shall be vested with general responsibility for discipline in the army, there

is no unfettered, untrammeled and unbridged discretion in the modern

administrative law. Our system of government is founded on the rule of

law, and unfettered discretion cannot exist where the rule of law reigns.

Discretion is subject to judicial review.

In Premachandra v. Major Montague Jayawickrema and Another [1994] 2

Sri LR 90 at 105, G.P.S. De Silva C.J. held:

There are no absolute or unfettered discretions in public law;

discretions are conferred on public functionaries in trust for the

public, to be used for the public good, and the propriety of the

exercise of such discretions is to be judged by reference to the

purposes for which they were so entrusted.

In the case of Munasinghe v. Vandergert [2008] 2 Sri LR 233 at 232,

Bandaranayake J. (later C.J.) observes:

Considering the present day administrative functions, there is no

doubt that it is necessary to confer authority on administrative

officers to be used at their discretion. Nevertheless, such

discretionary authority cannot be absolute or unfettered as such

would be arbitrary and discriminatory, which would negate the

equal protection guaranteed in terms of Article 12(1) of the

Constitution.

13

SC/APPEAL/15/2021

Further in Rajavarothiam Sampanthan and Others v. Attorney General

and Others (SC/FR/351-356, 358-361/2018, SC Minutes of

13.12.2018), H.N.J. Perera C.J. held at 67:

A related principle is that our Law does not recognize that any public

authority, whether they be the President or an officer of the State or

an organ of the State, has unfettered or absolute discretion or power.

Lord Wrenbury in the celebrated House of Lords decision in Roberts v.

Hopwood [1925] AC 578 at 613 articulated this in the following manner:

A person in whom is vested a discretion must exercise his discretion

upon reasonable grounds. A discretion does not empower a man to

do what he likes merely because he is minded to do so he must in

the exercise of his discretion do not what he likes but what he ought.

In other words, he must, by the use of his reason, ascertain and

follow the course which reason directs. He must act reasonably.

Lord Denning, M.R. in Breen v. Amalgamated Engineering Union [197I] 2

Q.B. 175 at 190 stressed the importance of the public authority

exercising discretion being focused on considerations only relevant to the

matter at hand without being strayed into irrelevant considerations.

Exercising discretion in good faith alone is not sufficient. Discretion must

be exercised according to law.

The discretion of a statutory body is never unfettered. It is a

discretion which has to be exercised according to law. That means

at least this: the statutory body must be guided by relevant

consideration and not by irrelevant. If its decision is influenced by

extraneous considerations which it ought not to have taken into

account, then the decision cannot stand. No matter that the statutory

body may have acted in good faith; nevertheless, the decision will

be set aside. That is established by Padfield v. Minister of

14

SC/APPEAL/15/2021

Agriculture, Fisheries and Food [1968] A.C. 997 which is a landmark

in modern administration law.

Professor Paul Craig, in Administrative Law (4th Edition, 1999) at page

507 explains how the Courts can shape the proper exercise of discretion

by public bodies.

First, the courts can impose controls on the way in which the

discretion is exercised, with the objective of ensuring that there has

been no failure to exercise the discretion. Limitations on delegation,

and on the extent to which an authority can proceed through policies

or rules, are the two main controls of this type. Secondly, constraints

can be placed upon an administrative authority in order to ensure

that there has been no misuse of power. The judiciary can impose

substantive limits on the power of an administrative body on the

ground that it is thereby ensuring that the body does not act illegally,

outside the remit of its power. Thirdly, the court can develop

principles to make sure that administrative authority does not

misuse its power by acting irrationally, thereby placing substantive

limits on the power of that authority.

Is the Presidents decision a stumbling block to grant relief to the

Appellant?

The main argument of learned Deputy Solicitor General is that, in view

of the Presidents decision contained in R15, the Appellants application

must be dismissed on futility because even if P3 and R14 are declared

null and void, R15 will survive. I am unable to agree with this argument

on several reasons.

What is the relief sought by the Appellant from the Court of Appeal? The

Appellant sought only to quash P3 by a writ of certiorari. Even if R14 and

15

SC/APPEAL/15/2021

R15 survive, there is no impediment for the Court to quash P3 by way of

a writ certiorari.

In Flying Officer Ratnayake v. Commander of Air Force and Others [2008]

2 Sri LR 162, after a Court of Inquiry, the Commander of the Air Force

recommended that the commission of the petitioner who was an officer

of the Air Force be withdrawn, and the President approved it. The

petitioner filed an application in the Court of Appeal seeking to quash the

recommendation by certiorari and to compel the respondents by

mandamus to hold a Court Martial in respect of the charges levelled

against him. De Abrew J. with the agreement of Sripavan J. (later C.J.)

quashed the recommendation by certiorari since a recommendation to

withdraw the commission of the petitioner could not have been made

upon findings of a Court of Inquiry but declined to issue mandamus.

Rights of the parties shall be determined at the commencement of

the action

Firstly, it is well settled law that rights of the parties shall be determined

at the time of the institution of the action. The Appellant filed the

application in the Court of Appeal on 01.10.2013 seeking to quash the

decision of the Commander of the Army contained in P3. Subsequent to

the filing of this application, the Commander of the Army wrote R14 to

the secretary of the Ministry of Defence on 18.10.2013. Based on R14,

the decision contained in R15 dated 28.11.2013 was taken by the

President. R14 and R15 came into being after the Appellant had filed the

application in the Court of Appeal.

Decision as a deterrence

Secondly, if a decision of a public authority is plainly ultra vires, even if

quashing it would not give any relief to the suiter, but would only be an

academic exercise, the Court would not act in vain by formally quashing

16

SC/APPEAL/15/2021

the said decision by certiorari as it would inter alia impress upon the

other bodies who discharge functions of public nature that the same fate

will befall on them if they also behave in the same manner. It will act as

a deterrence.

Clive Lewis in Judicial Remedies in Public Law (2nd Edition, London Sweet

& Maxwell, 2000) at page 342 states:

Even if there is no point in granting remedies such as certiorari, so

far as the particular applicant is concerned, there may still be a need

to clarify the law or give guidance for decision-makers in the future.

A court may grant a declaration setting out the true legal position, or

may give judgment clarifying the law but without making a formal

declaration.

In the case of Sundarkaran v. Bharathi [1989] 1 Sri LR 46, the petitioner-

Appellant filed an application seeking certiorari and mandamus after

being denied a liquor license for the year 1987. However, by the time the

matter reached the Supreme Court, it had become purely academic since

the year 1987 had already passed. Nonetheless, whilst allowing the

appeal, Amarasinghe J. took the view that The court will not be acting in

vain in quashing the determination not to issue the licence for 1987

because the right of the petitioner to be fully and fairly heard in future

applications is being recognised. Similar conclusion was reached by

Sripavan J. (later C.J.) in Nimalasiri v. Divisional Secretary, Galewela

[2003] 3 Sri LR 85.

Are recommendations amenable to writ jurisdiction?

Learned Deputy Solicitor General further submits that R14 contains a

recommendation and not a decision, and recommendations are not

amenable to writ jurisdiction. The Court of Appeal has also held that In

any event, R14 is only a recommendation which is not subject to a writ of

17

SC/APPEAL/15/2021

certiorari. As I have already stated the decision in R15 is based on the

misleading recommendation contained in R14.

In Flying Officer Ratnayake v. Commander of Air Force and Others (supra),

De Abrew J. with the agreement of Sripavan J. (later C.J.) quashed the

recommendation of the Commander of the Air Force to the President by

a writ of certiorari.

In Captain Nawarathna v. Major General Sarath Fonseka and Others

[2009] 1 Sri LR 190 at 202, Ratnayake J. (with S.N. Silva C.J. and

Tilakawardane J. agreeing) upheld the decision of the Court of Appeal to

issue writs of certiorari to quash the recommendations:

I note that the Court of Appeal had decided to grant partial relief by

issuing writ of certiorari to set aside the recommendation made by

the 1st Respondent to withdraw the commission and discharge the

Petitioner from the army and a writ of certiorari to quash the

recommendation to dismiss the Petitioner, which decisions will

stand.

The frontiers of the administrative law have expanded over the years.

Hence even recommendations of public authorities can be subject to writ

jurisdiction provided they make serious inroads into the rights of the

people.

In Sri Lanka Telecom Ltd. v. Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka [2020]

1 Sri LR 212, the Supreme Court held that recommendations of the

Human Rights Commission attract writ jurisdiction. In the course of the

Judgment, De Abrew J. at page 220 declared:

If a recommendation of a public body affects the right of an

individual, Superior Courts, in the exercise of their writ jurisdiction,

18

SC/APPEAL/15/2021

have the power to quash such a recommendation by issuing a writ

of certiorari.

In furtherance of this positive development in law, it was held in David

Raja v. Minister of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources Development and

Others [2020] 1 Sri LR 310 at 314 that:

if a recommendation of a public body protects the rights of an

individual, the superior Courts, in the exercise of writ jurisdiction,

have the power to compel the enforcement of such a recommendation

by issuing a writ of mandamus, if the Court is satisfied that the

recommendation is made on compelling grounds.

Conclusion

I answer the questions of law on which leave to appeal was granted in the

affirmative and set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal dated

25.03.2019. The decision of the Commander of the Army contained in P3

dated 13.08.2012 is quashed by a writ of certiorari. The petitioner is

entitled to costs of this Court and the Court of Appeal.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Buwaneka Aluwihare, P.C., J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court