1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application under

and in terms of Article 126 of the

Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Poorna Mayura Kankanige,

Jaliya Sevana No 363 Udupila,

Delgoda

Petitioner

Vs

1. Police Sergeant No. 24141 Senadheera,

Police Station, Bandaranaike Memorial

International Conference Centre,

Colombo 07.

2. Police Constable No. 70825

Jayawardena,

Police Station, Bandaranaike Memorial

International Conference Centre,

Colombo 07.

3. Police Constable No. 77341 Ruwan

Police Station, Bandaranaike Memorial

International Conference Centre,

Colombo 07.

4. Inspector of Police Attharagama

Officer-in-Charge

Police Station, Bandaranaike Memorial

SC/FR/Application No. 160/2014

2

International Conference Centre,

Colombo 07.

5. N. K. Illangakoon,

Inspector General of Police

Police Head Quarters,

Colombo 01.

6. The Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo-12.

Respondents

Before : Priyantha Jayawardena PC, J

Achala Wengappuli, J

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

Counsel : Shantha Jayawardena with D.D Silva for the petitioner

Canishka Witharana with H.M Thilakaratne for the 1st respondent

Saman Galappatti for the 2nd and 3rd respondents

Sajith Bandara, SC for the 5th and 6th respondents

Argued on : 18th January, 2022

Decided on : 29th February, 2024

Priyantha Jayawardena PC, J

Facts of the application

The petitioner filed the instant application stating that his Fundamental Rights guaranteed

under Articles 11 and 12(1) of the Constitution were infringed by the aforementioned

respondents.

3

The petitioner was twenty three years of age at the time of the alleged incident and was a

student of the City School of Architecture. It was stated that he was an Ordinary rating in

the Sri Lanka Volunteer Naval Force and a member of the water polo team of the Sri Lanka

Navy.

Further, an exhibition was organized by the Sri Lanka Institute of Architects at the

Bandaranaike Memorial International Conference Center (hereinafter referred to as BMICH)

from the 22nd to 26th of February, 2012. The petitioner stated that the City School of

Architecture at which he was studying had a stall at the said exhibition and the petitioner was

one of the students in charge of the said stall. The petitioner further stated that during the

exhibition he and the other students who were working at the stall entered and exited BMICH

through Gate No 03 on a pass issued by the management of the BMICH.

The petitioner stated that the exhibition ended at 10.00 p.m. on the 26th of February, 2012.

Thereafter, the petitioner along with two of his friends, loaded part of the equipment from their

stall into the lorry belonging to the petitioners father and left BMICH along with another lorry

carrying equipment from their stall through Gate No. 03.

After the goods were unloaded, both vehicles returned to BMICH to collect the rest of the

equipment from the stall as the management of BMICH wanted the equipment cleared out

before the next day. Thereafter, the other lorry entered BMICH through Gate No. 03 ahead of

the petitioners lorry.

However, when the petitioner attempted to follow the other lorry into the said premises, he was

stopped at the gate by the 1st respondent. The petitioner stated that he showed the 1st

respondent a pass and his student identity card issued by the City School of Architecture.

However, the 1st respondent refused to allow the petitioner to enter the premises with that

particular pass. Hence, the petitioner parked his lorry on the side of the road and got down

from it and walked in through the gate. Thereafter, he gave a telephone call to the management

of the City School of Architecture to inform them of the refusal by the 1st respondent to take

his lorry inside BMICH.

While the petitioner was attempting to contact the management of the City School of

Architecture, he observed that the 1st respondent was walking towards the conference center.

The petitioner further stated that while he was on the telephone, the 1st respondent came back

and closed the gate preventing the petitioner from leaving the BMICH compound.

4

The petitioner stated that thereafter, the 1st respondent came up to the petitioner and asked him

who do you think you are, to call all sorts of people?. The petitioner had informed the 1st

respondent that he attempted to call the management of the City School of Architecture.

Thereafter, 1st respondent suddenly slapped the petitioner on the face. The petitioner then held

the hand of the 1st respondent and told him, uncle, dont hit me. I have done nothing wrong.

The 1st respondent then pushed the petitioner and tried to slap him again. As the petitioner fell

down, the 1st respondent also lost his balance and fell on the petitioner.

The petitioner further stated that when he was on the ground, he saw the 2nd and 3rd

respondents who were wearing traffic uniforms and some other persons dressed in civilian

clothing come towards him. Thereafter, the 2nd respondent who was wearing shoes came up to

the petitioner who was lying on the ground and kicked the petitioners head with his foot while

the 3rd respondent assaulted him. The petitioner stated that he pleaded with the 2nd and 3rd

respondents not to hit him.

Moreover, there were two persons dressed in a yellow t-shirt and a black t-shirt who came with

the 2nd and 3rd respondents and assaulted the petitioner with clubs. Thereafter, his two friends

who were in the other lorry came running towards him. However, the two persons who were

assaulting him prevented them from intervening.

The petitioner stated that he pleaded with his attackers not to hit him. However, he stated that

they dragged him by his legs to the security hut. Thereafter, they closed the door of the said hut

and pushed him to the ground facing him downwards and bound his hands and legs tightly with

a thick elastic cord. Moreover, the 1st to 3rd respondents along with the two other men dressed

in civilian clothing assaulted the petitioner. The petitioner stated that he also heard the person

dressed in a yellow t-shirt saying, it is better to kill this fellow here.

Whilst the petitioner was being assaulted in the security hut, another unknown person entered

the said hut and informed them to stop assaulting him, as the 4th respondent (the OIC) was

approaching the said security hut. After the 4th respondent entered the said hut, the 1st

respondent immediately informed him that the petitioner pushed him to the ground and

assaulted him.

The 4th respondent inquired as to whether anyone saw the incident and the two friends of the

petitioner informed him that the petitioner was assaulted by the 1st respondent and others, and

5

they did not know the reason for it. Then, the 4th respondent slapped one of the petitioners

friends and asked them to leave if they did not know what happened.

Thereafter, the petitioner stated that his legs and hands were untied and he was pushed into the

rear portion of the jeep. Further, he stated that the 4th respondent had sat in the front seat of the

jeep. Furthermore, the 2nd respondent and the unidentified person wearing a black t-shirt got

into the back of the jeep with the petitioner.

The petitioner further stated that he was taken to the Cinnamon Garden Police Station where

the 2nd respondent held the petitioner by the neck and dragged him into the Police Station and

the 4th respondent followed them into the Police Station.

At the Minor Offences Branch, the 2nd respondent pushed the petitioner to the floor and

ordered him to sit on the floor. Thereafter, an unknown policeman approached him and pointed

a gun at him, asking the respondents why did you bring him here? You should have killed him

there itself and then trampled the right hand of the petitioner with his shoe. The petitioner

further stated that the said policeman slapped him on the face. The petitioner heard the 2nd

respondent saying dont hit him now. We have already assaulted him well. We will take care

of him later tonight.

Thereafter, the Principal of the City School of Architecture arrived at the Police Station and

spoke to the petitioner on the events that took place and the petitioner who was in extreme pain

told him with the greatest difficulty what had transpired. The principle then spoke to the police

officers who were at the Police Station and left. The petitioners parents were informed of his

plight by his friends and they arrived at the police station. However, when his parents arrived,

he was in a semi-conscious state and was unable to speak to them.

Afterwards, the petitioner vaguely remembered hearing that he was to be taken to the J.M.O.

and was lifted and put into a vehicle where his father was also present. He stated that he was

then taken to a doctor. However, he did not examine the petitioner but gave a chit to the

police officer to have the petitioner admitted to the hospital. The petitioner stated that he had

no recollection of the events that took place later that night and he was informed by his parents

that he was taken to the Colombo National Hospital where he was admitted to the accident

ward. The petitioner further stated that he remembers being on a trolley to which one of his

hands was handcuffed and two policemen were guarding him.

6

Thereafter the petitioner was admitted to ward No. 72 of the said hospital on the 27th of

February, 2012 at 1.55 a.m. and a series of medical tests, including X-rays were taken by the

said hospital. Further, on the same day a Judicial Medical Officer examined the petitioner. A

Magistrate also visited the petitioner and he informed the said Magistrate about his injuries and

showed him the wounds he had sustained.

On the 27th of February, 2012 (on the same day) in the evening, the petitioner was transferred

to ward No. 32 of the National Hospital and was handcuffed to the bed in the said ward.

Further, on the 29th of February, 2012 a Magistrate visited the ward and remanded the

petitioner until the 2nd of March, 2012. However, on that day, the learned Magistrate enlarged

the petitioner on bail. Thereafter, the petitioner was discharged from the National Hospital on

the 5th of March, 2012.

The petitioner also stated that on the 27th of February, 2012 his father made a complaint to the

Human Rights Commission regarding the assault and torture of the petitioner by the 1st, 2nd 3rd

and 4th respondents. Thereafter, the Human Rights Commission assigned No. HRC/955/12 to

the said complaint. The petitioners father also complained to the Police Head Quarters 'Sahana

Mediriya on the 27th of February, 2012 regarding the assault of the petitioner by the BMICH

Police.

Subsequently, the petitioner produced the diagnosis card issued by the hospital which shows

inter alia, subconjunctival hemorrhage and ecchymosis on the right-side of the eye and an

undisplaced fracture of the right side fronto-zygomatic suture. Further, the medico-legal report

referred to seven injuries on the petitioner, one of which was a fracture of the right fronto-

zygomatic suture, which is considered as a grievous injury as defined by section 311 of the

Penal Code.

In addition to the physical injuries suffered as a result of the assault on the petitioner by the 1st

to 4th respondents, he stated that he also suffered severe psychological trauma. The petitioner

stated that he was examined by Dr. Neil Fernando, Consultant Psychiatrist at the National

Hospital of Colombo on the 14th of March, 2012 and on 21st of March, 2012. Dr. Neil

Fernando by his report dated 21st of March, 2012 informed the J.M.O that the petitioner had

psychological evidence of trauma which may progress to post-traumatic stress disorder.

The petitioner further stated that he became aware that the OIC of the Cinnamon Garden Police

Station had filed a case bearing No. B-8711/01/11 in the Chief Magistrates Court of Colombo

7

alleging that the petitioner assaulted a police officer. Further, the said case was still being

called in the Magistrates Court of Colombo as it was referred to the Attorney Generals

Department for advice.

Furthermore, the petitioner stated that he made a written complaint dated 19th of March, 2012

regarding the assault by the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th respondents to the Human Rights Commission

of Sri Lanka, the Chairman of the National Police Commission and the 5th respondent.

On the 14th of September, 2012 the petitioner received a letter from the Officer in Charge of

the Sahana Mediriya' of the office of the Inspector General informing him that his complaint

was referred to the Deputy Inspector General of Police of the Colombo District and an inquiry

was conducted in which it transpired that the petitioner had been remanded by the learned

Magistrate on charges of assaulting a police officer and that further inquiries will be conducted

on the matter. The petitioner however stated that no further steps were taken by the 5th

respondent with regard to the complaint of the petitioner.

Thereafter, the petitioner stated that the Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka held an

inquiry into the complaint of the petitioner and by its decision dated 12th of May, 2014 found

that the 1st, 2nd and 3rd respondents violated the petitioner's rights guaranteed to him by Articles

11 and 12 of the Constitution and ordered to pay a sum of Rs. 1,000,000 as compensation to

the petitioner.

The petitioner further stated that the Human Rights Commission ordered that a copy of its

findings be transmitted to the 5th and 6th respondents. The decision of the Human Rights

Commission was posted to the petitioners father under registered cover on the 21st of May,

2014 and it was received on the 23rd of May, 2014. Furthermore, the petitioner stated that the

5th respondent has not taken any action with regard to the decision of the Human Rights

Commission of Sri Lanka to date. Further, the 5th respondent failed to act on the complaints

made to them by the petitioner.

The petitioner in his petition sought to challenge inter alia, the arbitrary arrest, detention, the

torture, cruel and degrading punishment meted out to him by the 1st to 4th respondents and the

failure on the part of the 5th respondent to take action regarding the torture of the petitioner

while in police custody.

8

Objections raised by the 1st respondent

The 1st respondent filed objections and stated that he was a Police Sergeant working at the

Police Station at BMICH. He further stated that it is an important location where special

security is needed and therefore, a separate police post was established at the BMICH premises

in order to guard the said premises. It was also stated that stringent traffic controlling measures

were implemented at the said premises in order to ensure the security of the public who enter

the premises and also to ensure smooth traffic flow within the said premises without any

congestion.

The 1st respondent stated that on the 26th of February, 2012 he assumed duty at Gate No. 3

situated at Sarana Road, Colombo 07 at around 10.00 p.m. He further stated that since it was

the final day of the said exhibition, Gate No. 3 was allocated to the vehicles which were

coming to clear the goods brought inside for the said exhibition and a large number of heavy

vehicles were lined up outside the said gate to enter the BMICH premises.

Due to security reasons and space available within the premises, only a limited number of

vehicles were allowed to enter the premises at a given time. Thus, the vehicles which were

lined up outside Sarana Road were allowed to enter the BMICH premises after departure of

vehicles which were inside the premises.

The 1st respondent further stated that when he assumed duties, there was a long queue of

vehicles including lorries, trucks and cabs outside the gate which were waiting for their turn to

enter the premises and he was controlling the vehicle inflow to the BMICH premises where he

allowed the vehicles to enter according to the order in the queue. He further stated that the

entrance of the gate was always kept clear in order to allow the vehicles to exit the premises.

Furthermore, vehicles waiting to enter the premises were kept at a distance so that the entrance

would not be blocked for the exiting vehicles.

However, during this time the petitioner came in his lorry disregarding the queue and stopped

the lorry in front of the gate and blocked the entrance. The petitioner then informed the 1st

respondent to allow him to take his vehicle inside the said premises. At that time, the 1st

respondent informed the petitioner that he could not be allowed to enter the said premises

disregarding the others in the queue, as they were waiting for a long time to enter the said

premises. Hence, the petitioner was ordered to join the queue of the vehicles waiting to enter

9

the BMICH premises. However, the petitioner refused to do so and insisted that he be

permitted to enter the premises out of turn, claiming that he was a Naval Officer.

Further, the 1st respondent also requested the petitioner to move his vehicle from where it was

parked since his lorry was obstructing the exiting vehicles. However, the petitioner disregarded

and disobeyed the said directions given by him and he got down from his vehicle without

moving it.

Thereafter, the petitioner insisted that the 1st respondent open the gate for him to take the lorry

inside. The 1st respondent stated that the petitioner became violent and abused him by grabbing

his uniform and punching him in the face. As a result, both of them lost control and fell down

and thereafter, the petitioner assaulted him.

The 1st respondent stated that he was forty eight years of age at the time of the incident and

hence, he was unable to control the violent behavior of petitioner. Therefore, he called for help

through his walky talky.

Meanwhile, the drivers of the other vehicles who were waiting outside the gate got agitated and

came there and pulled the petitioner away from the 1st respondent. The 2nd respondent who

heard the call for help over the radio communication and the 3rd respondent who saw the

incident arrived at the scene and apprehended the petitioner. The 1st respondent stated that

H.A.S. Indrajith attached to a private security service, who was working at the same gate along

with him, witnessed the entire event. Thus, a statement was recorded from him and it was

produced along with his objections. The 1st respondent also stated that he was severely

assaulted by the petitioner and therefore, he was admitted to the National Hospital of Colombo.

Furthermore, later he became aware that the petitioner was a person with a violent character

and he was charged before the Magistrates Court of Colombo on a previous occasion on

charges of assault and robbery. He also stated that he had an unblemished career in the Police

Department and he would never assault a young boy of the age of 21 years. He stated that it

was the petitioner who assaulted him after having disobeyed his orders.

In the circumstances, the 1st respondent denied the arbitrary arrest, detention, torture, cruel or

degrading treatment of the petitioner as alleged in the petition.

10

Objections of the 2nd and 3rd respondents

The 2nd and 3rd respondents stated that they did not arrest the petitioner nor was the petitioner

subjected to cruel, inhuman and degrading punishment by them.

The said respondents stated that they heard the 1st respondent calling over the walky-talky

saying he is being assaulted and that there is a situation he cannot control' and pleaded

'assistance from other police officers'. Having heard the said message, they rushed to the scene.

The 2nd and 3rd respondents stated that when they reached the scene, they saw the petitioner on

top of the 1st respondent, attacking him while the public was shouting do not hit the police

officer.

Moreover, it was stated that a few civilians dragged the petitioner away from the 1st respondent

and the petitioner ran out of the gate to avoid being attacked by the civilians. At that time, he

slipped and fell on the pavement.

The said respondents stated that, once they took control of the petitioner, they handed him over

to the OIC of the BMICH Police Post. Thereafter, the petitioner was handed over to the

Cinnamon Gardens Police station. Therefore, he was produced under case No. B 8711/01 in the

Magistrates Court Colombo.

The respondents admitted that the Human Rights Commission had given its decision dated 12th

of May, 2014. However, the respondents stated that they had not meted out cruel, inhuman or

degrading punishment or treatment on the petitioner and therefore, have not violated any

Fundamental Rights of the petitioner.

Did the respondents infringe the Fundamental Rights of the petitioner?

Medical Evidence

The Diagnosis Ticket marked as P4 produced along with the petition, shows that the

petitioner was treated for Sub- Conjunctival Hemorrhage and Ecchymosis on the right-side

eye and an undisplaced fracture of the right side of fronto-zygomatic suture. Further, in the

Medico-Legal Report issued by Dr. M.R.O. Suffyan, JMO observed the following 7 injuries on

the petitioner;

11

1. Bilateral intra orbital contusion noted during my examination;

i. Right side measuring 6 2 cm

ii. left side measuring 4 2 cm.

2. During my examination I had an elicited tender swelling over the right side of

the face. Medical notes revealed undisplaced fracture at the right fronto-

zygomatic suture.

3. Abrasion measuring 41 cm situated over the left lower face.

4. During my examination I had observed swelling over the left upper lip associated

with the inner upper lip contusion.

5. During my examination I had elicited tender swelling over the left shoulder area,

both calf muscles and right foot.

6. Linear abrasion measuring 7 cm situated over the back of upper chest on the

right.

7. Tramline contusion, measuring 62 cm situated over back of the left lower

chest.

Further, according to the X-ray, it revealed no fractures in the cervical spine and chest and

according to medical opinion injuries 1 to 7 as mentioned above were all non-grievous injuries.

Furthermore, in the Medico-Legal Report it was stated that the injuries mentioned above were

all caused by a blunt weapon.

Moreover, the injuries referred to above in (2) is a grievous injury.

According to the medical report dated 21st of March, 2012 issued by Dr. Neil Fernando,

Consultant Psychiatrist produced marked as P6, the petitioner has psychological evidence of

trauma. Moreover, the said report stated that the consultant doctor recommended a regular

assessment of symptoms severity, trauma focused counseling and medications to improve his

symptoms, at the forensic psychiatry Unit of National Hospital of Colombo.

12

The allegation of torture and violation of equal protection of the Law

In the statement of objections, the 1st, 2nd and 3rd respondents admitted their presence at the

scene and taking the petitioner to the security hut at the BMICH. The petitioner submitted that

he was admitted to the National Hospital of Colombo on the 27th of February, 2012 early in the

morning and was discharged from the hospital on the 5th of March, 2012. Further, according to

the said medical records the injuries were caused by a blunt weapon. Furthermore, the

petitioner was examined by the JMO on the 27th of February, 2012 and the Medico-Legal

Report stated the short history given by the patient as;

Alleges to had been assaulted by a Police Officer (who was on duty) by hand to

the head and same time another 10 Police Officers in civil assaulted him with

wooden pole to the body and taken him into Police guard room and assaulted by

another 3 Police Officers. Incident took place on 26.02.2012 10.30 pm at

B.M.I.C.H Colombo.

Therefore, the petitioner was consistent in his narration of the incident and his version is

corroborated by the medical evidence. Thus, he satisfied the test of consistency in establishing

his credibility. Moreover, the petitioner disclosed the alleged incident without any delay to the

doctors at the hospital and the JMO, thus satisfied the test of spontaneity.

On the other hand, according to the 1st respondent, he was severely assaulted by the petitioner.

However, according to the medical report pertaining to the 1st respondent, he had only one

contusion, whereas, the petitioner had sustained severe injuries was in hospital from the 27th of

February, 2012 to 5th of March, 2015. Thus, the medical evidence shows that the petitioner had

been assaulted by the 1st, 2nd and 3rd respondents.

The material before court corroborates the version of the petitioner. Particularly by the medical

evidence. Further, the medical reports show that the petitioner has suffered severe injuries.

Such injuries could not have been caused by a fall. Hence, the version of the respondents

cannot be accepted.

The Police Notice dated 26th of February, 2012 at 11.55 p.m. shows that the petitioners body

was examined and there were no injuries to be found on the surface of his body. Hence, the

petitioner was handed over to the Cinnamon Gardens Police until his matter was taken up in

courts.

13

Article 11 of the Constitution provides as follows;

no person shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading

treatment or punishment.

Further, apart from the physical injuries caused to the petitioner, he suffered psychological

trauma as a result of the incident under reference by the 1st, 2nd and 3rd respondents.

Hence, the injuries, the mental trauma and the pain inflicted on the petitioner amounts to an

infringement of Article 11 of the Constitution.

A similar view was expressed in Adikari and another v Amarasinghe and others (2003) 1

SLR 270 at 274 where it was held;

However, the fundamental rights guaranteed in terms of Article 11 are not

restricted to mere physical injury. The words used in Article 11, viz. 'torture.

cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment would take many forms of

injuries which could be broadly categorized as physical and psychological and

would embrace countless situations that could be faced by the victims.

Accordingly, the protection in terms of Article 11 would not be restricted to mere

physical harm caused to a victim, but would certainly extend to a situation where

a person had suffered psychologically due to such action.

Further, in G.Jeganathan v Attorney General (1982) 1 SLR 294 at 302 it was held;

where public officers are accused of violating the provisions of Article 11,

the allegations must be strictly proved, for if proved they will carry serious

consequences for such officers

Moreover, having regard to the facts and circumstances of the said incident, I am of the

opinion that the petitioner proved his case with a high degree of certainty. Accordingly, I hold

that the 1st to the 3rd respondents have violated the Fundamental Rights of the petitioner

guaranteed by Articles 11 and 12(1) of the Constitution.

14

I order the 1st to 3rd respondents to pay a sum of Rs. 30,000/- within a month from the delivery

of this judgment (each of the said respondents should pay Rs. 10,000/-).

Judge of the Supreme Court

Achala Wengappuli, J

I Agree Judge of the Supreme Court

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

I Agree Judge of the Supreme Court