==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal under and in terms of Article 128 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka read with Section 5C(1) of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990, as amended

SC Appeal No: 26/2011 SC/HC/CALA No: 308/2009 NCP/HCCA/ARP/00234/2002 (F) DC Anuradhapura Case No: 17585/Land

T.M.K. Somawathie, Karambewa, Kalakaramba Wewa.

PLAINTIFF

Vs. (1) H.M. Sediris Appuhamy (2) H.M. Wimalawathie (3) H.M. Premarathne

All at, Palugaswewa No.1, Kalakaramba Wewa. DEFENDANTS (1) H.M. Wimalawathie (2) H.M. Premarathne

Both at Palugaswewa No.1, Kalakaramba Wewa. 2ND & 3RD DEFENDANTS – APPELLANTS

2

Vs.

T.M.K. Somawathie, Karambewa, Kalakaramba Wewa. PLAINTIFF – RESPONDENT

H.M. Sediris Appuhamy, Karambewa, Kalakaramba Wewa. 1ST DEFENDANT – RESPONDENT And Now between T.M.K. Somawathie, Karambewa, Kalakaramba Wewa. Dissanayake Mudiyanselage Susila Kumarihami Dissanayake, Karambewa, Kalakaramba Wewa. SUBSTITUTED – PLAINTIFF – RESPONDENT – APPELLANT

Vs (1) H.M. Wimalawathie (2) H.M. Premarathne

Both at Palugaswewa No.1, Kalakaramba Wewa. 2ND & 3RD DEFENDANTS – APPELLANTS –

RESPONDENTS

H.M. Sediris Appuhamy, Karambewa, Kalakaramba Wewa. DEFENDANT – RESPONDENT – RESPONDENT

3

Before: Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J Arjuna Obeyesekere, J M. Sampath K.B. Wijeratne, J Counsel: Razik Zarook, PC with Rohana Deshapriya and Chanakya Liyanage for the Substituted Plaintiff – Respondent – Appellant

Rohan Sahabandu, PC with Chathurika Elvitigala for the 2nd and 3rd Defendants – Appellants – Respondents Argued on: 27th March 2025 Written Tendered on behalf of the Substituted Plaintiff – Respondent – Submissions: Appellant on 8th October 2015 Tendered on behalf of the 2nd and 3rd Defendants – Appellants – Respondents on 2nd October 2015 Decided on: 31st March 2026 Obeyesekere, J (1) This is an appeal arising from the judgment delivered by the Provincial High Court of

the North Central Province holden at Anuradhapura exercising civil appellate jurisdicƟon [the High Court] by which the High Court set aside the judgment of the District Court, Anuradhapura [the District Court] and dismissed the plaint. Facts in brief (2) In her plaint ﬁled on 23rd February 2000, the PlainƟﬀ – Respondent – Appellant [the

PlainƟﬀ] stated as follows:

(a) She became the owner of the land referred to in the First Schedule, in extent of 1 acre, by maternal inheritance; (b) She has been in possession of the said land for over 45 years; (c) About 15 years prior to the ﬁling of acƟon, she had handed over to the 1st Defendant – Respondent – Respondent [the 1st Defendant] who was occupying the land adjacent to the land possessed by the PlainƟﬀ, 1 rood out of the said land [i.e. the land referred to in the Second Schedule] to enable the 1st Defendant to culƟvate the said land;

4

(d) The 1st Defendant had thereaŌer planted coconut trees and other crops on the

said land; (e) While the PlainƟﬀ took the income from the coconut trees, the 1st Defendant

took the income from the other crops; (f) In 1991, she had informed the 1st Defendant that she requires the said land to be given to her daughter; (g) Since the 1st Defendant was not willing to hand over the property, she had lodged a complaint with the MediaƟon Board. At the inquiry held at the MediaƟon Board, the 1st Defendant had agreed in wriƟng [P1] to hand over the premises to the PlainƟﬀ by 5th September 1992 subject to the PlainƟﬀ paying the Defendant a sum of Rs. 1500 for expenses incurred in developing the land and the 1st Defendant being permiƩed to remove the temporary hut erected by the 1st Defendant; (h) Even though she tried to pay to the 1st Defendant the payment that was agreed

before the MediaƟon Board, he had refused to accept the money and leave the premises, resulƟng in the PlainƟﬀ making a complaint to the MediaƟon Board and the MediaƟon Board issuing a CerƟﬁcate of Non-seƩlement [P2] on 4th October 1992; (i) While conƟnuing to occupy the said land, the 1st Defendant had obstructed the pathway that was used by the PlainƟﬀ to access her paddy ﬁeld situated on the western boundary of the land referred to in the First Schedule, which resulted in the PlainƟﬀ making a complaint at the Kekirawa Police StaƟon; (j) The 2nd Defendant – Appellant – Respondent, who is the daughter of the 1st Defendant, and her husband, the 3rd Defendant – Appellant – Respondent [the 2nd Defendant / 3rd Defendant] had thereaŌer entered the land and together with the 1st Defendant, commenced the construcƟon of a house with bricks and cement; (k) The PlainƟﬀ had lodged a complaint with the Kekirawa Police on 30th January 2000 about the obstrucƟon caused to the pathway and the construcƟon.

5

(3) It is only thereaŌer that the PlainƟﬀ ﬁled acƟon in the District Court, seeking inter

alia a declaraƟon of Ɵtle to the land in the First Schedule and an order for the ejectment of all three Defendants from the land referred to in the Second Schedule. (4) The PlainƟﬀ had also sought an enjoining order prevenƟng the Defendants from

proceeding with the construcƟon of the house. The District Court had iniƟally issued an enjoining order and aŌer inquiry, issued an interim injuncƟon. (5) In their answer, the Defendants admiƩed the situaƟon of the land in dispute. While

denying the claim of the PlainƟﬀ that she is the owner of the land and that she was in possession of the said land as well as the fact that the 1st Defendant entered the land as a licensee of the PlainƟﬀ, the 2nd and 3rd Defendants claimed that they had been in possession of the said land since 1968 and that they have prescribed to the said land. With regard to the seƩlement before the MediaƟon Board, the 2nd and 3rd Defendants pleaded that the 1st Defendant had no interest or connecƟon with the said land nor was he in possession of the said land and therefore the 1st Defendant had no authority to enter into any seƩlement with the PlainƟﬀ relaƟng to the said land.

(6) It is clear from the answer that the Defendants were not relying on paper Ɵtle but

were claiming prescripƟve Ɵtle to the land in the Second Schedule. It is also clear that the posiƟon of the PlainƟﬀ was that the 1st Defendant was in occupaƟon of the land with the leave and license of the PlainƟﬀ. The relief prayed for by the PlainƟﬀ must be understood in accordance with what the PlainƟﬀ has set out in the body of the plaint, which is to have her enƟtlement to the land in the Second schedule asserted and enforced.

Trial before the District Court (7) The trial commenced on 28th November 2000 with the parƟes admiƫng the

situaƟon of the corpus followed by the raising of issues. The PlainƟﬀ commenced her evidence on 25th July 2001 with her evidence-in-chief being led before the then District Judge. Her evidence was on the same lines as pleaded in her plaint, and was corroborated by Illangasinghe, who was a neighbour of both the PlainƟﬀ and the Defendants. The cross examinaƟon of the PlainƟﬀ commenced on 17th January 2002

6

and the rest of the evidence of the PlainƟﬀ, the witnesses called on her behalf, the 2nd and 3rd Defendants and the witnesses called on their behalf were all led before the learned District Judge who delivered the judgment. (8) The 1st Defendant did not give evidence. While both the 2nd and 3rd Defendants gave

evidence, they sought to distance themselves from the 1st Defendant and stated that the 1st Defendant was not in occupaƟon of the said land at any Ɵme but that it has been the 2nd and 3rd Defendants who have been in occupaƟon of such land since 1968. The 2nd and 3rd Defendants had to take up such a posiƟon in view of the seƩlement arrived at by the 1st Defendant before the MediaƟon Board to vacate the land and hand over possession to the PlainƟﬀ within an year, and to prevent being estopped from denying the Ɵtle of the PlainƟﬀ to the said land. The 2nd Defendant went a step further and feigned ignorance of the seƩlement reached before the MediaƟon Board, although her husband admiƩed that he was aware of such seƩlement. The seƩlement would however be binding on all Defendants since the evidence was that the 2nd and 3rd Defendants entered the land and commenced construcƟon only aŌer the 1st Defendant declined to honour the seƩlement.

(9) The 2nd Defendant also stated that her mother had purchased the disputed land for

a sum of Rs. 500 from Heen Banda Welvidana. Further details relaƟng to such purchase was not provided. While this posiƟon was not suggested to the PlainƟﬀ during her cross examinaƟon, the 2nd Defendant admiƩed that no deed was executed with regard to such purchase.

(10) The 2nd Defendant also admiƩed during the evidence-in-chief that she entered in to

the land on the assumpƟon that the said land belonged to her [ෙමම ඉඩමට ඇƱɢ ɬෙƜ

ෙȼ ඉඩම පැȽƝɣකාɜයෙĘ බව ʏතාෙගන ෙනාෙɩ. අෙȗ ඉඩම බව ʏතාෙගන]

(11) The following quesƟons and answers during cross examinaƟon of the 2nd Defendant

demonstrate that the Defendants had no claim to the land:

“ȝ : පැȽƝɣකාɜයට ෙȼ ඉඩම මɩ උɞමෙයǦ ලැȬණ බව üවා?

උ : ඔɩ ȝ : දැǦ ȘʘගǦනවාද ෙȼ ýɉර පැȽƝɣකාɜයෙĘ බව?

උ : ඇෙĘ ෙවǦන ඇƯ. මම දǦෙǦ නැහැ.”

7

(12) By its judgment delivered on 25th October 2004, the District Court held that, (a) the

1st Defendant was in occupaƟon of the said land with the leave and license of the PlainƟﬀ, (b) the PlainƟﬀ had thereby established her Ɵtle to the land, and (c) the 2nd and 3rd Defendants have not established that they have been in occupaƟon of the said land since 1968 and that they have acquired prescripƟve Ɵtle to the said land. The judgment of the High Court (13) Aggrieved, the 2nd and 3rd Defendants ﬁled an appeal which was heard by the High

Court. The High Court took the view that:

“ෙමම නƍෙɩ පාəශවයǦ ȿɢ අවස්ථාෙɩǏ ɪෂය වස්Ʊෙɩ අනනɕතාවය Șʘෙගන ඇත ද ɪƮƯෙɏ උƮතරෙɏ උප ෙɢඛනෙɏ සදහǦව ෙනාමැƯ ɬව ද ආරɬලට අදාළ ඉඩම හǐනා ෙගන ඔȗȚ ûɝම පැȽƝɢෙɢ වගüම ෙɩ. පැȽƝɢල ɪʆǦ ඉǎɜපƮ කර ඇƯ පැȽƝɢෙɢ උපෙɢඛනෙɏ සදහǦ ඉඩම ආරɬලට ɪෂය ɫ ඇƯ ඉඩම බවට ඉǎɜපƮ කර ඇƯ ෙɢඛන මęǦ සනාථ ûɝමú ʆǐ ɫ ෙනාමැත. එබැɪǦ පාəශවකɞවǦ ඉඩෙȼ අනනɕතාවය ȘʘගැǨමú වශෙයǦ සදහǦ කළ ද ෙə ɪǦƋකාŹෙයʤ නƍකරයකǏ එය ȝමාණවƮ ෙනාෙɩ.

එෙස් ඉඩෙȼ Șʏźම ඔȗȚ කළ ෙනාහැû අවස්ථාවක Ǐ පැȽƝɣකɞට තම නƍව පවƮවා ෙගන

යාමට හැûයාවú ෙනාමැත.”

(14) This confusion on the part of the High Court with regard to the idenƟty of the land

appears to have arisen from the fact that (a) the area in which the land was situated was known as Palugaswewa, (b) with the introducƟon of a new post oﬃce for the area, Palugaswewa was split in to two, namely Palugaswewa One and Palugaswewa Two, (c) the land in dispute was situated right in the middle of Palugaswewa One and Palugaswewa Two, and (d) almost adjacent to Palugaswewa Two was a village known as Karabewa where the PlainƟﬀ had her house. The evidence however revealed that these lands were all situated adjacent to one another and that the situaƟon of the land or its idenƟty was not in issue between the parƟes.

(15) Thus, the High Court took the view that even though (a) the parƟes had admiƩed

the situaƟon of the land in dispute and its idenƟty, and (b) the documents tendered by the PlainƟﬀ had been marked without any objecƟon being raised by the Defendants, the PlainƟﬀ has not established that the documents produced by the PlainƟﬀ relate to the land which is the subject maƩer of the dispute and that in a rei

8

vindicaƟo acƟon, failure to establish the idenƟty of the land is fatal to the maintainability of an acƟon.

(16) This was the basis on which the High Court proceeded to set aside the judgment of

the District Court. Given the evidence that was led by both parƟes and the posiƟon taken up by the 2nd Defendant that her mother had purchased the said land from Heen Banda Welvidana, I am of the view that such a conclusion was not only irrelevant but was erroneous. Thus, on that basis alone, the judgment of the High Court is liable to be set aside. (17) With regard to the prescripƟve claim of the Defendants, the High Court took the view

that the Defendants had not established that it has acquired prescripƟve rights. This is borne out by the following passage:

“ɪƮƯෙɏ කාලාවෙරʤǝ අɐƯවාʆකම ඔȗȚ ɫ ෙනාƯȬණ ද පැȽƝɣකාර පාəශවය ස්වüය අɐƯවාʆකȼ ǎසා අǝකරණය ඉǎɜෙɏ ෙɢඛන සහ සාúɿ මęǦ ǧʆ ෙලස තහɬɞ කර ෙනාමැƯ බව ෙපǨ යන ෙහɐǦ පැȽƝɢෙɢ ඉɢලා ඇƯ ûʆǐ සහනයú ලබා Ǐම ǩʈǐʈ බවට ưරණය කරȿ. ɪƮƯකාර පාəශවෙɏ ස්වüය කාලාවෙරʤǞ අɐƯවාʆකම සȼබǦධෙයǦ කරන ලද ඉɢɤȼ තහɬɞ කර ෙනාමැƯ ǧසා එü ඉɢɤම සȼබǦධෙයǦ ද සළකා බැɤමට Ǩතɕාǩþල හැûයාවú ෙනාමැƯ

බව ưරණය කරȿ.” Questions of Law (18) This appeal arises from the said judgment of the High Court. While the PlainƟﬀ

sought and obtained leave to appeal on the quesƟons of law set out in paragraph 14 of its peƟƟon, the learned President’s Counsel for the Defendants had raised one quesƟon of law. However, when this maƩer was taken up for hearing, the learned President’s Counsel for the PlainƟﬀ and the 2nd and 3rd Defendants moved that the quesƟon of law to be decided by this Court shall be as follows: “Whether the learned District Judge has analysed the evidence with regard to the Ɵtle of the PlainƟﬀ to the land in quesƟon.” (19) Thus, whether the 1st Defendant and/or the 2nd and 3rd Defendants have prescribed

to the said land is not a maƩer that I am required to consider in this judgment.

9

Nature of the action (20) The starƟng point in deciding this appeal is to idenƟfy the nature of the acƟon ﬁled

by the PlainƟﬀ. True enough, the PlainƟﬀ is seeking a declaraƟon of Ɵtle but what is criƟcal is the claim of the PlainƟﬀ that the 1st Defendant came into occupaƟon of the land at her request and with her permission but did not leave aŌer being requested to leave. Thus, even though the PlainƟﬀ was seeking a declaraƟon of Ɵtle, that was on the basis that the 1st Defendant had iniƟally possessed the land with the leave and license of the PlainƟﬀ. The District Court has accepted this posiƟon in its judgment and this conclusion has not been challenged by the Defendants. The mere fact that the PlainƟﬀ was seeking a declaraƟon of Ɵtle did not make her acƟon a rei vindicaƟo acƟon where a plainƟﬀ must establish on a balance of probability that he/she has Ɵtle to the land. Furthermore, if the acƟon was purely a rei vindicaƟo, the necessity to aver such relaƟonship and to raise issues on that basis does not arise since the rei vindicaƟo acƟon is based on Ɵtle of the PlainƟﬀ and the possession of the Defendant against such Ɵtle. (21) That being so, the claim of the PlainƟﬀ that the 1st Defendant came into occupaƟon

of the land at her request and with her permission, if successfully established, brings into play SecƟon 116 of the Evidence Ordinance, in terms of which, "No person who came upon any immovable property by the license of the person in possession thereof shall be permiƩed to deny that such person had a Ɵtle to such possession at the Ɵme when such license was given.”

(22) A clear explanaƟon of the diﬀerence between a rei vindicaƟo acƟon based on

ownership and an acƟon for ejectment based on the breach of contract is found in Pathirana v Jayasundara [(1955) 58 NLR 169; at 172 and 173] where GraƟaen, J stated as follows:

“In a rei vindicaƟo acƟon proper the owner of immovable property is enƟtled, on proof of his Ɵtle, to a decree in his favour for the recovery of the property and for the ejectment of the person in wrongful occupaƟon. “The plainƟﬀ’s ownership of the thing is of the very essence of the acƟon”. Maasdorp’s InsƟtutes (7th Ed.) Vol. 2, 96.”

10

“The scope of an acƟon by a lessor against an overholding lessee for restoraƟon and ejectment, however, is diﬀerent. Privity of contract (whether it be by original agreement or by aƩornment) is the foundaƟon of the right to relief and issues as to Ɵtle are irrelevant to the proceedings. Indeed, a lessee who has entered into occupaƟon is precluded from dispuƟng his lessor’s Ɵtle unƟl he has ﬁrst restored the property in fulﬁlment of his contractual obligaƟon. “The lessee (conductor) cannot plead the excepƟo dominii, although he may be able easily to prove his own ownership, but he must by all means ﬁrst surrender his possession and then liƟgate as to proprietorship . . . . ” Voet 19.2.32. Both these forms of acƟon referred to are no doubt designed to secure the same primary relief, namely, the recovery of property. But the cause of acƟon in one case is the violaƟon of the plainƟﬀ’s rights of ownership, in the other it is the breach of the lessee’s contractual obligaƟon. A decree for a declaraƟon of Ɵtle may, of course, be obtained by way of addiƟonal relief either in a rei vindicaƟo acƟon proper (which is in truth an acƟon in rem) or in a lessor’s acƟon against his overholding tenant (which is an acƟon in personam). But in the former case, the declaraƟon is based on proof of ownership; in the laƩer, on proof of the contractual relaƟonship which forbids a denial that the lessor is the true owner.” (23) Having considered whether a prayer for a declaraƟon of Ɵtle would make such acƟon

a rei vindicaƟo acƟon, H.N.G. Fernando, J (as he was then) stated as follows:

“There is however the further point that the plainƟﬀ in his prayer sought not only ejectment but also a declaraƟon of Ɵtle, a prayer for which laƩer relief is probably unusual in an acƟon against an overholding tenant. I have no doubt that it is open to a lessor in an acƟon for ejectment to ask for a declaraƟon of Ɵtle, but the quesƟon of diﬃculty which arises is whether the acƟon thereby becomes a rei vindicaƟo for which strict proof of the plainƟﬀ's Ɵtle would be required, or else is merely one for a declaraƟon (without strict proof) of a Ɵtle which the tenant is by law precluded from denying. If the essenƟal element of a rei vindicaƟo is that the right of ownership must be strictly proved, it is diﬃcult to accept the proposiƟon that an acƟon in which the plainƟﬀ can automaƟcally obtain a declaraƟon of Ɵtle through the operaƟon of a rule of estoppel should be regarded as a vindicatory

11

acƟon. The fact that the person in possession of property originally held as lessee would not preclude the lessor owner from choosing to proceed against him by a rei vindicaƟo. But this choice can I think be properly exercised only by pleadings clearly seƫng out the claim of Ɵtle and sounding in delict.” [page 171] (24) In Chandrasena v Lokubanda [SC Appeal No. 20/2010; SC minutes of 18th December

2020], Amarasekara, J opined that:

“Since rei vindicaƟo is based on ownership and violaƟon of rights of ownership, strict proof of Ɵtle is needed in a proper rei vindicaƟo acƟon. Even though, AƩanayake v. Aladin [(1997) 3 Sri LR 386] held that our common Law recognizes two acƟons, namely rei vindicaƟo and possessory acƟon as remedies that can be sought by an individual who is dispossessed, our law has developed and recognized a valid cause of acƟon on certain occasions to a dispossessed individual when strict proof of Ɵtle or ownership is not necessary to evict a person who is in unlawful possession; for example in an acƟon for declaraƟon of Ɵtle to evict an overholding lessee by a lessor, strict proof of Ɵtle like in a rei vindicaƟo proper is not necessary due to the estoppel taking place owing to secƟon 116 of the Evidence Ordinance. Thus, if one comes to the property accepƟng the PlainƟﬀ as landlord on a contractual relaƟonship, he cannot put the plainƟﬀ to strict proof of Ɵtle.” (25) As held in Ruberu and another v Wijesooriya [(1998) 1 Sri L R 58; at page 60]:

“The fact that the licensee or the lessee obtained possession from the plainƟﬀ appellant is perforce an admission of the fact that the Ɵtle resides in the plainƟﬀ.” “ …It is an inﬂexible rule of law that no lessee or licensee will ever be permiƩed either to quesƟon the Ɵtle of the person who gave him the lease or the license or the permission to occupy or possess the land or to setup want of Ɵtle in that person. …” (26) A similar view was taken by Samayawardhena, J in Nawaz and others v Bopage [SC

Appeal No. 92/2014; SC minutes of 12th February 2024] where he held as follows:

“The second quesƟon of law is on the burden of proof. The plainƟﬀ did not ﬁle a rei vindicaƟo acƟon. The plainƟﬀ ﬁled the acƟon as the landlord against the defendant as the overholding monthly tenant. As I explained earlier, the monthly

12

tenancy has unequivocally been admiƩed by the defendant. The terminaƟon of monthly tenancy was proved by P3 and P3(a). The plainƟﬀ’s acƟon is based not on ownership but on the violaƟon of the privity of contract. The plainƟﬀ’s main relief is the ejectment of the defendant, not the declaraƟon of Ɵtle to the premises. In cases of this nature, seeking a declaraƟon of Ɵtle is customary, yet it is superﬂuous. Although the plainƟﬀ produced the Ɵtle deed, it was not necessary as the defendant tenant cannot quesƟon the plainƟﬀ’s ownership to the property by operaƟon of the principle of estoppel embodied in secƟon 116 of the Evidence Ordinance.” [emphasis added] (27) Thus, the answer to the quesƟon of law is dependent on whether the PlainƟﬀ has

established that the Defendants were in possession of the land on the leave and license of the PlainƟﬀ. Reasoning of the District Court (28) The District Court has relied on two documents in support of its posiƟon that the 1st

Defendant came into possession of the disputed land with the leave and license of the PlainƟﬀ and that all three Defendants are thus estopped from denying this fact and that the Ɵtle to the land was with the PlainƟﬀ. The ﬁrst document is P1, that being the terms of seƩlement entered into before the MediaƟon Board. In terms of P1, the 1st Defendant had agreed to hand over the land within one year of P1, and for the PlainƟﬀ to pay the 1st Defendant a sum of Rs. 1500 as a culƟvaƟon gratuity. While P1 was marked without any objecƟon, it was not suggested to the PlainƟﬀ during cross examinaƟon that P1 does not relate to the land in the Second Schedule to the plaint. P1 serves as an acknowledgement on the part of the Defendants that the 1st Defendant was a licensee of the PlainƟﬀ. (29) The second document relied upon by the District Court, which necessarily does not

show leave and license, was the acreage tax receipts produced by the PlainƟﬀ for the disputed land for the years 1980-1981 [P6], 1982-1985 [P7], 1986 [P8] and 1987-1988 [P9] which showed that the PlainƟﬀ had paid acreage tax for the disputed land. These receipts were marked without any objecƟon from the Defendants and the PlainƟﬀ was not quesƟoned on the non-applicability of these documents to the disputed land.

13

(30) With the ﬁnding of the District Court that the Defendants were occupying the land

with the leave and license of the PlainƟﬀ, and in view of the provisions of SecƟon 116, I am of the view that it was not necessary for the District Court to have examined the Ɵtle of the PlainƟﬀ as in a rei vindicaƟo acƟon. The District Court was therefore right when it granted the PlainƟﬀ the relief prayed for.

(31) I must also state that the learned District Judge who delivered the judgment had the

beneﬁt of hearing the enƟrety of the evidence of all witnesses except the evidence-in-chief of the PlainƟﬀ and thereby had the opportunity of seeing for himself the demeanour of the witnesses including the PlainƟﬀ and the 2nd and 3rd Defendants. It has been held in a long series of cases that due regard must be had of such circumstances when considering a judgment of a trial court, and that an appellate Court must especially be slow to interfere with the ﬁndings of the trial court in such a situaƟon. [M.P. Munasinghe v C.P. Vidanage and another [69 NLR 97] and De Silva and others v Senevirathne and another [(1981) 2 Sri LR 7]]. Conclusion (32) In the above circumstances, I am of the view that the High Court erred when it

considered a maƩer which was not in dispute between the parƟes. I have considered carefully the judgment of the District Court and I am saƟsﬁed that the ﬁndings of the District Court are supported by the evidence. Accordingly, the quesƟon of law is answered in the aﬃrmaƟve. The judgment of the High Court is set aside, the judgment of the District Court is aﬃrmed and this appeal is allowed, without costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT M. Sampath K. B Wijeratne, J I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT