IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA In the matter of an appeal under and in terms of section 9(a) of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990. Officer-in-Charge Police Station, Wellawatta. Complainant SC Appeal No. 82/2019 SC SPL LA No. 97/2019 High Court of Colombo Case No HC MCA 67/2016 Magistrates Court of Colombo Case No. 13904/03 Vs. Beminahennadige Krishantha Ranmal Pieris No. 41, Mahavidana Mawatha, Koralawella, Moratuwa. Accused AND BETWEEN Beminahennadige Krishantha Ranmal Pieris No. 41, Mahavidana Mawatha, Koralawella, Moratuwa. Accused- Appellant

S.C. Appeal No.82/2019

2

Vs.

1. Officer-in-Charge Police Station, Wellawatta. 2. Hon. Attorney General Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12. Respondents

AND NOW BETWEEN Beminahennadige Krishantha Ranmal Pieris No. 41, Mahavidana Mawatha, Koralawella, Moratuwa. Accused- Appellant- Appellant Vs.

1. Officer-in-Charge Police Station, Wellawatta. 2. Hon. Attorney General AttorneyGenerals Department, Colombo 12. Respondent-Respoondents **********

S.C. Appeal No.82/2019

3

BEFORE : PRIYANTHA JAYAWARDENA, PC.,J. S. THURAIRAJA, PC., J. ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J. COUNSEL : Isuru Somadasa instructed by Pramodya Thilakaratne for the Accused-Appellant-Appellant Ganga Wakishta Arachchi DSG for the Respondent-Respondents. ARGUED ON : 13th June, 2023 DECIDED ON : 27th February, 2024 ********** ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

This is an appeal preferred by the Accused-Appellant-Appellant,

(hereinafter referred to as the Appellant) seeking to set aside the judgment

of the Provincial High Court, dismissing his appeal against the conviction

entered by the Magistrates Court.

The Appellant was charged before the Magistrates Court of Colombo

for committing criminal intimidation of one Lakna Somasiri on 02.08.2014,

an offence punishable under Section 486 of the Penal Code. He was also

charged for using criminal force on her, in the course of same transaction,

and thereby committing an offence punishable under Section 343 of that

Code. The Appellant pleaded not guilty to both charges and proceeded to

trial. The prosecution led evidence of Lakna Somasiri, Sujeewa Gamage and

WSI Perera of Wellawatta Police Station. The Appellant gave evidence

under oath, and called Don Lewis Fernando, Dulani Madurangi Perera and

Sinnadorai Kuvendra Rajah as witnesses on his behalf.

S.C. Appeal No.82/2019

4

The trial Court pronounced its judgment on 26.04.2016, and found

the Appellant guilty to the 1st count, while acquitting him of the 2nd count.

The Appellant was imposed a term of imprisonment of six months to

serve, a fine of Rs. 500.00 with a default sentence of six months. The

Appellant was also ordered to pay a sum of Rs. 30,000.00 to the virtual

complainant as compensation coupled with a default sentence of six

months.

Being aggrieved by the said conviction and sentence, the Appellant

preferred an appeal to the Provincial High Court of Colombo. One of the

grounds of appeal taken up in the petition of appeal by the Appellant was

that the trial Court had failed to consider his alibi. In dismissing the appeal

of the Appellant, the Provincial High Court, rejected the ground of appeal

raised by him on alibi. The Provincial High Court, whilst affirming the

conviction and the sentences imposed on the Appellant, decided to

enhance the period of imprisonment imposed on him from six months to

one year.

The Appellant sought leave to appeal against the judgment of the

Provincial High Court. When the Appellant supported his application

seeking leave to appeal on 06.05.2019, this Court granted leave on

questions of law, as set out in paragraph 43(a) to (f) in his petition dated

22.03.2019. However, at the hearing of the appeal on 13.06.2023, learned

Counsel for the Appellant confined his submissions only to the question of

law, as set out in sub paragraph 43(f).

S.C. Appeal No.82/2019

5

The question of law on which this Court was addressed on by the

learned Counsel for the Appellant as well as the leaned Deputy Solicitor

General was;

Did the learned High Court Judge of Colombo and the learned

Additional Magistrate of Colombo fail to properly consider the

defence of alibi presented by the Appellant ?

In relation to the said question of law, learned Counsel for the

Appellant submitted that the learned Judges of the Magistrates Court as

well as of the Provincial High Court misdirected themselves in adopting

the view that a plea of alibi should create a serious doubt in the

prosecution and it is for him to prove his alibi. He invited attention of

Court to the relevant instances where both Courts, in their respective

judgments, used the words failure to prove when his plea of alibi being

considered.

The contention of the Appellant on the imposition of a burden by

the Courts below to prove an alibi on him are based on certain

terminology used in the impugned judgments in dealing with his plea of

alibi. Hence, the said contention should be considered in the context in

which those references were used in the impugned judgments and should

also be assessed in the totality of the evidence presented by the parties for

its validity.

In view of the said solitary question of law that should be decided in

the instant appeal, I shall confine myself to dealing with the evidence

relating to the alibi.

S.C. Appeal No.82/2019

6

Perusal of the evidence of the virtual complainant, Lakna Somasiri,

indicates that the incident of intimidation had taken place at about 12.30 or

1.00 p.m. on 02.08.2014, along Marine Drive near the KFC outlet at

Wellawatta. She was returning home after her classes at ACBT campus in a

vehicle driven by one of her relatives. When the vehicle became stationary

for some time due to heavy traffic jam near the KFC outlet, the Appellant

came up to the vehicle and threatened her with death. His verbal threat

was to the effect that if the complainant and her family were to appear in

Court, they all would be killed. Driver of the vehicle, Sujeewa Sampath

corroborated the virtual complainant.

The reason for the issuance of such a threat was attributed to the two

criminal matters that were pending in Courts against the Appellant. They

were initiated by the virtual complainant. He was accused of committing

rape on virtual complainant (who was a minor at that point of time) in one,

while in the other, he was accused of committing cheating in respect of

gold jewellery worth Rs. 1,600,000.00.

It was revealed during the evidence of the virtual complainant that

she and the Appellant were in a relationship for some time and, when she

became pregnant as a result, he refused to marry her. It was also revealed

that by then the Appellant was already married and had two children from

that marriage. Thereupon, she lodged a complaint against the Appellant

resulting in the said two prosecutions.

Despite the lengthy cross examination of the virtual complainant by

the Appellant on several other aspects of her evidence, in respect of his

alibi, the Appellant merely suggested to her that by 1.00. p.m. on the day

S.C. Appeal No.82/2019

7

of the alleged incident he was nowhere near that place ( Th lshk isoah jQ

ojfi mj100 fjoaos fuu ;a;slre Th lshk ia:dkh wi,lj;a isfh keye lsh,

fh`ckd lrkjd@) She totally rejected that suggestion. Strangely, this

suggestion was not put to the other prosecution witness called by the

Appellant. However, it is noted that the Appellant had elicited from the

WSI Sanjeewani Perera that, in his statement to the Police, he had taken up

the position that he was elsewhere (isfh fjk ;ekl). The official

witnesss reply was the Appellant was well within the Wellawatta Police

area.

The Appellant gave evidence under oath. In his evidence the

Appellant stated that he was employed as a supervisor at the Ocean

Colombo Hotel during the relevant time. He had reported to work on the

day of the incident at 8.00 a.m. and worked for continuous twelve hours

until his sign off at 8.00 p.m. He was emphatic that after reporting to work,

he had no way of leaving his workplace. He added that his movements

could be checked from CCTV camera footage and one could even make

enquiries from his department head, whether he left workplace during any

time.

During cross examination by the prosecution, the Appellant

maintained the position that even in an emergency he was not allowed to

leave his workplace. According to the Appellant, an employee could leave

in an emergency only after properly applying for leave. He conceded that

there was only a distance of two kilometres between KFC Wellawatta and

his place of work. He also admitted that when the Police wanted to record

his statement over this incident, he was represented by an Attorney-at-

Law.

S.C. Appeal No.82/2019

8

The Magistrates Court, in consideration of the evidence relating to

the plea of alibi, devoted a separate segment in its judgment under that

heading to reason out the conclusions it had reached. The trial Court, on

its part had guided itself with the applicable principles of law in relation to

dealing with an alibi and reproduced citations from a long list of judicial

precedents. Having rejected the Appellants evidence, the trial Court

arrived at the conclusion that no reasonable doubt had arisen on the case

presented by the prosecution ( fuu kvqjg wod,j meKs,af,a kvqj ms<sn|j

lsis ielhla u;= ke;s w;r" meKs,a, iska ;a;slreg tfrysj ;u ia:djrh

;yjqre lr we; tfia Tmamq fldg we;s njg uu ;SrKh lr). It is clear

from this quotation, the trial Court correctly stated the applicable law and

its decision as meKs,af,a kvqj ms<sn|j lsis ielhla u;= ke;s w;r".

However, the Appellant referred instances in the 90-page judgment

of the trial Court, where references were made relating to the alibi of the

Appellant, which tends to indicate that it had taken the view that the

Appellant had failed to raise a reasonable doubt in the prosecution case. In

page 215 of the appeal brief the finding of Court that meks,a, ms<sn|j

wkHdia:kshNdjh mok lr f.k ielhla u;= lsrsug iu;a fkdue;s njo

i|yka l, hq;=h could be found. In addition, at page 218, another finding to

the effect tfiau meKs,af,a kvqj ms<sn| ielhla u;= lsrSug ;a;sfha idlaIs

u.ska mokula bosrsm;a fkdf k wlrKhg meKs,af,a ia:djrh ms,s.ekSug yels

nj my; i|yka fldgfika fmkS hhs is followed by ta wkqj ;a;sh lsis

wdldrhlg meKs,af,a kvqj ms,sn| ielhla u;= lsrSug iu;a ke; .

The Provincial High Court, in dealing with the ground of appeal

raised by the Appellant on his alibi, considered the question whether the

Appellant presented any evidence to satisfy Court of his alibi (wlrKh

S.C. Appeal No.82/2019

9

iEySulg m;ajk whqrska) and thereupon concurred with the conclusion

reached by the trial Court that the Appellant failed to substantiate his alibi.

Learned Counsel for the Appellant heavily relied on the wording

used by the trial Court as well as the appellate Court, in order to impress

upon this Court that in fact there was an undue burden imposed by the

Courts below. He sought to buttress the said contention by stating that he

was convicted by the trial Court due to his failure to raise a reasonable

doubt and that too by substantiating his alibi.

The principles of law that are applicable in an instance where an

accused takes up an alibi had been laid down by superior Courts in

multiple judicial pronouncements. Suffice to quote one such instance,

where a divisional bench of this Court in Mannar Mannan v Republic of

Sri Lanka (1990) 1 Sri L.R. 280, held (at p. 285 ) that it was sufficient for

the appellant to have raised a reasonable doubt as to the truth of the case for the

prosecution, namely that it was the appellant who shot and caused the death of the

deceased; that there was no burden whatsoever on the appellant to prove his denial

" or to prove that he was elsewhere at the time of the shooting.

Despite clear pronouncements made by the Courts of Record as to

the applicable legal principles, the determinations made by trial Courts on

plea of alibi are regularly challenged in appeal. As evident from the instant

appeal, the primary reason for challenging the determination of the trial

Court is not its application of those principles to the given set of

circumstances but the way in which the trial Court described its process of

reasoning by using certain terminology. The Appellant before us too relies

on such references in support of his contention of imposition of a burden.

S.C. Appeal No.82/2019

10

After perusing the judgment of the trial Court, for the reasons given

below, I am of the view that the pronouncements reproduced above were

made regarding nature of the evidence presented by the Appellant on his

alibi.

When the Appellant put across his alibi to the virtual complainant,

he merely suggested that he was nowhere near the place of the alleged

incident. The Appellant did not suggest to any of the prosecution

witnesses that he remained within his place of work, Ocean Colombo Hotel

premises, during the time he was said to have seen near the KFC. Only in

his examination in chief did the Appellant disclose for the first time where

he was during the relevant time.

The Appellant also called the Human Resource Manager of Ocean

Colombo Hotel, Madhurangi Fernando, to give evidence on his behalf.

During her evidence, the witness stated that the registers maintained at

Ocean Colombo Hotel indicate that the Appellant had reported to work on

02.08.2014 at 8.00 a.m. and left at 8.00 p.m. She tendered a copy of an

attendance sheet marked as V2, into which the Appellant himself had

entered the said details. She further stated that if an employee were to

leave the Hotel during office hours, he could do so only after informing the

security post located at the rear entrance, being the only exit point

available for employees other than the main entrance.

The prosecution, during its cross examination of the defence

witness, elicited that she had joined the said establishment at a later point

of time and could only state in evidence what the documents indicate.

Importantly, she conceded that any employee could leave the workplace

S.C. Appeal No.82/2019

11

during lunch break. She was unable to state from the records whether or

not the Appellant had left the premises during daytime on 02.08.2019.

It appears that the purpose of calling the Human Resource Manager

was to support the fact that the Appellant did report to work on 02.08.2019

and left his workplace only at 8.00 p.m. However, the witness conceded to

the suggestion by the prosecution that she is unable to provide any

evidence whether the Appellant remained within his workplace during

12.30 p.m. to 1.00 p.m.

Interestingly, the efforts made by the Appellant in his evidence to

emphasise that it is a near impossibility to leave his workplace during

office hours were botched by his own witness, Madhurangi, when she

conceded to the position suggested by the prosecution that one could leave

workplace during office hours without formally applying for leave. She,

however, offered a clarification that one could go out in like manner in

instances such as to buy a packet of lunch.

On the other hand, the prosecution presented clear unambiguous

evidence that the incident had taken place around 12.30 p.m. or 1.00 p.m.

near KFC Wellawatta. The Appellant himself conceded that there was only

a distance of two kilometres from his workplace to the place of the

incident. He was also content with merely stating to Court that if needed

his position could be verified by viewing CCTV footage and also with his

sectional head.

The prosecution that must discharge its burden of proof, in

establishing a criminal charge by which it alleged the Appellant had

committed an offence. Of the many factors the prosecution must establish

S.C. Appeal No.82/2019

12

in this regard, the identity of the accused is an important element, which

must be established beyond reasonable doubt. In other words, the

prosecution must establish that it was the accused, who is present in

Court, committed the alleged criminal acts or omission at the crime scene.

When a prosecution witness identifies an accused in Court and states that

it was that accused, who committed the acts or omissions which constitute

the alleged offence, it is inbuilt in that testimony that the accused was

physically present at that place to commit the alleged offence.

The question that arises in these circumstances is whether the

evidence relating to the alibi was sufficient to raise reasonable doubt in the

prosecution case ?

When the prosecution alleged that the Appellant was present at the

place of the incident to commit the alleged offence, and if the Appellant

takes up the plea of alibi, that would make his alleged presence at the

crime scene, inconsistent with the prosecution claim. The place where the

accused claims to be in during the relevant time therefore becomes a

relevant fact in issue. This conflict could be termed as an instance of

inconsistent fact in terms of Section 11 of the Evidence Ordinance.

Illustration (a) of Section 11 of the Evidence Ordinance reads thus;

The question is whether A committed a crime at Colombo on a

certain day. The fact that on that day A was at Galle is relevant.

The fact that near the time when the crime was committed A was at

a distance from the place where it was committed, which would

render it highly improbable, though not impossible, that he

committed it, is relevant.

S.C. Appeal No.82/2019

13

In relation to the instant appeal, the fact in issue is whether the

Appellant was on Marine Drive at about 12.30 or 1.00 p.m. near Wellawatta

KFC threatening the virtual complainant. The prosecution alleges that he

was, but that would be inconsistent with the position of the Appellant,

who said to have remained within the premises of Ocean Colombo Hotel

during that time.

The alibi set up by the Appellant should be in relation to the place

and time period the prosecution had alleged he was. Coomaraswamy, in his

treatise titled Law of Evidence (Vol I, page 278) describing the underlying

rationale as to why an alibi succeeds as an exception to criminal liability,

states thus;

If the element of the time of the crime is definitely fixed, and the

accused is shown to have been at some other place at that time, the

two facts are mutually inconsistent and the truth of the charge

cannot be established.

In this context, learned author added that [T]he alibi should cover the

time of the alleged offence, so as to exclude presence at the place of the offence.

It is already noted that there was only a distance of two kilometres

between the place of offence and the Appellants workplace and he could

have reached there within a half an hour. In such a situation, the

requirement insisted by Coomaraswamy assumes greater significance. If the

distance between the two places itself makes it impossible for the accused

to be present at the scene during the relevant time period, the specifics of

time might lose some of its significance. Perhaps this factor could be

clarified with an example.

S.C. Appeal No.82/2019

14

If the Appellant had taken up the position that he was in Jaffna in

that morning and if there was evidence, which tends to support that

position, then that alibi might have been sufficient to raise a reasonable

doubt in the prosecutions allegation that he was at Wellawatta. This is

because of the physical impossibility of the Appellant being present in the

two given locations during the same time interval, due to sheer distance

between the two places. But here is a situation where the Appellant could

walk up to Wellawatta KFC from his workplace within a matter of and

return to the workplace in less than thirty minutes, as his witness

conceded. The Appellant did not specifically claim that he was at the Hotel

during the relevant time interval. He expected the Court to infer that fact

from his evidence. The witness called by him did not clearly support this

position either. In fact, her evidence could be taken to be consistent with

that of the prosecution.

It is this aspect that the trial Court had commented on by stating

fuu kvqf oS ;A;slre wod, ia:dkhg fkd.sh njg ;yjqre lsrSu i|yd ;ud fiajh

l,d jQ wdh;kfha ks,Odrskshla idlaIshg le|jd we;s kuq;a tu idlaIsldrshf.a

idlaIsfhka meks,a, ms<sn|j wkHdia:kshNdjh mok lr f.k ielhla u;=

lsrsug iu;a fkdue;s njo i|yka l, hq;=h

Furthermore, the requirement of [T]he alibi should cover the time of

the alleged offence, so as to exclude presence at the place of the offence too

received consideration of the trial Court. The trial Court, by reproducing

the reasoning of the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Rupasinghe v

Republic of Sri Lanka ( CA Appeal No. 179/2005), concluded that the said

S.C. Appeal No.82/2019

15

requirement is not fulfilled by the Appellant in adducing evidence on alibi.

The Court stated thus;

th meKs,af,ka ia;r lrk isoaosh is jk f,df Tyq tu isoah is jQ

ia:dkfha fkdj fjk;a ia:dkhl is nj;a" tls ia;r lrk f,df Tyqg tu

ia:dkhg ,.Zd ug yelshdj fkdue;s ;ekl is nj;a" wlrKhg wkq;shla

we;s jk wdldrfhka m%n, ielhla h hq;= nj i|yka lr we;

The trial Court, although used the terms such as m%n, ielhla and

ielhla u;= lsrsug iu;a fkdue; in translating the quoted text from the

judgments, unwittingly left room for the Appellant to contend that a

burden was imposed. What the Court really expected from the Appellant

was to place sufficient evidence which might create a reasonable doubt in

the prosecution case. The process of reasoning adopted by the Court, in to

finding the Appellant guilty to the 1st count, negates any such

apprehensions that it imposed a burden on him. The relevant

pronouncement is reproduced below;

meKs,af,a kvqj ms<sn| ielhla u;= lsrSug ;a;sfha idlaIs u.ska mokula

bosrsm;a fkdf k wlrKhg meKs,af,a ia:djrh ms,s.ekSug yels nj

meKs,af,a meid 01" meid 02" meid 03" hk ishu idlaIslrejkaf.a idlaIs u.ska

pQos;f.a wkkH;djh idOdrK ielfhka Tng Tmamq lr we;.

Having carefully perused the impugned judgment of the trial Court,

it is my considered view that it had not imposed any burden on the

Appellant on his alibi and rightly applied the applicable burden of proof

beyond reasonable doubt on the prosecution to prove its case before

arriving at the verdict of guilty.

S.C. Appeal No.82/2019

16

It is a fundamental tenet in Criminal Law, that the prosecution must

prove its case beyond reasonable doubt while the accused remain silent as

there is absolutely no burden on him to establish anything, unless he relies

on a general exception. The fact that an accused opted to cross examine the

prosecution witnesses, made suggestions to them or even opted to offer

evidence does not ordinarily mean that he is obliged to do any of these.

The purpose of cross examination of prosecution witnesses by an accused

is to provide material for the Court to properly evaluate credibility and

reliability of the evidence presented by that witness and not an attempt to

raise a reasonable doubt in the prosecution case. Upon the material

elicited from prosecution witnesses through cross examination by an

accused, a Court may or may not entertain a reasonable doubt in the

prosecutions case.

Cross examination also is a tool for an accused to elicit from a

prosecution witness that there could have been another version to the

narrative, as spoken to by that witness. Having suggested a different

version to the one presented by the prosecution; an accused may opt to

give evidence in support of the positions he suggested. If he failed to offer

any evidence in support of the suggestions put to the prosecution, those

suggestions would lose its value both in its consistency and content.

Thus, the decision to enter a conviction against the Appellant by the

Magistrates Court as well as the decision to affirm that conviction by the

Provincial High Court were made, based on the consideration of the

totality of the available evidence. Both Courts found the prosecution

evidence to be credible and reliable and opted to reject the Appellants

version of events.

S.C. Appeal No.82/2019

17

The use of the terms m%n, ielhla and ielhla u;= lsrsug iu;a

fkdue; by the trial Court should be considered in the light of the context

in which they were used. Here the trial Court commenting on the

insufficiency of the evidence presented before that Court by the Appellant

to arise a reasonable doubt in the prosecution version. Similarly, the

Provincial High Court too, having identified the issue to be determined in

the appeal as whether there was sufficient material presented before Court

in relation to plea of alibi, went on to state that (tlS fkdyelshdj fy` wkH

ia:dkslNdjh ms<sn|j wlrKh iEySulg m;ajk whqrska pQos; fjkqfjka lreKq

bosrsm;a ;sfo hkak i,ld ne,sh hq;=f.)

Learned Deputy Solicitor General, during her submissions referred

to the judgment of this Court in Asela De Silva & Others v Attorney

General (SC Appeal No. 14 of 2011 decided on 17.01.2014 ). In that

appeal, the High Court, commenting over the failure of the appellants to

go to the Police and state that they were elsewhere, used the words

(Tjqkaf.a ksfo`IS Ndjh Tmamq lrkakg).

It was contended on behalf of the appellants in that appeal, these

words clearly indicative of a serious misdirection on the part of the High

Court over the question of burden of proof of an alibi. Rejecting this

contention, Marsoof J stated that [I]t is clear from a fuller reading of the

judgment of the High Court that the learned High Court Judge was conscious of

the fact that the burden of proof was on the prosecution to prove its case beyond

reasonable doubt and that in particular the Judge was mindful of the principles of

law applicable to the proof of alibi. It is trite law that in a case where an alibi has

been pleaded, the Court has to arrive at its finding on a consideration of all

S.C. Appeal No.82/2019

18

evidence led at the trial and on a full assessment of all that evidence and

proceeded to dismiss their appeal .

However, in the instant appeal, in relation to the Appellants

evidence, no similar words that are indicative of any imposition of a

burden of proof were used by either of the two Courts. Those references

referred to earlier on in this judgment were made only when commenting

on the nature of evidence that had been adduced by the Appellant on his

plea of alibi. It is preferable if the Courts used the words idOdrK ielhla

u;+ fkdh=, instead of using ielhla u;= lsrsug or u;= fkdlf,ah leaving

room for similar challenges. However, when considered in the proper

context in which they were used by the Courts below, it is evident that

these references were made only to signify the fact that no reasonable

doubt had arisen in the prosecution case and not to justify an attempt to

impose any burden of proof on the Appellant.

In view of the reasoning contained in the preceding paragraphs, I

proceed to answer the question of law on which the instant appeal was

argued, namely; did the learned High Court Judge of Colombo and the

learned Additional Magistrate of Colombo fail to properly consider the

defence of alibi presented by the Appellant? in the negative.

Accordingly, the Judgments of the Magistrates Court as well as of

the Provincial High Court are affirmed along with the enhanced sentence

imposed by the appellate Court on 13.03.2019. The order made by this

Court on 06.05.2019, in enlarging the Appellant on bail pending appeal is

hereby vacated.

S.C. Appeal No.82/2019

19

The appeal of the Appellant is dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

PRIYANTHA JAYAWARDENA, PC.J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

S.THURAIRAJA, PC.J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT