1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for Leave to Appeal, under and in terms of Section 5C of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990, as amended by Act No. 54 of 2006, from the Judgment of the High Court of Civil Appeal of the Western Province (Holden in Colombo), dated 11. 01. 2017, in case bearing No. WP/HCCA/COL.27/2015 (RA).

SC (HCCA) LA Application No. 51/2017

WP/HCCA/COL27/2015 (RA).

DC (COLOMBO) CASE No. 75942/TAX

P. M. Dissanayake, Deputy Commissioner, Unit 14, Department of Inland Revenue, Colombo 02.

Complainant Vs. Gifuulanka Motors (Pvt.) Limited, No. 50/2, Vijaya Road, Gampaha. Respondent And Between Gifuulanka Motors (Pvt.) Limited, No. 50/2, Vijaya Road, Gampaha. Respondent-Petitioner

2

Vs.

P. M. Dissanayake, Deputy Commissioner, Unit 14, Department of Inland Revenue, Colombo 02.

Complainant-Respondent

Kalyani Dahanayake, Commissioner General of Inland Revenue, Department of Inland Revenue,

Sir Chittampalam A. Gardiner Mawatha, Colombo 02.

Respondent And Now Between Gifuulanka Motors (Pvt.) Limited, No. 50/2, Vijaya Road, Gampaha. Respondent-Petitioner-Petitioner Vs. P. M. Dissanayake, Deputy Commissioner, Unit 14, Department of Inland Revenue, Colombo 02. Complainant-Respondent-Respondent

Ivan Dissanayake, Commissioner General of Inland Revenue, Department of Inland Revenue,

3

Sir Chittampalam A. Gardiner Mawatha, Colombo 02.

Respondent-Respondents Before: Buwaneka Aluwihare, PC. J. V. K. Malalgoda, PC. J. E. A. G. R. Amarasekara J.

Counsel: Nilshantha Sirimanna for Respondent-Petitioner-Petitioner.

M. Corea DSG for Complainant-Respondent-Respondent.

Argued on: 29. 11. 2019

Order on: 27. 07. 2021

Aluwihare PC. J., The Respondent-Petitioner-Petitioner [hereinafter the Petitioner] moved this court by

way of an application for Leave to Appeal against the judgment of the High Court of

Civil Appeals dated 11. 01. 2017. Having heard the Learned Counsel for the Petitioner

in support of this application as well as the Learned Deputy Solicitor General for the

Complainant-Respondent-Respondent [hereinafter the Complainant] and the

Respondent-Respondent, we wish to make following order.

The gravamen of the Petitioner’s Application is that the Civil Appellate High Court

had erred by failing to consider and adjudicate on the central issue raised by the

4

Petitioner that, the District Court of Colombo has no jurisdiction to order the recovery

of Value Added Tax [hereinafter VAT] in terms of Section 43(1) of the Value Added

Tax Act No. 14 of 2002 [hereinafter referred to as the VAT Act].

As time and again the jurisdiction of the District Court, regarding tax matters, has

been the ground for appeals, we consider it appropriate to clarify the current position

so as to clear all doubts and prevent such litigations in the future

The Complainant, sought to recover defaulted VAT, filed in the District Court of

Colombo, ‘Tax in Default Certificate’ dated 28. 01. 2011 against the Petitioner, a

limited liability company. The defaulted taxes amounted to; VAT liability amounting

to Rs. 7,251,676/- and Economic Service Charge (ESC) liability amounting to Rs.

131,423/- a sum of Rs. 7,383,099/- in total.

Among several matters, the Petitioner in particular has raised the issue as to whether

the District Court of Colombo is vested with the jurisdiction to entertain an

application for the recovery of VAT under the provisions of the VAT Act.

In subparagraphs (a), (b) and (c) of Paragraph 30 of the petition, the Petitioner has

raised the following questions of law;

(a) Did the Hon. Civil Appellate High Court of Colombo err by failing to duly and

properly consider and adjudicate upon the Petitioner’s contention that the

District Court of Colombo had no jurisdiction in law to entertain and /or order,

inter alia, recovery of VAT under Section 43(1) of the VAT Act No.14 of 2002,

in respect of any Certificate of default filed in the said Court and/or by failing to

appreciate that the said lack of jurisdiction was patent in nature, in the particular

circumstances.

(b) Did the Hon. Civil Appellate High Court of Colombo err by failing to

appreciate/find that Section 60 of the Judicature Act No. 2 of 1978 did not vest

5

any power /authority in the relevant Minister to concurrently/additionally vest

by Regulation [as published in the Government Gazette Notification, bearing

No.1380/17, dated 16/02/2005] a jurisdiction/power in the District Court to

recover VAT in default under Section 43 (1) of the VAT Act No. 14 of 2002,

when evidently the said power had specifically vested with the Parliament

exclusively in the Magistrate’s Court and therefore, the recovery of VAT under

Section 43 (1) of the VAT Act in the District Court of Colombo under the said

purported Tax in Default certificate, was clearly illegal and void?

(c) Did the Hon. Civil Appellate High Court of Colombo err by totally failing to

appreciate that the said purported Tax in Default Certificate was clearly filed in

and/or addressed to the wrong Court, and was therefore, flawed/ misconceived

and liable to be dismissed, and no attempt whatsoever was made by the

Respondents to rectify and/or amend the said error.

Jurisdiction of the District Court of Colombo relating to matters under the VAT Act

Chapter VIII of the VAT Act deals with recovery of tax and Section 43 of that chapter,

refers to proceedings for recovery [of tax] before a magistrate. In terms of the said

provision, the Commissioner General is empowered to issue a certificate containing

the particulars of such tax in default, to a magistrate having jurisdiction in the division

in which, such place of business or residence of the defaulter is situate.

In the year 1979, the Minister of Justice, by virtue of the powers vested in him under

section 61 of the Judicature Act No. 2 of 1978 [hereinafter the Judicature Act], read

with Section 5 (1) of the said Act, inter alia, designated the District Court of Colombo

to try and adjudicate on all matters under the Inland Revenue Act No. 4 of 1963

[Gazette No. 43/4 dated 2nd July 1979].

6

The above Gazette was amended in the year 2005 [Gazette No.1380/7 dated 16. 02.

2005]. The Minister, acting under the aforesaid powers, designated the District Court

of Colombo to try and adjudicate on all matters under the VAT Act No.14 of 2002.

It should to be noted that the validity of the Gazettes aforesaid has not been challenged

when promulgated and has been in force since1979 and 2005 respectively. On the

other hand, the original jurisdiction vested with the magistrate’s court in terms of the

provisions of the VAT Act, continues to remain in force. As such, the District Court of

Colombo has island wide jurisdiction concurrent with that of the magistrate’s court

of the relevant division, over matters relating to recovery of VAT. As observed by the

Court of Appeal in the case of Costa v. Deputy Commissioner of Inland Revenue [1986

Sri Lanka Tax Cases Vol. IV 268 at 270]

“… for all matters referred to in the regulation the District Court of Colombo

has island wide jurisdiction. This jurisdiction is concurrent with that of the

several Magistrate’s Courts throughout the island, in the matter of proceedings

for the recovery of taxes, by imposing the amount as a fine with power to

impose a term of imprisonment in default.” (Emphasis added.)

The preamble to the Judicature Act, spelling out the legislative intent, states, that it is

“An Act to…… define the jurisdiction of and to regulate the procedure in and before

such courts….” and Section 61 of the Judicature Act vests the Minister with the power

to make regulations for carrying out or giving effect to the principles and provisions

of the Judicature Act. Section 60 of the Judicature Act clearly vests the Minister with

the power to nominate a court or courts anywhere in Sri Lanka to hear and determine

such categories of civil or criminal proceedings or any other matters, by regulation

notwithstanding anything to the contrary, in any other written law. This court wishes

to observe that the Gazettes referred to, have not by any means taken away the powers,

the Parliament has vested, with the magistrate’s court to deal with recovery of taxes,

but has only complemented that jurisdiction by vesting similar powers with the

District Court of Colombo as well.

7

This court also notes that in terms of Section 19 of the Judicature Act, District Courts

are empowered, in the exercise of their jurisdiction, to impose fines, penalties and

forfeitures over persons. As such, we do not envisage that the District Court

encountering any difficulty in the enforcement of its orders in relation to the matters

in question.

In the circumstances, we are of the view that there is no merit in the application to

grant leave to proceed on the questions of law referred to in (a) and (b) above.

The learned Counsel for the Petitioner also submitted that the Tax in Default

Certificate was addressed to the magistrate’s Court and not to the District Court and

thereby is flawed and/or misconceived and liable to be dismissed for that reason. It

is well-settled that an exercise of a power will be referrable to a jurisdiction which

confers validity upon it and not to a jurisdiction under which it will be nugatory. This

principle has been applied even to cases where a Statute which confers no power has

been quoted as authority for a particular act, as there was in force another Statute

which conferred that power [See L. C. H. Peiris v. Commissioner of Inland Revenue

65 NLR 457]. Similarly, this principle should apply to instances where the jurisdiction

had been correctly invoked, but in doing so, the forum is wrongly stated.

The Deputy Commissioner of Inland Revenue had correctly invoked the jurisdiction

of the District Court of Colombo and had used a printed form No.101G (new) where

the word ‘magistrate’ is printed, to issue the Tax in Default Certificate.

Furthermore, the Civil Appellate High Court could have relied on the proviso to Article

138 (1) of the Constitution, which states, “Provided that no judgement, decree or

order of any court shall be revised or varies on account of any error, defect or

irregularity, which has not prejudiced the substantial rights of the parties or occasion

a failure of justice.”

8

There is no material before this court to arrive at a finding that the rights of the

Petitioner were prejudiced in any way due to the aforesaid defect and we see no merit

in the argument, to grant leave to appeal on the said question of law as well.

Accordingly, leave to appeal is refused and the application is dismissed.

Application Dismissed

Judge of the Supreme Court

V. K. Malalgoda, PC. J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

E. A. G. R. Amarasekara, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court