1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA In the matter of an application under and in terms of Article 126 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. SC FR Application No. SC/FR.361/2015 Rev. Watinapaha Somananda Thero No.101, Sri Vajirasrama Buddhist Centre, Ananda Rajakaruna Mw, Colombo 10. Petitioner 1. Hon. Akila Viraj Kariyawawam Minister of Education, Ministry of Education, “Isurupaya” Pelawatta, Battaramulla. Sri Lanka 2. Mr. W. M. Bandusena, Secretary, Ministry of Education, “Isurupaya”, Pelawata, Bataramulla. Sri Lanka. 3. Mr. S.U. Wijerathna The Additional Secretary, “Isurupaya”,Pelawatta, Bataramulla.

2

4. G.R.Chandana Kumara Kadigamuwa No.136 D, Isuru Mawatha, Ellakkla. 5. Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General’s Department, Hulftsdorp, Colombo 12. Respondents BEFORE: BUWANEKA ALUWIHARE, PC, J. ANIL GOONERATNE, J & VIJITH K. MALALGODA, PC, J. COUNSEL: Ruwantha Cooray for the Petitioner Dr. Avanti Perera, SSC for the Respondents ARGUED ON: 30.05.2017 DECIDED ON: 14.12.2017 ALUWIHARE, PC, J: This court granted leave to proceed in this application on alleged violations under Articles 12(1) and 14(1) (g) of the Constitution and court also granted interim relief by suspending the operation of letter P18, by which the Petitioner was transferred from Colombo District to Ampara District. The Petitioner held the substantive post of Assistant Director of Education (Piriven) since 2011 and had been appointed an Acting Deputy Director of Education (Piriven) in 2013; the functions of the latter position have to be performed from Colombo.

3

The Petitioner had averred that he has more than the requisite educational qualifications and having held numerous portfolios relating to Priven education, gained extensive experience in the sphere of administration and management in the relevant field. The Petitioner has also stated that he is responsible for making significant changes in management and the administration of the Piriven education system. Petitioner says in view of the contribution he made towards Piriven education,

he was appointed a Provincial Assistant Director of Education (Piriven) with

effect from 1st September, 2010 (P5) and was appointed an Assistant Director

(Piriven) with effect from 4th May, 2011 (P6) and was vested with duties

relating to administration and management of the Piriven education, both in

the Southern and Western Provinces.

The Petitioner asserts that the Additional Secretary (Planning) Ministry of

Education, entrusted the Petitioner with the supervisory and planning duties,

duties that were performed by the Director of Education (Piriven) who had

retired in March 2013. In the same year the Petitioner has been appointed as

Acting Deputy Director Education (Piriven) (Administration and Planning) by

the Secretary Ministry of Education (P8). The Petitioner also had asserted that

as a result of the positive contribution he made after assuming duties as Acting

Deputy Director (Piriven), he was able to achieve tremendous progress in the

sphere of Piriven education that some members of the staff of the Piriven

education branch of the Ministry of Education, requested the then minister of

Education Hon. Bandula Gunawardena to appoint the Petitioner to act in the

post of Director Education (Piriven) (P12)

The Petitioner had contended that he obtained sick leave due to ill health from

26-2 2015 to 10th-03-2015 and on the 27th -02-2015 the Secretary to the

Ministry of Education, the 2nd Respondent, had over the phone asked the

Petitioner to request for a transfer to serve in a different district.

4

The Petitioner had responded by informing the 2nd Respondent that he is not

inclined to request for a transfer.

It is the position of the Petitioner that when he reported back to work on

10.03-2015 the duties he performed in the capacity of Acting Deputy

Director of Education (Piriven) had been entrusted to the 4th Respondent. It is

alleged by the Petitioner that the appointment of the 4th Respondent to

overlook the duties of Deputy Director is mala fide and had been done for

political considerations. Furthermore, it was contended that the 4th

Respondent is only an Acting Assistant Director of Education. (P16)

It was contended on behalf of the Petitioner that he had served in the capacity

of Acting Deputy Director (Piriven) for a period of two years and performed

his duties without any blemish whatsoever, and the removal of the duties he

was performing as Acting Deputy Director, while his acting appointment was

still in force, is demonstrative of the male feeds on the part of the Respondent.

The Petitioner thereafter had sought redress by bringing the attention of his

predicament to both His Excellency the President and the Secretary to the

Ministry of Education, but to no avail.

The Petitioner, however, had been transferred to Uva Province and Ampara

District by letter P18 with effect from 17-09-2015. It is the position of the

Petitioner that the holder of the post of Acting Deputy Director of Education is

based in Colombo and accordingly, as long as the Petitioner holds that

position he is entitled to be based in the Colombo district.

The Petitioner alleges that, although it is the Secretary to the Ministry of

Education who is the competent authority to effect the transfers, the 4th

Respondent acting in collusion with the 1st Respondent had taken steps to

effect his transfer.

5

The Petitioner further alleges that his transfer to Uva Province is illegal and

had been done at the instance and the instigation of the 4th Respondent to

perpetuate his illegal appointment and complains that transferring him out of

Colombo amounts to an unlawful constructive termination of the Petitioners’

acting post of Deputy Director Education (Piriven).

The Petitioner states that he is the most senior officer attached to the Piriven

branch of the Ministry of Education and removing him and appointing the 4th

Respondent, who is not qualified to hold the said post, is due to his political

affiliations.

The Petitioner has also averred that due to his present state of health, he is

required to obtain medical treatment in Colombo and accordingly has

informed the 2nd Respondent regarding his inability to assume duties at the

place of work to which he had been transferred.

The 2nd Respondent in the objections filed, has taken up the position that way

back in 2011, the then Minister of Education had sought cabinet approval to

absorb 14 persons into the Sri Lanka Education Administrative Service

(hereinafter referred to as SLEAS) and to make them permanent in the posts of

Assistant Director Education (Piriven) (2R1). The said Cabinet memorandum

(2R1) carries the names of 14 persons, 12 Bhikkhus and 2 lay persons. The

Petitioner is one of the Bhikkhus whose name is among the 14 persons

referred to, in 2R1. Consequent to the Cabinet memorandum, a decision had

been taken by the Cabinet of Ministers and the decision is reflected in the

memorandum issued by the Secretary to the Cabinet dated 12-05-2012

reference WUM 11/0482/530/016 (2R2). It appears that the Cabinet has

granted approval to appoint the 12 Bhikkhus referred to in the Cabinet

Memorandum referred to above, to the post of Assistant Director Education

(Piriven) and the decision specifies in stating that these positions are outside

the SLEAS cadre and are personal to the Bhikkhus so appointed.

6

Further, it also states that the said posts get rescinded whenever a post falls

vacant and as such, these positions are to be considered as posts in the SLEAS

(Special Cadre).

What is significant is that the approval sought by the said Cabinet

memorandum to have the 14 persons “absorbed into the SLEAS (Special

Cadre)” had not received the Cabinet approval (2R2).

Consequent to the Cabinet decision aforesaid, the Petitioner had been

appointed as Assistant Director Education (Piriven) (2R3) along with the other

11 Bhikkhus, with effect from 4-05-2011.

The 2nd Respondent, however, states that the details with regard to these

appointments were not conveyed to the Public Service Commission as the

implementing authority happened to be the Ministry of Education.

The 2nd Respondent concedes that the Petitioner, in addition to his substantive

post, was also appointed as Acting Deputy Director Education (Piriven)

(Administration and planning) with effect from 15-08-2013 (P8).

Subsequently a Cabinet memorandum dated 03-05-2014 had been submitted

and by that memorandum, Cabinet approval was sought, inter alia, to have

the Petitioner appointed to act in the post of Deputy Director Education

(Piriven) which had fallen vacant by then.

Consequent to the Cabinet memorandum referred to above, the Cabinet of

Ministers by its decision of 07-08-2014 granted approval (2R4), to appoint

the Petitioner to act as Deputy Director Education (Piriven), upon obtaining

the concurrence of the Public Service Commission (hereinafter also referred to

as the PSC) (2R4). Accordingly, in compliance with the Cabinet decision, by

letter dated 18-09-2014, the then Secretary to the Ministry of Education, had

written to the PSC, seeking their concurrence to have the Petitioner appointed

as Acting Deputy Director of Education (Piriven) (2R5).

7

The PSC, responding to the said communiqué, by letter dated 7th November

2014 had informed the Secretary, Ministry of Education that the PSC cannot

grant concurrence to have the Petitioner appointed to the said post. The PSC in

their letter had highlighted the fact that the post of Deputy Director Education

(Piriven) is a SLEAS post and in terms of Rule IX:115 of the Code of Procedural

Rules of the PSC, the Petitioner cannot be appointed as the Acting Deputy

Director of Education (Piriven) (2R6)

The position of the 2nd Respondent is that the Petitioner has ceased to hold

office of Acting Deputy Director of Education (Piriven), in view of the letter of

the PSC (2R6).

It was contended on behalf of the 2nd Respondent that he sought the

concurrence of the PSC as per the Cabinet decision (2R4) and his action is

based on the response he received from the PSC (2R6).

The learned Senior State Counsel, at the hearing of this Application raised the

issue that the Petitioner had failed to cite the parties necessary to prosecute

this Application, namely the Public Service Commission, on whose decision,

the Petitioner ceased to be the “Acting Deputy Director Education (Piriven)”.

The decision of the PSC is not challenged in these proceedings and I cannot

fault the 2nd Respondent giving effect to the letter 2R6 of the PSC which he

was required to comply, in terms of the Cabinet decision (2R4).

The learned Senior State Counsel drew our attention to the decision of this

court in the case of Farook V. Dharmaratne, Chairman, Provincial Public

Service Commission, Uva and Others 2005 (1) SLR 133. In the said case the

Petitioner who was in Grade 1-1 of the Sri Lanka Principal’s service

8

challenged his transfer to another school and alleged infringement of Article

12 (1) of the Constitution. Her Ladyship Justice Bandaranayke (as she then

was) held:

“The petitioner's relief sought from this Court is to declare that his

(Petitioner’s) transfer as Principal of Pitarathmale No. 1 Tamil

Vidyalaya, Haputale and the 6th respondent's transfer as Principal of

Sri Razick Fareed Maha Vidyalaya, Bandarawela are null and void.

In view of the foregoing analysis of the material placed before this

Court the petitioner has no right to be the Principal of Razick Fareed

Maha Vidyalaya as he has not got the requisite qualifications.

However, the petitioner quite clearly has sought to obtain relief on

the basis of unequal treatment. When a person does not possess the

required qualifications that is necessary for a particular position,

would it be possible for him to obtain relief in terms of a violation of

his fundamental rights on the basis of unequal treatment? If the

answer to this question is in the affirmative, it would mean that

Article 12 (1) of the Constitution would be applicable even in a

situation where there is no violation of the applicable legal

procedure or the general practice. The application of Article 12(1)

of the Constitution cannot be used for such situations as it provides

to an aggrieved person only for the equal protection of the law

where the authorities have acted illegally or incorrectly without

giving due consideration to the applicable guidelines. Article 12 (1)

of the Constitution does not provide for any situation where the

authorities will have to act illegally. The safeguard retained in

Article 12 (1) is for the performance of a lawful act and not to be

directed to carry out an illegal function.

9

In order to succeed the petitioner must be in a position to place

material before this Court that there has been unequal treatment

within the framework of a lawful act.

In the same case her ladyship referred to a passage in the case of C. W.

Mackie and Company Ltd. v Hugh Molagoda, Commissioner General of

Inland Revenue and others 1986 1 SLR 300 at page 309, with approval,

wherein the court held:

"But the equal treatment guaranteed by Article 12 is equal treatment

in the performance of a lawful act. Via Article 12, one cannot seek

the execution of any illegal or invalid act. Fundamental to this

postulate of equal treatment is that it should be referable to the

exercise of a valid right, founded in law in contradistinction to an

illegal right which is invalid in law."

In the instant case too, the acting appointment of the Petitioner could not be

regularised due to the fetter referred to by the Public Service Commission in

their letter (2R6) which is not challenged in these proceedings.

Although the Petitioner has complained about his transfer to the Uva Province,

it appears from the documents 2R7 and 2R8 (i) to 2R 8 (xi) that the duty

stations of all other Bhikkhus appointed along with the Petitioner has been

simultaneously changed. As such I do not see any discriminatory treatment

peculiar to the Petitioner.

10

For the aforesaid reasons I hold that the petitioner has failed to establish the

alleged violations of Articles 12 (1) and 14 (1) (g) of the Constitution. This

application is accordingly dismissed, but in all the circumstances of the case

without costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Justice Anil Gooneratne

I agree

Judge of the Supreme Court

Justice Vijith Malalgoda P.C

I agree

Judge of the Supreme Court