1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

S.C. Appeal No. 139/2013 SC/HCCA/LA/11/2013 CP/HCCA/Kandy/LA/07/2011 DC Matale Case No. 4601/L

In the matter of an Appeal with leave of the Supreme Court first had and obtained in terms of Section 5C of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) (Amendment) Act No. 54 of 2006 read with Article 127 and 128 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. Mohamed Wahid ‘Rock View’, 9th Mile Post Alawatugoda. Probate holder of late Muhandiramge Aboobakkar Lebbe Mohamed Yusoof of 9th Mile Post, Alawatugoda. PLAINTIFF Vs. Rev. Wattegama Sumana Tissa Sri Wijayaramaya, Kuriwela, Ukuwela. (Deceased) DEFENDANT Rev. Wattegama Siri Sumana Elwela Temple, Elwela. (Deceased) SUBSTITUTED-DEFENDANT

2

Rev. Kalundewe Chandrasiri Elwela Temple, Elwela. SUBSTITUTED DEFENDANT AND Rev. Kalundewe Chandrasiri Elwela Temple, Elwela. SUBSTITUTED-DEFENDANT-PETITIONER Vs.

Mohamed Wahid ‘Rock View’, 9th Mile Post Alawatugoda. Probate holder of late Muhandiramge Aboobakkar Lebbe Mohamed Yusoof of 9th Mile Post, Alawatugoda. PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT AND NOW Mohamed Wahid ‘Rock View’, 9th Mile Post Alawatugoda. Probate holder of late Muhandiramge Aboobakkar Lebbe Mohamed Yusoof of 9th Mile Post, Alawatugoda. PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT-PETITIONER Vs.

3

Rev. Kalundewe Chandrasiri Elwela Temple, Elwela. SUBSTITUTED-DEFENDANT-PETITIONER-RESPONDENT BEFORE: Sisira J. de Abrew J. Anil Gooneratne J. & K. T. Chitrasiri J. COUNSEL: Shabry Haleemdeen with Srimal Seneviratne for Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant Kushan de Alwis P.C. with Rajiv Wijesinghe and B. Gamaarachchi For the Substituted-Defendant-Petitioner-Respondent ARGUED ON: 25.01.2017 DECIDED ON: 07.03.2017 GOONERATNE J. This was an action filed in the District Court, Matale for a

declaration of title and eviction of the Defendant-Petitioner-Respondent. Plaint

was filed on 18.12.1992. Answer having being filed by the Defendant-Petitioner-

Respondent, and thereafter the Plaintiff moved to file amended plaint for which

the Defendant objected. However learned District Judge allowed the amended

4

plaint to be filed. Case proceeded to trial, and after trial action was dismissed.

An appeal was preferred by the Appellant to the Civil Appellate High Court of

Kandy. The Civil Appellate Court, set aside the Judgment of the District Judge

and made order to hold a trial De Novo. Respondent appealed to the Supreme

Court having sought Leave to Appeal which was allowed, and the Supreme Court

by Order of 16.03.2008 dismissed the appeal of the Respondent.

Trial De Novo commenced on 21.10.2010 by raising 21 issues and

issue Nos. 13, 14 & 15 were tried as preliminary issues. Preliminary issues relate

to the date of filing plaint, (18.12.92) whether Plaintiff is entitled to rights on the

amended plaint based on the stator determination published on 11.03.1994 as

per the Land Reform Law, and the question of Plaintiff maintaining the action.

Issues were answered in favour of the Appellate by the District Court. Being

aggrieved by the judgment of the District Court, Respondent appealed to the

Civil Appeal High Court, Kandy and the Civil Appellate High Court, allowed the

appeal of the Defendant-Petitioner-Respondent and held that Plaintiff cannot

maintain the action.

This court on or about 14.01.2013 granted Leave to Appeal to the Plaintiff-

Respondent-Petitioner from the above order on the following questions of law.

16. (c ) Have their Lordships in the Civil Appellate High Court erred in law

in not appreciating that by operation of law that the said Usoof became

the Statutory Lessee of the land owned by him, with the right to make a

5

declaration as to which portion of the land owned by him, he wishes to

retain?

16 (f) Have their Lordships in the Civil Appellate High Court failed to

appreciate that the Petitioner could proceed with the case to vindicate his

title to the land which had been confirmed by the statutory

determination?

In this case, according to the Land Reform Law, land in excess of the

land ceiling as claimed by the Appellant vested in the Land Reform Commission.

In brief the facts of this case are as follows. By a deed of transfer bearing No.

234 of 15.07.54 two persons namely Mohamed Ibrahim and Abdul Kapur

transferred the property, the subject matter of this action to Abdul Hameed and

Mohamed Yusoof (deceased). The Appellant is the probate holder or executor

of late Mohomed Yusoof. As both Abdul Hameed and late Mohamed Yusoof

owned more than 50 acres of land, by operation of law, according to provisions

of the Land Reform Law, land which were co-owned in excess vested in the Land

Reform Commission.

The scheme of the above law is that in terms of Section 5 of the said

law after the date of commencement of this law, any person becomes the owner

of agricultural land in excess of the ceiling, any such land owned by such person

in excess shall as from that date deemed to vest in the commission and be held

by that person under a statutory lease from the Land Reform Commission

6

Section 6 of the law states that when land is vested in the commission under the

Land Reform Law, such vesting shall have the effect of giving the land vested in

the commission absolute title to the commission, free from all encumbrances.

The above section of the law are plain and simple and needs no

further interpretation to understand its contents. Plaintiff is claiming a

declaration of title to the land in question. As such the important question to be

decided is whether the Plaintiff-Appellant had title to the property when it was

released to him and when action was filed in the District Court of Matale. To

enable the Plaintiff to file a rei vindicatio action Plaintiff himself must have had

title as observed by the learned High Court Judge. The material made available

to this court no doubt suggest that by the time action was filed in the District

Court, late Mohamed Yusoof in whose favour a declaration of title is sought had

no title to the property in dispute. By that time property in dispute had vested

in the Land Reform Commission. Action was instituted on 18.12.1992. Land

Reform Commission published the statutory determination on 11.03.1994.

(undisputed facts).

Section 18 of the law provides that every person who became a

statutory lessee, within 1 month of publication in the Gazette by the

7

commission, call upon the statutory lessee to make a statutory declaration in a

prescribed form of the total extent of the agriculture land so held by him on such

lease. The next two sections viz. Sections 19 and 20 of the Land Reform Law are

the important provisions which would have a direct bearing to the case in hand.

19 (1) reads thus:

The following provisions shall apply on the receipt by the Commission of a statutory

declaration made under section 18 –

(a) The Commission shall, as soon as practicable, make a determination, in this Law

referred to as a “statutory determination”, specifying the portion or portions of the

agricultural land owned by the statutory lessee which he shall be allowed to retain. In

making such determination the Commission shall take into consideration the

preference or preferences, if any, expressed by such lessee in the declaration as to

the portion or portions of such land that he may be allowed to retain.

(b) The Commission shall publish the statutory determination in the Gazette and shall also

send a copy thereof to such lessee by registered letter through the post. Such

determination shall be final and conclusive, and shall not be called in question in any

court, whether by way of writ or otherwise.

Section 20 reads thus:

Every statutory determination published in the Gazette under section 19 shall come into

operation on the date of such publication and the Commission shall have no right, title or

interest in the agricultural land specified in the statutory determination from the date of

such publication.

The learned counsel for the Appellant took some pains to submit to

us, that what is relevant is the date on which the commission decided to make

8

a statutory determination, and for that purpose it would be necessary to have

lead evidence in the District Court and sought to demonstrate that this question

cannot be decided in the way “trial Judge permitted preliminary issues to be

raised and ruled on same. However learned President’s Counsel for the

Respondent opposed the above submissions of learned counsel for the

Appellant and submitted to this court that the above Sections 19 and 20 of the

said law need no further explanation and what is material is the date of

publication of the Gazette as provided by Section 20 of the said law.

The Learned President’s Counsel invited this court to consider the

following authorities and submitted to court that the law is settled on this issue,

which had been considered even by the learned High Court Judge. In Gangegoda

Appuhamillage Don Edmund Ananda Seneviratne, Krishnajeena Seneviratne Vs.

Rohan Tissa Anthony Weeratunga, Tissa Indika Weeratunga

S.C. Appeal No. 18/2010: S.C minutes of 15.03.2012

Per Bandaranayake CJ:

A plain reading of the said Section 20, clearly indicates that when a Statutory

Determination is published in the Gazette in terms of Section 19, from the date of such

notification is published, the Land Reform Commission shall not have any right, title or

interests in the said agricultural land. Accordingly, when an agricultural land owned by a

person in excess of the ceiling on the date of commencement of the Land Reform Law had

been vested in the Commission, and the said land be deemed to be held by such person under

a statutory lease from the Commission, thereafter on the basis of a Statutory declaration

made by the statutory lessee, if a Statutory Determination is made, the Land Reform

9

Commission would not have any right, title or interest from the date of the publication in the

Gazette of the Statutory Determination. Therefore when the Statutory Determination is made

and the Gazette Notification is published, the person in whose favour the said Determination

was made would become the owner of the land stipulated in the said Statutory

Determination.

This position was considered in Jinawathie and Others v. Emalin Perera ((1986) 2 Sri L.R. 121)

by a Divisional Bench of this Court. In that, the objectives of the Land Reform Law and the

effects of a Statutory Determination were clearly considered and it was held that,

Once the statutory determination is made the person in whose favour it was made

becomes owner of the land specified in the determination with all the incidents of

ownership”.

The questions of law is answered as follows:

16 (c ) No. High Court has not erred in law. Statutory lessee has a right to make

a statutory declaration within 1 month as provided by Section 18 of the said law.

The law is clear on this aspect but title will pass only on publication of the gazette

by the commission as required by Section 20 of the Land Reform Law.

16(f) No. Appellant would not be entitled to relief as prayed for in his amended

plaint.

In all the above circumstances of the case in hand, I affirm the

judgment of the Civil Appellate High Court. Appellant no doubt commenced his

action by filing plaint on 18.12.1992 and the statutory determination was made

by gazette notification only on 11.03.1994. Therefore the action filed by the

10

Appellant in the trial court was not maintainable as he had no title to the

property in dispute as at the date of filing action. Appeal is dismissed with costs.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Sisira J. de Abrew J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

K.T. Chitrasiri J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT