SC Appeal No. 111/2013 JUDGMENT Page 1 of 20

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

1. Weliwattage Upali Indrasiri Perera,

2. Weliwattage Yasawardane Nandasiri Perera

3. Weliwattage Yasawardane Chandrasiri

Perera

All of

No. 327, High Level Road,

Pannipitiya

PLAINTIFFS

Vs.

1. Colomage Celestina Jayawardane,

2. Satharasinghage Amaratunga,

3. Satharasinghage Don Abeywardane,

4. Satharasinghage Dharmasena,

5. Satharasinghage Don Gunawardane

All of

Maththegoda, Polgasowita.

DEFENDANTS

AND BETWEEN

4. Satharasinhage Dharmasena,

Maththegoda, Polgasowita.

4th DEFENDANT-APPELLANT

SC Appeal No. 111/2013

S.C. HCCA LA Application No.

282/2012

WP/HCCA/AVI/317/2008(F)

D.C. Homagama Case No.

117/L

SC Appeal No. 111/2013 JUDGMENT Page 2 of 20

Vs.

1. Weliwattage Seeman Perera

(Deceased)

1A. Weliwattage Upali Indrasiri Perera,

2. Weliwattage Yasawardane Nandasiri Perera

3. Weliwattage Yasawardane Chandrasiri

Perera

All of

No. 327, High Level Road,

Pannipitiya

PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENTS

1. Colomage Celestina Jayawardane,

(Deceased)

1 Satharasinghage Amaratunga,

1 Satharasinghage Don Abeywardane,

1 Satharasinghage Dharmasena,

2. Satharasinghage Amaratunga,

(Deceased)

2 Jayasinghe Arachchige Kamalawathi,

2 Satharasinghage Don Nalani,

2 Satharasinghage Don Sarathchandra,

3. Satharasinghage Don Abeywardane,

5. Satharasinghage Don Gunawardane,

(Deceased)

5 Satharasinghage Amaratunga,

SC Appeal No. 111/2013 JUDGMENT Page 3 of 20

5 Satharasinghage Don Abeywardane,

5 Satharasinghage Dharmasena

All of

Maththegoda, Polgasowita.

DEFENDANT-RESPONDENTS

AND NOW BETWEEN

Satharasinhage Dharmasena,

Maththegoda, Polgasowita.

(Deceased)

4th DEFENDANT-APPELLANT-

PETITIONER

Kodikkarage Ewline Sumanawathie of

Maththegoda, Polgasowita

SUBSTITUTED 4th DEFENDANT-

APPELLANT-APPELLANT

Vs.

1. Weliwattage Seeman Perera

(Deceased)

1A. Weliwattage Upali Indrasiri Perera,

2. Weliwattage Yasawardane Nandasiri Perera

3. Weliwattage Yasawardane Chandrasiri

Perera

All of

SC Appeal No. 111/2013 JUDGMENT Page 4 of 20

No. 327, High Level Road,

Pannipitiya

PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT-RESPONDENTS

1. Colomage Celestina Jayawardane,

(Deceased)

1 Satharasinghage Amaratunga,

1 Satharasinghage Don Abeywardane,

1 Satharasinghage Dharmasena,

2. Satharasinghage Amaratunga,

(Deceased)

2 Jayasinghe Arachchige Kamalawathi,

2 Satharasinghage Don Nalani,

2 Satharasinghage Don Sarathchandra,

3. Satharasinghage Don Abeywardane,

5. Satharasinghage Don Gunawardane,

(Deceased)

5 Satharasinghage Amaratunga,

5 Satharasinghage Don Abeywardane,

5 Satharasinghage Dharmasena

All of

Maththegoda, Polgasowita.

DEFENDANT-RESPONDENT-

RESPONDENTS

SC Appeal No. 111/2013 JUDGMENT Page 5 of 20

BEFORE: S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

A.L. SHIRAN GOONERATNE, J. AND

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J

COUNSEL: Harsha Soza, PC with R. Perera instructed by Srihan Samaranayake for

the Petitioners

Ranjan Suwandaratne, PC with Anil Rajakaruna for the Plaintiff-

Respondent-Respondent

WRITTEN

SUBMISSIONS:

04th Defendant-Appellant-Petitioner-Appellant on 23rd October 2013

Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent on 14th November 2013

ARGUED ON: 25th March 2024

DECIDED ON: 20th May 2025

THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

1. Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondents (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the Plaintiffs or

Plaintiff-Respondents) instituted this action before the District Court of Homagama

seeking, inter alia,

i. Interim injunction and enjoining order to restrain the Defendant from tapping

the rubber trees on the land described in 2nd Schedule to the Plaint.

ii. Declaration that the Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondents are entitled to the

property described in the 2nd Schedule to the Plaint.

2. After trial, on 27th March 2005, the District Court of Homagama had entered judgment in

favour of the Plaintiffs. Aggrieved by the said judgment dated 27th March 2005, the 4th

SC Appeal No. 111/2013 JUDGMENT Page 6 of 20

Defendant to the said action preferred an appeal against the same to the Provincial High

Court of the Western Province holden in Avissawella, exercising civil appellate jurisdiction

(hereinafter the High Court of Civil Appeal). By judgment dated 11th June 2012, the High

Court of Civil Appeal had dismissed the appeal, affirming the District Court decision

subject to variationsspecifically the answers to issues Nos. 19 and 20 as to whether the

corpus is an undivided portion of a larger land.

3. Aggrieved by the judgment of the High Court of Civil Appeal, the 4th Defendant-

Appellant-Appellant (who was substituted pending this appeal and shall hereinafter be

referred to as the Appellant) appeals to this Court. Leave has been granted on the

following questions of law:

i. Has the High Court of Civil Appeals erred in holding that the Plaintiffs-Respondents

have established the title to the property in suit?

ii. Has the High Court of Civil Appeals erred in not considering that the said Plan No.

4190 (P5) referred to in the 2nd Schedule to the Plaint has not effected a valid division

of the land in suit?

iii. Has the High Court of Civil Appeals erred in not considering that on the material

before it the Plaintiffs-Respondents have neither paper title nor prescriptive titled to

the land in suit?

iv. Has the High Court of Civil Appeals erred in failing to appreciate that inter family

transfers can be impeached on the basis that the transferor had no title?

4. The fact that the subject of the District Court action is described in the 2nd Schedule to

the Plaint has not been disputed. It is a portion of a larger land called Mattegoda

Mukalana, five acres in extent, and was described in the 1st Schedule to the Plaint.

SC Appeal No. 111/2013 JUDGMENT Page 7 of 20

5. It is apparent from the questions of law aforementioned that all questions before this

Court are concerned with the title to the property in suit. As the Appellant correctly

contended, it was incumbent upon the Plaintiffs to prove title.

6. The Plaintiffs chain of title, as claimed by the Plaint of the Plaintiffs before the District

Court, begins with one Satharasinhage Don Manis, who was the owner of the larger land

Mattegoda Mukalana (5A:0R:0P) and happens to be the husband of the 1st Defendant-

Respondent-Respondent. Said Don Manis had then conveyed an undivided extent of two

acres to one Imbuldeniyage Don Davith by Deed No. 749 of 23rd February 1935, attested

by W. Sathasivam, Notary Public (marked P2). These facts have not been disputed.

7. Thereafter, by Deed No. 1043 of 18th July 1941 (marked P3), Don Davith had conveyed

the said undivided extent of two acres, which was granted to him by Deed marked P2,

to Colombage Celestina Jayawardane (the 1st Defendant-Respondent-Respondent).

8. According to the Plaint of the Plaintiffs, Celestina Jayawardane and her predecessors in

title had long been in undisturbed and uninterrupted possession and control of a distinct

and separate two-acre portion of the land in lieu of their undivided rights, acquiring

prescriptive rights over the said distinct two-acre portion. Thereafter, the Plaintiffs state,

by Deed No. 8289 of 17th January 1948 (marked P4), said Celestina Jayawardane together

with her husband, Don Manis, had conveyed an undivided one acre two roods out of the

said divided two acres to Charles Silva. However, the Deed No. 8289 clearly indicates that

what has been conveyed is an undivided extent of one acre and two roods towards the

southern boundary out of the five-acre land.

9. The Defendants have contested the validity of this conveyance on the basis that

aforementioned Don Davith, who conveyed undivided two acres to Celestina Jayawardane

in 1941, had conveyed the same undivided two acres in 1955 to the 3rd Defendant for

valuable consideration by Deed No. 4551 of 12th June 1955 (marked V3). Although the

SC Appeal No. 111/2013 JUDGMENT Page 8 of 20

former Deed was executed 14 years prior to the latter, the latter was duly registered on

17th June 1955, while the former was not registered until 24th June 1995.

10. Both the learned District Judge as well as the learned High Court Judge have correctly

come to the conclusion that the latter Deed, i.e., Deed No. 4551 of 12th June 1955 (marked

V3), is entitled to the benefit of prior registration in terms of Section 7 of the Registration

of Documents Ordinance. However, this in itself does not defeat the Plaintiffs title. Deed

No. 8289 was jointly executed by Celestina Jayawardane and her husband, Don Manis. As

the Appellant conceded in the written submissions, Don Manis conveyed to Don Davith,

undivided two acres from the five acres he owned, by Deed marked P2. Subsequent to

this conveyance, he had left with him undivided rights over three acres of the said land.

As such, the title of Celestina Jayawardane, by virtue of Deed No. 1043 of 18th July 1941

(marked P3) per se does not prove or disprove the Plaintiffs title, as title could devolve

to Charles Silva from that of Don Manis.

11. Howbeit, after the aforesaid conveyance to Charles Silva, he had had the land surveyed

and seen to the preparation of Plan No. 4190 of 17th February 1951 by M.D.A.

Goonetilleke, Licensed Surveyor (marked P5). The said Plan No. 4190 on the face of it

carries the following: Lot B in the extent 1.2.00 is claimed by Gamage Charles Silva under

and by virtue of Deed 8289 dated 17.1.1948 by D.V. Ranasinghe.

12. It is these rights claimed by Charles Silva that had then been conveyed to the Plaintiffs

father, Seeman Perera, by Deed No. 1769 of 04th August 1951 (marked P14). It is very

clear from this Deed marked P14 that Carles Silva had intended to convey an extent of

one acre and two roods as divided by Plan No. 4190 to said Seeman Perera. Seeman

Perera had thereafter leased the property to various parties on several instances.

13. The question as to whether Plaintiffs can claim prescriptive rights over the property in suit

has been considered by the learned District Judge in detail. As the learned Judge has

SC Appeal No. 111/2013 JUDGMENT Page 9 of 20

observed, there had been various disputes concerning the land in suit at least since 1951,

with some of the parties seeking legal remedies with respect to the same. Owing to these

disputes, the learned Judge has found that the Plaintiffs or their predecessors in title had

not had undisturbed or uninterrupted possession over any portion of the land Mattegoda

Mukalana, leading to the rejection of the Plaintiffs claim of prescriptive rights. learned

High Court Judge has correctly left these findings undisturbed.

14. The Land Reform Law, No. 1 of 1972 (hereinafter the Law) came into effect in August 1972

while Seeman Perera still had rights over the land in suit. According to the Plaintiffs, by

operation of this Law, the corpus was deemed to be vested in the Land Reforms

Commission as Seeman Perera held land in excess of the ceiling imposed thereunder.

15. However, upon his request and a subsequent appeal,1 the Land Reforms Commission had

permitted Seeman Perera to effect what is known as an inter-family transfer in terms of

Section 14 of the Law with respect to the land in suit among other properties.2

Accordingly, Seeman Perera had gifted to the Plaintiffs an extent of one acre, one rood

and thirty-five perches, depicted in Lot 1 in Plan No. 1013 of 11th November 1974 (marked

P14) by virtue of Deed No. 474 of 22nd February 1976 (marked P15).

16. On the face of it, said Lot 1 (1A:1R:35P) in Plan No. 1013 (P14) appear to be the same as

Lot B (1A:2R:0P) in Plan No. 4190 (P5). However, very clearly, the two lots refer to two

different extents of land. However, the learned High Court Judge has considered this

discrepancy of five perches to be insignificant in the instant case as the land can be clearly

ascertained, relying on the authority of Yapa v. Dissanayake Sedara.3 As no questions

1 This is evidenced by documents marked P11 and P12

2 As evidenced by document marked P13

3 [1989] 1 Sri L.R. 361

SC Appeal No. 111/2013 JUDGMENT Page 10 of 20

of law has been raised before this Court with respect to this finding, I see no need to

consider this in any greater detail.

17. However, when the matter was argued before this Court, the Appellant contended the

division purportedly effected by Plan No. 4190 (P5) to be invalid on the basis that,

whereas the said Plan mentioned Lot B (1A:2R:0P) as depicted therein to be a lot claimed

by Charlis Silva by virtue of Deed No. 8289, the said Deed No. 8289 only gives him

undivided rights over the larger land named Mattegoda Mukalana and not over any

identified portion of it.

18. The Appellant contended that a mere plan, such as Plan No. 4190 (P5), which does not

relate to a partition deed or decree and has not been signed or accepted by all co-owners,

to be incapable of effecting a division over a co-owned land. I am in agreement with the

Appellant on this contention, for that is trite law. As such, the learned High Court Judges

reasoning to the effect that the land described in Schedule 2 to the Plaint became a

divided portion upon being surveyed on 17th February 1951 (the date borne on Plan No.

4190) is clearly erroneous.

19. While that may be so, before this Court can reach a conclusion as to the Plaintiffs title

over the corpus, I must necessarily consider the effect of the Land Reform Law, No. 1 of

1972, as the corpus was deemed to be vested in the Land Reforms Commission before

the inter-family transfer under Section 14 of the Law was effected.

20. The Law itself leaves no ambiguity as to its purpose. As Section 2 of the Law sets out, it

seeks to (a) to ensure that no person shall own agricultural land in excess of the ceiling;

and (b) to take over agricultural land owned by any person in excess of the ceiling and to

utilize such land in a manner which will result in an increase in its productivity and in the

employment generated from such land.

SC Appeal No. 111/2013 JUDGMENT Page 11 of 20

21. Section 3(2) states that any agricultural land owned by a person in excess of the ceiling

set out in Section 3(1) on the date of commencement shall be deemed to vest in the Land

Reforms Commission. According to Section 6 of the Law, such vesting has the effect of

giving the Commission absolute title to such land free from any and all encumbrances.

22. As Parinda Ranasinghe, J (as His Lordship was then) noted in Jinawathie and Others v.

Emalin Perera,4 while this appears rather straightforward where a sole owner hold land

in excess of the ceiling, matters become less uncomplicated with respect to the interests

of co-owners. In such instances, it is necessary to carefully consider Sections 6 and 7 of

the Law.

23. Section 6 of the Law states,

Where any agricultural land is vested in the Commission under this Law, such

vesting shall have the effect of giving the land in the Commission absolute title to

such land as from the date of such vesting, and free from all encumbrances.

24. Whereas Section 7 of the Law states,

For the purposes of this Law, where any agricultural land is co-owned, each co-

Owner shall be deemed to own his share in such land as a distinct and separate

entity.

25. As held in Jinawathie and Others v. Emalin Perera,5

The provision of this section requires, by the use of a statutory fiction, the interests

of a co-owner which would, at the time this Law comes into operation be only an

undivided share of a larger land owned in common, to be treated as a distinct and

4 [1986] 2 Sri L.R. 121, at 128

5 ibid at 129-130

SC Appeal No. 111/2013 JUDGMENT Page 12 of 20

separate entity. Such an assumption is only for the purposes of this Law The

moment this Law comes into operation the undivided share of a co-owner, whether

he be one whose interest are over fifty acres or not, becomes, in the eye of the law, a

distinct and separate entity, equal to the undivided extent he was earlier entitled to

in the common land. Such entity is, at that time, still not identified or located on the

ground, as distinct from the larger land By the use of this fiction undivided interest

are treated as divided, and a co-owner is treated as the sole owner of a distinct entity,

in order to ser the provisions of this Law in motion. The effect of the operation of the

provisions of sec. 7 is to bring about a separation or partition of the undivided share

of a person, who, at the time this Law comes into operation, owns such interests in

common with several others, and transform such undivided share into a distinct and

separate portion The combined operation of the provisions of sec. 2 and sec. 7 of

this Law would result, in the case of a person, coming within sec. 3(2), but whose

interest in agricultural land comprise, either wholly or party, undivided share or share

of land, in such undivided shares being converted, albeit notionally, to a distinct and

separate entity, and such distinct and separate entity then being treated as vesting

in the Commission. The undivided share of a person would thus, in law, be considered

as having ceased to exist as an undivided share, and being separated off from the

undivided shares of the other co-owners, and bcoming [sic] a distinct and separate

entity The distinct and separate entity brought into being, though at that stage only

notionally and confined to paper without any identification of its existence on the

ground, will become identified and located on the ground once the provisions of sec.

18, 19 and 21 have run their operational course.

26. Sections 18, 19 and 21 create provisions for the determination of the land that is to be

vested in the Land Reforms Commission. These provisions set out the process by which it

is decided as to which portion or portions of land a person who comes within Section 3

SC Appeal No. 111/2013 JUDGMENT Page 13 of 20

may be allowed to retain. Although Section 3(1) provides that all such land beyond the

ceiling shall be deemed to vest in the Commission, the exact metes and bounds of the

lands to be vested remain uncertain until such determination.

27. Where the Commission makes a statutory determination under and in terms of Section

19 as to what portions of land a person may retain with them, such person in whose favour

such determination is made becomes an owner of such land with all incidents of

ownership. The land does not cease to be a distinct and separate entity and does not once

again become an undivided portion of a larger land following such determination, even

where such land was co-owned at the time of vesting the same in the Commission.6

28. The Appellant sought to distinguish Jinawathie and Others v. Emalin Perera (supra)

from the case at hand, arguing that the dicta of the Jinawathie Case to be only applicable

where the Land Reforms Commission has made a statutory determination. While the

Appellant is correct in this assertion that the Jinawathie Case is not binding with respect

to inter-family transfers effected in terms of Section 14 of the Law, it is illuminative as to

how the scheme of the Law operates as against co-owned lands.

29. The Jinawathie Case also makes it amply clear that, where one of several co-owners hold

land over the ceiling imposed by the Law and any undivided share of such co-owner is

deemed to vest in the Commission, such share is considered, in law, as being separated

from the undivided shares of other co-owners, having ceased to exist as an undivided

share. The share of such co-owner whose rights overshot the ceiling is then considered a

distinct and separate entity for the purpose of the Land Reform Law.

30. The Appellant contended, however, that co-ownership with respect to Mattegoda

Muakalana has not been terminated. The Appellant further contended that, in spite of

6 Jinawathie and Others v. Emalin Perera [1986] 2 Sri L.R. 121

SC Appeal No. 111/2013 JUDGMENT Page 14 of 20

Plan No. 1013 (P14) being prepared for the purpose of the Section 14 transfer, rights in

Mattegoda Mukalana (5A:0R:0P) have to be divided and resolved in a partition case.

31. In light of the Jinawathie dicta, this contention of the Appellant could only succeed if the

effect of a Section 14 approval is to restore the status quo ante the vesting of land in the

Land Reforms Commission for the limited purpose of effecting an inter-family transfer.

32. Section 14 of the Law provides as follows:

(1) Any person who becomes a statutory lessee of any agricultural land under this

Law may within three months from such date make an application to the

Commission in the prescribed form for the transfer by way of sale, gift, exchange or

otherwise of the entirety or portion of such agricultural land to any child who is

eighteen years of age or over or to a parent of such person.

(2) The Commission may by order made under its hand grant or refuse to grant

approval for such transfer. Such order shall be made within one year of the date of

application under subsection (1). Every such order shall be sent by registered post to

the applicant under subsection (1). Any such applicant aggrieved by the order may

appeal to the Minister within three weeks of the receipt of such order. The receipt of

the order shall be deemed to be effected at the time at which letters would be

delivered in the ordinary course of post.

(3) Any transfer effected in accordance with the provisions of an order made under

subsection (2) or such order as amended, varied or modified on appeal shall have the

effect of transferring right, title or interest in property so transferred free of the

statutory lease.

SC Appeal No. 111/2013 JUDGMENT Page 15 of 20

33. In Susangatha De Fonseka v. Pussewalage Ashokalatha,7 Obeyesekere, J, with whom

Buwaneka Aluwihare, PC and Janak De Silva, JJ agreed, sheds some light on this process

under Section 14 of the Law. As clearly explained therein, an inter-family transfer under

Section 14 is made not by the Commission but by the statutory lessee to whom the land

belonged before it was deemed vested in the Commission by the enactment of the Law.

His Lordship described the application of a statutory lessee to the Commission in terms

of Section 14 to be one seeking the return to such statutory lessee [i.e. to the owner],

agricultural land that was over and above the ceiling stipulated in Section 3(1) in order that

the said land be transferred to such persons children who were over eighteen years of age

or such persons parents.

34. In the above case, it was further held that,

once the approval of the Commission was received, the transfer was to be

effected by the applicant in favour of his or her child, and not by the

Commission

While I shall elaborate later on in this judgment, I must state at this point that:

(a) it is not the Commission that transferred the impugned land to the Plaintiff but

her own father; and

(b) what was transferred to the Plaintiff was the title that the Plaintiffs father

had in the said land at the time the Law came into force, and therefore free

of the statutory lease to which the Plaintiffs fathers rights over the land had been

reduced to in terms of Section 3 of the Law8

7 SC Appeal No. 107/2015, SC Minutes of 13th November 2023

8 ibid at p. 11 (Emphasis added)

SC Appeal No. 111/2013 JUDGMENT Page 16 of 20

35. Obeyesekere, J has elaborated on this position further in the said judgment as follows:

The learned Presidents Counsel for the Plaintiff submitted that with the coming into

operation of the Law and with land over and above the ceiling deemed to have been

vested in the Commission free of any encumbrance, the Plaintiffs father lost his title

to the mortgaged property and was transformed into a statutory lessee. He therefore

submitted that when the Plaintiffs father executed Deed No. 2085, he did so not as

the owner of Manomani Estate which was subject to a mortgage but as the statutory

lessee of a land that was no longer encumbered. He submitted further that with

Manomani Estate being deemed vested in the Commission in 1972, the Plaintiff

derived her title to 25 acres of Manomani Estate not from her father but from the

Commission, and most importantly, free of any encumbrance.

I am unable to agree with this argument of the learned Presidents Counsel for the

Plaintiff. Although in terms of Section 3(2), all agricultural lands in excess of the

ceiling are deemed to have vested in the Commission on the day the Law came into

operation by way of a legal fiction, as I have already stated, for the purposes of this

case, that vesting is subject to:

(a) a statutory determination of the land area amounting to 50 acres that an owner

would be allowed to retain as his entitlement in terms of the Law; and

(b) the release to the owner of land in excess of the ceiling in order that the said land

be gifted to his children who are over the age of eighteen.

What the Commission did in terms of the Order made under Section 14(2) was grant

approval to the owner to transfer land to his children, which is a further manifestation

of the concept of the land being merely deemed vested in the Commission. In doing

so, the Commission revived the title of the owner to that portion of land for

which approval was being granted, while simultaneously removing his status

SC Appeal No. 111/2013 JUDGMENT Page 17 of 20

as statutory lessee, thereby enabling the land be transferred to his children.

This is reflected in the wording of Section 14(3), as well as by the fact that the Deed

of Gift was executed by the Plaintiffs father and not by the Commission. Thus, I am

of the view that the Plaintiff in this case derived her title from her father and

not from the Commission.

Having said so, I must reiterate that the benefit of title vesting free of any

encumbrances, as provided by Section 6, has only been conferred upon the

Commission, and that when the Commission grants approval in terms of Section

14(2) for an inter-family transfer, the title that the beneficiaries of such

transfer receive is not the unencumbered title of the Commission but the title

of the person who owned the land at the time the Law came into force,

including any encumbrance that may have existed at the time in respect of such

land9

36. The above observations are indorsed by the language of Section 21(3) of the Land Reform

(Special Provisions) Act, No. 39 of 1981. It provides that,

"Where it is not practicable for the Commission to grant approval for the transfer

by the statutory lessee of any agricultural land under subsection (2) of section

14 of the Land Reform Law, the Commission shall alienate land to the extent of

the land acquired from such statutory lessee under the Land Acquisition Act, to any

child or to a parent of such statutory lease.10

37. Although the case of Susangatha De Fonseka v. Pussewalage Ashokalatha (supra) did

not involve a co-owned land, I do not see that as a distinguishing factor insofar as the

findings on Section 14 provisions relevant to this instant case are concerned. Under

9 ibid at pp. 24-25 (Emphasis added)

10 Emphasis added

SC Appeal No. 111/2013 JUDGMENT Page 18 of 20

Section 7 of the Law, which is concerned with co-owned land, each co-owner of a land

shall be deemed to own his or her share as a distinct and separate entity. This, too, much

like Section 3(2), is a deeming provision.

38. The function of the Land Reforms Commission in terms of Section 14(2) is to grant

permission to the applicant (statutory lessee/prior owner) to transfer the title that such

applicant himself had over such land to any family member(s) recognised by the Law. The

Commission plays no part in the conveyance of title per se.

39. Accordingly, under an inter-family transfer in terms of Section 14 of the Law, a person can

only transfer such interests he himself had over a particular land before such land was

deemed vested in the Commission. As Obeyesekere, J has astutely observed, this is a

manifestation of the concept of land being merely deemed vested in the Land Reforms

Commission.

40. As previously noted, I do not see Section 7 having any effect on these principles where a

land is co-owned. This is so, as the effects of both Section 3(2) and Section 7 are to create,

for the purpose of the operation of the Land Reforms Law, a statutory fiction11 of (a) land

in excess of the ceiling being vested in the Commission and (b) co-owned land being

vested in the Commission as a distinct and separate entity reflecting the share such co-

owner against whom the Law operates would have had over a land. Where the

Commission grants permission to execute an inter-family transfer in terms of an order

under Section 14(2), this statutory fiction is extinguished momentarily, and the title a

statutory lessee had is revived, for the limited purpose of effecting such transfer.

11 See Jinawathie and Others v. Emalin Perera [1986] 2 Sri L.R. 121, at p. 128-130

SC Appeal No. 111/2013 JUDGMENT Page 19 of 20

41. As such, I am in agreement with the Appellants contention that co-ownership with

respect to Mattegoda Muakalana has not been terminated by virtue of any provisions of

the Land Reforms Law.

42. In the instant case, it was amply clear from the material before us that Charlis Silva (who

conveyed his interests over the property in suit to Seeman Perera, Plaintiffs father) had

undivided one acre and two roods over a large land, five acres in extent.

43. Although he had had Plan No. 4190 of 17th February 1951 (P5) prepared, recognising the

corpus of this action as Lot B therein, such a plan could not have duly portioned or

divided the land. This remains the same with respect to Plan No. 1013 of 11th November

1974 (P14). The latter Plan itself mentions that the survey was done as pointed out by

the owner. As the Plaintiffs themselves admitted, the said Plan No. 4190 had been used

in the preparation of Plan No. 1013.

44. Clearly, the Plaintiffs father, Seeman Perera, could only have acquired undivided interests

over the land in suit from his predecessor in title. There is no material whatsoever

indicating that rights of the co-owner over Mattegoda Mukalana (5A:0R:0P) have ever

been duly divided in terms of the law. Therefore, said Seeman Perera, who effected the

inter-family transfer, could only have conveyed undivided title.

45. Accordingly, the second and fourth questions of law are answered in the affirmative. As

to the first and third questions of law, I answer them in the negative, and hold that

Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent have established undivided title over the property in

suit.

46. Considering the above answers to the questions of law, and especially the fact that the

title of the Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondents over the property in suit is undivided, the

appeal is allowed.

SC Appeal No. 111/2013 JUDGMENT Page 20 of 20

47. Judgments of the District Court of Homagama and Provincial High Court of the Western

Province holden in Avissawella exercising civil appellate jurisdiction are set aside.

48. The action is dismissed. Parties shall bear their costs.

Appeal Allowed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

A.L. SHIRAN GOONERATNE, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT