1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application under and in terms of Articles 17 and 126 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

SC / FR No. 64/2014

1. Werage Sunil Jayasekera,

38, Susara, Kadawathagama, Kadugannawa. 2. Amarakoon Mudiyanselage Keerthi

Amarakoon, “Amara Sevana”, Varahakkogada, Danturei. 3. Sampath Priyadarshana Gunathilake,

“Narmada”, Hammalawa, Kuliyapitiya. 4. Kariyawasam Don Jayantha Weerasinghe,

08/A, Abihamani, Vaharakkogada, Danturei. 5. Murukkuvadura Tilaka Asela Wijerathna,

34/6 A, Sri Seewala Road, Nalluruwa, Panadura.

2

6. Amarakoon Achchilage Somapala

Amarakoon, 25/3E, Gohagoda Road, Katugastota. 7. Obada Kankanamlage Lalith Kumara,

131, Pelahela, Dompe. 8. Atapattu Mudiyanselage Thilak Nanda

Wijerathne, 488/2, Halbarawa, Talahena, Malambe. 9. Widanagamage Shantha Kumara

Wickramanayake, Totupala Road, Weragampitiya, Matara.

10. Meemendra Kumara Aberathna,

Weliyaya Road, Digana, Mahawa.

11. Singahalage Gamini Weerasinghe,

345/B, Denipagoda, Muruthugahamulla, Gampola.

12. Jayakody Arachchige Pradeep Lalantha

Priya, 33/1, Koskandawala, Yakkala.

13. Chandana Elanperuma Kodituwakku,

“Samaya”, Samagi Mawatha, Walgama, Matara.

3

14. Bopage Prince Wijerathna,

Hospital Road, Puwakdeniya, Rambukkana.

15. Don Amarasiriwardenage Prasanna

Sylvester Wijesekera, 971/17, Maradana Road, Colombo 08.

Petitioners

Vs. 1. B.A.P. Ariyaratne,

General Manager, Department of Railways, Maradana, Colombo 10.

1A. Vijaya Amaratunga,

General Manager, Department of Railways, Maradana, Colombo 10. 1B. S.M. Abewickrama,

General Manager, Department of Railways, Maradana, Colombo 10. 1C. M.J.D. Fernando,

General Manager, Department of Railways, Maradana, Colombo 10.

4

1D. W.A.D.S. Gunasinghe,

General Manager (Acting), Department of Railways, Maradana, Colombo 10. 2. Dhammika Perera,

Secretary, Ministry of Transport, No. 1, D.R. Wijewardene Mawatha, Colombo 10. 2A. Nihal Somaweera,

Secretary, Ministry of Transport, No. 1, D.R. Wijewardene Mawatha, Colombo 10. 2B. G.S. Vithanage,

Secretary, Ministry of Transport, No. 1, D.R. Wijewardene Mawatha, Colombo 10. 2C. N.B. Monti Ranatunga,

Secretary, Ministry of Transport, No. 1, D.R. Wijewardene Mawatha, Colombo 10.

3. Dayasiri Fernando,

Chairman,

4. Palitha M. Kumarasinghe,

Member,

5

5. Sirimavo A. Wijeratne,

Member, 6. S.C. Mannapperuma,

Member, 7. Ananda Seneviratne,

Member, 8. N.H. Pathirana,

Member, 9. S. Thillanadarajah,

Member, 10. M.D.W. Ariyawansa,

Member, 11. A. Mohamed Nahiya,

Member, 3rd to 11th Respondents all at: Public Service Commission, No. 177, Nawala Road, Narahenpita. 12. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12.

Respondents

13. Justice Sathyaa Hettige, PC,

Chairman,

14. Kanthi Wijetunga,

Member,

6

15. Sunil S. Sirisena,

Member, 16. Dr. I.M. Zoysa Gunasekera,

Member, 13th to 16th Added Respondents all at: Public Service Commission, No. 177, Nawala Road, Narahenpita.

Added Respondents

17. Dharmasena Dissanayaka,

Chairman, 17A. Hon. Justice Jagath Balapatabendi (Retired),

Chairman, 18. A. Salam Abdul Waid,

Member, 18A. Indrani Sugathadasa,

Member, 19. D. Shirantha Wijayatilaka,

Member, 19A. V. Shivagnanasothy,

Member, 20. Prathap Ramanujam,

Member, 20A. T.R.C. Ruberu,

Member,

7

21. V. Jegarasasingam,

Member, 21A. Ahamad Lebbe Mohamed Saleem,

Member, 22. Santi Nihal Seneviratne,

Member, 22A. Leelasena Liyanagama,

Member, 23. S. Ranugge,

Member, 23A. Dian Gomes,

Member, 24. D.L. Mendis,

Member, 24A. Dilith Jayaweera,

Member, 25. Sarath Jayathilaka,

Member, 25A. W.H. Piyadasa,

Member,

17A to 25A Respondents above; all at Public Service Commission, No. 177, Nawala Road, Narahenpita.

Further Added Respondents

8

Before: Chief Justice Jayantha Jayasuriya, PC

Justice E.A.G.R. Amarasekara

Justice A.L. Shiran Gooneratne Counsel: Senany Dayaratne with Ms. Nishadi Wickramasinghe for the Petitioners.

Rajitha Perera, SSC for the 1C, 2C, 12th, 17thA - 25thA Added Respondents.

Argued on: 12/10/2021

Decided on: 05/04/2022

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

The Petitioners in this application are employees who hold the rank of Sub Inspector of

the Railway Protection Force who joined the Department of Sri Lanka Railways from

its inception in the year 1988. The Petitioners claim that they have been kept stagnant

at the position of Sub Inspector for 32 years wherein, in terms of the scheme of

promotions, a Sub Inspector was eligible for promotion to the rank of Inspector upon

completion of 7 years of satisfactory service and thereafter, to the rank of Assistant

Superintendent upon completion of 6 years in the rank of Inspector. The Petitioners are

aggrieved by the continuous failure and/ or inaction or tacit refusal on the part of the

General Manager Department of Railways (1st Respondent) and 3rd to 11th Respondents

to give effect to the recommendation made by the Human Rights Commission (HRC),

dated 16/07/2007, marked ‘P10’, and the directions given by the Public Petitions

Committee (PPC), order dated 13/06/2013, marked ‘P14’, to promote the Petitioners

with effect from the date on which the Petitioners were eligible for promotions.

9

Hence, the Petitioners contend that their rights guaranteed under Article 12(1) of the

Constitution is violated and their "legitimate expectations" denied due to the said

continuous failure and/ or inaction or tacit refusal to enforce the said recommendations

and/ or directions, and therefore to declare that an infringement has been caused by the

said Respondents under Article 12(1) of the Constitution and also in the circumstances

of this application, the Court make order granting 'just and equitable' relief in terms of

Article 126(4) of the Constitution.

The Petitioners contend that they were recruited externally, at the inception of the

Railway Protection Force (RPF), the successor to the Railway Security Service. With

the establishment of the RPF on 1st November 1987, several employees had opted to

retire and some had opted to remain in the Department of Railways and join the newly

formed RPF. It is also contended that, in June 1997, on the recommendation of the

Political Victimization Committee of the Ministry of Transport and the implementation

of the Cabinet Memorandum marked ‘P2a’, and also the directions given by the

Judgment of the Supreme Court in SC/FR/ 944/1999, approximately 50 of the said

retired employees were reinstated with all annual increments applicable to their grade

and placed in higher ranks than the Petitioners. It is also contended that according to a

settlement reached in Application Bearing No. SC/FR/186/2005 dated 13/09/2011,

approximately 150 employees who opted to remain in the Department by joining the

RPF were also placed at a higher salary structure equal to one promotion from their

current rank as contained in ‘P4a’ and ‘P4b’, respectively.

In the circumstances, the Petitioners contend that since 1988 to date, the Petitioners

hold the rank of Sub Inspector for approximately 26 years, in denial of their legitimate

expectation of securing promotions in terms of the applicable service minute. The

Petitioners reiterate that in terms of the provisions of the Scheme of Recruitment and

Promotions marked ‘P6’, the Petitioners would have been eligible to be promoted to

the rank of Inspector and thereafter, to the rank of Assistant Superintendent in the year

1995 and 2001, respectively.

10

By letter dated 06/12/2012, the 2nd Respondent has sought necessary approval from the

Public Service Commission to give effect to the recommendation of the Human Rights

Commission to promote Sub-Inspectors to the rank of Assistant Superintendent as

contained in ‘P12’.

The Petitioners state that due to the failure of the 1st Respondent to give effect to the

said recommendation made by the Human Rights Commission (HRC), the 1st, 5th, 6th,

7th, and 13th Petitioners forwarded Petition dated 12/07/2012 to the Public Petitions

Committee Office, seeking relief. The Public Petitions Committee Office by letter dated

13/06/2013, marked ‘P14’, directed the 2nd Respondent to take steps to promote the said

5 Petitioners to the rank of Assistant Superintendent on a supernumerary basis pending

the approval of the Public Service Commission (PSC).

Having taken into consideration the recommendation made by the Human Rights

Commission, dated 16/07/2007 (P10), and the directions given by the Public Petitions

Committee Office dated 13/06/2013, (P14), the Public Service Commission by letter

dated 13/01/2014, (P16), decided that appointments cannot be made on supernumerary

basis, the fact that examinations had been held, Petitioners also had the opportunity to

obtain promotions through those examinations and it is open for them to obtain

promotions based on the SOR. According to letter dated 21/05/2014, (1R9), the PSC

has brought to the attention of the 1st Respondent, that existing vacancies should be

filled in terms of the SOR and therefore no appointments can be made on a

supernumerary basis.

Senior State Counsel appearing for the Respondents contend that due to the deliberate

misrepresentation and suppression of material facts and the lack of Uberrima Fides of

the Petitioners, this application should be rejected without going into the merits of the

case. In the facts and circumstances of this case, the said contention is based on disputed

matters and therefore, should be decided at a later stage.

11

For easy reference, the Petitioners to this application identified three categories of

employees as stated below-

I. The officers attached to the original Sri Lanka Railways Service who opted to

retire from the Department of Railways in 1988, who were re-instated in the

RPF in June 1997.

Accordingly, 50 employees were absorbed to the RPF and matters relating to their

placements, promotions back wages were to be determined in accordance with the

scheme applicable to the 1980 July strikers (P2 and P3).

II. The officers attached to the original Sri Lanka Railways Service who opted to

remain in the Department of Railways by joining the RPF at its inception.

According to the settlement reached in Application Bearing Number SC/FR/186/2005,

the 1st to 3rd Petitioners of the said application, who were called “the beneficiaries” of

the said settlement, were considered similarly placed contemporaries of officers who

were recruited after retirement (category I above) and was placed at a higher salary

structure equal to one promotion from their current rank. The settlement in that case

was entered as Judgment of the Court, argued and decided on 13/09/2011, and in its

terms of settlement as set out in paragraph 12 of the said application, the Court made

special reference that the said settlement will not set a precedent.

III. Officers who were recruited to the RPF externally at the inception of the

RPF, similar to that of the Petitioners.

Therefore, it is clear that the settlement entered in Action Bearing Number

SC/FR/186/2005, was on the basis that the officers belonging to categories 1 and 2 are

contemporaries and similarly placed. It is pertinent to note that prior to arriving at the

said settlement entered as Judgment of this Court, the Court specifically considered

“the unique facts and circumstances surrounding and/ or attendant upon the situation

12

of the aforesaid beneficiaries to the settlement arrived therein, and more particularly

the fact that the beneficiaries of the settlement were contemporaries of the 3rd to 52nd

Respondents in the Ceylon Government Railway Security Service, and similarly

placed”. It is contended that some of the Petitioners to the present application together

with 14 others, sought to intervene in the said application, however, the said

intervention was not permitted by Court.

As observed earlier, the Petitioners in the present action belong to the 3rd category who

were recruited to the RPF at its inception. Therefore, the said Petitioners can be clearly

distinguished from the officers belonging to category 1 and 2.

By Notice dated 07/01/2002, applications were called for the Post of Inspector from the

rank of Sub Inspector as contained in ‘1R2’. According to the Scheme of Recruitment

marked ‘1R1’, applicable to the Petitioners, 4 Applicants were promoted to the rank of

Inspector. The list of marks scored by the said Applicants are marked ‘1R4’.

Subsequent to the recommendation of the HRC dated 10/07/2007, marked ‘P10’, by

notice dated 10/09/2009, marked ‘1R5’, applications were once again called for the post

of Inspector. Responding to the said notice dated 10/09/2009, the 1st, 3rd, 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th,

9th, 10th, 11th, 12th and the 13th Petitioner applied for promotions. According to the

applicable Scheme of Recruitment, 13 promotions have been made to the rank of

Inspector, however, none of the Petitioners were successful. A copy of the

recommendations of the Board of Interview is marked as ‘1R7’.

Recommendations made by of the Human Rights Commission.

HRC by its recommendation dated 16/07/2007, informed the Public Service

Commission to formulate an effective and transparent scheme to promote the

Petitioners in conformity with the applicable Scheme of Promotion. The Petitioners,

inter alia, have prayed that this Court make order to give effect to the said

13

recommendation made by the Human Rights Commission dated 16/07/2007. In its

recommendation, the HRC has taken into consideration 8 complaints filed by persons

who were recruited as Sub Inspectors to the RPF on 02/05/1988, similar in rank to that

of the Petitioners in this case. In the affidavits tendered to the HRC, the complainants

drew attention of the said Commission to the Supreme Court Application Number

SC/FR/944/99 filed by officers who retired, and sought to be absorbed to the RPF.

According to paragraph 11 of the affidavit tendered by the 1st Respondent, the

reinstatement in 1997 of approximately 50 employees who retired in 1998, was to

implement the Cabinet Memorandum marked ‘P2a’, the Cabinet Decision marked

‘P2b’ and the directions given by the Judgment of this Court in SC/FR/ 944/99,

applicable to officers who are now identified as belonging to category 1. Also, in terms

of the settlement arrived in SC/FR/186/2005, dated 13/09/2011, relief was granted to

the aggrieved officers belonging to category 2, on the basis of similarly placed as

officers belonging to category 1.

Directions given by the Public Petitions Committee Office.

The Public Petitions Committee Office considered the complaints of the 1st, 5th, 6th, 7th

and the 13th Petitioner who were before them. The Complainants have conveniently

overlooked the scheme of recruitment and the examination process referred to in ‘1R2’

and ‘1R5’. The said Committee observed that the rest of the affected Petitioners are

awaiting the implementation of the recommendation made by the HRC to the PSC and

further observed that the 5 Petitioners before the said Committee cannot stay any longer

for the implementation of the HRC recommendation and with no reasons given,

directed the 2nd Respondent to back date and promote the said 5 Petitioners on

supernumerary basis, on a suitable scheme. The said direction does not specify any

particular rank to which the officers should be promoted and was made only in respect

of the 5 Petitioners who were before the Committee. Therefore, the directive of the

PPC, if implemented, would be akin to promotions made on a selective basis which

14

would benefit only 5 Petitioners out of similarly circumstanced Petitioners who are now

before this Court. However, up to date no supernumerary promotions have been made

to any of the Petitioners based on the said recommendation.

The Scheme of Recruitment.

In this back drop, the Petitioners strongly contend that strict compliance with the

Scheme of Recruitment cannot be implemented in extenuating circumstances. In

support of this contention, the Petitioners have endeavored to list instances where strict

compliance and/ or implementation of the Scheme of Recruitment was not followed.

Firstly, the Petitioners have drawn the attention of Court to document marked ‘XX’ in

the counter affidavit filed in this case. The said letter refers to a competitive

examination for the promotion of officers to the rank of Inspector to be held on

27/08/2011. The said letter states that if you chose not to sit for the said examination,

the Department should not be held responsible. In other words, a decision not to sit for

the examination would be at your own peril.

The Petitioners have also drawn attention to documents marked ‘P4a and P4b’, in

paragraph 7, of the counter affidavit dated 02/11/2016, which refer to a Petition and the

Judgment entered in SC/FR/186/2005, respectively. As observed earlier, in the said

case, a settlement Judgment was entered between officers belonging to the said category

2 on the basis that they were similarly placed with officers belonging to the said

category 1.

Secondly, it is submitted that the inordinate delay in holding examinations perpetuated

the grievance of the Petitioners. The Petitioners admit that applications were called in

the year 2002 and 2009 for promotions to fill existing vacancies and pursuant to

examinations been conducted, officers were promoted to the rank of Inspector.

Applications were called for the post of Inspector by notice dated 07/01/2002, marked

15

‘1R2’. According to the marks obtained, 4 promotions were made to the rank of

Inspector as reflected in document marked ‘1R4’ and thereafter by notice dated

10/09/2009, marked ‘1R5’, a further 13 promotions were made to the rank of Inspector.

Some of the Petitioners who applied, were not successful.

Thirdly, the inordinate delay in holding examinations in terms of the Scheme of

Recruitment.

Fourthly, to compete with younger aspirants for promotions whose probability of being

successful at the written examination was higher. The Petitioners strongly contend that

they were kept stagnant for over 30 years in one rank and therefore, had to compete

with younger persons usually superior to that of older persons.

Acting in terms of ‘1R8’, the Respondents have written to the PSC and the response is

contained in ‘1R9 and 1R10’. The PSC has observed that the promotions to the next

rank are based upon competitive examinations in terms of the Scheme of Recruitment

and the Petitioners had the opportunity to sit for the said examination. The Petitioner’s

failed to qualify at the competitive examination on two occasions and therefore cannot

now claim to be promoted as of right. If the delay in holding the examinations deprived

promotions, the Petitioners should have challenged the purported delay in holding

examinations at the appropriate stage, with the available remedies in law.

The 1st Respondent by letter dated 26/11/2012, whilst making reference to letter dated

16/07/2007, has clearly informed the Public Service Commission that presently there

are no existing vacancies to effect promotions and further sought directions from the

PSC seeking to divert from the Scheme of Recruitment in order to promote the 5

Petitioners on a supernumerary basis on the directions given by the PPC. By letter dated

13/01/2014, marked ‘1R9’, the PSC has categorically stated that the Petitioners have

been afforded an opportunity to face examinations and therefore, the conditions of the

Scheme of Recruitment should be followed in order to promote the Petitioners to the

16

next rank. A similar conclusion was arrived by the PSC in their letter dated 13/01/2014,

marked ‘1R10’.

The Petitioners in this application joined the Railways Protection Force in 1988. There

is no disclosure that persons named by documents pleaded in the affidavit dated

29/11/2018, marked ‘Z1’ to ‘Z8’, are appointees recruited to the RPF in its inception in

1988.

As observed earlier, the recommendation to the PSC by the HRC, inter alia, was to

formulate an effective and transparent scheme to promote the Petitioners in conformity

with the applicable SOR. Never was it recommended by the HRC that the authorities

divert from the existing SOR to effect promotions to the Petitioners. Adhering to the

said recommendation, the 1st Respondent held an examination on 27/08/2011, for

persons to be promoted to the rank of Inspector, as evinced by letter dated 21/05/2014,

marked ‘1R9’. It is also to be noted that the directions given by the PPC if implemented,

would have treated the rest of the Petitioners who were similarly circumstanced,

differently. The Petitioner's reliance on legitimate expectation is founded in statements

made by the HRC and the PPC.

In the circumstances, can the Petitioners entertain a legitimate expectation to be

promoted on a supernumerary basis arising on the recommendation of the HRC

and/ or the direction given by the PPC.

Promoting officers to the next rank on a supernumerary basis was never the criteria

applicable to officers recruited to the newly established RFT. With the change in policy,

the Petitioners can be identified as a distinct group of officers who were directly

recruited to the Railways Department and also be clearly distinguished from the officers

similarly placed belonging to category 1 and 2. None of the Petitioners were promoted

on a supernumerary basis or any other criteria which would likely to have frustrated the

procedural and/ or substantive rights of the Petitioners legitimate expectations to be

17

promoted to the next rank. What the Petitioners are now seeking is a change in policy

from that of the existing scheme of promotions to that of promotions to be made on a

supernumerary basis. In the circumstances have the Petitioners establish unfairness or

abuse of process in the application of the scheme of recruitment to the Petitioners.

Lord Woolf MR, in R vs. North & East Devon Health Authority, Ex parte Coughlan

[1999] EWCA Civ 1871, laid down at least three possible outcomes to be considered

by a Court to satisfy itself as to the legitimacy of an expectation, as stated below-

(a) The Court may decide that the public authority is only required to bear in mind its

previous policy or other representation, giving it the weight, it thinks right, but no

more, before deciding whether to change course.

(b) On the other hand, the Court may decide that the promise or practice induces a

legitimate expectation of, for example, being consulted before a particular

decision is taken. Here it is uncontentious that the Court itself will require the

opportunity for consultation to be given unless there is an overriding reason to

resile from it.

(c) Where the Court considers that a lawful promise or practice has induced a

legitimate expectation of a benefit which is substantive, not simply procedural,

authority now establishes that here too the Court will in a proper case decide

whether to frustrate the expectation is so unfair that to take a new and different

course will amount to an abuse of power. Here, once the legitimacy of the

expectation is established, the Court will have the task of weighing the

requirements of fairness against any overriding interest relied upon for the change

of policy. (emphasis is mine)

18

On the question of substantive legitimate expectation, in Ariyarathne and Others vs.

Illangakoon and Others (SC FR Application No. 444/2012 decided on 30/07/2019,

Prasanna Jayawardena J. stated that the,

“… phrase substantive legitimate expectation’ captures the situation in which the

applicant seeks a particular benefit or commodity, such as a welfare benefit or a

license, as a result of some promise, behaviour or representation made by the public

body”.

A similar view was expressed in Meril vs. Dayananda de Silva and others (2001) 2

SLR 11.

In Sirimal & Others vs. Board of Directors of the Co-operative Wholesale

Establishment & Others (2003) 2 Sri L.R. 23, the Supreme Court, recognized a

situation where substantive or procedural legitimate expectation would arise, where

Weerasooriya J. held that,

“if the legitimate expectations are protected only procedurally, the most employees

could hope for, would be an order requiring of consultation before a change of policy

is affected. If, however, the legitimate expectations are substantive the position is

deferent, in that it is open to a court to require the public authority to confer upon the

person the substantive benefit which he is expected to receive under the earlier policy”.

As observed earlier, the asserted legitimate expectation of the Petitioners, derives from

a statement made by a public body to consider formulating an effective and transparent

scheme to promote the Petitioners in conformity with the applicable scheme of

promotions and certainly not a statement to change the existing policy on promotions

in favour of the Petitioners. The decision-making authority the PSC, was consistent in

its directives that the Scheme of Recruitment be followed to fill vacancies and the

existing vacancies were filled, accordingly. Therefore, the Petitioners mere expectation

19

or hope of being promoted on a supernumerary basis cannot be treated as an expectation

which is legitimate or substantive, within the existing policy.

The above position was considered in Siriwardana vs. Seneviratne and 4 Others

(2011) 2 SLR 1, where Dr. Shirani A. Bandaranayake, C.J. cited with approval the case

of India vs. Hindustan Development Corporation (1993) 3 SSC 499, where it was

stated that;

"However earnest and sincere a wish, a desire or a hope may be and however

confidently one may look to them to be fulfilled, they by themselves cannot amount to

an assertable expectation and a mere disappointment does not attract legal

consequences. A pious hope cannot amount to a legitimate expectation. The legitimacy

of an expectation can be inferred only if it is founded on the sanction of law or custom

or an established procedure followed in a natural and regular sequence. Again, it is

distinguishable from a mere expectation. Such expectation should be justifiable,

legitimate and protectable. Every such legitimate expectation does not by itself fructify

into a right and, therefore, it does not amount to a right in a conventional sense."

According to Andrew le seur, Maurice Sunkin, Jo E. K. Murkens, ‘Public Law -

Texts, Cases, and materials (Third Ed.)’ (pg.732)-

“Legitimate Expectation arises where claimants argue that public bodies have said or

done things that have created an expectation that they will act in accordance with past

practice, policies, promises or representations.” (For recent discussion refer - P.

Reynolds, on ‘Legitimate expectations and the protection of trust in public officials’

[2011] Public Law 330.)

The Petitioners are before this Court to assert their right to equal protection before the

law. As seen before, this Court in a settlement Judgment clearly identified officers

belonging to the 1st and 2nd categories as similarly placed and relief granted accordingly.

20

A promotion is to be effected according to the procedure laid down in the scheme of

recruitment which requires a process of holding an examination. The scheme of

promotion applicable to the Petitioners who belong to the 3rd category was applied to

the Petitioners. Some of the Petitioners, who complied with the said Scheme were not

successful. In the circumstances, the asserted relief by the Petitioners that they be

promoted on a supernumerary basis would indeed be detrimental to the interests of the

Respondents. For the reasons stated, the Petitioners would not be entitled to a

declaration for an infringement of their fundamental rights guaranteed in terms of

Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

The Petitioners have also pleaded that this Court exercising its wide discretion in terms

of Article 126(4), make a just and equitable order as it may deem. As already

mentioned, the PPC, with no just or reasonable criteria, identified 5 officers who were

present before the Committee to be promoted on a supernumerary basis. If

implemented, the right to equality before the law of the other Petitioners may have been

infringed. As discussed before, a process which included a competitive examination

and the award of marks on seniority and special qualifications was available to the

Petitioners according to the applicable Service Minute for the next promotion. Some of

the Petitioners complied with the said process as far back as the year 2002. None of the

Petitioners sought to challenge the said established process regarding promotions, at

that stage. Therefore, considering the circumstances of this case, I refrain from making

an order in terms of Article 126(4) of the Constitution.

As observed earlier, The Respondents contend that due to the deliberate

misrepresentation and suppression of material facts and the lack of Uberrima Fides of

the Petitioners, this application warrants a dismissal based upon the same. The

provisions contained in the Service Minute ‘1R1’, reveals that the next promotion of

the Petitioners to the rank of Inspector would include a competitive examination and

the award of marks for seniority and special qualifications. On 07/01/2002 and

10/09/2009, by ‘1R2 and 1R5’ respectively, applications have been called twice to fill

21

in vacancies to the post of Inspector. According to ‘1R3 and 1R6’, Some of the

Petitioners applied for the examination held in 2002 and 2009 respectively and

complied with the applicable Service Minute. The Petition does not contain any

reference to the above.

However, the non-disclosure of conducting of examinations twice and that some of the

Petitioners attempted and failed was admitted by the Petitioners in their counter

affidavit.

The Petitioners filed this application on the premise that with the applicable Service

Minute the Petitioners were eligible to be promoted to the next rank by satisfactorily

completing the required number of years in service, but have been deprived of their

promotions for the last 26 years. However as asserted above, the Petition did not

disclose that some of the Petitioners had complied with the applicable Service Minute,

but were not successful to be promoted to the next rank. The Petitioners in their counter

objections have admitted that applications were called in 2002 for the rank of Inspector

as evinced by ‘1R2’ and again in 2009 as evinced by ‘1R5’. Having contended that the

Petitioners were denied of their promotions and/ or prospects of promotions based on

the applicable Service Minute, it was incumbent on the Petitioners to have disclosed

such vital and decisive facts in the Petition, essential to the adjudication of matters in

dispute. The Petitioner’s conduct in suppression and misrepresentation of material

facts, clearly lacked Uberrima Fides. This position is reflected in several Judgments

delivered by this Court. (Jayasinghe vs. The National Institution of Fisheries and

Nautical Engineering and Others, (2002) 1 SLR 277, Liyanage and Another vs.

Divisional Secretary Gampaha and Others, (2013) 1 SLR 06, Jahangir Sheriffdeen

vs. Principal Visakha Vidyalaya, SC/FR 01/2015, SCM 03/10/2016).

Accordingly, this application has to be rejected on this ground as well.

22

Therefore, I hold that the Petitioners are not successful in establishing any

inconsistency, inequality, or unreasonableness affecting an enforceable right, infringed

by any of the Respondents, in terms of Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

The application is dismissed. I order no costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Jayantha Jayasuriya, PC. CJ.

I agree

Chief Justice

E.A.G.R. Amarasekara J.

I agree

Judge of the Supreme Court