==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 7

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Special Leave to Appeal under Article 128(2) of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. Harischandra Senarathne Bulathsinhala, No. 311, “Siri Medura”, Kotte Road, Nugegoda.

Plaintiff-Petitioner- Respondent-Appellant SC Appeal No: 09/2020 SC (SPL) LA No. 259/2016 CA (Rev) Application No. 1518/2006 DC Colombo Case No. 5037/ZL

Vs. Piyasena Hapuarachchi (Deceased), No. 82, Rahula Road, Mulleriyawa New Town, Angoda.

4th Respondent-Petitioner-

Respondent Dinuka Malith Hapuarachchi, No. 92/A, Rahula Road, Mulleriyawa New Town, Angoda.

Substituted 4th Respondent

- Petitioner-Respondent

Page 2 of 7

1. Anthony Didacus Baldsing,

No. 57, Kiththanpahuwa, Wellampitiya.

Defendant-Respondent-

Respondent

2. Duruwaththage Swarnalatha Perera

Baldsing, No. 34/3, N.P. Perera Mawatha, Mulleriyawa New Town, Angoda. 3. Patabendige Sriani Nelumkanthi

Mohandiram, No. 120, Pansala Road, Mahabuthgamuwa, Angoda.

2nd & 3rd Respondents- Respondents-Respondents

Before: Justice A. L. Shiran Gooneratne

Justice K. Priyantha Fernando

Justice Sobhitha Rajakaruna

Counsel: Rohan Sahabandu, PC with Chathurika Elvitigala and S.

Senanayake instructed by Sarath Welgamage for the

Plaintiff-Petitioner-Respondent-Appellant.

Navin Marapana, PC Uchitha Wickremasinghe and Saumya

Hettiarachchi instructed by Srimal Weerakkody for the 4th

Respondent-Petitioner-Respondent.

Argued on: 11/09/2025

Decided on: 17/10/2025

Page 3 of 7

A. L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

1. By Plaint dated 09.08.1985, the Plaintiff–Respondent–Appellant

(hereinafter referred to as the “Plaintiff”) instituted action No. 5037/ZL in

the District Court of Colombo against the Defendant–Respondent–

Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the “Defendant”), seeking a

declaration of title to the land known as Poththekumbura alias

Kosgahakumbura, depicted in Plan No. 124 dated 17.02.1947 prepared by

T. I. A. Anandappa, Licensed Surveyor, and more fully described in the

schedule to the Plaint. The Plaintiff further prayed for the ejectment of the

Defendant and all persons holding under him from the said land.

2. By Answer dated 12.03.1986, the Defendant denied the Plaintiff’s right and

title to the land and instead claimed title to the allotment of land described

in the schedule to the Answer. The Defendant accordingly prayed for the

dismissal of the Plaintiff’s action.

3. Upon conclusion of trial, the learned District Judge, by Judgment dated

03.07.1990, dismissed the Plaintiff’s action. The Plaintiff thereafter

preferred an Appeal to the Court of Appeal. By Judgment dated

21.06.2000, the Court of Appeal set aside the Judgment of the District

Court and entered Judgment in favour of the Plaintiff as prayed for in the

Plaint. An application for Special Leave to Appeal to this Court against the

said Judgment was refused.

4. Consequent to the said Judgment, the Plaintiff sought execution of the

decree. When the Fiscal proceeded to execute the writ, the 4th Respondent–

Petitioner–Respondent, one Piyasena Hapuarachchi (hereinafter referred

to as the “4th Respondent”), who was not made a Defendant in the original

action instituted in the District Court, resisted and obstructed execution.

Since the 4th Respondent resisted the Fiscal in the execution of the decree,

the Plaintiff moved the District Court under Section 325 of the Civil

Page 4 of 7

Procedure Code seeking the delivery of possession of the land described in

the schedule to the Plaint.

5. At the inquiry under Section 325, the 4th Respondent filed a Statement of

Objections, contending that he was in possession of a portion of the land

under a title independent of the Judgment Debtor, and therefore not liable

to ejectment. By Order dated 05.10.2006, the learned District Judge

rejected the objection and placed the Plaintiff in possession of the decreed

land.

6. Being dissatisfied with the said order, the 4th Respondent preferred a

Revision application to the Court of Appeal. By Judgment dated

29.10.2016, the Court of Appeal set aside the Order of the District Judge

and allowed the application of the 4th Respondent.

7. Aggrieved by the Judgment of the Court of Appeal, the Plaintiff invoked the

jurisdiction of this Court by way of Leave to Appeal. By Order dated

27.01.2020, Special Leave to Appeal was granted on two questions of law.

8. At the hearing, the learned President’s Counsel for the Plaintiff confined

his submissions to the second question of law, namely:

“Has the learned Judge of the Court of Appeal committed a grave

error of law in setting aside the order of the learned District Judge,

which included the order to evict the judgment debtor?”

9. Section 325 of the Civil Procedure Code empowers the Court, upon

obstruction to the execution of a decree, to inquire into the matter and

determine whether such obstruction is occasioned by a person claiming

under the judgment debtor, or by a person asserting an independent right.

Where the obstruction is found to be by a person claiming under the

judgment debtor, the Court is empowered to remove such obstruction and

place the decree-holder in possession.

Page 5 of 7

10. Section 325 (1) of the Civil Procedure Code reads thus;

325. (1) Where in the execution of a decree for the possession of movable

or immovable property the Fiscal is resisted or obstructed by the

judgment-debtor or any other person, or where after the officer has

delivered possession, the judgment-creditor is hindered or ousted by the

judgment-debtor or any other person in taking complete and effectual

possession thereof, and in the case of immovable property, where the

judgment-creditor has been so hindered or ousted within a period of one

year and one day, the judgment-creditor may at any time within one

month from the date of such resistance or obstruction or hindrance or

ouster, complain thereof to the court by a petition in which the

judgment-debtor and the person, if any, resisting or obstructing or

hindering or ousting shall be named respondents. The court shall

thereupon serve a copy of such petition on the parties named therein as

respondents and require such respondents to file objections, if any,

within such time as they may be directed by court.

11. The 4th Respondent, who had not been made a Defendant in the original

action instituted in the District Court, objected to the application made

under Section 325 of the Civil Procedure Code on the ground that he was

in possession of a portion of the land under a title independent of the

judgment debtor. The Plaintiff, however, contended that there was no

statutory obligation to have the 4th Respondent joined as a party to the

original action, as he was not in actual occupation at the time the cause of

action arose.

12. At the inquiry, reliance was placed on the Surveyor’s Report marked X7,

pursuant to a commission dated 31.05.1987. The Report disclosed that the

4th Respondent was in possession of Lot 2 in Plan X9, as claimed by his

sister, who had asserted possession at the time of the survey. It was

admitted in evidence that the Plaintiff was aware of this fact but failed to

add the 4th Respondent as a defendant. In the circumstances, it is

Page 6 of 7

contended that the learned District Judge did not have adequate disclosure

to consider the title or possession of the 4th Respondent.

13. Despite the disclosure made by the sister of the 4th Respondent before the

Court Commissioner, the Plaintiff, in his Plaint dated 09.08.1985 filed in

the District Court, named only A.D. Bolsing as the sole Defendant, and

sought the ejectment of the said Defendant and all persons claiming under

him from the entirety of the land 0A 0R 38.36P in extent. However, at the

inquiry, the Plaintiff admitted that the 4th Respondent was in possession of

Lot 2 depicted in Plan No. 641.

14. In the revision application, the 4th Respondent relied on the Report of

Court Commissioner S. Rasappah, Licensed Surveyor, who, in Plan No. 641

clearly depicted Lot 1 as belonging to the Defendant A. D. Bolsing and Lot

2 as occupied by one Piyasena Hapuarachchi, the 4th Respondent. The 4th

Respondent maintained that he possessed Lot 2 not under the judgment

debtor but on an independent title, and therefore could not lawfully be

ejected in execution.

15. The Court of Appeal observed that the 4th Respondent’s entitlement was

derived from Deed No. 263 dated 06.12.1920, and that the 4th Respondent

had been in possession from 06.09.1987, acquiring prescriptive title to the

land. The Survey Report corroborated that Lot 2 was in the possession of

the 4th Respondent. The Court further noted that the learned District Judge

had not considered the 4th Respondent’s claim of title or possession.

16. It is thus evident that a direct conflict exists between the claims of the

Plaintiff and the 4th Respondent concerning the land subject to execution.

In such circumstances, it is observed that irreparable prejudice would be

caused if the 4th Respondent was dispossessed on execution of the writ

without adjudication of his independent claim.

Page 7 of 7

17. Accordingly, we see no reason to interfere with the Judgment of the Court

of Appeal. The second question of law, on which leave to appeal was

granted, is answered in the negative.

18. For these reasons, the Judgment of the Court of Appeal dated 28.10.2016

is affirmed. This Appeal is dismissed. No order as to costs.

Appeal dismissed.

Judge of the Supreme Court

K. Priyantha Fernando, J.

I agree

Judge of the Supreme Court

Sobhitha Rajakaruna, J.

I agree

Judge of the Supreme Court