[SC Rule No. 16/2023] Page 1 of 13

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of a Rule in terms of Section

42(2) of the Judicature Act No. 2 of 1978,

against Wickramage Don Dharmasiri

Karunaratne.

W. S. B. S. Fernando

Registrar of the Court of Appeal,

Superior Courts Complex,

Colombo 12

COMPLAINANT

-Vs-

Wickramage Don Dharmasiri Karunaratne

No. 57,

Baseline Road,

Colombo 08

No. 1,

M.D.H. Jayawardenapura,

Pelawatte,

Battarumulla.

RESPONDENT

SC Rule No. 16/2023

[SC Rule No. 16/2023] Page 2 of 13

BEFORE : P. PADMAN SURASENA, J1

KUMUDINI WICKREMASINGHE, J

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J

COUNSEL : Shanil Kularatne, PC with Ms. Hashini Opatha, SSC for the Attorney-

General.

Yalith Wijesurendra for the Respondent.

Rohan Sahabandu, PC with Ms. Chathurika Elvitigala, Ms. Sachini

Senanayake and Ms. Pubudu Weerasuriya for the BASL.

INQUIRY ON : 11-12-2024

18-02-2025

DECIDED ON : 06-08-2025

P. PADMAN SURASENA, CJ

This Court having considered a complaint made by the Registrar of the Court of Appeal, has

caused the Rule dated 28-08-2024 issued against the Respondent Attorney-at-Law, under the

hand of the Registrar of this Court. The said Rule has alleged that the Respondent Attorney-

at-Law has engaged in the following acts:

(a) applying to peruse the case record of the case bearing No. COC-0011-22

from the main record room of the Court of Appeal Registry which is

situated at the Kaluthota Building, No. 19, Sangharaja Mawatha, Colombo

10;

(b) furnishing a false name i.e., Mr. C Fernando (Mr. Chandrasiri Fernando)

when applying for permission to peruse the said record;

1 As he was, at the time of hearing this matter.

[SC Rule No. 16/2023] Page 3 of 13

(c) proceeding to tear two pages (four sides) from the afore-said case record,

(torn pages contain the caption of the case and notice issued to the

Respondent which contained the charges) which was detected by the

staff of the said record room of the Court of Appeal;

(d) stating to the staff of the record room that he was a relative of one

Jayathunga (an Attorney-at-Law) who is the Petitioner in the case bearing

No. COC-0011-22 which is the case relevant to the case record he had

tampered with;

(e) not providing any further explanation in respect of causing damage and

mischief to the said case record and removing pages from the same;

(f) engaging in that act with an intention to cause the theft of the said pages;

Upon the staff of the record room detecting the afore-said acts of the Respondent Attorney-

at-Law and upon complaint, the officers of Maradana Police Station took him into custody and

produced him before the Magistrate of Maligakanda who has enlarged him on two surety bail

of Rs. 500,000.00 on or around 25.01.2023. This was on the basis that he is a heart patient

and a diabetic.

Thus, there is a case pending against the Respondent Attorney-at-Law in the Magistrates

Court of Maligakanda under case bearing No. B/3285/23 based on the above-mentioned

incidents.

The Rule having considered the serious, felonious nature and the fraudulent tenor of his

actions, has alleged as follows:

(a) by the fraudulent and felonious actions in submitting a false name to

peruse the Case Record of case bearing No. COC-0011-22 and tearing

two pages of the same, the Respondent Attorney-at-Law has committed

a breach of Rule 11 of the Supreme Court (Conduct of and Etiquette for

Attorneys-at-Law) Rules 1988 made under Article 136 of the Constitution

of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka;

(b) the aforesaid conduct amounts to acts of deceit, malpractice, crime or

offence which warrants the Respondent Attorney-at-Laws suspension

[SC Rule No. 16/2023] Page 4 of 13

from office or removal from office under Section 42(2) of the Judicature

Act No. 2 of 1978;

(c) by reason of the aforesaid conduct which cannot be countenanced, the

Respondent Attorney-at-Law has conducted himself in a manner which

would reasonably be regarded as disgraceful or dishonourable of

Attorneys-at-Law of good repute and competence and has thus

committed a breach of Rule 60 of the Supreme Court (Conduct of and

Etiquette for Attorneys-at-Law) Rules 1988 made under Article 136 of

the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka;

(d) by reason of the aforesaid acts and conduct, the Respondent Attorney-

at-Law has conducted himself in a manner which is inexcusable and such

as to be regarded as deplorable by his fellows in the profession and has

thus committed a breach of Rule 60 of the said Rules;

(e) by reason of the aforesaid acts and conduct, the Respondent Attorney-

at-Law has conducted himself in a manner unworthy of an Attorney-at-

Law and has thus committed a breach of Rule No 61 of the said Rules.

It is on the above basis that the Rule has commanded the Respondent Attorney-at-Law in

terms of Section 42(3) of the Judicature Act No.2 of 1978, to show cause as to why he should

not be suspended from practice or be removed from the office of Attorney-at-Law of the

Supreme Court of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka in terms of Section 42(2) of

the Judicature Act.

When the Court read out the Rule on 02-04-2024, the Respondent Attorney-at-Law pleaded

not guilty to the charges contained in the Rule.

The learned Additional Solicitor General led before Court, the evidence of three witnesses.

The learned Counsel who appeared for the Respondent Attorney-at-Law cross-examined

them. After the learned Additional Solicitor General closed his case, the Respondent Attorney-

at-Law gave evidence under oath before Court. It is in that background that I commence

evaluating the evidence placed before Court.

[SC Rule No. 16/2023] Page 5 of 13

The witness, Mapitigama Sumedha Priyadarshana Perera, who was first called to give evidence

before Court is a Binder attached to the Registry of the Court of Appeal. In the course of his

evidence, the following items of evidence have been revealed:

i. He was on duty in record room No. 01, housed in the Kaluthota building on 24-01-

2023;

ii. This serves as a part of the main record room of the Court of Appeal; it is housed

on the third floor of Kaluthota building which is about 500-800 metres away from

the main Courts Complex;

iii. The incident relevant to this case had occurred at around 2:30 p.m. - 3:00 p.m.

on 24-01-2023;

iv. At that time, the Respondent Attorney-at-Law had come there and obtained the

record of the case bearing No. COC/11/2022 for inspection. The record room

officials had released this record for the Respondent Attorney-at-Law to inspect

and study, upon entering the name of the applicant lawyer, the case number, etc.

on the register maintained by the Registry for that purpose;

v. A little while later, he had heard a sound of tearing of papers. He then came close

to the Respondent Attorney-at-Law from behind. It was at that time that he had

seen that the Respondent Attorney-at-Law had torn some pages from the record

of the case bearing No. COC/11/2022; that was the case record the Respondent

Attorney-at-Law had obtained from the record room officials for his inspection and

study;

vi. The Binder Sumedha Priyadarshana Perera had seen this incident at a close range.

He also had seen the Respondent Attorney-at-Law placing the papers torn from

the record in the file he had brought when he came requesting for this case record

for inspection;

vii. The Binder Sumedha Priyadarshana Perera had then immediately proceeded to

keep Jude Dhanushka Perera informed about this incident. Sumedha Priyadarshana

Perera has also stated that thereafter Jude Dhanushka Perera too went and

questioned the Respondent Attorney-at-Law as to why he had done such a thing.

Thereafter, Jude Dhanushka Perera having informed the Assistant Registrar

[SC Rule No. 16/2023] Page 6 of 13

Shamali had proceeded to bring this incident to the immediate attention of the

Deputy Registrar of the Court of Appeal Maheshi Welagedara.

Although the learned Counsel for the Respondent Attorney-at-Law has cross-examined this

witness (Sumedha Priyadarshana Perera), the material elicited from the cross-examination

has only enabled the witness Sumedha Priyadarshana Perera to repeatedly reiterate the facts

of this incident, i.e., the incident of the Respondent Attorney-at-Law tearing some pages from

the case bearing No. COC/11/2022 which he had obtained from the record room officials for

his inspection and study.

After the conclusion of the evidence of the witness Sumedha Priyadarshana Perera, it was

Gurunnanselage Jude Dhanushka Perera who was called to give evidence as the second

witness before Court.

Jude Dhanushka Perera has stated in his evidence that it was Sumedha Priyadarshana Perera

who drew his attention to this incident on the date of the incident. Upon him being told by

Sumedha Priyadarshana Perera that something suspicious was happening, he too had come

close to the Respondent Attorney-at-Law and had observed the Respondent Attorney-at-Law

inserting some torn papers into the file the Respondent Attorney-at-Law had brought. He had

observed that these papers were the two pages from the record of the case bearing No.

COC/11/2022.

The learned Counsel for the Respondent Attorney-at-Law has also cross-examined Jude

Dhanushka Perera at length. However, the learned Counsel for the Respondent Attorney-at-

Law has not been able to elicit any important factor which could have been capable of assailing

the evidence of Jude Dhanushka Perera. It must be noted that all that has happened during

the cross-examination is only the fact that Jude Dhanushka Perera has got a second

opportunity to repeat whatever he has stated in his evidence-in-chief.

It was the Deputy Registrar of the Court of Appeal, Maheshi Anurika Premarathna Welagedara,

who came to give evidence before Court as the third witness. She is an Attorney-at-Law who

had taken oaths in that position in 2005. On the date of the incident, she was preparing an

official letter along with the Assistant Registrar Shyamali Sriyalatha, when Jude Dhanushka

Perera had come to inform them about this incident. Then, the Deputy Registrar Maheshi

Welagedara had rushed to the place of the incident, along with Jude Dhanushka Perera and

Assistant Registrar Shyamali Sriyalatha. Deputy Registrar Maheshi Welagedara had then

[SC Rule No. 16/2023] Page 7 of 13

inspected the record of the case bearing No. COC/11/2022 and had observed that two pages

had been torn from that case record.

Deputy Registrar Maheshi Welagedara has also found that the two pages torn from the said

case record had been inserted into another personal file. She has also observed that the

Respondent Attorney-at-Law was seated there. Deputy Registrar Maheshi Welagedara already

knew the Respondent Attorney-at-Law by his name as a lawyer. However, when she had

inspected the register in which the name of the requesting lawyer was supposed to have been

inserted before the record room officials could have released the record, she had observed

that the name of the requesting lawyer has been inserted as Chandrasiri Fernando. Thus,

according to the evidence of the Deputy Registrar Maheshi Welagedara it has been revealed

that the Respondent Attorney-at-Law has inserted a name which is different from his name in

the register to obtain this case record from the record room. This must be viewed as a

deliberate act to suppress his identity. The only inference I can draw from the suppression of

his identity is that it is a part of the preparation engaged in by the Respondent Attorney at

Law to commit an illegal act when inspecting/studying the case record which the Respondent

Attorney-at-Law had obtained from the record room officials.

Deputy Registrar Maheshi Welagedara has been cross-examined by the learned Counsel for

the Respondent Attorney-at-Law. However, similar to the previous two witnesses, all that has

happened during the cross-examination is that this witness too has got a second opportunity

to reiterate whatever she had said in evidence-in-chief. The learned Counsel for the

Respondent Attorney-at-Law did not elicit through cross-examination any material which Court

could have considered in favour of his client.

Thus, at the close of the case by the learned Additional Solicitor General, the evidence adduced

by the three witnesses against the Respondent Attorney-at-Law remained uncontroverted.

It was thereafter that the Respondent Attorney-at-Law Wickramage Don Dharmasiri

Karunaratne commenced giving evidence. He has admitted going to the record room of the

Court of Appeal housed in the Kaluthota building on the date of the incident and at the time

of the incident. He has also admitted that he has requested, obtained and inspected the case

record of the case bearing No. COC/11/2022 from the said record room. He also has confirmed

the presence of the second witness Jude Dhanushka Perera at the said record room at that

time. He has admitted that he studied the said case record at that point of time. However, he

has denied that he removed any paper from the record. Thus, the only point which is not

[SC Rule No. 16/2023] Page 8 of 13

admitted by the Respondent Attorney-at-Law is the fact that he has removed two papers from

the record as alleged by the witnesses called by the learned Additional Solicitor General.

The learned Additional Solicitor General has cross-examined the Respondent Attorney-at-Law.

During the cross-examination, the Respondent Attorney-at-Law has not been able to place

before Court any acceptable reason as to why he had wanted to inspect that case record. The

reason the Respondent Attorney-at-Law had placed before Court in that regard is the fact that

he wanted to study how the petition in that case had been drafted as he was contemplating

drafting a similar petition. Upon being asked as to how he got to know that a similar type of

petition is available in that case record, his reply was that he found it through a Google search.

However, when asked about the way in which he had previously launched a Google search in

order to find the case number of this record, the Respondent Attorney-at-Law has failed to

give any acceptable answer. It is the position of the learned Additional Solicitor General that

the Respondent Attorney-at-Law could not have found the case No. COC/11/2022 through a

Google search conducted in the way the Respondent Attorney-at-Law claims to have done.

I have considered the evidence of the Respondent Attorney-at-Law and the answers he has

given to the questions asked by the learned Additional Solicitor General in cross-examination.

Having considered them, I am of the view that the explanation offered by the Respondent

Attorney-at-Law as to the purpose for which he has obtained the record of the case bearing

No. COC/11/2022 is unacceptable. Therefore, I am compelled to take the view that the

Respondent Attorney-at-Law has applied and obtained this record, not for the purpose he

claimed in his evidence, but for the surreptitious removal of certain papers which he had

indeed done after the record was released to him by the record room officials. Another reason

as to why I am compelled to come to this conclusion is the fact that the Respondent Attorney-

at-Law has ensured that his name is not inserted in the register to conceal the fact that it was

he who had applied for the said case record. This was to ensure that no link to him will be

established, even at a later point of time. The absence of any acceptable explanation as to

any useful purpose that would have served the Respondent Attorney-at-Law by the

inspection/study of the said case record is another factor which indicates that the Respondent

Attorney-at-Law has obtained this case record for an undisclosed and surreptitious purpose

and not for the purpose he has claimed in his evidence.

On the other hand, the Respondent Attorney-at-Law, in his evidence under oath, has stated

from the witness box in no uncertain terms the following: that he knew Deputy Registrar

Maheshi Welagedara for a long time; that he knew the Deputy Registrar Maheshi Welagedara

[SC Rule No. 16/2023] Page 9 of 13

to be an honest, hardworking and genuine officer; and that Deputy Registrar Maheshi

Welagedara did not have any reason to fabricate false evidence against him. The above

positions taken up by the Respondent Attorney-at-Law has transpired in his own evidence,

and therefore I would reproduce the following portion from this evidence below:

: ?

: . .

. .

,

.

: ?

: .

.

: ?

: .

: ?

: .

: ?

: . .

: ?

[SC Rule No. 16/2023] Page 10 of 13

: .

: ?

: . .

: ?

: .

.

: ?

: .

: , ?

: .

: ?

: .

: ?

: , . .

: ?

: .

: , .

?

[SC Rule No. 16/2023] Page 11 of 13

: .

: ?

: .

I have already mentioned above that at the close of the case by the learned Additional Solicitor

General, evidence adduced by the three witnesses against the Respondent Attorney-at-Law

remained uncontroverted. It was thereafter that the Respondent Attorney-at-Law gave

evidence. In his evidence, the Respondent Attorney-at-Law has not adduced any different

sequence of events regarding the facts of the case. This is so in his evidence as well as in the

line of cross-examination of the three witnesses by his Counsel. Indeed, the Respondent

Attorney-at-Law has not been able to discredit their testimony. The only point of evidence

denied by the Respondent Attorney-at-Law is the fact that he has removed two papers from

the record.

As I have already stated, the Respondent Attorney-at-Law does not produce any reason as to

why the three witnesses should implicate him in this incident by fabricating false evidence.

Moreover, the Respondent Attorney-at-Law, in his evidence, has categorically stated that the

Deputy Registrar Maheshi Welagedara is a person known to him, and is an honest and efficient

officer. Therefore, what is embedded in that statement is the fact that the Deputy Registrar

Maheshi Welagedara could never have fabricated and given false evidence against him. This

is the thinking of the Respondent Attorney-at-Law in the course of his evidence. Moreover, I

find that the evidence of all three witnesses led by the Additional Solicitor General have

mutually corroborated each other with no discrepancies amongst them. All these three

witnesses are persons who have independently observed the events narrated by them.

Having considered all the above material I am convinced that the three witnesses, whose

evidence was led by the Additional Solicitor General, have given truthful evidence before

Court.

Having considered the totality of evidence I am not prepared to accept the denial by the

Respondent Attorney-at-Law that he has not removed two papers from the record. In my view

it is a false denial put forward as an attempt to escape from the responsibility for the act he

had done. I cannot see any possibility of drawing a different inference upon consideration of

the above facts. Thus, upon consideration of the totality of the evidence adduced in this case,

[SC Rule No. 16/2023] Page 12 of 13

I conclude that the Respondent Attorney-at-Law, on the date of the incident, having obtained

the record of the case bearing No. COC/11/2022 from the record room of the Registry of the

Court of Appeal, by misleading the record room officials to believe that he was one

Chandrasiri Fernando. by inserting that false name in the register, had thereafter

surreptitiously torn two pages from the said record and inserted those torn pages into a

personal file he had brought along with him.

In the aforesaid circumstances, and for the foregoing reasons, I hold that the above-

mentioned charges set out in (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) of the Rule dated 28-08-2024 have been

proved to the satisfaction of Court and that the said acts amount to acts of deceit and/or

malpractice and/or crime and/or offence in terms of Section 42(2) of the Judicature Act.

Therefore, I find the Respondent Attorney-at-Law guilty of the said acts of deceit, malpractice,

crime and offence referred to above in paragraphs (a) to (e) of the Rule dated 28-08-2024. I

order that the Rule be confirmed.

The Respondent Attorney-at-Law has not been sincerely and truly repentant over the above

breaches for which he is clearly liable. Instead, he was determined to the last stages of the

inquiry to contest the said allegations. That necessarily indicates the absence of any remorse

on his part in relation to the said acts of defiance.

Rule 60 of the Supreme Court (Conduct of and Etiquette for Attorneys-at-Law) Rules 1988

published in the Gazette Extraordinary of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka No.

535/7 dated 07-12-1988 states as follows.

An Attorney-at-Law must not conduct himself in any manner which would be

reasonably regarded as disgraceful or dishonourable by Attorneys-at-Law of good

repute and competency or which would render him unfit to remain an Attorney-at-

Law or which is inexcusable and such as to be regarded as deplorable by his fellows

in the profession.

It is also relevant to note that while Rule 61 states that an Attorney-at-Law shall not conduct

himself in any manner unworthy of an Attorney-at-Law, Rule 62 states that these rules are

not exhaustive.

In terms of Section 42 of the Judicature Act, the Supreme Court has been vested with the

power to suspend from practice or remove from office, any Attorney-at-Law who is found to

be guilty of any deceit, malpractice, crime or offence.

[SC Rule No. 16/2023] Page 13 of 13

It must be borne in mind that this Court admits and enrolls as Attorneys-at-Law in terms of

Section 40 of the Judicature Act, only persons of good repute and of competent knowledge

and ability. Such Attorneys-at-Law once enrolled cannot engage in any deceit, malpractice,

crime or offence. It is a reasonable expectation of both the public and those involved in the

administration of justice in the country. If an Attorney-at-Law is unable to maintain the

expected standard, then such an Attorney-at-Law cannot be permitted to continue to function

in that capacity any more. Section 42 has entrusted this Court with the responsibility of

maintaining the aforesaid standards. Thus, this Court has a duty to take into consideration,

the interests and aspirations of the general public that only persons of good repute and of

competent knowledge and ability function as Attorneys-at-Law. It also has a duty to maintain

the quality of the administration of justice, and the need to maintain the standards expected

from the members of the legal fraternity when deciding the course of action it should take in

a case of this nature.

In the above circumstances, I do not think it is necessary for me to give further reasons to

show how the actions of the Respondent Attorney-at-Law has tarnished the image of the legal

profession of this country as a whole.

Having considered all those circumstances, as the Respondent Attorney-at-Law has been

found guilty of an act of deceit which is also a malpractice, acting in terms of Section 42 of

the Judicature Act, I direct that the Respondent Attorney-at-Law Wickramage Don Dharmasiri

Karunaratne be removed from office as an Attorney-at-Law forthwith.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to take all necessary steps to implement this order

removing the Respondent Attorney-at-Law from office as an Attorney-at-Law forthwith.

CHIEF JUSTICE

KUMUDINI WICKREMASINGHE, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT