1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

S.C. Appeal No. 30/2015 S.C (Spl) LA No. 113/2014 Court of Appeal No. CA 132/99 (F) D.C Homagama Case No.3291/CD

In the matter of an Application for Special Leave to Appeal made in terms of Article 128 of the Constitution of Sri Lanka and the Supreme Court Rules thereof. Talagalage Punchi Singho No. 251, Seelammala Mawatha, Oruwala South, Athurugiriya. PLAINTIFF Vs. Ratnayake Mudiyanselage Bandara Menike No. 64/C, Vidyala Mawatha, Oruwala. DEFENDANT AND Ratnayake Mudiyanselage Bandara Menike No. 64/C, Vidyala Mawatha, Oruwala. DEFENDANT-APPELLANT Vs.

2

Talagalage Punchi Singho No. 251, Seelammala Mawatha, Oruwala South, Athurugiriya. (Deceased) PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT Thalagalage Wijeratna No. 251, Seelammala Mawatha, Oruwala South, Athurugiriya. SUBSTITUTED-PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT AND NOW BETWEEN Thalagalage Wijeratna No. 251, Seelammala Mawatha, Oruwala South, Athurugiriya. SUBSTITUTED-PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT-APPELLANT Vs. Ratnayake Mudiyanselage Bandara Menike No. 64/C, Vidyala Mawathqa, Oruwala. DEFENDANT-APPELLANT-RESPONDENT BEFORE: B. P. Aluwihare P.C., J.

Priyantha Jayawardena P.C., J. &

Anil Gooneratne J.

3

COUNSEL: Chathura Galhena With Ms.Manoja Gunawardana for the Substituted Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant Pulasthi Hewamanne with Ms. C. Hettiarachchi for the Defendant-Appellant-Respondent on behalf of the Legal Aid Commission. ARGUED ON: 02.10.2017 WRITTEN SUBMISSION OF THE DEFENDANT-APPELLANT-RESPONDENT FILED ON: 24.07.2015 WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS OF THE SUBSTITUTED-PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT FILED ON: 22.01.2016 DECIDED ON: 23.10.2017 GOONERATNE J. This was an action filed in the District Court of Homagama

pertaining to a case of revocation of a deed of gift by the Plaintiff-Respondent-

Appellant, (now deceased) on the ground of ingratitude of the Defendant-

Appellant-Respondent. The facts of this case reveal that the District Court held

in favour of the Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant but in appeal to the Court of

Appeal the Appellate Court set aside the Judgment of the District Court and

dismissed the action of the Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant. The main issue as

4

stated in the Judgment of the Court of Appeal is on the question of credibility of

the Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant’s evidence that transpired at the trial.

However the Supreme Court granted Leave to Appeal on questions of law set

out in paragraph 16 (i and iii) of the petition dated 19.07.2014. However the

written submissions of the Plaintiff–Respondent-Appellant refer to three

questions of law. In any event I would refer to all three questions which reads

as follows:

(i) Did the court of Appeal misdirect itself on the concept of standard of

proof required to establish gross ingratitude?

(ii) Did the Court of Appeal misdirect itself in analysing the evidence led

and documents marked at the trial by the deceased Plaintiff?

(iii) Did the Court of Appeal err in entering the Judgment without dealing

with the merits of the Judgment of the District Court.

Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant was the owner of the land and premises

described in the schedule to the plaint. Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant became

the owner by deed P1 dated 18.08.54 from which he derived ownership from

his mother. The Defendant-Appellant-Respondent was a lessee of the Plaintiff-

Respondent-Appellant from the year 1992. The Defendant-Appellant-

Respondent had taken care of the Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant during the

period she was a lessee and looked after him when he was sick and promised to

do so even in the future. On that basis the Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant gifted

5

an undivided share of 10 perches of the land in dispute inclusive of the house

situated therein to the Defendant-Appellant-Respondent by deed P2 of

22.05.1995. However subsequently the Defendant-Appellant-Respondent

breached the above undertaking within a few days after the execution of deed

P2, and as such Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant filed action on the basis of gross

ingratitude by the Defendant-Appellant-Respondent, to have the deed of gift to

her revoked.

Deed of Gift P2 though irrevocable could be revoked for gross

ingratitude under Roman Dutch Law gifts inter vivos are as a rule irrevocable,

Voet 39.5.4 except for such cases as ingratitude. 17 NLR 507. The question of

ingratitude is a question of fact. It could vary with the circumstances of each

case. I do agree with the views of the learned Judge of the Court of Appeal that

gratitude is a form of mind which has to be inferred from the donee’s conduct,

and such an attitude of mind will be indicated either by a single act or a series

of acts.

In a case of this nature bare assertions of being assaulted by a

person alone will not suffice. Gross ingratitude should be proved with certainty

and with sound evidence. If a party is able to prove gross ingratitude would

deprive a person of a property right. In the case in hand the oral testimony of

6

the Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant will diminish in its value due to the

statement made to the police by the Plaintiff.

In the statements marked and produced in court as P3 does not

implicate the Defendant-Appellant-Respondent. It is one Piyasena who had hit

the Plaintiff (Defendant’s husband). I agree with the views expressed on this

statement by the Court of Appeal. If the statement contradict or is an omission

to the oral testimony it is unsafe for a court to act upon it. Especially when gross

ingratitude has to be established. The second complaint to the police by the

Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant dated 26.07.1995, there is no mention of the

Defendant-Appellant-Respondent. The other complaint to the police is

produced marked P4 dated 23.06.1997. This statement is a belated statement

made to the police, subsequent to filing action by the Plaintiff-Respondent-

Appellant. No court will consider its application and consequences since value

of such statement will greatly diminish due to delay and that being an after

thought. This statement no doubt implicates the Defendant-Appellant-

Respondent. That is only a wilful attempt on the part of the Plaintiff-

Respondent-Appellant to harm the Defendant and project Defendants

ingratitude. It cannot be relied upon in the circumstances of the case in hand.

Evidence Ordinance recognise the rule of impeaching credit of witness by other

7

evidence. It could be done by proof of former statements inconsistent with any

part of his evidence which is liable to be contradicted.

In this background it is also relevant to consider the evidence of the

Defendant-Respondent-Appellant. It is Defendant’s evidence that she was a

tenant of Plaintiff from 1987. Defendant-Respondent-Appellant had helped the

Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent and as such he gifted 10 perches of the land with

the house to her. Defendant testify that she expended her money and built a

well, toilet and a room for Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent (proceeding of

25.09.1998). Defendant-Respondent-Appellant emphasis that she never ill-

treated the Plaintiff. It is the explanation of the Defendant that Plaintiff sought

to revoke deed P2 as she married the Plaintiff’s cousin. As regards the injuries

of Plaintiff the Defendant testified that the Plaintiff very frequently travelled

about at night by bicycle. Defendant-Respondent-Appellant also states in

evidence that she will continue to look after the Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent.

Slight acts of ingratitude are insufficient to revoke a deed of gift

1992 (2) SLR 180. I have to state that a Court of law has to consider the totality

of evidence led and arrive at a conclusion. It is not correct to give your mind only

to certain items of evidence. The material placed before court does not make it

possible to interfere with the Court of Appeal Judgement. Therefore I affirm the

Judgment of the Court of Appeal, and dismiss this appeal without costs. The

8

questions of law are answered in the negative in favour of the Defendant-

Appellant-Respondent.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

B.P. Aluwihare P.C., J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Priyantha Jayawardena P.C., J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREEM COURT