==== BLOCKS ==== 

SC Appeal 03/2023 JUDGMENT Page 1 of 17

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In In the matter of an application for Special

Leave to Appeal under and in terms of Article

154P(3)(b) of the Constitution and in terms

of provisions of Industrial Disputes Act No.

43 of 1950 (as amended) from the Judgement

of the High Court of the Eastern Province

(Holden in Ampara) dated 28 February 2022.

H.M. Siriwardana

Rathugala Wellassa,

Galgamuwa,

Inginiyagala.

APPLICANT

Vs.

Jungle Safari Lanka (Pvt) Limited,

Rathugala, Galgamuwa,

Inginiyagala.

RESPONDENT

AND BETWEEN

Jungle Safari Lanka (Pvt) Limited,

Rathugala, Galgamuwa,

Inginiyagala.

SC APPEAL 03/2023

SC/SPL/LA 115/2022

HC/AMP/ALT/557/2020

LT Case No: 44/691/2018

SC Appeal 03/2023 JUDGMENT Page 2 of 17

BEFORE: S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J. AND

ARJUNA OBEYESEKERE, J

RESPONDENT-APPELLANT

Vs.

H.M. Siriwardana

Rathugala Wellassa,

Galgamuwa,

Inginiyagala.

APPLICANT-RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

Jungle Safari Lanka (Pvt) Limited,

Rathugala, Galgamuwa,

Inginiyagala.

RESPONDENT-APPELLANT-

APPELLANT

Vs.

H.M. Siriwardana

Rathugala Wellassa,

Galgamuwa,

Inginiyagala.

APPLICANT-RESPONDENT-

RESPONDENT

SC Appeal 03/2023 JUDGMENT Page 3 of 17

COUNSEL: Shamir Zavahir instructed by M/s Paul Ratnayake Associates for the

Respondent-Appellant-Appellant

Nisala Seniya Fernando with Ms. Udeni Gallage for the Applicant-

Respondent-Respondent

WRITTEN

SUBMISSIONS:

Written submissions on behalf of the Respondent-Appellant -

Appellant on 20th April 2023.

Written submissions on behalf of the Applicant-Respondent-

Respondent on 20th May 2024.

Further Written submissions on behalf of the Respondent-Appellant -

Appellant on 07th June 2024.

ARGUED ON: 19th July 2024

DECIDED ON: 19th September 2024

THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

1. The instant case is an appeal against the judgment of the High Court of the Eastern

Province which affirmed an Order of the Labour Tribunal of Ampara. The Applicant-

Respondent-Respondent in instant case, namely, H.M. Siriwardana (hereinafter referred

to as the “Respondent”), instituted an action in the Labour Tribunal of Ampara on 19th

December 2018 against the Respondent-Appellant-Appellant, namely, Jungle Safari Lanka

(Pvt) Limited (hereinafter referred to as the “Appellant Company”), stating that he was

constructively terminated by the Appellant Company on 18th January 2018, and sought

SC Appeal 03/2023 JUDGMENT Page 4 of 17

relief for his reinstatement of service with back wages, statutory dues and compensation

for the alleged constructive termination.1

2. The Appellant Company in their Answer2 took up the preliminary objection that the

Respondent had resigned from employment of his own volition. During the trial, the

Appellant Company submitted as evidence the Letter of Resignation of the Respondent

and contends that the Respondent has resigned at his own wish, thereby failing to

constitute a wrongful termination of employment. The Respondent asserts this position

by stating that the circumstances created by the Appellant Company were hostile,

particularly in light of the accusations levied against him by a Manager of the Appellant

Company, Mr. Roshan, and that such circumstances coerced the Respondent to submit a

letter of resignation in order to be allowed to receive his Salary and Service fee for the

month of January 2018. For ease of reference, I have reproduced the contents of the said

letter, along with an approximate translation of the same.3

“සේවසෙන් ඉවත්වන බව දැනුම් දීම

“ගල්ඔෙ ස ොජ්” සංචොරක නිවොඩු නිසේතනසේ මුළුතැන්සේ සහොෙකසෙකු වශසෙන්

වසර තුනක ආසන්න කො ෙේ සේවෙ ක මො 2018.01.26 දින සිට මසේ කැමැත්ත

මත සේවසෙන් ඉවත් වන බව සමයින් දැනුම් සදන අතර, 2018 ජනවොරි මස 26

දින දේවො මො සේවෙ කරන ද දින කීපෙ සඳහො නිෙමිත වැටුප සහ සේවො

ගොේතු බො සදන ස ස සමයින් ඉල් ො සිටීමි

සමෙට

1 Application submitted before the Labour Tribunal dated 19th December 2018, p. 1 of the Labour Tribunal brief.

2 Answer of the Appellant Company (then Respondent) dated 04th April 2019, p. 7 of the Labour Tribunal brief

3 Letter of Resignation dated 27th January 2018 document marked as “වග 02”, p. 105 of the Supreme Court brief.

SC Appeal 03/2023 JUDGMENT Page 5 of 17

විශ්වොසී

(Signature of Respondent)

ජනවොරි මොසෙට අදාළ වැටුප සහ සේවො ගොේතු බො ගනිමි.

මීට,

H.M.සිරිවර්ධන

3. A salient point to note, however, is that the Respondent does not refer to or mention such

circumstances in the said letter of resignation, and instead states that he is resigning on

his own wishes. The abovementioned letter coherently stipulates that the Respondent

wishes to resign from his services with effect from 26th January 2018 and acknowledges

in writing and signature that he has been paid the full salary and service fee until January

“Notice of Resigantion

I, who have served as an assistant at 'Galoya Lodge' Tourist Holiday

Resort for nearly three years, hereby inform you that I am resigning from

my position effective January 26, 2018, at my own request. I request that

the due salary and service fees for the days worked up to January 26,

2018, be provided to me accordingly.

Yours Faithfully,

(signature of Respondent)

I have received the salary and service for the month of January.

Sincerely,

H.M.Siriwardene

(Signature of Respondent)"

SC Appeal 03/2023 JUDGMENT Page 6 of 17

2018 upon his request. At the first instance, while the Respondent asserts his position and

states that he was allegedly terminated on 18th January 2018, while on the contrary the

attendance sheet to be signed by the employers of the Appellant Company indicates that

the Respondent had proceeded to report to work until the end of January 2018.4

Thereafter, during his cross-examination, the Respondent admits and apologises that the

date of resignation stipulated in the initial application on his part and his alleged

termination was effective from 26th January 2018.5

4. The Appellant Company contended that in such circumstances the instant action does not

fall within the jurisdiction of the Labour Tribunal in accordance with the provisions of the

Industrial Disputes Act (as amended)6, and thus prayed that the application be dismissed

in limine. Despite having raised the said preliminary objection, in adjudicating this matter,

the President of the Labour Tribunal issued an Order7 and held in favour of the

Respondent concluding that, due to the allegations levied against the Respondent by the

Manager of the Appellant Company, the prevailing conditions compelled the Respondent

to resign from his position, thereby amounting to a wrongful constructive termination of

the Respondent’s employment. The Appellant Company appealed to the High Court of

the Eastern Province holden in Ampara, whereby the High Court Judge delivered the

judgment dated 28th February 2022 affirming the Order of the Labour Tribunal and

dismissed the appeal of the Appellant Company.8

4 Attendance Sheet-Month of January document marked as “වග 01”, p. 104 of the Labour Tribunal brief.

5 Cross-Examination report dated 06th June 2019, p. 24 of the Labour Tribunal brief

6 S.31B(1) Industrial Disputes Act No.43 of 1950 (as amended)

7 Labour Tribunal Order dated 17th July 2020

8 Annexed to the Petition of the Appellant Company dated 08th April 2022 and marked as “A” in the Supreme Court brief

SC Appeal 03/2023 JUDGMENT Page 7 of 17

5. Being aggrieved by the Judgment of the High Court Judge, the Appellant Company

preferred an appeal to the Supreme Court9 and prays to set aside the Judgment of the

High Court of the Eastern Province holden in Ampara dated 28th February 2022, and to

set aside and/or vary the Order of the Labour Tribunal of Ampara dated 17th July 2020.

On 10th January 2023, the Supreme Court heard the submissions of the Counsel in support

of the Petition and was inclined to grant leave to appeal to the questions of law provided

under paragraphs 11(b) and 11(q) of the Petition. Further, the Counsel were granted

permission to present an additional question of law concerning the Labour Tribunal's

jurisdiction to adjudicate the present matter. Consequently, the Court granted leave to

the three legal questions delineated below.

A. Has the Learned High Court Judge erred and misdirected himself in law in

coming to the conclusion that the Respondent was constructively

terminated?

B. Has the Learned High Court Judge erred and misdirected himself in law by

not holding that the action of the Respondent was prescribed and/ or out of

time?

C. Did the Labour Tribunal have jurisdiction to hear the application?

6. Upon careful consideration of the three legal questions in the context of the facts and

circumstances of the present case, I find that the questions “A” and “B” are contingent on

question “C” which pertains to the jurisdiction of the Labour Tribunal to entertain the

instant action. Furthermore, when the instant case was argued before this Court on 03rd

June 2024 and 19th July 2024, both parties resolved and concurred that it is sufficient to

9 Petition of the Appellant Company dated 08th April 2022

SC Appeal 03/2023 JUDGMENT Page 8 of 17

only address Question “C”. Therefore, I will turn now to address the third of the

aforementioned questions of law.

7. The Labour Tribunal is a creature and creation of the Industrial Disputes Act, and its

jurisdiction is vested by and pursuant to S. 31B of the Industrial Disputes Act, whereby

paragraph (1), states as follows.

(1) A workman or a trade union on behalf of a workman who is a member of

that union, may make an application in writing to labour tribunal for relief

or redress in respect of any of the following matters:-

(a) the termination of his services by his employer;

(b) the question whether any gratuity or other benefits are due to

him from his employer on termination of his services and the amount

of such gratuity and the nature and extent of such benefits, where such

workman has been employed in any industry employing less than

fifteen workmen on any date during the period of twelve months

preceding the termination of the services of the workman who makes

the application or in respect of whom the application is made to the

tribunal;

(c) the question whether the forfeiture of a gratuity in terms of the

Payment of Gratuity Act, 1983 has been correctly made in terms of

that Act,

(d) such other matters relating to the terms of employment, or the

conditions of labour, of a workman as may be prescribed.

[Emphasis added]

SC Appeal 03/2023 JUDGMENT Page 9 of 17

8. Accordingly, the Labour Tribunal's jurisdiction is limited to adjudicating matters

concerning termination of employment, gratuity entitlements and related issues, as well

as other matters pertaining to the terms of employment. It should be noted that the

Respondent does not seek relief for an infringement of the terms of the contract of

employment, nor for any issues of payment of gratuity, rather, that the Respondent was

coerced to submit his resignation and terminate his employment which amounts to

constructive termination.10

9. In considering the factual matrix of the instant case, it was submitted by both parties at

the proceedings before the Labour Tribunal that, prior to instituting this action before the

Labour Tribunal, the Respondent had lodged a complaint before the Monaragala Labour

Commission.11 During the proceedings, the Respondent admits to this fact.12

ප්‍ර: සම් සම්බන්ධව කම්කරු සදපොර්තසමන්තුවට පැමිණිලි කළොද?

පි: සමොණරොග කම්කරු කොර්ෙො ෙට පැමිණිලි කළො.

ප්‍ර: කම්කරු කොර්ෙො සෙන් දැනුම් දීමේ කළොද?

පි: ඔව්. වන්දිෙේ අරන් සදන්න බැහැ නැවත රැකිෙොවට ෙන්න කිව්වො.

[Q: Have you complained to the Labour Department regarding this?

A: I lodged a complaint at the Monaragala Labour Commission.

Q: Did you receive any notice from the Labour Commission?

10 pp. 1-2 of the Labour Tribunal brief, Application submitted before the Labour Tribunal dated 19th December 2018

11 Vide document marked “ඉ- 03” pg.96 of the Labour Tribunal brief, Letter No. MON-P-ID/2018/15

12 p. 16 of the Labour Tribunal brief, statement of Respondent recorded during proceedings dated 02nd May 2019

SC Appeal 03/2023 JUDGMENT Page 10 of 17

A: Yes. That they are unable to grant me compensation and asked

me to return to employment.]

10. The Respondent further elaborates that he had lodged a complaint at the Monaragala

Labour Commission against the Manager of the Appellant Company, for allegedly having

hurled false accusations at the Respondent, the excerpt which has been reproduced

below.13

ප්‍ර: කම්කරු සදපොර්තසම්න්තුවට පැමිණිලි කසේ සමොනව සම්බන්ධවද?

පි: සබොරු සචෝදනො මත සේවෙ අවසන් කළො කිෙ ො.

ප්‍ර: තමොට නැවත සේවෙට ෙන්න බැරි සේතුව කිව්වද?

පි: ඔව්.

ප්‍ර: තමොට කම්කරු කොර්ෙො ෙට කළ පැමිණිල් ට සොධොරණෙේ වුණොද?

පි: නැහැ.

[Q: What was the complaint to the Labour Commission regarding?

A: That they terminated services based on false accusations.

Q: Did you inform the reason you didn’t want to be reinstated?

A: Yes.

Q: Did you receive any relief for the complaint lodged?

A: No.]

11. At the proceedings before the Labour Tribunal, the Respondent had admitted that the

Appellant Company had not defaulted on any payments which were due to the

13 P. 27 of the Labour Tribunal brief, Labour Tribunal proceedings dated 06th June 2019

SC Appeal 03/2023 JUDGMENT Page 11 of 17

Respondent and, have made the necessary and all EPF/ETF contributions on behalf of the

Respondent. In light of this, the Labour Commissioner has ordered that the Respondent

be reinstated since there didn’t appear to be any infringement of his employment

contract. Upon being offered the option and opportunity for reinstatement, the

Respondent had refused to accept such a relief, despite having sought to be reinstated

in his initial application before the Labour Tribunal.14 Such refusal on the part of the

Respondent was premised on the speculation that, should he return to employment he

would be the victim of several other accusations in the future which may even pose the

risk of being arrested. The relevant excerpts and approximate translations have been

provided below.

ප්‍ර: ඔබට සෙෝජනො කරනවො සේවක අර්ථ සොධක අරමුදල් නිසි පරිදි බැර

කිරිමේ කර ො කිෙ ො පිළිගන්නවද?

පි: ඔව්.

ප්‍ර: සේවක භොරකොර අරමුද ට නිසි පරිදි මුදල් බැර සව ො කිව්සවොත්

පිළිගන්නවද? මොසිකව 3%ේ බැර සවනවො සන්ද?

පි: ඔව්.

ප්‍ර: ඵතසකොට ජනවොරි 25 දේවො නිසි පරිදි වැටුප්, සේවක අර්ථ සොධක

මුදල්, සේවක භොරකොර මුදල් බැර සව ො කිව්සවොත් පිළිගන්නවද?

පි: ඔව්.

ප්‍ර: සහකොර කම්කරු සකොමසොරිේතුමො පැමිණිල් පිළිබඳ නිසි පිෙවරේ

සනොගත්සත් සම් සිෙළු දිමනො සගව ො තිසෙන නිසො කිව්සවොත් හරි සන්ද?

පි: ඔව්.

14 P. 2 of the Labour Tribunal brief, Application submitted before the Labour Tribunal dated 19th December 2018

SC Appeal 03/2023 JUDGMENT Page 12 of 17

ප්‍ර: ඔබ ඒ අවේථොසව් නැවත රැකිෙොවට ෙන්න කැමති වුණොද?

පි: නැහැ. නැවත රැකිෙොවට ගිසෙොත් ඊට වඩො සචෝදනොවේ කර ො

සපොලිසිෙට අල් ො සදන්න පුළුවන් නිසො ගිසේ නැහැ.15

[Q: Do you accept that the employee's provident fund contributions

have been properly paid?

A: Yes.

Q: If it is confirmed that the funds to the employee's provident fund

have been properly deposited, do you acknowledge this? The

contribution is 3% monthly, correct?

A: Yes.

Q: If it is confirmed that salary, employee provident fund contributions,

and employee welfare fund contributions have been properly

deposited up to 25th January, will you accept this?

A: Yes.

Q: Would it be accurate to state that the Assistant Commissioner of

Labour did not take appropriate action regarding the complaint

because all dues have been settled?

A: Yes.

Q: Did you wish to return to work at that time?

A: No. I did not want to return because I could face more issues and

potentially involve the police if I did.]

15 p. 25-26 of the Labour Tribunal brief, statement of Respondent recorded during proceedings dated 06th June 2019

SC Appeal 03/2023 JUDGMENT Page 13 of 17

12. Further, Mr. Ajith Kumara who was the Accountant of the Appellant Company and the

witness on behalf of the Appellant Company submitted to the Labour Commissioner and

also admitted during the proceedings, that the Appellant Company was agreeable to

have the Respondent reinstated, but that the Respondent had refused due to the

Manager who had scolded him was still employed at the Appellant Company.16

ප්‍ර: ඔබ ො කම්කරු සදපොර්තසම්න්තුවට සම් සම්බන්ධසෙන් පැමිණිලි කළො

සන්ද?

පි: ඔව්.

ප්‍ර: එහි දී ඔබ ො රැකිෙොව බො සදන්න බැහැ කිව්වො?

පි: රැකිෙොව බො සදන්න අපි සපොසරොන්ු වුණො. සරොෂොන් කිෙන කළමණොකරු

එතැන වැඩ කරන නිසො එතැන වැඩ කරන්න බැහැ කිෙ ො

ඉල්ුම්කරු කිව්වො.

[Q: Did you file a complaint with the Department of Labour regarding

this matter?

A: Yes.

Q: Did they state that they could not provide you with employment

there?

A: We committed to providing employment. However, the Applicant17

stated that they could not work there because Roshan, the manager,

was working there.]

16 p. 64 of the Labour Tribunal brief, statement of Respondent recorded during proceedings dated 19th December 2019

17 At present, Applicant-Respondent-Respondent (referred to as “Respondent”)

SC Appeal 03/2023 JUDGMENT Page 14 of 17

13. This factual circumstance thus prompts the question whether resorting to such a remedy

before the Labour Commissioner would in any way affect the jurisdiction of the Labour

Tribunal. At this juncture, I draw my attention to the latter provisions of s.31B Industrial

Disputes Act, particularly S. 31B (5) of the Industrial Disputes Act which provides as

follows.

“(5) Where an application under subsection (1) is entertained by a

labour tribunal and proceedings thereon are taken and concluded, the

workman to whom the application relates shall not be entitled to any

other legal remedy in respect of the matter to which that application

relates, and where he has first resorted to any other legal remedy,

he shall not thereafter be entitled to the remedy under subsection

(1).”

[Emphasis added]

14. In Ceylon Tobacco Co. Ltd v. Illangasinghe,18 upon the termination of her employment,

the employee made an application to the Labour Commissioner, who in turn made an

order stating that her case was not covered by the Termination of Employment of

Workmen (Special Provisions) Act No. 45 of 1971 as she had consented to the

termination of her services by way of first, the cessation of her contract of employment,

and second, her having accepted her gratuity and other service payments. She then

sought relief before the Labour Tribunal pursuant to s.31B of the Industrial Disputes Act.

The question placed before the Court was whether having resorted to her legal remedy

under Act No. 45 of 1971 she could now seek relief under the Industrial Disputes Act. It

was held that s.31B of the Industrial Disputes Act bars a workman from seeking relief

under the said Act where he has first resorted any other legal remedy, and that the

18 (1986) 1 SLR 1

SC Appeal 03/2023 JUDGMENT Page 15 of 17

expression “legal remedy” means a remedy provided by the law whether it be under the

common law or under statute s. 31B (5) is bars a workman from obtaining both his legal

remedy under the Industrial Disputes Act and any other legal remedy. Further, the Court

gave a strict interpretation to the word “resorted to another legal remedy” by stating as

follows.

“The counsel for the 2nd respondent, relying on the decision in Mendis v R.

V. D. B (80 CLW 49) contended that what section 31B(5) [of the Industrial

Disputes Act] provides is not that a workman cannot seek his remedy under

the Act and any other legal remedy also but that he cannot obtain both. I

find myself unable to agree with this submission as it does violence to the

plain language used in the section -"where he has first resorted to any other

legal remedy". The ordinary meaning of the word 'resorted to' is 'to have

recourse, to apply (to)". Lord Guest and Lord Devlin in their dissent in The

United Engineering Workers Union v Devanayagam19 made the observation:

"The workman has to make his choice between the remedy

afforded by the Act and any other legal remedy he may have:

he cannot seek both”

[Emphasis added]

15. A similar interpretation of s.31B(5) of the Industrial Disputes Act was adopted in

Independent Newspapers Limited v. Commercial and Industrial Workers’ Union.20

More recently, in delivering the judgment for the case Rodrigo v. Central Engineering

Consultancy Bureau21 I have provided for a similar interpretation as follows.

19 69 NLR 289, at 305

20 (1997) 3 SLR 197

21 SC Appeal 228/2017, SC Minutes of 02 October 2020

SC Appeal 03/2023 JUDGMENT Page 16 of 17

"any other legal remedy in the second limb of section31B(5) echoes and

should be understood to have the same meaning as it has in the first limb of

section 31B(5). Thus, it can be concluded with certainty that the phrase "any

other legal remedy in the second limb of section 31B(5) is limited in its

meaning to "any other legal remedy which the workman has previously

sought in a court or other forum in respect of the termination of his services

and which had the same subject matter as his subsequent application to the

Labour Tribunal.”

[Emphasis added]

16. From the above legal jurisprudence, it is clearly understood that it is immaterial whether

or not the Respondent had refused the remedy or relief ordered by the Labour

Commissioner but what is relevant and would directly affect the jurisdiction of the Labour

Tribunal is if the Respondent had already sought some remedy before another forum

possessing concurrent jurisdiction with the Labour Tribunal, which in the instant case the

Respondent had done. It is clear from the evidence submitted before both the Labour

Tribunal and the Provincial High Court that both the Learned President of the Labour

Tribunal and the Learned High Court Judge were both well aware of the fact that the

Respondent had received such remedy, but yet decide to let it go unnoticed and rule on

constructive termination. What both courts have failed to comprehend is that, the

Respondent’s conduct of resorting to such other legal remedy has negated the

jurisdiction of the Labour Tribunal and disentitles the Labour Tribunal from rendering

such an Order in the instant case.

17. In light of the above, I answer the third question of law pertaining to the jurisdiction of

Labour Tribunal negatively and, considering the lack of jurisdiction, I find it redundant to

address the first and second questions of law as this is a matter to be dismissed in limine.

SC Appeal 03/2023 JUDGMENT Page 17 of 17

18. Therefore, I am inclined to allow the said appeal and set aside both the Order of the

Labour Tribunal dated 17th July 2020, and the Judgment of the High Court dated 28th

February 2022, and rule in favour of the Appellant Company.

Appeal allowed without costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J

I agree/disagree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

ARJUNA OBEYESEKERE, J

I agree/disagree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT