IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Viacom International Inc.,

1515, Broadway,

New York,

United States of America.

Plaintiff

SC APPEAL NO: SC/CHC/APPEAL/28/2003

CHC CASE NO: HC/Civil/20/98(3)

Vs.

1. The Maharaja Organisation

Limited,

No.146,

Dawson Street,

Colombo 02.

2. The Director General of

Intellectual Property,

3rd Floor,

“Samagam Medura”,

D.R. Wijewardena Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

Defendants

AND NOW BETWEEN

2

Viacom International Inc.,

1515, Broadway,

New York,

United States of America.

Plaintiff-Appellant

Vs.

1. The Maharaja Organisation

Limited,

No.146,

Dawson Street,

Colombo 02.

2 The Director General of

Intellectual Property,

3rd Floor,

“Samagam Medura”,

D.R. Wijewardena Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

Defendant-Respondents

Before: P. Padman Surasena, J.

E.A.G.R. Amarasekara, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Dr. K. Kanag-Isvaran, P.C., with Dr. Harsha

Cabral, P.C., and Kushan Illangatillake for the

Plaintiff-Appellant.

Romesh De Silva, P.C., with Rudrani

Balasubramaniam, Sugath Caldera and

3

Shanaka Cooray for the 1st Defendant-

Respondent.

Suren Gnanaraj, S.S.C., for the 2nd Defendant-

Respondent.

Argued on: 19.02.2021 and 10.03.2021

Written submissions:

The Plaintiff-Appellant and the 1st Defendant-

Respondent on 07.04.2021.

Decided on: 30.06.2021

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Introduction

The Appellant, Viacom International Inc., a company

incorporated in the United States of America, is the owner of

the “MTV Music Television” mark, which has been registered

in the USA and in the majority of trademark jurisdictions in

the world since 1984 for the transmission of television music

programmes and related products and services. The use of

the mark commenced in the USA in 1981, the first music

programme having been launched on 01.08.1981, and had

thereafter expanded into approximately 72 countries on six

continents when the Appellant lodged the application No.

61297 with the 2nd Respondent, the Director of Intellectual

Property, on 15.05.1991 to have the said mark registered in

Sri Lanka in Class 38 of the international classification in

respect of communication services including the transmission

of television programmes. The 2nd Respondent accepted the

mark with the disclaimer that the registration of the mark

4

shall give no right to the exclusive use of the words “Music

Television” and the letters “MTV”, and published it in the

gazette dated 05.02.1993.

Eight days after the Appellant had applied for the registration

of the MTV Music Television mark, on 25.05.1991, the 1st

Respondent, The Maharaja Organisation Ltd., lodged

application Nos. 61331 and 61332 for the registration of the

mark MTV in the same Class and in respect of the same

services, i.e. in Class 38 in respect of communication services

essentially consisting of the diffusion of television

programmes. The 2nd Respondent accepted the two marks of

the 1st Respondent with the disclaimer that the registration of

the marks shall give no right to the exclusive use of the

letters MTV and published them in the gazette dated

29.07.1994.

The two marks are reproduced below.

Appellant’s Mark 61297 Respondent’s Mark 61331

The Appellant objected to the 1st Respondent’s marks and vice

versa. After an inquiry, by order dated 28.05.1998, the 2nd

Respondent decided to register the Appellant’s mark No.

61297. Thereafter, by orders dated 30.06.1998, the 2nd

Respondent decided to register the 1st Respondent’s two

marks, Nos. 61331 and 61332. Both parties appealed from

5

the decisions of the 2nd Respondent to the Commercial High

Court and thereafter to this Court.

The appeal in respect of mark No. 61332 was allowed by this

Court in SC/APPEAL/40/1999, which is now reported in

Viacom International Inc. v. Maharaja Organisation Ltd. [2006]

1 Sri LR 140. The appeal in respect of mark No. 61297 was

dismissed by this Court today in SC/APPEAL/4/2002.

On appeal, the Commercial High Court affirmed the decision

of the 2nd Respondent in respect of mark No. 61331. The

instant appeal is against that Judgment.

It may be noted that when the 2nd Respondent made the order

and the High Court affirmed it, the law in force was the Code

of Intellectual Property Act, No. 52 of 1979 (Code), not the

Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 (Act). Hence the

legal position discussed in this Judgment is under the Code.

Question at Issue

Learned President’s Counsel for the 1st Respondent in his

written submissions dated 07.04.2021 filed after the

argument identifies the specific question to be decided in this

appeal in this manner:

The question at issue in the Appeal before [this] Court is

as to whether there can be any confusion/misleading of

the public in respect of the Petitioner’s “MTV Music

Television” mark by the Respondent’s use of its “MTV”

mark.

Without embarking upon an in-depth analysis of the facts

and law in this regard, as I will elaborate on below, this

6

question can conveniently be answered in the affirmative and

the appeal can safely be allowed taking into consideration the

express admissions made by the 1st Respondent itself.

The First User

Although the 1st Respondent lodged the application for

registration of the trade mark eight days after the application

lodged by the Appellant, the 1st Respondent claims to be the

first user of the MTV mark in Sri Lanka from May 1992.

However it is significant to note that this was by no means a

smooth process. It happened under protest. Prior to the use

of the mark by the 1st Respondent, a letter of demand dated

03.02.1992 was sent by the Attorney-at-Law of the Appellant

to the 1st Respondent asserting that the proposed use of the

MTV mark was an attempt to pass off the Appellant’s services

and activities as those of the 1st Respondent, and on this

basis the Appellant demanded an undertaking from the 1st

Respondent that it would not use the term MTV. The 1st

Respondent appears to have remained silent and continued

with its own course of action.

Therefore the 1st Respondent’s repeated emphasis in these

proceedings that it is the first user of the MTV mark in Sri

Lanka well before the Appellant, is ill-conceived. The 1st

respondent jumping the gun, in my view, tends to show mala

fides, and cuts across his argument advanced in passing that

he is an honest concurrent user of the mark.

The Appellant used this mark for the first time in Sri Lanka

on 01.12.1995. Nevertheless, by then the Appellant had been

in use of the MTV Music Television mark in several countries

7

and trade circles in abundance, as seen from the copious

documentary evidence marked A to F produced at the inquiry

before the 2nd Respondent, and thereby arguably had some

presence in Sri Lanka due to cross-border reputation. The

documents A1 to A9 are US registrations of the MTV Music

Television mark; B is a list containing the countries in which

the Appellant’s mark is registered; C1 to C11 are

representative articles relating to the recognition of the

Appellant’s mark; D1 to D5 are news reports reflecting the

acclaim accorded to the Appellant’s television programming;

and E is an article that appeared in the USA Weekly Variety

on 02.12.1991 regarding the ensuing dispute between the two

parties.

Notably, the 1st Respondent did not file even a scrap of paper

to substantiate its position before the 2nd Respondent or the

Commercial High Court.

District Court Case No. 4500/SPL

After the Appellant had filed the application for registration of

the mark but just before the use of the mark by the Appellant

in Sri Lanka, the 1st Respondent with MTV Channel (Private)

Ltd filed case No. 4500/SPL in the District Court of Colombo

on 20.11.1995 against the Appellant and Teleshan Network

(Private) Ltd asserting that the proposed use of the MTV mark

by the Appellant would be in breach of the 1st Respondent’s

legal rights and contrary to the provisions of the Code of

Intellectual Property Act, particularly on unfair competition in

terms of section 142 of the Code, in that the acts of the

Appellant and the other were:

8

wrongful and/or unlawful and/or illegal and/or in

violation of the plaintiffs’ rights;

likely or bound to mislead the public in respect of the

source;

likely or bound to mislead the public in respect of the

goods or services in connection with the use of the mark;

of such a nature as to create confusion with the

establishment, the services and/or commercial activities

of the plaintiffs, who are competitors;

indications of the source or origin of the services which in

the course of trade are liable to mislead the public as to

the source of the services;

a direct and/or indirect use of a false and/or deceptive

indication of the source of goods and/or services and/or

the identity of the suppliers.

This complaint was reiterated by the 1st Respondent over and

again throughout the proceedings before the 2nd Respondent

because the 1st Respondent was objecting to the Appellant’s

registration of the MTV mark No. 61297 in Sri Lanka

predominantly on the basis that the 1st Respondent is the

prior user of the MTV mark in Sri Lanka.

The 1st Respondent in its affidavit in reply dated 27.05.1996

filed before the 2nd Respondent against the Appellant’s

registration of the MTV mark No. 61297 inter alia states that

the Appellant was trying to “take a free ride” on the mark

MTV which the public in Sri Lanka associate with the 1st

Respondent, and “the use of the mark MTV in any manner

9

similar to the use of the mark MTV by the Applicant in Sri

Lanka which could confuse the trade and the public is an act

contrary to honest trade practice in contravention of section

142 of the Code. Any income derived in Sri Lanka in the

circumstances referred to above is illegal.”

Let me also quote the 2nd paragraph of the order of the 2nd

Respondent dated 28.05.1998 made in respect of mark No.

61297:

The opponent (the 1st Respondent in the instant appeal)

opposed the registration of the propounded mark under

section 99(1)(d)(f), 100(1)(a)(b) and section 142 of the

Code. The opponent contends that the propounded mark

of the applicant (the Appellant in the instant appeal) is

incapable of distinguishing the goods or services of one

enterprise from those of other enterprises. The use of the

propounded mark by the applicant in Sri Lanka is likely

to mislead trade circles or the public as to the source of

the goods or services concerned. The opponent further

contends that the propounded mark infringes third party

rights contrary to the provisions of Chapter 29 relating to

unfair competition.

The argument of learned President’s Counsel for the 1st

Respondent that “Although bundles of documents have been

filed by the petitioner before Court, not a single document has

been filed evidencing any confusion whatsoever caused to even

a single member of the public in Sri Lanka, in respect of the

petitioner’s MTV Music Television mark as a result of the

Respondent using its MTV mark”, is clearly misplaced in light

of the previous position taken up by the 1st Respondent as

stated above.

10

As I will explain below, there is no necessity on the part of the

Appellant to prove that the misleading of the public did take

place or will definitely take place but only that it is likely to

take place.

Admitted facts need not be proved in terms of section 58 of

the Evidence Ordinance.

The doctrine of estoppel and the doctrine of approbate and

reprobate (which is a species of estoppel) forbid a litigant to

approbate and reprobate, affirm and disaffirm, blow hot and

cold, to suit the occasion. A party cannot say at one time

that a transaction is valid and thereby gain some advantage

from it, and then turn round and say it is invalid for the

purpose of securing some other advantage.

E.R.S.R. Coomaraswamy, in The Law of Evidence, Vol I, page

163 states:

Estoppel arises where a party has by his previous

conduct disqualified himself from making particular

assertions in giving evidence. The law has the right to

require consistency in its litigants. An estoppel may be

defined shortly as a rule of law whereby a party is

precluded from denying the existence of some state of

facts, which he has formerly asserted.

In Ranasinghe v. Premadharma [1985] 1 Sri LR 63 at 70,

Sharvananda C.J. observed:

In cases where the doctrine of approbation and

reprobation applies, the person concerned has a choice

of two rights, either of which he is at liberty to adopt, but

not both. Where the doctrine does apply, if the person to

11

whom the choice belongs irrevocably and with full

knowledge accepts one, he cannot afterwards assert the

other; he cannot affirm and disaffirm.

The Issue before the 2nd Respondent

The actual question to be resolved at the inquiry into the

registrability of the 1st Respondent’s MTV mark No. 61331

was not whether the two marks resembled each other in such

a way as to be likely to mislead the public, as this was

admittedly so, but who – whether the Appellant or the 1st

Respondent – was trying to piggyback on the reputation of the

other, which is contrary to honest practices in industrial or

commercial matters constituting the act of unfair competition

as contemplated in section 142 of the Code.

However in the two page order of the 2nd Respondent

delivered more than 1 ½ years after the conclusion of the

inquiry, the only two main points, as I understand, stressed

by the 2nd Respondent were that: (a) the registration of the 1st

Respondent’s propounded mark does not give the 1st

Respondent the right to the exclusive use of the letters M, T

and V; and (b) the device of the 1st Respondent’s logo on the

mark makes the 1st Respondent’s mark distinctive (when

compared with the Appellant’s mark, thereby eliminating any

likelihood of misleading the public as to the source of service,

identity of the supplier etc).

In the given facts and circumstances of this case, this

approach of the 2nd Respondent is in my view a misdirection

in fact and law, which vitiates the order.

In short, when the 1st Respondent complained against the

Appellant’s use of the mark as creating confusion and

12

misleading the public, the 1st Respondent was already fully

aware of the said two points highlighted by the 2nd

Respondent in his order, as, by that time, the marks of both

parties had been gazetted.

It is unfortunate that on appeal the Commercial High Court

affirmed the order of the 2nd Respondent.

Although this is sufficient to set aside the order of the 2nd

Respondent and the Judgment of the Commercial High Court

which affirmed it, I will further deliberate on the matter, as if

there was no such admission, in view of the extensive

submissions made by eminent learned President’s Counsel

for both parties.

Section 100(1)(a) of the Code

In terms of section 100(1)(a) of the Code, no mark which

resembles, in a manner likely to mislead the public, a mark

already (a) validly filed or (b) registered by a third party, shall

be registered.

A mark shall not be registered which resembles, in such

a way as to be likely to mislead the public, a mark

already validly filed or registered by a third party, or

subsequently filed by a person validly claiming priority

in respect of the same goods or services or of other goods

or services in connexion with which use of such mark

may be likely to mislead the public.

Firstly, by the time the 1st Respondent made the application

for registration of its MTV mark, the Appellant had already

filed a valid application to register its MTV Music Television

mark, which, according to the own admissions of the 1st

13

Respondent quoted above, resembles the 1st Respondent’s

mark in such a way as to be likely to mislead the public.

Then obviously the 1st Respondent’s mark could not have

been registered.

Secondly, when the 2nd Respondent made the order dated

30.06.1998 registering the 1st Respondent’s mark, the

Appellant’s mark (which, according to the 1st Respondent

resembles its mark causing confusion) had already been

registered.

According to section 114(2) of the Code “A mark when

registered shall be registered as of the date of receipt by the

Registrar of the application for registration, and such date shall

be deemed for the purposes of this Part to be the date of

registration.” Hence the registration of the Appellant’s mark

takes effect from 15.05.1991, the date the application for

registration was received by the 2nd Respondent. Then the 1st

Respondent’s mark could not have been registered on

30.06.1998 as a mark shall not be registered which

resembles, in such a way as to be likely to mislead the public,

a mark registered by a third party.

It is significant to note that section 100(1)(a) requires a

likelihood of misleading the public. There is no necessity to

prove that the misleading of the public has actually taken

place or will definitely take place but only that it is likely to

take place. The word “likely” denotes establishing a

probability that the public will be misled.

Can the Logo make the Difference?

What is this logo the 2nd Respondent and the learned High

Court Judge have placed such heavy reliance on in deciding

14

the matter in favour of the 1st Respondent? This purported

company logo of the 1st Respondent was already part of the

propounded mark of the 1st Respondent when the 1st

Respondent complained against the Appellant’s MTV mark

No. 61297 as being misleading, confusing, deceptive etc. in

terms of inter alia the source, service and identity of the

supplier. The logo was not something new, which the 2nd

Respondent found for the first time at the inquiry. Hence

there was no reason to give undue weightage to the logo of

the 1st Respondent company in the propounded mark.

In the first place, do the public know that what is found in

the 1st Respondent’s mark in addition to MTV is the logo of

the 1st Respondent? Have a look at the logo in the mark

reproduced earlier. Does the logo play a dominant part in the

mark so as to distinguish the two marks? Where is the

evidence produced before the High Court for the High Court

to state:

The 1st defendant’s logo is well known to the public of Sri

Lanka and has been associated with the 1st defendant

for a long period of time. Any person looking at the 1st

defendant mark will immediately identify the mark with

the 1st defendant because of the 1st defendant’s logo in

the mark. The logo of the 1st defendant has acquired

reputation among the public in connection with its

business and when the logo is formed a part of its trade

mark the general public would know that it identifies

with the services provided by the 1st defendant. The

logo of the 1st defendant displayed conspicuously in its

trade mark which forms part of the mark would clearly

show the goods and services of the 1st defendant are

15

peculiar to him by reason of adopting the 1st defendant

company logo.

In fairness to the 1st Respondent and with respect to the

learned High Court Judge, I must state that this kind of

detailed factual description is not found even in any of the

self-serving affidavits of the 1st Respondent or written

submissions filed on behalf of the 1st Respondent before the

Director of Intellectual Property or the High Court. I repeat,

not a single document was tendered by the 1st Respondent

with the affidavits to substantiate anything including this

logo saga.

A mark which resembles another cannot be made distinctive

by adding a device unless it makes a tangible difference

between the two. No such impact is made by the addition of

the device which the 1st Respondent claims is its logo.

Finding Equilibrium between the two Parties

The learned High Court Judge commences the impugned

Judgment dated 16.09.2003 in this manner:

The plaintiff is the owner of the mark MTV Music

Television which has been registered in the United

States. The plaintiff registered its mark MTV Music

Television in Sri Lanka by application No. 61297 in

respect of class 38 on 15th May 1991. This application

was opposed by the 1st defendant and after an inquiry

held by the 2nd defendant, by his order dated 28th May

1998 rejected the opposition of the 1st defendant and

accordingly dismissed the 1st defendant’s opposition.

16

Learned President’s Counsel for the 1st Respondent quoted

the above paragraph in his written submission to convince

this Court that the 2nd Respondent was mindful of the fact

that he had rejected the opposition of the 1st Respondent to

the Appellant’s mark when he rejected the opposition of the

Appellant to the 1st Respondent’s mark.

It appears that the learned High Court Judge assumed that

because the 2nd Respondent had previously rejected the

opposition of the 1st Respondent to the Appellant’s mark, the

2nd Respondent was also correct to have reciprocally rejected

the opposition of the Appellant to the 1st Respondent’s mark,

little realising that the two situations are incomparable.

In my view, in the facts and circumstances of this case, the

2nd Respondent had no choice but to allow the application of

the Appellant, and thereafter to reject the application of the

1st Respondent. There was no question of balancing the

rights of both parties.

Identical or Resembling

At the outset I must make it clear that the Appellant

presented its case on the basis that the 1st Respondent’s

mark resembles the Appellant’s mark and not that the marks

are identical. Nevertheless, in the course of writing this

Judgment, this matter – whether the two marks are identical

or resemble each other – caused me some anxiety. Hence I

thought I must advert to it although I am not inclined to

make a conclusive view on that matter.

For a mark to be considered identical to another mark, it

need not necessarily be the exact copy of the other. If the

dominant element or the most prominent part or the eye-

17

catching distinctive component of the mark is identical to

that of the other, arguably, the mark is identical

notwithstanding differences are identifiable upon a side by

side comparison.

In De Cordova v. Vick Chemical Co. (1951) 68 RPC 103 at 105-

106, the Privy Council declared:

[A] mark is infringed by another trader if, even without

using the whole of it upon or in connection with his

goods he uses one or more of its essential features. The

identification of an essential feature depends partly on

the court’s own judgment and partly on the burden of the

evidence that is placed before it. A trade mark is

undoubtedly a visual device; but it is well-established

law that the ascertainment of an essential feature is not

to be by ocular test alone. Since words can form part, or

indeed the whole, of a mark, it is impossible to exclude

consideration of the sound or significance of those

words. Thus it has long been accepted that, if a word

forming part of a mark has come in trade to be used to

identify the goods of the owner of the mark, it is an

infringement of the mark itself to use that word as the

mark or part of the mark of another trader, for confusion

is likely to result.

In Associated Rediffusion v. Scottish Television [1957] RPC

409, the Plaintiffs were the registered owners of the trade

mark “TV Times” in respect of printed periodicals and

publications relating to matters connected with television

broadcasts. The Defendants proposed to publish a magazine

listing Scottish programmes under the title “Scottish TV

Times” or “Scottish Television Times”. The Plaintiffs were

18

operating substantially in the English market and the

Defendants proposed to operate substantially in the Scottish

market. In an action for infringement, an interim injunction

was granted against the Defendants.

Salmon J. observed at page 414:

It seems to me that the essential feature of the Plaintiffs’

Trade Mark is the juxtaposition of the words “TV Times”.

No one I think could pretend – and I am sure the

Plaintiffs do not – that they have any right in the name

“Television” or “TV” by itself, still less could they have

any right in the name “Times” by itself. The essential

element, or the essential feature, of this Trade Mark, as

it seems to me, particularly as it is in respect of printed

periodical publications relating to matters connected with

television broadcasts, is the use of the two names

together, “TV Times”.

There is a good deal of evidence before me that the use

of the words “Scottish TV Times” would be likely to

cause confusion in the minds of many people and would

be likely to lead many people to suppose that the

“Scottish TV Times” was the Scottish edition of the

Plaintiffs’ publication…I think that the question I have to

pose myself is not “If two people saw these papers side

by side would they confuse them?”, but, “Is the use of

the name ‘Scottish Television Times’ likely to lead to

confusion, likely to cause people to think that that

publication is or may be the Scottish edition of the

Plaintiffs’ journal?”. I do not believe (that it makes any

difference that the word “Television” is written in the

name rather than “TV”. Whatever the Defendants call it I

19

think it is plain – and I think it must be very plain to the

Defendants – that the vast bulk of the public will refer to

that paper as the “TV Times”.

If a mark is identical to a registered mark phonetically and

visually and is also used in the course of trade for identical

goods and services, a double identity is established.

Kerly’s Law of Trade Marks and Trade Names, 14th Edition,

paragraph 14-051 at page 375, states:

Once the defendant’s sign has been identified it must be

compared with the registered mark to determine if it is

identical. Again, this is a matter to be considered from

the perspective of the average consumer. A sign will be

identical with the registered mark where it reproduces,

without any modification or addition, all the elements

constituting the mark or where, viewed as a whole, it

contains differences so insignificant they may go

unnoticed by the average consumer.

Article 5(1) of Council Directive No. 89/104/EEC to

approximate the laws of the Member States of the European

Union relating to trade marks (Trade Mark Harmonisation

Directive) provides:

The registered trade mark shall confer on the proprietor

exclusive rights therein. The proprietor shall be entitled

to prevent all third parties not having his consent from

using in the course of trade:

(a) any sign which is identical with the trade mark in

relation to goods or services which are identical with

those for which the trade mark is registered;

20

(b) any sign where, because of its identity with, or

similarity to, the trade mark and the identity or similarity

of the goods or services covered by the trade mark and

the sign, there exists a likelihood of confusion on the part

of the public, which includes the likelihood of association

between the sign and the trade mark.

In interpreting the said Article 5(1)(a), a Nine Judge Bench of

the European Court of Justice in the case of LTJ Diffusion SA

v. Sadas Vertbaudet SA [2003] ETMR 83 held:

Article 5(1)(a) of the directive must be interpreted as

meaning that a sign is identical with the trade mark

where it reproduces, without any modification or

addition, all the elements constituting the trade mark or

where, viewed as a whole, it contains differences so

insignificant that they may go unnoticed by an average

consumer.

Is there an arguable case that the 1st Respondent’s mark is

identical to that of the Appellant because the main element in

both marks is MTV? The get-up and the words Musical

Television in small letters by the Appellant and the small

sized logo of the 1st Respondent are subordinate to the said

dominant element.

Perhaps with this in mind – probably not – learned

President’s Counsel for the 1st Respondent, in his ingenuity,

making a comparison between section 10(1) of the English

Trade Marks Act of 1994 and section 117(2)(a) of the Code of

Intellectual Property Act of 1979 in Sri Lanka submits that

although in English Law section 10(1) mandates that a

trademark which is identical to a registered trademark and

21

used for identical goods would result in automatic

infringement without proof of anything further, “In our law

however even if an identical trademark to the registered

trademark is used (any use of the mark) in order to prove

infringement, the owner of the mark has to also prove that such

use is likely to mislead the public.”

Section 10(1) of the English Trade Marks Act of 1994 enacts:

A person infringes a registered trade mark if he uses in

the course of trade a sign which is identical with the

trade mark in relation to goods or services which are

identical with those for which it is registered.

Section 117(2)(a) of the Code of Intellectual Property Act

enacts:

Without the consent of the registered owner of the mark

third parties are precluded from the following acts:

any use of the mark, or of a sign resembling it, in

such a way as to be likely to mislead the public for

goods or services in respect of which the mark is

registered, or for other goods or services in

connexion with which the use of the mark or sign

is likely to mislead the public.

I accept that there is a difference between our Code and the

English Act. Our Code focuses on the resemblance of marks

and not identical marks. If a mark is identical to (not

resembling) a registered trade mark and relates to identical

goods or services, misleading the public is, for all practical

purposes, inevitable. I must add that there may be situations

where the use of well-known marks can be denied even in

22

respect of completely dissimilar goods and services, as it

might confuse the public that the goods and services

originate from the same trade source. The registration of an

identical mark in relation to identical goods and services can

conveniently be challenged under unfair competition. The

Court in such circumstances can, under section 114 of the

Evidence Ordinance, draw a presumption in favour of the

owner of the registered mark allowing the propounder of the

subsequent mark to rebut such a presumption.

Although this was not expressly stated in the Code, it is

expressly stated in section 121(4) of the existing Intellectual

Property Act, No. 36 of 2003:

The court shall presume the likelihood of misleading the

public in instances where a person uses a mark identical

to the registered mark for identical goods or services in

respect of which the mark is registered.

This does not mean that the Court could not have drawn

such a presumption under the Code.

Resemblance of the Marks

When a mark resembles another mark, confusion or the

misleading of the public, particularly as to the source of the

goods or services, is anticipated.

There is no standard formula in assessing the resemblance of

marks. It is not correct to compare a part of the mark with a

part of the other mark. The marks shall be considered as a

whole. In doing so, the Court will not examine the marks in

too much detail. A side by side comparison with microscopic

scrutiny would be out of place. A critical comparison of the

23

marks such as word by word, letter by letter and syllable by

syllable might disclose numerous points of difference.

Nonetheless, in the field of trade, the ordinary customer does

not take decisions after such close scrutiny. What is

important is the overall impression created whilst bearing in

mind that ordinary members of the public have an ordinary

memory and not an extraordinary memory, acuteness or

sharpness. How the two marks appear in the course of trade

literally, visually, phonetically and conceptually are all

relevant factors. Also relevant are the nature of the goods or

services the marks are used for, the nature of the end users

of such goods or services, their modes of purchase, their

methods of use etc. This is not an exhaustive list but only a

guide to be adopted in considering the resemblance of marks.

Factors may vary from case to case. So does the weight to be

attached to them. That is why in Wagamama Ltd v. City

Centre Restaurants PLC [1995] FSR 713 at 732, Laddie J.

remarked “Whether there has been trade mark infringement is

more a matter of feel than science.”

In the Pianotist Co. Ltd. case (1906) 23 RPC 774 at 777,

Parker J. opined:

You must take the two words. You must judge of them

both by their look and by their sound. You must

consider the goods to which they are to be applied. You

must consider the nature and kind of customer who

would be likely to buy these goods. In fact you must

consider all the surrounding circumstances; and you

must further consider what is likely to happen if each of

those trade marks is used in a normal way as a trade

mark for the goods by the respective owners of the

24

marks. If, considering all those circumstances, you come

to the conclusion that there will be confusion - that is to

say, not necessarily that one man will be injured and the

other will gain illicit benefit, but that there will be a

confusion in the minds of the public which will lead to

confusion in the goods - then you may refuse the

registration, or rather you must refuse registration in that

case.

The degree of resemblance necessary to uphold an objection

for registration cannot be tabulated. It is a question of fact.

In Seixo v. Provezende (1865-66) LR 1 Ch App 192 at 196,

Lord Cranworth declared:

What degree of resemblance is necessary from the

nature of things, is a matter incapable of definition à

priori. All that courts of justice can do is to say that no

trader can adopt a trade mark so resembling that of a

rival, as that ordinary purchaser, purchasing with

ordinary caution, are likely to be misled. It would be a

mistake, however, to suppose that the resemblance must

be such as would deceive persons who should see the

two marks placed side by side. The rule so restricted

would be of no practical use.

There is no necessity to copy the registered mark. If the goods

or services bear the same name when used in trade circles,

confusion cannot be ruled out.

Lord Cranworth continued at 196-197:

If a purchaser looking at the article offered to him would

naturally be led, from the mark impressed on it, to

25

suppose it to be the production of the rival manufacturer,

and would purchase it in that belief, the Court considers

the use of such a mark to be fraudulent. But I go further.

I do not consider the actual physical resemblance of the

two marks to be the sole question for consideration. If

the goods of a manufacturer have, from the mark or

device he has used, become known in the market by a

particular name, I think that the adoption by a rival

trader of any mark which will cause his goods to bear

the same name in the market, may be as much a

violation of the rights of that rival as the actual copy of

his device.

Ever since the year 1848, the Plaintiff, Baron Seixo, had

caused his casks to be stamped with his coronet and the

word “Seixo,” and the evidence shews that his wines

had thus acquired in the market the name of “Crown

Seixo Wine”. When, therefore, the Defendants, in the

year 1862, adopted as their device a coronet, with the

words “Seixo de Cima,” meaning “Upper Seixo,” below it,

the consequence was almost inevitable that persons with

only the ordinary knowledge of the usages of the wine

trade from Oporto would suppose that, in purchasing a

cast of wine so marked, they were purchasing what was

generally known in the market as “Crown Seixo Wine”.

Although the marks are compared as a whole, emphasis is

placed on the dominant elements of the marks.

In Athinaiki Oikogeniaki Artopoiia Avee v. OHIM [2006] ECR II-

785, the figurative mark “FERRO” (the word FERRO on a

banner) was held to be similar to the well-known mark

“FERRERO” in respect of same class of goods – the dominant

26

verbal element was phonetically and visually similar. Here

the verbal element FERRO was dominant, prevailing over the

figurative banner which was of purely secondary importance

and without distinctive character. The marks shared the

same letters in the same order, and the differing number of

syllables did not detract from this visual similarity.

A word of caution is required: the Director of Intellectual

Property and the Commercial High Court need not rely too

heavily on decided cases as those cases have been decided on

their own unique facts and circumstances. Those authorities

can only be used as guides.

The 2nd Respondent in his order refers to some decided

authorities in support of his conclusion that the 1st

Respondent’s mark is not similar to the mark of the

Appellant. He says:

Parker J. [in Pianotist Application (1906) 23 RPC 774]

held that the mark “NEOLA” was not similar to

“PIANOLA”; the numerals “99” and words “Double nine”

held not similar to “999” in Ardoth Tobacco v.

Sandorides 42 RPC 30; “POL-RAMA” was held not

similar to “POLAROID” in Pol-Rama TM (1977) RPC 581;

and ACEC TM (1965) RPC 369 where the well-known

word “ACE” was held not similar to the letters “ACEC”.

However the facts and circumstances of these cases are

different from those of the instant case. Let me explain this

in further detail because it may be useful in the future

decision-making process. The 2nd Respondent in the above

paragraph refers to four cases. I will consider them one by

one.

27

In the Pianotist Co. Ltd. case (1906) 23 RPC 774, the Appellant

had registered its trademark “Pianola” in Class 9 for all goods

in that class. Thereafter, the Respondent applied to register

“Neola” for a piano player being a musical instrument

included in Class 9. The objection by the former to the

latter’s mark was overruled. Dismissing the appeal filed

against that order, Parker J. observed at pages 777-778:

[T]he argument before me has taken two lines. In the

first place, it is suggested that the importance of the

Trade Mark “Pianola” lies in its termination, and that

anybody who takes a word with a similar termination

may cause confusion in the mind of the public. The

second way it is put to me is, that the sounds of the

words, although the look of the words may be different,

are likely to be so similar that a person asking for a

“Pianola” might have a “Neola” passed off on him, or vice

versa.

Of course, one knows that the persons who buy these

articles are generally persons of some education, (it is

not quite the same as somebody going and asking for

washing soap in a grocer’s shop) and some

consideration is likely to attend the purchase of any

instrument of the cost of either of these instruments,

whether it be a “Pianola” or a “Neola”. Now, in my

opinion is that having regard to the nature of the

customer, the article in question, and the price at which

it is likely to be sold, and all the surrounding

circumstances, no man of ordinary intelligence is likely to

be deceived. If he wants a “Pianola” he will ask for a

“Pianola”, and I cannot imagine that anybody hearing

28

the word “Pianola” if pronounced in the ordinary way in

the shop, and knowing the instruments as all shopmen

do would be likely to be led to pass off upon that

customer a “Neola” instead of “Pianola”.

This part of the Judgment is important:

There is another point in the matter – though I do not

know that it is very material – that is, that according to

the evidence the “Pianola” is, practically speaking, an

outside attachment, to be attached to the piano. The

“Neola”, on the other hand, is a thing where there is no

outside attachment at all, but the mechanical part of the

machine is inside the case of the piano, so that anybody

who really wanted a “Pianola” and knew what the

“Pianola” was would not be likely to mistake the actual

article, even if the “Neola” was tendered to him, for that

which he desired to buy.

If I may repeat for emphasis: “the “Pianola” is, practically

speaking, an outside attachment, to be attached to the piano.

The “Neola”, on the other hand, is a thing where there is no

outside attachment at all, but the mechanical part of the

machine is inside the case of the piano.”

In the instant application, the 1st Respondent’s mark

predominantly consists of the word MTV, which is literally

and phonetically identical, not similar, to the dominant part

of the Appellant’s registered mark, which both parties use for

the same service, i.e. the transmission or diffusion of

television programmes.

In Ardath Tobacco Co. Ltd. v. W. Sandorides Ld. (1924) 42

RPC 50, the question was the use of the numbers “999” by

29

the Plaintiff and “99” by the Defendant in their respective

marks, after the names “State Express” and “Lucana”

respectively, on the cigarette boxes of the two companies. It

was held not to be similar.

This case can be distinguished from the instant case as one

of the main reasons given to dismiss the Plaintiff’s claim in

Ardath Tobacco Co. Ltd. was that the Plaintiff’s customers

commonly asked for “State Express” cigarettes and not “999”

cigarettes. Thus there was no risk of deception or confusion.

However, this is not the situation with regard to MTV. Both

parties transmit television programmes with the MTV mark.

In the POL-RAMA Trade Mark case [1977] RPC 581, the

application to register “POL-RAMA” as a trade mark for

sunglasses with polarising lenses was opposed by the

proprietors of the mark “POLAROID”. The reasons given to

conclude that there was no danger of confusion from the

phonetic aspect were:

Whatever way the prefix POL- of the applicant’s mark is

pronounced the mark as a whole, even when spoken

quickly or casually, will, I think, have three syllables,

POL-RA-MA, whereas POLAROID spoken similarly will

have two, POLE-ROID. I think that there is a more

definite break between the first and second syllables of

POL-RAMA than with POLAROID and greater emphasis

placed on the RA-second syllable.…from the phonetic

point of view, the -ROID ending of POLAROID is a

component of the mark which makes an impression on

the hearer.…I think that less stress is likely to be placed

on the prefix of POL-RAMA and more weight given to the

suffix -RAMA.

30

With regard to the instant action, the dominant part of the

mark MTV is identical in both marks and there is no

necessity to break it down into syllables.

In the ACEC Trade Mark case [1965] RPC 369, the applicants

applied to register the word “ACEC”. The opponents were the

proprietors of the mark “ACE”.

In concluding that there was no risk of deception or confusion

in the marks themselves, the reasons given were:

The opponents’ mark is a well-known English word; the

applicants’ mark is not a word which has any meaning,

and does not, in fact, give the appearance of being a

word at all. It is possible to give it a pronunciation, such

for example as EH-SEK. It is not, however, an easy

word to pronounce and in my opinion many people

would simply use the letters A C E C.

With regard to the instant case, the dominant feature MTV of

the two marks is identical and people simply recite the letters

M T V separately, whether in reference to the Appellant or the

1st Respondent. Hence confusion is likely when

recommendations of programmes are made by one viewer to

another and also during business activities among trade

circles.

P. Narayanan in Law of Trade Marks and Passing Off, 5th

Edition, paragraph 17.28 at page 235 states:

When the words in question are both invented and, to

most people, meaningless, phonetic and visual similarity

may be conclusive. Where the words have no intrinsic

31

meaning for differentiation, it is a matter of memory to

decide the purpose or association of the words.

Learned President’s Counsel for the 1st Respondent submits

that the 1st Respondent is the owner of an actual television

channel, namely MTV, but the Appellant uses his MTV mark

to present television programmes on some other television

channel, and therefore there cannot be any confusion. The

confusion is not in connection with the ownership of

television channels but the ownership of television

programmes, and therefore the confusion stands. Both

marks appear on English programmes catering to a particular

segment of the Sri Lankan public.

In the instant case it would be a matter of pressing a button

on the remote controller of the television to switch between

the 1st Respondent’s MTV programme and the Appellant’s

MTV programme/channel, with MTV appearing on the

television screen in both instances.

The primary function of a trade mark is to indicate the origin

of goods or services.

When the programmes of both parties are presented with the

dominant element of the mark MTV, the viewer is bound to

get misled or confused as to the origin of the service. The

viewer may believe that the owners of the two trademarks are

related or affiliated or connected in the sense that one is an

extension of the other or that the goods or services originate

from the same source.

32

Phonetic Similarity

The learned High Court Judge correctly states at the outset of

his order that consideration shall be given to the degree of

similarity of the two marks phonetically and visually.

However the learned Judge later changes his mind to say that

phonetic similarity may be ignored if the two marks appear

different when considered as a whole. Learned President’s

Counsel for the Appellant stresses that phonetic confusion

has far reaching effects and cannot be rectified even by an

apparent lack of similarity in appearance.

Aural similarity may be sufficient if it plays the dominant part

in the mark.

In Mystery Drinks GmbH v. OHIM [2004] ETMR 18,

“MYSTERY” and “MIXERY” were held to be similar where the

goods might be ordered orally.

As the Privy Council stated in De Cordova v. Vick Chemical

Co. (1951) 68 RPC 103 at 106:

A trade mark is undoubtedly a visual device; but it is

well-established law that the ascertainment of an

essential feature is not to be by ocular test alone. Since

words can form part, or indeed the whole, of a mark, it is

impossible to exclude consideration of the sound or

significance of those words.

In Arumugam Pillai v. Syed Abbas, AIR 1964 Mad 204, a

trader dealing in the sale of chewing tobacco registered a

trade mark under the name “Thanga Baspam Tobacco”.

Subsequently, a manufacturer of chewing tobacco sought

registration of his trade mark under the name “Thangapavun

33

Tobacco”. The designs of the two trade marks were

significantly different and there was no visual similarity

between the two. But the trader opposed the registration of

the manufacturer’s trade mark on the ground that the

manufacturer’s mark was phonetically similar to and closely

resembled his own trade mark.

The Court held that the registration of the manufacturer’s

trade mark could not be permitted if he used the prefix

“Thangapavun”, as a part of the manufacturer’s mark was

likely to mislead the public. An average person with

imperfect memory was likely to be misled if the two marks

were put up together in the market. Very few people of that

class would pause to consider the distinction between the

words “Thanga Baspam” and “Thangapavun”.

In the local case of Hebtulabhoy & Company Ltd v. Stassen

Exports Ltd [1989] 1 Sri LR 182, the Appellants were owners of

the registered trade mark “Rabea” which they used in Roman

letters on labels in the export of tea to foreign buyers. The

word “Rabea” in Arabic means the season of spring. The

registration prohibited the use of the mark “Rabea” in

translation. The Respondent’s Company used the words

“Chai el Rabea” in Arabic on their labels in the export of tea

to Egypt. The Appellant sued the Respondent for a

permanent injunction and obtained an interim injunction.

The District Judge refused the permanent injunction.

On appeal, the Court of Appeal held:

In deciding whether “Rabea” in Roman characters and

“Chai el Rabea” in Arabic are deceptively similar, the

Court must look at the question from a business and

34

commonsense point of view. There was phonetic

similarity in the two expressions even if there is no

visual resemblance. The resemblance between the two

marks has to be considered with reference to the ear as

well as to the eye. The selection of the name “Chai el

Rabea” by the Respondents lent itself to suspicion of

fraudulent motive to trade upon the Appellant’s

reputation. The Respondent, at the request of his buyer,

affixed the labels in Colombo prior to export and

committed infringement of the Appellant’s rights, as a

registered owner of the trade mark.

The Court made the following pertinent observation at page

191:

In the light of the views expressed by Judicial authority

in both local and foreign cases considered above, one

has to consider the comments in Callmann’s treatise on

Unfair Competition 4th Edition Vol. 3 on motives for the

selection of Trade Marks. “A boundless choice of words,

phrases and symbols is available to one who wishes to

mark to distinguish his product or service from others.

When a defendant selects from this practically unlimited

field a trade mark confusingly similar to the mark

publicly associated with the plaintiff’s product, then it

would appear that the defendant made the particular

choice in order to trade upon the plaintiff’s established

reputation. If there is no reasonable explanation for the

defendant’s choice of such a mark though the field of his

selection is so broad the inference is inevitable that it

was chosen deliberately to deceive.”

35

Learned President’s Counsel for the 1st Respondent has

drawn the attention of the Court to Wagamama Ltd v. City

Centre Restaurants PLC [1995] FSR 713 to say that phonetic

similarity is not important at all times. I accept this position.

L. Bently and B. Sherman in Intellectual Property Law, 3rd

Edition, at page 864 opine:

The relative importance of each sort of similarity will

vary with the circumstances in hand, in particular the

goods and the types of mark. In the case of certain

kinds of goods, such as clothes or furniture, visual

similarity between the marks in issue will be the most

important form of similarity. In contrast, it has been said

that wine marks will be perceived verbally, with

restaurant services (where word-of-mouth

recommendation is highly important), it is likely that

phonetic similarity will be a key. Each case is therefore

to be viewed in its own context.

Wagamama Ltd v. City Centre Restaurants PLC was an action

in respect of a registered trade mark infringement and

passing off. The Plaintiff owned and operated a successful

restaurant under the name “WAGAMAMA”. In late 1993, the

Defendant decided to develop a restaurant chain by the name

“RAJAMAMA”. The Plaintiff objected to the use of that name.

The Court held in favour of the Plaintiff.

Laddie J. at 732-733 held:

Whether there has been trade mark infringement is more

a matter of feel than science. I have borne in mind all of

the arguments advanced by the defendant. However in

this case, it is significant that the marks are being used

36

in relation to comparatively inexpensive restaurant

services. This is an area where imperfect recollection is

likely to play an important role. Furthermore the fact

that the plaintiff’s mark is quite meaningless means that

imperfect recollection is more likely. Although some of

the target market may consider the defendant’s mark to

be made of two parts, each of which has some sort of

meaning, I think a significant section will not bother to

analyse it in that way. To them it will be just another

artificial mark. Although I accept that when seen side by

side the plaintiff's and defendant's marks are easily

distinguishable, this is not determinative of the issue of

infringement.

Learned President’s Counsel for the 1st Respondent contends

that phonetic similarity is not relevant in the instant case

because the relevant segment of the public will perceive the

mark through their eyes on the television screen and not

through their ears.

Even if the two marks are perceived by sight, confusion is

likely as both depict MTV. Besides, the MTV mark is not only

visible on the television screen but also often recited during

the transmission of programmes by the 1st Respondent,

perhaps to leave an indelible impression in the minds of

viewers.

Hence phonetic similarity plays a role in the instant case.

Disclaimer

If the mark otherwise resembles a mark already filed or

registered in such a way as to be likely to mislead the public

or create confusion with the goods or services of a competitor,

37

it cannot be registered on the basis that the registered mark

contains a disclaimer.

The learned High Court Judge in the impugned order, whilst

repeatedly stating that the marks shall be considered as a

whole (about which there is no dispute), fell into error when

he immediately thereafter stated that the disclaimed parts

shall nevertheless be disregarded in that assessment. The

learned Judge states:

[T]he registration will give exclusive rights only to the

mark as a whole. Where there is a disclaimer entered in

the register, the owner of the mark, by the strength of the

registration alone cannot prevent the use by others of the

disclaimed feature by itself. The plaintiff’s mark is

registered subject to the disclaimer that mark shall give

no right to the exclusive use of the words Music

Television and the letters MTV.

In the instant case, the 2nd Respondent permitted the

Appellant’s mark MTV Music Television to be registered

subject to the disclaimer that “Registration of this Mark shall

give no right to the exclusive use of the words Music Television

and the letters MTV separately and apart from the mark.”

Learned President’s Counsel for the 1st Respondent submits

that even if the Appellant’s mark is a registered mark, “the

disclaimer would prevent the petitioner from objection to the

Respondent’s mark as it comprises the letters MTV, which have

been expressly disclaimed.”

A disclaimer is an acknowledgement by the owner of a trade

mark that the owner does not have the exclusive right to use

part of that trade mark. Disclaimers may be voluntarily

38

provided as a means of ensuring the registration of a trade

mark without delay. Otherwise, a disclaimer might be

requested by the authority as a condition for the registration

of a mark if the mark contains an element that is not

distinctive and the inclusion of which could give rise to doubt

as to the scope of protection of the mark.

However when there is a conflict, and if part of the registered

mark is subject to a disclaimer as being non-distinctive, the

overall impression of the conflicting mark inclusive of the part

disclaimed is decisive because the disclaimer does not go out

into the market with the goods or services offered in the

course of trade. The general public is unaware of such

disclaimers. A disclaimer on the Register of the Intellectual

Property Office only affects the trade mark owner’s rights

attached to the registration of the trade mark.

An exception to this, however, may be infringement cases

involving hybrid trade marks where it is not the overall

impression of the entire mark that is decisive but only the

overall impression of the elements that are protectable.

For instance, in the case of Christian Louboutin v. Van Haren

Schoenen (Case C-163/16) [2018] ETMR 31, at the point of

applying for registration, the mark at issue was described as

follows: “The mark consists of the colour red (Pantone

18-1663TP) applied to the sole of a shoe as shown (the contour

of the shoe is not part of the trade mark but is intended to

show the positioning of the mark)”. The European Court of

Justice in the Judgment delivered on 12.06.2018 held that

the trade mark must be interpreted as meaning that a sign

consisting of a colour applied to the sole of a high-heeled shoe

does not include the shape of the shoe.

39

In the Ford-Werke AG’s case (1955) 72 RPC 191, the Appellant

applied for registration of a mark of which the essential

features were the letters “F” and “K” in interlaced ovals. The

Appellant offered to include in the application a disclaimer on

the right to the exclusive use of the letters “F” and “K” and

claimed registration on the appearance of the mark as a

whole. The application was refused. Affirming the order on

appeal, Lloyd-Jacob J. stated at 195:

Nor would the position be any different were the

applicants’ offer to enter a disclaimer to the exclusive

right to the use of these letters to be accepted. Such a

disclaimer, while affecting the scope of the monopoly

conferred by the registration, could not affect the

significance which the mark conveyed to others when

used in the course of trade. If it be right to conclude that

it is the letters F and K which constitute the feature of

the mark which would strike the eye and fix in the

recollection, this cannot be affected by what is or is not

entered upon the Register housed at the Patent Office.

Attention must, therefore, be focused upon the content of

the mark, and not upon the content of the protection

sought for the mark.

In the TeleCheck Trade Mark case [1986] RPC 77 at 81, it was

held:

A disclaimer on the Register does not alter

the trade mark as it only deals with the rights of the

proprietor when registered. In the circumstances of this

case, where the most prominent part of the trade mark is

the word “TeleCheck”, the significance of the trade mark

40

to the public and its capacity to distinguish remain the

same whether a disclaimer is on the Register or not.

In the Granada case [1979] RPC 303 at 308, it was held:

I do not think, therefore, that a disclaimer per se affects

the question of whether or not confusion of the public is

likely when the question is for determination under

section 12(1), a context other than one that is concerned

solely with the exclusive rights of a proprietor. As Lloyd

Jacob J. put it in Ford Werke’s Application (1955) 72

RPC 191 at 195 lines 30 to 38, a disclaimer does not

affect the significance which a mark conveys to others

when used in the course of trade.

Disclaimers do not go into the market place, and the

public generally has no notice of them. In my opinion

matter which is disclaimed is not necessarily

disregarded when questions of possible confusion or

deception of the public, as distinct from the extent of a

proprietor's exclusive rights, are to be determined.

P. Narayanan in Law of Trade Marks and Passing Off, 5th

Edition, paragraph 9.53A at page 163 states:

The fact that the opponent has disclaimed any feature of

the mark is not a factor to be considered in comparing

the marks.

L. Bently and B. Sherman in Intellectual Property Law by, 3rd

Edition, at page 793 take a similar view:

The courts have recognized that disclaimers are of

limited value because they only appear on the Register

41

and do not follow goods into the market. Consequently,

because consumers and competitors would normally be

unaware that aspects of a mark had been disclaimed,

often a disclaimer will not save a mark from objection.

Therefore the conclusion of the 2nd Respondent and the

learned High Court Judge that the objection of the Appellant

is not entitled to succeed because the Appellant’s mark was

registered subject to the disclaimer that the Appellant has no

right inter alia to the exclusive use of the letters MTV is

erroneous.

Infringement

In his notice of opposition, the Appellant submitted to the 2nd

Respondent that the mark of the 1st Respondent shall not be

admitted for registration as “The registration of the

propounded mark therefore will contravene the provisions of

Unfair Competition under section 142, 100(1)(a) and 99(2) of

the Code.”

At this point I must state that although learned President’s

Counsel for the Appellant relies on section 99(2) of the Code

to convince the Court that the application of the 1st

Respondent shall be rejected as the mark has been in use by

the Appellant in other countries for a long period of time, this

section in my view is not meant for that purpose but for an

applicant like the Appellant to convince the 2nd Respondent

that his mark shall not be refused under section 99(1).

Section 99(1) of the Code sets out the objective grounds from

(a) to (l) upon which a mark can be refused, and then section

99(2) enacts:

42

The Registrar shall in applying the provisions of

paragraphs (b), (c), (d), (f), (g) and (h) of subsection (1),

have regard to all the factual circumstances and, in

particular, the length of time the mark has been in use in

Sri Lanka or in other countries and the fact that the mark

is held to be distinctive in other countries or in trade

circles.

I have already dealt with the applicability of section 100(1)(a)

of the Code, which states that a mark that resembles a mark

already filed or registered in such a way as to be likely to

mislead the public shall not be registered. In the facts and

circumstances of this case, the 2nd Respondent has violated

this section.

I accept the submission of learned President’s Counsel for the

1st Respondent that healthy competition is necessary and

shall not be impeded.

A market economy allows for and encourages competition

between industrial and commercial organisations. Fair or

healthy competition between enterprises is necessary

particularly to ensure consumer welfare. Without such

competition, one business will monopolise an industry

leading to inferior products and exorbitant prices. Healthy

competition between businesses encourages good customer

service, quality products, and fair pricing.

“Unfair competition” encompasses a wide ambit. It protects

not only the honest businessman but also the innocent

consumer.

43

Section 142(1) of the Code stated that “Any act of competition

contrary to honest practices in industrial or commercial matters

shall constitute an act of unfair competition.”

Section 142(2), which did not encompass an exhaustive list,

provided certain instances which would constitute unfair

competition.

142(2) Acts of unfair competition shall include the

following:

(a) all ads of such a nature as to create confusion by

any means whatsoever with the establishment, the

goods, services or the industrial or commercial

activities of a competitor;

(b) a false allegation in the course of trade of such a

nature as to discredit the establishment, the goods,

services or the industrial or commercial activities of a

competition;

(c) any indication of source or appellation of origin the

use of which in the course of trade is liable to mislead

the public as to the nature, manufacturing process,

characteristics, suitability for their purpose or the

quantity of goods;

(d) making direct or indirect use of a false or deceptive

indication of the source of goods or services or of the

identity of their producer, manufacturer or supplier;

(e) making direct or indirect use of a false or deceptive

appellation of origin or imitating an appellation of origin

even if the true origin of the product is indicated, or

44

using the appellation in translated form or

accompanied by terms such as “kind”, “type”, “mark”,

“imitation” or the like.

It is worth noting that section 100(1)(e) of the Code referred to

section 142.

100(1)(e) A mark shall not be registered which infringes

other third party rights or is contrary to the provisions of

Chapter XXIX relating to the prevention of unfair

competition.

Although unfair competition is encapsulated in section 100,

which sets out the grounds for the refusal of registration of

marks by reason of third party rights, unfair competition is

sometimes used to refer to the broad genus of all marketplace

wrongs, of which trademark infringement is one species.

In Sumeet Research and Holdings Ltd. v. Elite Radio and

Engineering Co. Ltd. [1997] 2 Sri LR 393, Mark Fernando J.

referring to section 142(1) of the Code which provides that

“Any act of competition contrary to honest practices in

industrial or commercial matters shall constitute an act of

unfair competition”, observed at pages 401-402:

Apart from that, what is meant by “contrary to honest

practices in industrial or commercial matters”? If this

includes only conduct contrary to obligations imposed by

statute law (criminal or civil) or common law (especially

the law of delict), section 142 would seem to be

superfluous – because anyway such conduct is

prohibited by law. It seems arguable, therefore, that

section 142 mandates higher standards of conduct –

some norms of business ethics – and does not merely

45

restate existing legal obligations. If so, what those

standards of conduct are would be a matter for

determination by the trial Judge. It is also arguable that

the prohibition against unfair competition in section

142(2) must be interpreted not only in the context of

protecting intellectual property rights, but also of

safeguarding the rights and interests of consumers – by

enabling consumers to know what exactly they are

getting, without, for instance, being deceived, confused

or misled as to the manufacturer, the source, the origin,

and the quality of goods or services.

Section 142(2)(a) and 142(2)(c) speak of “creating confusion”

and “misleading the public” respectively. In the facts and

circumstances of this case, the acts of the 1st Respondent fall

within those two sections. The conduct of the 1st Respondent

has contravened honest practices in industrial or commercial

matters so as to constitute an act of unfair competition.

Conclusion

When the 2nd Respondent decided to register the MTV mark

No. 61331 in the name of the 1st Respondent on 30.06.1998,

the Appellant had been the rightful owner of the MTV Music

Television mark No. 61297 from 15.05.1991 by order of the

2nd Respondent dated 28.05.1998.

It is relevant to note that the 1st Respondent filed an appeal in

the Commercial High Court against the order dated

28.05.1998, 2 years 3 months and 18 days after that order,

i.e. on 15.09.2000.

The dominant element of the two marks – MTV – is literally,

phonetically and visually similar such as to cause confusion

46

in the mind of the public and trade circles inter alia as to the

source of the services offered under each mark in that it

could create the erroneous impression that the 1st

Respondent’s services are the services of the Appellant or vice

versa or that there is a connection between the 1st

Respondent and the Appellant in terms of services whereas

they are in fact competitors.

It was erroneous on the part of the 2nd Respondent to have

registered the 1st Respondent’s MTV mark No. 61331. The

Judgment of the High Court which affirmed it is also wrong.

In the prayer to the petition of appeal, the Appellant prays

that the Judgment of the High Court dated 16.09.2003 be set

aside and the reliefs prayed for in the plaint dated 30.07.1998

filed in the Commercial High Court be granted.

In the plaint, the main relief sought from the High Court is to

set aside the order of the 2nd Respondent dated 30.06.1998

allowing the registration of the 1st Respondent’s mark.

I grant all the said reliefs and allow the appeal.

The Appellant is entitled to costs in this Court and the Court

below.

Judge of the Supreme Court

P. Padman Surasena, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

E.A.G.R. Amarasekara, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court