==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

SC Appeal No: 156/2016 SPL LA Application No: 198/13 Provincial High Court Galle Case No: 881/2011 Magistrate’s Court Galle Case No: 75556

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal under and in terms of Section 09 of the High Courts of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No.19 of 1990.

Officer in Charge, Police Station, Ahangama.

Complainant Vs.

1. Merenchige Jinadasa,

2. Merenchige Saman

Jayashantha, 3. Merenchige Sandya

Dilrukshi, 4. Merenchige Jasalin

Nona, all of Yakdehiwatta, Sangarathana Mawatha, Madyama, Ahangama. 5. Hewabuhage Thanuja

Priyanthi,

2

Kajugahawatta, Ratgama Gedera, Kataluwa, Ahangama. 6. Merenchige Saman

Krishantha, Yakdehiwatta, Sangarathana, Mawatha, Madyama, Ahangama. 7. Ambalangoda Gamage

Samanthika Priyangika, Mahawatta, Mahavihara Road, Ahangama. 8. Ambalangoda Subath,

Hemantha, Mahawatta, Mahavihara Road, Ahangama. 9. Sudurukku Hannadige

Krishantha, Kumara, Mahavihara Road, Madyama, Ahangama. 10. Ambalangodage Prasad

Dipal, Mahawatta, Mahavihara Road,

3

Ahangama. 11. Kodagoda Hettige

Dimuthu Pushpakumara, Pahalawatta, Mahavihara Road, Ahangama. 12. Kahadarathmalpage

Danushka Udaya Kumara, Aranwala Handiya Kanda, Ahangama 13. Saunda Hannadige

Indika Prabath Kumara, Visudarama Road, Aranwala, Ahangama. 14. Nishantha Tenabadu,

Dharmarama Road, Ahangama.

15. Ambalangodage Nishan

Jayantha, Mahawatta, Mahavihara Road, Ahangama. 16. Merenchige Saman

Aruna Shantha,

4

Yakdehiwatta, Sangarathana Mawata, Madyama, Ahangama. 17. Merenchige Priyangani

Dilrukshi, Yakdehiwatta, Sangarathana Mawata, Madyama, Ahangama. 18. Yakdehige Suranga

Jayalath, Dharmarama Road, ‘Ruwanthika Niwasa’, Madyama, Ahangama. 19. Yakdehige Suresh

Jayalath, Dharmarama Road, ‘Ruwanthika Nisa’, Madyama, Ahangama. Accused And 1. Merenchige Jinadasa,

(1st Accused - Appellant) 2. Merenchige Saman

Jayasantha,

5

(2nd Accused - Appellant) 3. Merenchige Sandya

Dilrukshi, (3rd Accused - Appellant)

all of Yakdehiwatta, Sangarathana Mawatha, Madyama, Ahangama.

4. Hewabuhage Thanuja

Priyanthi, Kajugahawatta, Ratgama Gedera, Kataluwa, Ahangama. (5th Accused- Appellant)

5. Merenchige Saman

Krishantha, Yakdehiwatta, Sangarathana, Mawatha, Madyama, Ahangama. (6th Accused - Appellant)

6. Ambalangoda Subath,

Hemantha, Mahawatta, Mahavihara Road, Ahangama.

6

(8th Accused - Appellant)

7. Sudurukku Hannadige

Krishantha, Kumara, Mahavihara Road, Madyama, Ahangama. (9th Accused -

Appellant)

8. Kahadarathmalpage

Danushka Udaya Kumara, Aranwala Handiya Kanda, Ahangama (12th Accused - Appellant)

9. Saunda Hannadige

Indika Prabath Kumara, Visudarama Road, Aranwala, Ahangama. (13th Accused - Appellant)

10. Nishantha Tenabadu,

Dharmarama Road, Ahangama. (14th Accused - Appellant)

7

Vs.

1. Officer in Charge,

Police station, Ahangama. Complainant - Respondent 2. Honourable Attorney

General, Attorney General’s Department, Colombo - 12. Respondent.

And Now Between

1. Ambalangodage Subath,

Hemantha, Mahawatta, Mahavihara Road, Ahangama. (8th Accused - Appellant - Petitioner)

2. Sudurukku Hannadige

Krishantha, Kumara, Mahavihara Road, Madyama, Ahangama. (9th Accused - Appellant - Appellant)

8

3. Kahadarathmalpage

Danushka Udaya Kumara, Aranwala Handiya Kanda, Ahangama (12th Accused - Appellant - Petitioner)

4. Saunda Hannadige

Indika Prabath Kumara, Visudarama Road, Aranwala, Ahangama. (13th Accused Appellant - Petitioner) Vs.

1. Officer in Charge,

Police Station, Ahangama. (Complainant - Respondent - Respondent) 2. Honourable Attorney

General, Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12 Respondent - Respondent

9

BEFORE: E.A.G.R. AMARASEKARA, J. K. KUMUDINI WICKREMASINGHE, J. A.L. SHIRAN GOONERATNE, J. COUNSEL: Saliya Pieris, PC with Susil Wangiapura for the Accused- Appellant- Appellant. Ms. Induni Punchihewa SC for the Respondent-Respondent. WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS: Written Submissions by the Respondent- Respondent on 05.05.2021 Written Submissions by the 9th Accused- Appellant-Petitioner on 21.09.2021 ARGUED ON: 04.11.2022 DECIDED ON: 30.10.2024 K. KUMUDINI WICKREMASINGHE, J. The application for special leave to appeal was preferred by the 8th, 9th, 12th, and

13th Accused Appellant Petitioners against the judgment of the Provincial High

Court of the Southern Province Holden at Galle dated 25.06.2013 affirming the

convictions and the sentences imposed by the Learned Magistrate of Galle in case

bearing No. MC 75556 and dismissing their Appeal. Aggrieved by which the 8th,

9th, 12th, and 13th Accused Appellant Petitioners appealed to the Supreme Court.

Accordingly this court by order dated 10.08.2016 granted special leave to appeal on

the following question of law:

“Whether the sentence imposed on the 9th Accused Appellant Appellant is

excessive or not.”

10

The Court refused to grant special leave to appeal for the 08th, 12th and 13th

Accused- Appellant- Petitioners.

The Petitioners along with 15 others were charged in the Magistrate’s Court of Galle

on the following charges:

1. On or about the 09th of December 2001, the accused being members of an

unlawful assembly to cause mischief to the house and property of one Balage

Ananda Rathnasiri residing at Madyama, Sangarathana Mawatha, Ahangama,

violated under section 139 of the Penal Code punishable under section 140 of

the Penal Code.

2. That at the same time, place and in the course of the same transaction the

accused with the common intention of causing mischief to the house and

property of one Balage Ananda Rathnasiri, caused damage amounting to Rs.

490,250/- thus committing an offence punishable under section 419 read with

32 of the Penal Code.

3. That at the same time, place and in the course of the same transaction the

accused with the common object of causing mischief to the house and property

of one Balage Ananda Rathnasiri, caused damage amounting to Rs. 490,250/-

thus committing an offence punishable under section 419 read with section

146 of the Penal Code.

4. That at the same time, place and in the course of the same transaction the

accused trespassed into the house and property of one Balage Ananda

Rathnasiri with the common intention of causing mischief to the said property

thus committing an offence punishable under section 434 read with section 32

of the Penal Code.

5. That at the same time, place and in the course of the same transaction the

accused trespassed into the house and property of one Balage Ananda

11

Rathnasiri with the common object of causing mischief to the said property

thus committing an offence punishable under section 434 read with section

146 of the Penal Code.

The Petitioners state that they pleaded not guilty to the charges leveled against them

and the trial commenced on 24.08.2004. The Petitioners state that six witnesses gave

evidence on behalf of the prosecution and nine witnesses (the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th,

7th, 8th, 9th and 10th Accused) gave evidence on behalf of the defense. The

Petitioners state that on 25th October 2011 the Learned Magistrate of Galle delivered

his judgment and convicted the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 5th, 6th, 8th, 9th, 12th, 13th and 14th

Accused on the 02nd and 04th counts and acquitted them on the 01st, 03rd and 05th

counts.

The Learned Magistrate of Galle sentenced the Petitioners on 29.11.2011 as follows:

A. The 08th and 13th Accused- Appellant- Petitioners

The Second Count

01 year rigorous imprisonment suspended for 10 years and a Rs. 1500/- fine

and in default 2 months simple imprisonment.

Rs. 25,000/- compensation to the 1st witness (virtual complainant) by each

Accused and in default 6 months simple imprisonment.

The Fourth Charge

Rs. 1000/- fine and in default 2 months simple imprisonment.

B. The 9th Accused- Appellant- Appellant

The Second Count

12

01 year Rigorous imprisonment and a Rs. 1500/- fine and in default 2 months

simple imprisonment.

Rs. 25,000/- compensation for the 1st witness (the virtual complainant) and in

default 6 months simple imprisonment.

The Fourth Count

Rs. 1000/- fine and in default 2 months simple imprisonment.

C. The 12th Accused- Appellant- Petitioner

The Second Count

01 year rigorous imprisonment suspended for 5 years.

Rs. 25,000/- compensation for the 1st witness (the virtual complainant).

The 9th Accused Appellant Appellant was imposed 01 year rigorous imprisonment

by the Learned Magistrate of Galle and the same was not suspended since he has a

previous conviction (one year rigorous imprisonment) imposed by the Magistrate

Court of Galle for the offence of robbery in case bearing No. 31112. An appeal has

been preferred against the said conviction and the sentence and the said appeal is

pending in the Provincial High Court of Galle.

Aggrieved by the judgement and sentence of the Learned Magistrate of Galle in case

bearing No. MC 75556 the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 5th, 6th, 8th, 9th, 12th, 13th and 14th

Accused preferred an appeal to the Provincial High Court of the Southern Province

Holden at Galle. The Learned High Court Judge by his judgement dated 25.06.2013

dismissed the appeal of the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 5th, 6th, 8th, 9th, 12th, 13th and 14th

Accused Appellants and affirmed the judgement of the Learned Magistrate of Galle

in case bearing No. MC 75556.

13

Being aggrieved by the decision of the Provincial High Court of the Southern

Province Holden at Galle, the 8th, 9th, 12th, and 13th Accused Appellant Petitioners

by Petition dated 01.08.2013 sought Special Leave to Appeal from this Court.

Accordingly, this Court granted Special Leave to Appeal from the aforementioned

judgement of the Provincial High Court of the Southern Province Holden at Galle.

I will now proceed to answer the question of law on which leave has been granted,

namely that “Whether the sentence imposed on the 9th Accused Appellant Appellant

is excessive or not.”

In the written submissions of the 9th Accused Appellant Appellant it is submitted

that the sentence imposed in the case bearing No. 31112 in the Magistrate Court of

Galle cannot be considered as the Accused's previous character since the offence

related to the said charges had been committed after the offence for which he was

convicted and sentenced in the present case. It is submitted that the case bearing No.

31112 pertained to an offence committed on 28.05.2004 which was subsequent to

the date of the present case which was on 09.12.2001.

It is further submitted that when the sentence was imposed on the 9th Accused

Appellant Appellant in the case bearing No.75556 of the Magistrate Court of Galle

the conviction in the case bearing No. 31112 had not been conclusively determined

since the appeal is pending before the High Court of Southern Province holden at

Galle under case bearing No. 848/11.

In the written submissions of the Respondent- Respondent, the learned State Counsel

submitted that the Appellate Courts of Sri Lanka have repeatedly considered the

matters that ought to be considered when imposing a sentence on the Accused such

as the gravity of the offence committed. The State Counsel submitted that in this

case the damage to property resulting from a fire, is violence over and above the

14

force necessary to commit the offence of mischief. Further, the facts and

circumstances of the instant matter clearly illustrate that the weapons have been used

to frighten the residents of the house and the mischief had been carefully planned.

Owing to which, it is the contention of the Respondent- Respondent that the Learned

Magistrate of Galle has acted in accordance with the law as set out in the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act, as amended in imposing a custodial sentence on the

Accused Appellant Appellant.

In order to answer the question of law on which leave has been granted, I will first

evaluate the law regarding suspended sentences in Sri Lanka. This is set out in

section 303 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 as amended:

“(1) Subject to the provisions of this section, on sentencing an offender to a term of

imprisonment, a court may make an order suspending the whole or part of the

sentence if it is satisfied, for reasons to be stated in writing, that it is appropriate to

do so in the circumstances, having regard to-

(a) the maximum penalty prescribed for the offence in respect of which the sentence

is imposed;

(b) the nature and gravity of the offence:

(c) the offender's culpability and degree of responsibility for the offence:

(d) the offender's previous character;

(e) any injury, loss or damage resulting directly from the commission of the offence:

(f) the presence of any aggravating or mitigating factor concerning the offender;

(g) the need to punish the offender to an extent, and in a manner, which is just in all

of the circumstances;

15

(h) the need to deter the offender or other persons from committing offences of the

same or of a similar character;

(i) the need to manifest the denunciation by the court of

the type of conduct in which the offender was engaged in;

(j) the need to protect the victim or the community from the, offender;

(k) the fact that the person accused of the offence pleaded guilty to the offence and

such person is sincerely and truly repentant; or

(l) a combination of two or more of the above.

(2) A court shall not make an order suspending a sentence of imprisonment if-

(a) a mandatory minimum sentence of imprisonment has been prescribed by law for

the offence in respect of which the sentence is imposed; or

(b) the offender is serving, or is yet to serve, a term of imprisonment that has not

been suspended; or

(c) the offence was committed when the offender was subject to a probation order

or a conditional release or discharge; or

(d) the term of imprisonment the aggregate terms

Where the offender is imposed, or of imprisonment

Where the offender is convicted for more than one offence in the same proceedings

exceeds two years.

(3) The period for which the whole or a part of a sentence may be suspended

(hereinafter referred to as the "operational period") shall be-

16

(a) determined; and

(b) specified, by the court, when making the order suspending the whole or part of

the sentence:

Provided that such period shall not be less than five years from the date of The order

suspending the whole or Part of the sentence.”

When considering the established principles of law regarding the granting of

suspended sentences, the standard practice is that when the Accused has a previous

conviction he or she is not entitled to a suspended sentence unless there are

extenuating circumstances.

There are sentencing guidelines recommended, which aid judges in their decision

making. In international law there are several common guiding principles to

sentencing, which are common to criminal justice policies in many jurisdictions

including Sri Lanka which include principles such as Proportionality, Parsimony,

Totality and Consistency.

The Administration of Justice Law No. 44 of 1973, which brought about a

sentencing policy, appears to have significantly altered the focus from punitive or

deterrent to reformative and rehabilitative sentences to be imposed in the future,

allowing the prisoner to reintegrate into society after having served his time.

In the case of Attorney - General v. H .N. De Silva 57 NLR 121 at 123 in that

“In assessing the punishment that should be passed on an offender the judge should

consider the matter of sentence both from the point of view of the public and the

offender. Judges are too often prone to look at the question only from the angle of

the offender. A judge in determining the proper sentence should first consider the

17

gravity of the offence, as it appears from the nature of the act itself and should have

regard to the punishment provided in the penal code or other statute under which

the offender is charged. He should also regard the effect of the punishment as a

deterrent and consider to what extent it will be effective. The incidence of crimes

of the nature of which the offender has been found to be guilty and the difficulty

of detection are also matters which should receive due consideration.”

In the case of Kumara Vs. Attorney General [2003] (1) Sri LR 139 where the

court held;

“i. A suspended sentence is a means of re-educating and rehabilitating the offender,

rather than alienating or isolating the offender

ii. No offender should be confined to in prison unless there is no alternative available

for the protection of the community and to reform the individual

iii. Imprisonment has an isolating and alienating effect on the family of the

imprisoned offender because of the hardships they are faced with during the

imprisonment of one of the family members

iv. Suspended sentence with its connotations of punishment and pardon is supposed

to have integrative powers. The offender is shown that he has violated the tenets of

society and provoked its wrath, but is immediately forgiven and permitted to

continue to live in society with the hope that he would not indulge in that form of

behavior again

v. The accused does not have previous convictions; he surrenders to the police; he

pleaded guilty on the first date of trial; he offered compensation to the aggrieved

party;

these amply demonstrate the mitigatory factors.”

18

In the case of The Attorney General Vs. Mendis [1995] 1 Sri LR 138 it was held

“once an accused is found guilty on his own plea or after trial the judge is deciding

on sentence, should consider the point of view of the accused on the one hand and

the interest of society on the other. The nature of the offence committed, the

machinations and manipulations resorted to by the accused to commit the offence,

the effect of committing such a crime in so far as the institution or organization in

respect of which it has been committed, is concerned, the person who are affected

by such crime, the ingenuity with 10 which it has been committed and the

involvement of others in committing the crime are matters which the judge should

consider.”

Justice Gunasekera in the case of Attorney General V. Jinak Sri Uluwaduge and

Another [1995] (1) Sri LR 157 held that, “In determining the proper sentence the

Judge should consider the gravity of the offence as it appears from the nature of the

act itself and should have regard to the punishment provided in the Penal Code or

other statute under which the offender is charged. He should also regard the effect

of the punishment as a deterrent and consider to what extent it will be effective.

Incidence of crimes of the nature of which the offender has been found guilty and

the difficulty of detection are also matters which should receive due consideration.

The Judge should also take into account the nature of the loss to the victim and the

profit that may accrue to the culprit in the event of non- detection. Another matter

to be taken into account is that the offences were planned crimes for wholesale profit.

The Judge must consider the interests of the accused on the one hand and the

interests of society on the other; also necessarily the nature of the offence committed,

the machinations and manipulations resorted to by the accused a commit the offence,

the effect of committing such a crime insofar as the institution or organization in

respect of which it has been committed, the persons who are affected by such crime,

19

the ingenuity with which it has been committed and the involvement of others in

committing the crime”.

In the case of Asan Mohamad Rizwan v Hon. Attorney General , C.A. Revision

No.CA [PHC] [APN 141/2013] dated 25.03.2015; His Lordship Justice Chithrasiri

categorised the principles to be considered while sentencing. Those are as follows;

“(a) The maximum and the minimum (if any) penalty prescribed for the offence;

(b) The nature and gravity/seriousness of the particular offence.

(c) The offender's culpability and degree of his/her responsibility for the offence

(d) mental state of the accused at the time the offence was committed;

(e) Evidence as to pre-arrangement for the commission of the offence;

(f) The impact of the offence on any victim and the injury, loss or damage caused as

a result of the offence committed;

(g) Whether the offender pleaded guilty to the offence and if so, the stage in the

proceedings at which the offender did so or the stage at which it was indicated;

(h) The conduct of the offender during the trial as an indication of remorse or the

lack of remorse;

(i) Any action taken by the offender to make restitution of the injury, loss or damage

arising from the offence, including his or her willingness to comply with any order

for restitution that a court may consider.

(j) The offender's previous character, good or bad;

(k) Imprisonment should be used when no other sentence IS adequate;

(1) Proportionality between the crime and the sentence;

(m) Possibility of reforming the offender;

(n) To ensure consistency in deciding sentences;

(0) Presence of any aggravating or mitigating factors concerning the offender or

any other circumstance relevant to the commission of the offence;”

20

The main contention of the Appellant in this case is that the Learned Magistrate is

wrong in law when he imposed a custodial sentence on the Appellant whilst the

similarly circumstanced other Accused were imposed suspended sentences. The

Appellant contends that the sentence in the case bearing No. 31112 in the Magistrate

Court of Galle cannot be considered as the offender's previous character since the

offence related to the said charge was committed after the offence for which he was

convicted in the present case. The date of commission of offence relevant to this trial

was on 09.12.2001 for which he was convicted on 25.10.2011 and sentenced

29.10.2011. The offence committed in the case 31112 was committed on 28.05.2004

however, the Appellant was convicted on 30.11.2010 and sentenced on 14.12.2010

both of which are before the conviction and sentence which is the subject of this

appeal. Therefore, even though the offence was committed after the date of

conviction is before the date of conviction subject to this appeal and in the eyes of

the law viewed as a previous conviction. The fact that the offence was committed

after is a mere technicality. Therefore at this juncture, such conviction cannot be

considered as a previous conviction.

When considering the culpability of other Accused's Appellants Appellants, all of

them have acted with common intention to commit the mischief. The Learned

magistrate had not considered any other ground or gravity of the offence and nature

of offence of the crime, damage caused and culpability of the Accuseds. The

previous conviction of the Appellant is pending in Appeal.

21

The Learned magistrate has only considered the previous conviction of the Accused

Appellant Appellant to impose a jail term and not any other reason. Therefore when

leaving a side the previous conviction, there is no other ground stated to differentiate

the culpability of the 9th Accused Appellant Appellant from the other Accused

person, to impose a custodial sentence. Since all the accused have acted with the

common intention and the culpability of each accused are the same, the sentencing

also should have been the same.

Therefore, the question of law mentioned above, in respect of which this court has

granted leave, has to be answered in favour of the 9th Accused Appellant Appellant.

For the foregoing reasons, I affirm the order with regard to the conviction of the

High Court of the Southern Province holden in Galle and the Magistrate Court of

Galle, but 1 year Rigorous Imprisonment imposed on the 9th Accused Appellant

Appellant is suspended for 10 years. Subject to the above mentioned variation, the

appeal is hereby dismissed without cost.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

E.A.G.R. AMARASEKARA, J. I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

A.L. SHIRAN GOONERATNE, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT