Page 1 of 32

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for Special Leave to Appeal in terms of Article 128 of the Constitution against the judgment of the Court of Appeal dated 31st October 2023 in case bearing No. CA/Writ/434/2022 filed in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution for a mandate in the nature of a Writ of Quo Warranto.

Hitihamilage Don Oshala Lakmal Anil Herath, No. 22, Wata Mawatha, Piliyandala.

Petitioner Vs. S.C. Appeal No. 11/2024 S.C. (S.P.L.) L.A. No. 306/2023 C.A. (Writ) Application No. 434/2022

1. Hon. Diana Gamage, State Minister of Tourism, No. 537/21, Country Glade Bungalow, Amaragoda Road, Hokandara North. 2. Hon. Tiran Alles, Minister of Public Security, 15th Floor, Suhurupaya, Battaramulla. 3. I. S. H. J. Ilukpitiya, Controller General of Immigration and Emigration, Suhurupaya, Battaramulla. 4. Ranjith Madduma Bandara, General Secretary, Samagi Jana Balawegaya, 72, Dr. N. M. Perera Mawatha, Colombo 08.

Page 2 of 32

5. Dhammika Dassanayake, Secretary General of Parliament, Parliament of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, Sri Jayawardenapura Kotte. 6. N. G. Punchihewa, Former Chairman, Elections Commission of Sri Lanka, Election Secretariat, P.O. Box 02, Sarana Mawatha, Rajagiriya. 6A. R. M. A. L. Rathnayake,

Chairman, Elections Commission of Sri Lanka, Election Secretariat, P.O. Box 02, Sarana Mawatha, Rajagiriya. 7. S. B. Diwarathne, Former Member, Elections Commission of Sri Lanka, Election Secretariat, P.O. Box 02, Sarana Mawatha, Rajagiriya. 7A. M. A. P. C. Perera,

Member, Elections Commission of Sri Lanka, Election Secretariat, P.O. Box 02, Sarana Mawatha, Rajagiriya. 8. M. M. Mohammed, Former Member, Elections Commission of Sri Lanka, Election Secretariat, P.O. Box 02, Sarana Mawatha, Rajagiriya.

Page 3 of 32

8A. Ameer Faaiz,

Member, Elections Commission of Sri Lanka, Election Secretariat, P.O. Box 02, Sarana Mawatha, Rajagiriya. 9. K. P. P. Pathirana, Former Member, Elections Commission of Sri Lanka, Election Secretariat, P.O. Box 02, Sarana Mawatha, Rajagiriya. 10. P. S. M. Charles,

Elections Commission of Sri Lanka, Election Secretariat, P.O. Box 02, Sarana Mawatha, Rajagiriya. 11. Mahinda Deshapriya,

Former Chairman, Elections Commission of Sri Lanka, Election Secretariat, P.O. Box 02, Sarana Mawatha, Rajagiriya. 12. N. J. Abeysekara, Presidents Counsel,

Former Member, Elections Commission of Sri Lanka, Election Secretariat, P.O. Box 02, Sarana Mawatha, Rajagiriya. 13. Prof. Rathnajeewan Hoole,

Former Member, Elections Commission of Sri Lanka, Election Secretariat, P.O. Box 02, Sarana Mawatha, Rajagiriya.

Page 4 of 32

14. M. S. Karunaratne,

Chief Inspector of the Human Trafficking and Smuggling Division, Criminal Investigations Department, Sri Lanka Police, York Street, Colombo. 15. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department, No. 159, Hulftsdorp, Colombo 12.

Respondents

AND NOW BETWEEN Hitihamilage Don Oshala Lakmal Anil Herath, No. 22, Wata Mawatha, Piliyandala.

Petitioner-Appellant Vs. 1. Hon. Diana Gamage, State Minister of Tourism, No. 537/21, Country Glade Bungalow, Amaragoda Road, Hokandara North. 2. Hon. Tiran Alles, Minister of Public Security, 15th Floor, Suhurupaya, Battaramulla. 3. I. S. H. J. Ilukpitiya, Controller General of Immigration and Emigration, Suhurupaya, Battaramulla.

Page 5 of 32

4. Ranjith Madduma Bandara, General Secretary, Samagi Jana Balawegaya, 72, Dr. N. M. Perera Mawatha, Colombo 08. 5. Dhammika Dassanayake, Secretary General of Parliament, Parliament of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, Sri Jayawardenapura Kotte. 6. N. G. Punchihewa, Former Chairman, Elections Commission of Sri Lanka, Election Secretariat, P.O. Box 02, Sarana Mawatha, Rajagiriya. 6A. R. M. A. L. Rathnayake,

Chairman, Elections Commission of Sri Lanka, Election Secretariat, P.O. Box 02, Sarana Mawatha, Rajagiriya. 7. S. B. Diwarathne, Former Member, Elections Commission of Sri Lanka, Election Secretariat, P.O. Box 02, Sarana Mawatha, Rajagiriya. 7A. M. A. P. C. Perera,

Member, Elections Commission of Sri Lanka, Election Secretariat, P.O. Box 02, Sarana Mawatha, Rajagiriya.

Page 6 of 32

8. M. M. Mohammed, Former Member, Elections Commission of Sri Lanka, Election Secretariat, P.O. Box 02, Sarana Mawatha, Rajagiriya. 8A. Ameer Faaiz,

Member, Elections Commission of Sri Lanka, Election Secretariat, P.O. Box 02, Sarana Mawatha, Rajagiriya. 9. K. P. P. Pathirana, Former Member, Elections Commission of Sri Lanka, Election Secretariat, P.O. Box 02, Sarana Mawatha, Rajagiriya. 10. P. S. M. Charles,

Elections Commission of Sri Lanka, Election Secretariat, P.O. Box 02, Sarana Mawatha, Rajagiriya. 11. Mahinda Deshapriya,

Former Chairman, Elections Commission of Sri Lanka, Election Secretariat, P.O. Box 02, Sarana Mawatha, Rajagiriya. 12. N. J. Abeysekara, Presidents Counsel,

Former Member, Elections Commission of Sri Lanka, Election Secretariat, P.O. Box 02, Sarana Mawatha, Rajagiriya.

Page 7 of 32

13. Prof. Rathnajeewan Hoole,

Former Member, Elections Commission of Sri Lanka, Election Secretariat, P.O. Box 02, Sarana Mawatha, Rajagiriya. 14. M. S. Karunaratne,

Chief Inspector of the Human Trafficking and Smuggling Division, Criminal Investigations Department, Sri Lanka Police, York Street, Colombo. 15. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department, No. 159, Hulftsdorp, Colombo 12.

Respondent-Respondents

Before: Hon. E. A. G. R. Amarasekara, J.

Hon. K. Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J.

Hon. Janak De Silva, J.

Counsel:

Hafeel Farisz with Nishika Fonseka and Shannon Tillekeratne for the Petitioner-Appellant

Shavindra Fernando, P.C. with M. Skandarajah for the 1st Respondent-Respondent

Farman Cassim, P.C. with Vinura Kularatne and T. Abeyratne for the 4th Respondent-

Respondent

Dishna Warnakula, D.S.G. with Rajin Gunaratne, S.C. for the 2nd, 3rd and 5th to 15th

Respondent-Respondents

Page 8 of 32

Written Submissions:

Petitioner-Appellant on 28.02.2024

1st Respondent-Respondent on 26.02.2024

4th Respondent-Respondent on 28.02.2024

Argued on: 13.02.2024

Decided on: 08.05.2024

Janak De Silva, J.

The 1st Respondent-Respondent (1st Respondent) is a Member of Parliament and State

Minister of Tourism. The Petitioner-Appellant (Appellant) invoked the jurisdiction of the

Court of Appeal in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution and sought a Writ of Quo

Warranto requiring the 1st Respondent to show by what authority she claims to hold office

and continues to function as a Member of Parliament of the Democratic Socialist Republic

of Sri Lanka.

The Appellant alleged that the 1st Respondent is a British citizen and holder of British

Passport bearing Nos. 094425352 and 521398876 and consequently has ceased to be a

citizen of Sri Lanka. Therefore, the Appellant claims that the 1st Respondent is disqualified

from holding office as a Member of Parliament. I will advert to this contention in greater

detail later.

The 1st Respondent raised the following preliminary objections:

(1) The Appellant has failed to comply with Rule 3 (1) (a) of the Supreme Court Rules

and hence it must be dismissed in limine.

Page 9 of 32

(2) The facts are in dispute between the parties. That is the Appellant, the 1st

Respondent and the 3rd Respondent-Respondent as evident from the pleadings and

as such writ will not lie and the petition of the Appellant should be dismissed in

limine.

(3) The relief sought in the petition of the Appellant is not conclusive, as such, granting

such relief by this Court will be futile. Therefore, the petition of the Appellant

should be dismissed in limine.

This application was heard by a divisional bench of the Court of Appeal. The majority

(majority judgment) upheld the preliminary objections and dismissed the application.

The minority (minority judgment) granted the Writ of Quo Warranto prayed for by the

Appellant.

Aggrieved by the majority decision, the Appellant sought special leave to appeal which

was granted on the following questions of law:

(1) Did the Court of Appeal err in law in its application of the law for a Writ in the

nature of a Writ of Quo Warranto?

(2) Did the Court of Appeal err in law in failing to appreciate that in a Writ of Quo

Warranto the burden of proving title and/or authority to Public Office is on the 1st

Respondent?

(3) Did the Court of Appeal err in law in its application of principles of Writs of

Mandamus and/or Procedendo and/or Certiorari in a Writ of Quo Warranto?

(4) Did the Court of Appeal err in law in not holding that the 1st Respondent is

disqualified from holding office as a Member of Parliament upon her refusal to

provide proof for her Sri Lankan citizenship in terms of the Law?

(5) Did the Court of Appeal err in Law in failing to appreciate that the Appellants

application relates to the franchise of the people of the Republic?

Page 10 of 32

Court fixed this matter for argument on top of the list for 12.02.2024 and 13.02.2024. All

parties were heard on these two days. At the conclusion of the hearing, all parties were

granted two weeks time to file written submissions. The Appellant, 1st Respondent and

the 4th Respondent-Respondent have filed written submissions. Court is grateful to these

parties for having assisted it by tendering detailed written submissions on time.

Before proceeding to deal with the merits, I wish to refer to the contention made by the

learned Presidents Counsel for the 1st Respondent that parties were heard only on the

preliminary objections and the majority judgment dismissed the application on the

preliminary objections without going into the merits. An examination of the proceedings

before the Court of Appeal and a plain reading of the majority judgment shows the fallacy

of this contention.

The written submissions dated 27.03.2023 filed on behalf of the 1st Respondent states

that they are tendered on the Preliminary Objections and the main application. The

synopsis of the submissions tendered on behalf of the 1st Respondent dated 04.10.2023

states that they are tendered on the entirety of the matters raised in the petition of the

Petitioner with regard to the main application, subsequent counter affidavit of the

Petitioner and the preliminary objections raised on behalf of the 1st Respondent. In fact,

the majority judgment after upholding the preliminary objections, went on to state (at

page 27) that [t]he merits of the case also do not warrant the issuance of the Writ prayed

for. Clearly the parties were heard on both the preliminary objections as well as the

merits and the majority judgment considered the merits of the application as well in

dismissing it.

Disqualification as Member of Parliament

The Appellant contends that the 1st Respondent is disqualified from holding office as a

Member of Parliament in terms of Article 91 read with Article 89 of the Constitution.

Page 11 of 32

Article 91 states that a person is disqualified to be elected as a Member of Parliament or

to sit and vote in Parliament if, inter alia, he is subject to any of the disqualifications

specified in Article 89.

According to Article 89, no person shall be qualified to be a Member of Parliament if he is

not a citizen of Sri Lanka.

According to Section 2 (4) of the Citizenship Act No. 18 of 1948 as amended (Citizenship

Act), a person is entitled to the status of a citizen of Sri Lanka either by right of descent

or by virtue of registration as provided therein or by any other Act authorising the grant

of such status by registration in any special case of a specified description.

In terms of Section 20(2) of the Citizenship Act, where a person is a citizen of Ceylon or Sri

Lanka by descent and that person, by operation of law, is at the time of his birth or

becomes thereafter, also a citizen of any other country, that person shall on the 31st day

of December, 1952, or on the day immediately succeeding the date of the expiration of a

period of twelve months from the date on which he so becomes a citizen of that other

country, or on the day on which he attains the age of twenty-two years, whichever day is

in his case the latest, cease to be a citizen of Sri Lanka, unless before that day he renounces

citizenship of that other country in accordance with the law therein in force in that behalf

and notifies such renunciation to a prescribed officer.

According to Section 20 (5) of the Citizenship Act, a person who is a citizen of Sri Lanka by

descent, ceases to be a citizen of Sri Lanka if he voluntarily becomes a citizen of any other

country.

As the learned counsel for the Appellant correctly submitted, any person who ceases to

be a citizen as aforesaid can, pursuant to Section 8 of the Citizenship Act, resume the

status of citizen upon a declaration made by the Minister. A precondition for such

declaration is that such person shall renounce citizenship of the other country in

Page 12 of 32

accordance with the law. However, the Minister may exempt such person from such

precondition and nonetheless make a declaration as to citizenship.

Therefore, for a Writ of Quo Warranto to be issued in this application, the following facts

must be established:

(1) The 1st Respondent has ceased to become a citizen of Sri Lanka either voluntarily

or by operation of law; and,

(2) The 1st Respondent has not resumed the status of a citizen according to law.

In considering whether they have been established, the burden of proof must also be

addressed. I will consider these matters in conjunction with an examination of the

majority judgment on the preliminary objections.

Rule 3 (1) (a) of the Court of Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules 1990 (Rules)

I am in agreement with the contention of the learned Presidents Counsel for the 1st

Respondent that this is an imperative rule as in Shanmugavadivu v. Kulathilake [(2003) 1

Sri.L.R. 215] it was held that the requirements in Rules 3 (1) (a) and 3 (1) (b) of the Court

of Appeal (Appellate Procedure) Rules 1990 (1990 Rules) are imperative.

The learned counsel for the Appellant relied on the decision in Kiriwanthie and Another

v. Navaratne and Another [(1990) 2 Sri.L.R. 393] and contended that the non-compliance

with the relevant rules does not require automatic dismissal. Nevertheless, in

Shanmugavadivu v. Kulathilake [supra. at page 220] Bandaranayake J. held that

Kiriwanthie's case was decided on the basis of Rule 46 of the Supreme Court Rules 1978

and therefore admittedly has no application to Rules 3 (1 ) (a) and 3 (1 ) (b).

Nevertheless, Rule 3 (1) (a) does not require that all originals or duly certified copies of

documents must be annexed to the petition. It requires originals or duly certified copies

of all the documents material to such application to be annexed to the petition. This was

Page 13 of 32

confirmed in Urban Development Authority v. Ceylon Entertainments Limited and others

[(2004) 1 Sri.L.R. 95 at 98] where Edussuriya J. held:

[] where an objection is taken on the ground that either the originals or duly

certified copies of material documents have not been filed with the petition then

the Court of Appeal must before making a ruling on such objection consider the

question whether such documents are material in deciding the questions urged

by the petitioner in the application [] (emphasis added)

The learned Presidents Counsel for the 1st Respondent placed heavy reliance on the

decision of the Court of Appeal in Sharmila Roweena Jayawardena Gonawela v. Hon.

Ranil Wickremasinghe and Others [CA/Writ/388/2018, C.A.M. 21.05.2019]. However,

there the Court of Appeal upheld the objection on the basis that documents marked P6a

to P7e, annexed in support of averment 13 of the petition, are material documents for the

determination of that application.

In this application, all documents which provide evidence of the citizenship of the 1st

Respondent are material to the application. The originals or certified copies of such

documents should have been annexed to the petition.

The majority judgment held that documents marked P8 and P11 are not originals or duly

certified copies and hence are contrary to Rule 3 (1) (a).

Document P8 is a true copy of the editorial of the Sunday Island dated 01.11.2020

reporting that the 1st Respondent had voted for the 20th Amendment to the Constitution

contrary to the stance of the Samagi Jana Balawegaya, the party from which she was

appointed as a Member of Parliament from the National List. However, it is not a material

document to the question of disqualification of the 1st Respondent.

Page 14 of 32

Document P11 is a photographed copy of what the Appellant verily believes to be the

information page of the British passport of the 1st Respondent. This is plainly a material

document to the application of the Appellant. It is neither the original nor a certified copy.

Nevertheless, Rule 3 (1) (a) does not require that an application should be dismissed for

every failure to comply with it. It states that the Court may, ex mero motu or at the

instance of any party, dismiss such application. The use of the word may connote

discretionary power. The discretion must be exercised based on the facts and

circumstances of each case.

In this application, the Appellant has tendered along with his petition, a certified copy of

the complete case record of M.C. Colombo Case No. B 48037/01/2021 marked as P12.

This, in addition to the B Reports, contains complete copies of certain statements made

to the Police by the Deputy Controller of the Department of Immigration and Emigration

and the 1st Respondent.

These statements have been recorded in the course of an investigation conducted by the

Criminal Investigations Department (CID) pursuant to a complaint lodged by the

Appellant that the 1st Respondent is illegally residing in the country without a valid visa.

Consequent to such investigations, the then holder of the office of 14th Respondent

reported facts to the Colombo Magistrates Court in Case No. B 48037/01/2021.

The majority judgment (at page 25) states that these police statements do not amount to

evidence as admissible under and in terms of the Evidence Ordinance. This is a threadbare

statement without reference to any particular provision in the Evidence Ordinance which

deals with admissibility. Let me examine this statement in detail.

The statements contained in P12 were recorded during criminal investigations initiated in

terms of Section 109 (5) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Cri.P.C) consequent to the

complaint made by the Appellant.

Page 15 of 32

Section 110 (3) of the Cri.P.C. states that a statement made by any person to a Police

Officer in the course of any investigation may be used in accordance with the provisions

of the Evidence Ordinance except for the purpose of corroborating the testimony of such

person in court. The proviso states that a statement made by an accused person in the

course of any investigation shall only be used to prove that he made a different statement

at a different time. The 1st Respondent is not an accused person as no charges have been

filed against her.

Moreover, the Cri.P.C. is according to its preamble an Act to regulate the procedure of the

Criminal Courts. This an application made in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution.

Section 25 (1) of the Evidence Ordinance prohibits a confession made to a Police Officer

from being proved as against a person accused of any offence. This has no application to

the 1st Respondent as she is yet to be charged for any offence.

In Tunnaya alias Gunapala v. Officer-in-Charge, Police Station, Galewela [(1993) 1 Sri

L.R. 61 at 66] Bandaranayake J. held:

A consideration of the meaning and scope of s. 116 and of s. 136 (1) (d) of the Code

thus becomes necessary. Section 116 is a section contained in that part of the Code

dealing with the investigation of offences and the powers of Police Officers and

inquirers to investigate. It is a step in the process of investigation. It is the

counterpart of s. 114 which permits the release of an accused if evidence is

deficient. Section 116 (1) requires that a suspect be sent in custody to a Magistrate's

Court with jurisdiction when the information is well founded in the case of a non-

bailable offence. That is to say that the suspect should be so forwarded when the

Police Officer or inquirer comes to a conclusion that there is sufficient evidence in

the sense that a substantial case is made out at an early stage of an investigation

which can properly be sent before a Magistrate. Thereafter it is necessary for the

Magistrate to make an order for the detention of the suspect. On the other hand, if

Page 16 of 32

the offence is bailable the section even permits the Police Officer or inquirer to take

security from the suspect for his appearance before Court. The section also provides

for productions to be sent to the Court immediately without being kept at the Police

Station for further investigations if necessary, and for witnesses to be bound over

to appear and testify at a trial. The fact that the Police can take bail and release the

suspect if the offence is bailable under sub-section (1) and the fact that

investigations can continue under sub-section (3) and the use of the word "suspect"

and not "accused" in the language of sub-section (1) used to refer to this person

clearly point to the fact that no proceeding has yet been instituted against that

person as an accused.

The provisions in the Cri.P.C. apply only to criminal proceedings. There is nothing in the

Cri.P.C. or the Evidence Ordinance which prohibits the use of the original or certified

copies of the complete complaints or statements made to the Police in the course of any

criminal investigation from being used by a civil court in civil proceedings.

In Jayanetti v. Mitrasena (71 NLR 385 at 397) Weeramantry J. held:

It may indeed appear somewhat disconcerting that admissions made or

information divulged by the accused person himself should be the very material

upon which a criminal charge against him is proved, but, as in other areas of the

criminal law, such a circumstance does not render the evidence inadmissible. The

Evidence Ordinance lays down certain limits transgression beyond which will render

statements of an accused person inadmissible at his prosecution, but short of this

no principle of law is offended by the use against an accused person at his trial, of

disclosures made by that person himself.

I am of the view that the provisions of the Cri.P.C. do not apply to proceedings pursuant

to Article 140 of the Constitution. Neither does the prohibition in Section 25 (1) of the

Evidence Ordinance.

Page 17 of 32

One of the statements contained in P12, is one made by Ramawickrema Gamaachchige

Champika Piyari Dinushan Ramawickrema, Duputy Controller, Department of Immigration

and Emigration. He was in charge of the computer division of the Department of

Immigration and Emigration. This statement had been made after checking the records in

that division.

According to this statement, British passport bearing number 094425352 has been issued

to one Diana Gamage. She had arrived in Sri Lanka using this passport for the first time

on 10.10.2004. Thereafter, she had travelled to and from Sri Lanka using this passport and

had last left Sri Lanka on 30.06.2014.

Thereafter, she had used British passport bearing number 521398876 from 16.07.2014 to

05.10.2014 to travel to and from Sri Lanka.

She had obtained a Sri Lankan passport bearing No. N5091386 on 24.01.2014. The

National Identity Card bearing No. 658534300V had been submitted to obtain this

passport. She had used this to proceed oversees on 12.04.2014 and returned last on

03.01.2018.

On 07.08.2018 she had applied for a Diplomatic passport and had been issued a

diplomatic passport bearing No. OL 5654794. She had used this diplomatic passport to

proceed oversees on 04.04.2019 and last returned on 16.01.2020.

This evidence shows that Diana Gamage used British passport bearing number

521398876 from 16.07.2014 to 05.10.2014 to travel to and from Sri Lanka when at the

same time she was holding a Sri Lankan passport bearing number N5091386 from

24.01.2014.

A statement from the 1st Respondent, Diana Gamage was recorded on 31.10.2022 which

forms part of P12 [P17(a), pages 223-226 of Volume IV]. The learned Presidents Counsel

for the 1st Respondent submitted that in the absence of an affidavit of any person who

Page 18 of 32

claims to have recorded such statement accurately, this statement is inadmissible against

the 1st Respondent.

I have no hesitation in rejecting this contention. This statement is contained in the

certified copy of the complete proceedings in Colombo Magistrates Court Case No.

B48037/01/2021. Moreover, the 1st Respondent has not denied that this is her statement

or claimed that it has been recorded inaccurately.

According to the statement made to the CID by the 1st Respondent, she was born in Sri

Lanka and proceeded to Britain in 1981. Her mother is British and she obtained British

citizenship through her. She admits to have used the British passports bearing numbers

094425352 and 521398876. She claims that she got her British citizenship cancelled after

returning to Sri Lanka in 2014. She was never a dual citizen. According to Coomaraswamy

[The Law of Evidence, Vol. 1 (Lake House Investments Ltd., 1989), page 361], a partys

statements adverse to his case are received as evidence of the truth of their contents both

in civil and criminal proceedings.

Let me at this point, address a fact most fascinating. The 3rd Respondent, Ilukpitiyage

Srinath Harshadewa Jayasen Ilukpitiya, the Controller General of Immigration and

Emigration has in his affidavit, at paragraph 19(ix)(d), stated that he is not aware whether

the holder of the British passport bearing number 521398876 is the 1st Respondent. It is

sufficient to state that the 1st Respondent, in her statement to the CID, as well as

Ramawickrema Gamaachchige Champika Piyari Dinushan Ramawickrema, Duputy

Controller, Department of Immigration and Emigration, after having examined the

computer records of the Department of Immigration and Emigration, state otherwise.

I am of the view that the provisions of the Evidence Ordinance do apply to proceedings

for judicial review with necessary adaptation.

Page 19 of 32

The Evidence Ordinance does not prohibit the admission of the statement made by the

1st Respondent to the Police. In fact, it contains admissions made by the 1st Respondent

on her British passport which are admissible in evidence in terms of Sections 17 and 21 of

the Evidence Ordinance.

The statement of Ramawickrema Gamaachchige Champika Piyari Dinushan

Ramawickrema, Deputy Controller, Department of Immigration and Emigration, contains

evidence on facts in issue and relevant facts.

Moreover, the 3rd Respondent-Respondent, the Controller of Immigration and Emigration,

has annexed to his affidavit marked R4, the entry and exit details which appear in the

Border Control System for the British passport number 521398876. According to this

document, the 1st Respondent is a British citizen. Notwithstanding this document having

been tendered by a Respondent, it still is evidence which the Court should have

considered.

In these circumstances, the majority erred in law in dismissing the application for the

failure to tender the original or duly certified copy of P11, a photographed copy of the

information page of the British passport of the 1st Respondent when P12 and R4, which

are duly certified copies, provides the necessary evidence to establish that material fact.

Disputed Facts

The learned Presidents Counsel for the 1st Respondent contended that it is trite law that

whenever facts are in dispute the writ jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal under Articles

140 and 141 of the Constitution will not apply. In support of this proposition, our attention

was drawn to the decisions in Thajudeen v, Sri Lanka Tea Board and Another [(1981) 2

Sri.L.R. 471], Dr. K. Puvanendran and Another v. T.M. Premasiri and two Others [S.C.

59/2008, S.C.M. 23.10.2008], Wijenayake and Others v. Minister of Public

Administration [(2011) 2 Sri.L.R. 247], Liyana Atukoralalage Done Thanuja Darshini and

Page 20 of 32

8 Others v. Ceylon Electricity Board and 21 Others [C.A. Writ 410/2016, C.A.M.

22.05.2019].

This is the correct exposition of the law. The issue is whether the material facts in this

application are in dispute. Not every disputed fact is a material fact. It must be a fact, the

existence of which must necessarily be proved, for the court to make a determination on

the application for judicial review.

In order for the Appellant to succeed in this application it must firstly be established that

the 1st Respondent became a British citizen. This must be done on a balance of probability.

The learned Presidents Counsel for the 1st Respondent submitted that the 1st Respondent

has specifically denied being a British citizen and as such material facts are in dispute.

As explained more fully above, the material before us clearly establish that the 1st

Respondent was a citizen of Sri Lanka by descent and sometime after proceeding to Britain

in 1981, had obtained a British passport. The 1st Respondent was at one time the holder

of British passports bearing numbers 094425352 and 521398876. She had used these two

British passports to travel to and from Sri Lanka on several occasions, last on 05.10.2014.

In Nrisingha Murari Chakraborty and Ors. v. State of West Bengal [(1977) 1 M.L.J. (Crl)

327 at 328] it was held:

A passport is a document which, by its nature and purpose, is a political document

for the benefit of its holder. It recognises him as a citizen of the country granting it

and is in nature of a request to the other country for his free passage []

According to Section 20(2) of the Citizenship Act, a person who is a citizen of Sri Lanka by

descent ceases to be a citizen of Sri Lanka if he becomes a citizen of any other country by

operation of law. Similarly, pursuant to Section 20 (5) of the Citizenship Act, a person who

is a citizen of Sri Lanka by descent, ceases to be a citizen of Sri Lanka if he voluntarily

becomes a citizen of any other country.

Page 21 of 32

Therefore, the Appellant has established, on a balance of probability, that the 1st

Respondent has ceased to become a citizen of Sri Lanka sometime after 1981. In these

circumstances, it is questionable how 1st Respondent has obtained a Sri Lankan passport

on 24.01.2014.

The next material fact that needs to be considered is whether the 1st Respondent has

resumed the status of a citizen of Sri Lanka according to law.

As the learned counsel for the Appellant correctly submitted, any person who ceases to

be a citizen as aforesaid can, pursuant to Section 8 of the Citizenship Act, resume the

status of citizen upon a declaration made by the Minister. A precondition for such

declaration is that such person shall renounce citizenship of the other country in

accordance with the law. However, the Minister may exempt such person from such

precondition and nonetheless make a declaration as to citizenship.

The question arises as to who must take on the burden of proving this material fact.

Undoubtedly, the Appellant carries the overall burden of proof. Nevertheless, the

Evidence Ordinance recognises that certain facts must be proved by the person having

special knowledge. Section 106 reads as follows:

When any fact is especially within the knowledge of any person, the burden of

proving that fact is upon him.

Illustration (b) elucidates this provision as follows:

A is charged with travelling on a railway without a ticket. The burden of proving

that he had a ticket is on him.

Whether the 1st Respondent resumed the status of a citizen upon a declaration made by

the Minister after renouncing her British citizenship in accordance with the law or whether

the Minister has exempted her from such precondition is a matter entirely within the

knowledge of the 1st Respondent. The burden of proving that fact is on the 1st Respondent.

Page 22 of 32

There can be no difficulty for the 1st Respondent to obtain the relevant information

through the use of the Right to Information Act No. 12 of 2016 or any other due process

as she is a Member of Parliament and the State Minister of Tourism.

However, other than a mere denial of her British citizenship, the 1st Respondent makes no

assertion of regaining the status of a citizen by due process. Instead, she has, at paragraph

4 in her affidavit, stated that there is a possibility of being named as a suspect and/or

accused in Magistrates Court of Colombo case No. B 48037/01/2021. Since the

Constitution guarantees the presumption of innocence, the right to remain silent and a

right to a fair trial, the 1st Respondent has been advised not to compromise such rights by

answering each and every averment contained in the petition.

The position taken by the 1st Respondent is misconceived in law. The right to remain silent

and the presumption of innocence are concepts that apply in criminal proceedings. They

have no application to proceedings for judicial review. As was held in Khatri & Ors. Etc. vs

State of Bihar & Ors. [(1981) 1 SCC 627] the pendency of a criminal proceeding cannot be

urged as a bar against the Court trying a civil proceeding or a writ petition where a similar

issue is involved.

There are instances where a person may be exposed to both criminal and civil proceedings

concurrently. For example, in a road accident resulting in injury or death to another party,

a driver of a vehicle is exposed to criminal proceedings in the relevant criminal court and

civil proceedings in the District Court.

Where such person avoids answering the averments in the plaint in detail and makes a

bare denial of every averment in the plaint, he will be impeded in raising issues which

need to be specifically pleaded. That is a choice a person makes which has consequences

in so far as the civil proceedings are concerned.

Page 23 of 32

Besides, all what the 1st Respondent need have done is to provide the relevant declaration

made by the Minister or the exemption granted to her. That may well have been the

answer to the pending criminal proceedings. Instead of choosing that path, the 1st

Respondent chose to take refuge under the right to remain silent and the presumption of

innocence, which are concepts applied in criminal proceedings.

In these circumstances, I am justified in applying the principle in Section 114 (f) of the

Evidence Ordinance which states that:

The court may presume that evidence which could be and is not produced would

if produced, be unfavorable to the person who withholds it.

Moreover, there are consequences even in criminal proceedings, if the accused choses to

remain silent where the prosecution has made out a strong prima facie case. As Lord

Ellenborough held in Rex v. Cocharane [1814 Gurneys Report 479]:

"No person accused of crime is bound to offer any explanation of his conduct or of

circumstances of suspicion which attach to him, but nevertheless, if he refuses to

do so where a strong prima facie case has been made out and when it is in his own

power to offer evidence, if such exist in explanation of such suspicious

circumstances, which would show them to be fallacious and explicable consistently

with his innocence, it is a reasonable and justifiable conclusion that he refrains from

doing so only from the conviction that the evidence so suppressed or not adduced

would operate adversely to his interest."

This dictum has been applied in many cases in Sri Lanka. [See Inspector Arendstz v.

Wilfred Peiris [10 C.L.W. 121 at 123], R v. Seeder Silva [41 N.L.R. 337 at 344], King v.

Wickramasinghe [42 N.L.R. 313], King v. Peiris Appuhamy [43 N.L.R. 412 at 418], King v.

Endoris [46 N.L.R. 498], Queen v. Seetin [68 N.L.R. 316], Chandradasa v. Queen [72 N.L.R.

160], Beddavithanu v. Attorney-General [(1990) 1 Sri.L.R. 275 at 278], Republic v.

Page 24 of 32

Ilangathilake [(1984) 2 Sri.L.R. 38], Aruna alias Podi Raja v. Attorney-General [(2011) 2

Sri.L.R. 44]].

In Attorney-General v. Potta Naufer and Others [(2007) 2 Sri.L.R. 144 at 202],

Amaratunga J. rejected the contention that [] there is no dictum called the dictum of

Lord Ellenborough; that the words attributed to Lord Ellenborough is a fabrication by

Wills; and that the views expressed by Lord Ellenborough is not a part of the Law of Sri

Lanka. "

The Appellant has on a balance of probability established that the 1st Respondent ceased

to be a citizen of Sri Lanka upon acquiring British citizenship and passport. Thereafter, the

burden of proving that she resumed the status of citizen of Sri Lanka falls on the 1st

Respondent in terms of Section 106 of the Evidence Ordinance.

In Buwaneka Lalitha Keembiwela and Others v. Geetha Samanmalee Kumarasinghe and

Others [S.C. Appeal 99/2017, S.C.M. 02.11.2017] a similar question arose as to whether

Mrs. Geetha Samanmalee Kumarasinghe was disqualified from being a Member of

Parliament as she was a citizen of Switzerland. She had admitted that she was a citizen of

Switzerland but had later given up the citizenship of Switzerland. The Court, applying

Sections 101, 103 and 106 of the Evidence Ordinance held that the burden was on Mrs.

Kumarasinghe to prove the date on which she gave up citizenship and that she had failed

to do so.

For the foregoing reasons, I hold that it has been established that the 1st Respondent has

ceased to be a citizen of Sri Lanka upon acquiring British citizenship. The 1st Respondent

has failed to prove that she has resumed the status of citizen of Sri Lanka.

The learned Presidents Counsel for the 1st Respondent contended that the Appellant has

not challenged the upholding of the preliminary objections by the majority judgment. I

Page 25 of 32

see no merit in this contention. Question of law No. 1 is wide enough to capture this issue

as well.

Relief Inconclusive

The learned Presidents Counsel for the 1st Respondent submitted that she holds office as

a Member of Parliament by virtue of Gazette No. 2188/46 dated 14.08.2020 issued under

the hand of the Chairman and Members of the then Election Commission. Therefore, the

1st Respondent will continue to hold such office until Parliament is dissolved or by a

Gazette Notification issued by the Election Commission amending the said Gazette

Notification insofar as the removal of the 1st Respondents name from the said Gazette

Notification.

As the Appellant has failed to pray for such a relief, as was done in Dilan Perera v. Rajitha

Senaratne [(2000) 2 Sri.L.R. 79], granting the relief prayed for by the Appellant will not

remove the 1st Respondent as a Member of Parliament since the Gazette No. 2188/46

dated 14.08.2020 issued under the hand of the Chairman and Members of the then

Election Commission remains valid. Accordingly, it was submitted that any relief prayed

for by the Appellant will be a futile exercise. The decisions in Dayananda v. Thalwatte

[(2001) 2 Sri.L.R. 73], Wanninayaka Mudiyanselage Dhanapala and Others v. Nimal

Kotawalagedera, Commissioner of Buddhist Affairs and Others [C.A. (Writ) 243/2017,

C.A.M. 07.11.2017], Ratnasiri and Others v. Ellawala and Others [(2004) 2 Sri.L.R. 180],

R. v. Fulham, Hammersmith and Kensington Rent Tribunal ex p Zerek [(1951) 2 K.B. 1,

11], Jahruddin v. Magutumsab [R.S.A. 783/1989, Karnataka High Court 05.09.1997]

were cited to buttress this contention.

This contention overlooks the basic purpose of the Gazette No. 2188/46 dated 14.08.2020

issued under the hand of the Chairman and Members of the then Election Commission. It

is a Declaration made under Article 99A of the Constitution notifying that the persons

whose names appear in the schedule thereto, including the 1st Respondent, have been

Page 26 of 32

elected as Members of Parliament. This is a ministerial act that must necessarily be made

at the conclusion of every General Election to appoint Members of Parliament. No

determination is made on the qualification of the persons declared to be elected as

Members of Parliament.

Such a declaration cannot in any way surpass a subsequent order made by a Court of

competent jurisdiction declaring such a person to be disqualified to be a Member of

Parliament and is thus not entitled to hold office as a Member of Parliament of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. In Buwaneka Lalitha Keembiwela and Others

v. Geetha Samanmalee Kumarasinghe and Others [supra.] Court rejected the contention

that the only way to remove a Member of Parliament was by filing an election petition

and that Article 140 of the Constitution cannot be invoked to remove a Member of

Parliament.

It must be borne in mind that the Court of Appeal as well as the Supreme Court exercises

the judicial power of the People when exercising the jurisdiction in terms of Article 140 of

the Constitution. In this application, the Appellant has sought a Writ of Quo Warranto

declaring that the 1st Respondent is disqualified to be a Member of Parliament and is thus

not entitled to hold office as a member of Parliament of the Democratic Socialist Republic

of Sri Lanka.

When a Court issues such a mandate in the nature of a Writ of Quo Warranto, the 1st

Respondent ipso facto ceases to be a Member of Parliament. The declaration made by

Gazette No. 2188/46 dated 14.08.2020 as an administrative step insofar as pertaining to

the 1st Respondent ceases to be operative.

I reject the contention that issuing a Writ of Quo Warranto as prayed for in the petition is

a futile act.

Page 27 of 32

M.C. Colombo Case No. B 48037/01/22

The learned Presidents Counsel drew the attention of Court to the present status in the

above case. On 24.04.2023, the learned Magistrate held that no arrest order will be issued

for the arrest of the 1st Respondent. It was made as the CID has the power to take

measures relating to the arrest for offences under the Immigrants and Emigrants Act No.

28 of 1948 as amended. The proceedings before the Magistrates Court have since been

laid by until such time the CID has concluded investigations or is in a position to name the

1st Respondent as a suspect. Accordingly, it was submitted that in the absence of a prima

facie case, the issuance of a Writ of Quo warranto against the 1st Respondent is

indefensible and not justifiable.

In response, the learned counsel for the Appellant submitted that facts were reported to

the Magistrate on 21.03.2021 and that thereafter the matter strangely and startlingly

remained in limbo with no investigation for over 18 months. It was submitted that such is

a privilege only a very few people in the Republic are afforded, especially when suspected

to have been in violation of the Immigrants and Emigrants Act. According to the Appellant,

despite almost 3 years since the facts were reported, the 1st Respondent continues to

function as a Member of Parliament with the law not taking its course as it would against

any normal citizen.

In this appeal, Court is exercising its constitutional powers pursuant to Article 140 of the

Constitution. There is no need to consider the position in the criminal proceedings. The

CID may well have an explanation for the failure to conclude the investigations thus far.

Article 12 (1) of the Constitution states that all persons are equal before the law. The

blindfold on Lady Justice depicts objectivity and impartiality. It is a direction to all judges,

as well as all persons involved in the administration of justice, that all persons before the

court should not be judged for their appearance, power, status, fame, or wealth, but solely

for the strength of the claims or the evidence they are presenting. Our system of justice

Page 28 of 32

does not, and in practice should not, have one law for those in positions of power, privilege

and responsibility and another for those who are not.

As far as this matter is concerned, the admissible evidence before Court clearly establishes

that the 1st Respondent lost her status as a citizen of Sri Lanka upon acquiring British

citizenship. The 1st Respondent has failed to place any material before us to establish that

she has resumed the status of a citizen of Sri Lanka.

In Buwaneka Lalitha Keembiwela and Others v. Geetha Samanmalee Kumarasinghe

and Others [supra. page 13-14], Sisira J. De Abrew held as follows:

[] I hold that if a candidate in a Parliamentary Election is a citizen of Sri Lanka

and any other country

1. on the day of the Parliamentary Election or

2. on the day of taking oaths as a Member of Parliament

he cannot be considered as a Member of Parliament and that the office of such

person as a Member of Parliament is a nullity. I further hold that after taking oaths

as a member of Parliament, if he becomes a citizen of any other country or

continues to be a citizen of any other country, he too cannot be considered as a

Member of Parliament and that the office of such person as a Member of

Parliament is a nullity.

The 1st Respondent is disqualified from being a Member of Parliament as she has failed to

establish that she is a citizen of Sri Lanka.

Page 29 of 32

I am constrained to address another point relied on by the Appellant, which has caused

Court great concern. The learned counsel for the Appellant submitted that:

(a) The entire majority judgment, including the parts which are seemingly an analysis

of the case before us, is directly from the written submission of the 1st Respondent

and, accordingly, with no analysis in Law;

(b) The parts of the majority judgment which is a reproduction of the said written

submissions of the 1st Respondent is a blatant and manifest misapplication and

misconstruction of the law pertaining to a Writ of Quo Warranto.

In elaborating on this allegation, the Appellant contended that the content of the majority

judgment (from pages 5 to 27) comprises, sequentially, a verbatim reproduction of the

Appellants petition before the Court of Appeal, the Appellants written submissions filed

in March 2023 and the 1st Respondents written submissions filed in May 2023.

In order to buttress this submission, the Appellant has with his written submissions

tendered a table marked X5 setting out each paragraph of the judgment and the

corresponding paragraphs of the petition or the written submissions. According to this

chart, there are 80 such places in the majority judgment.

According to the Appellant the only original parts of the majority judgment are found from

the 3rd paragraph on page 26 of the judgment, a total of five paragraphs. According to the

Appellant, the original paragraphs are as follows:

The conditions required to apply to the court to issue a Writ is restricted in several

ways. There is no bar or restriction on who can apply. Any person can apply as long

as their fundamental or any other legal right is being breached. In cases where

there is no breach of right, a question of public interest must arise with respect to

the application. It should not be made for the sake of certain hidden political

struggle or undercurrent. The applicant should act in public interest, and not expect

Page 30 of 32

any benefit or unethical gain through making the application. The application made

by the applicant should be bona fide.

A Writ is only granted to compel the performance of duties of a public nature and

not merely of a private character, that is to say for the enforcement of a mere

private right stemming from a contract of the parties. The Petitioner has failed to

satisfy this court that he has a statutory right against the 1st Respondent.

The preliminary objections are upheld. Accordingly, we see no merit in the

Application of the Petitioner. For all the above reasons, this court is not disposed to

grant the discretionary remedy asked for.

The application of the Petitioner is an action of private nature and therefore not

governed by any statutes of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. As such

the Petitioner is not entitled to invoke the Writ jurisdiction of this Court against the

1st Respondent.

The merits of the case also do not warrant the issuance of the Writ prayed for. As

such the Petitioners application warrants dismissal.

I have given anxious consideration to this submission of the Appellant and find that there

is much merit in it. The majority judgment (from pages 5 to 27) indeed contains 80 parts

as alleged by the Appellant, sequentially, which are either a verbatim reproduction or a

slight variation (without any acknowledgment of the source) of the Appellants petition

before the Court of Appeal, the Appellants written submissions filed in March 2023 and

the 1st Respondents written submissions filed in May 2023.

The only original five paragraphs of the majority judgment by far does not set out the

correct principles that govern the issue of a Writ of Quo Warranto.

Page 31 of 32

The reference therein to bona fide appears to be an acceptance of the allegation made by

the 1st Respondent that the Appellant is motivated by political considerations and the

application has been made mala fide. I fail to see the relevance of this assertion where

the evidence before Court establishes that the 1st Respondent ceased to be a citizen of Sri

Lanka upon acquiring British citizenship and failed to resume the status of citizen of Sri

Lanka according to law. She is thereby disqualified to be a Member of Parliament by the

Constitution.

Franchise is a fundamental right of all citizens of Sri Lanka. Members of Parliament are

appointed by the exercise of the franchise of the People. Thereafter, they exercise the

legislative power of the People. The Constitution itself provides for the qualifications a

person must have to become a Member of Parliament. Where a person so elected is

disqualified of holding such office, any citizen of the country can invoke the jurisdiction of

the Court of Appeal seeking a Writ of Quo Warranto calling upon the holder to show the

authority under which he claims to hold such office.

For all the reasons more fully set out above, the majority judgment erred in law in

upholding the three preliminary objections and refusing the relief prayed for by the

Appellant on the merits. The minority judgment granted the relief prayed for by the

Appellant without a consideration of the three preliminary objections raised on behalf of

the 1st Respondent.

All the questions of law are answered in the affirmative.

Both the majority and minority judgments dated 31.10.2023 are hereby set aside.

I issue a Writ of Quo Warranto declaring that the 1st Respondent is disqualified to be a

Member of Parliament and is thus not entitled to hold office as a Member of Parliament

of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Page 32 of 32

The 1st Respondent shall pay the Appellant his costs in both courts.

Appeal allowed.

Judge of the Supreme Court

E.A.G.R. Amarasekara, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court