Page 1 of 10

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

SC/CHC/Appeal No: Kim Hyum Wook,

54/2017 Ranmutugalawatte,

Kadawatha.

CHC Case No: PLAINTIFF

HC (CIVIL) 470/2011/MR

Vs.

1. Don Lalith Indralal

Rajapaksha,

203/3, Tharumalyaya,

Veyangoda,

Wegowwa.

2. Daisy Rajapaksha,

203/3, Tharumalyaya,

Veyangoda,

Wegowwa.

DEFENDANTS

AND NOW BETWEEN

Page 2 of 10

Don Lalith Indralal Rajapaksha,

203/3, Tharumalyaya,

Veyangoda,

Wegowwa.

1st DEFENDANT-APPELLANT

Vs.

Kim Hyum Wook,

Ranmutugalawatte,

Kadawatha.

PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT

Daisy Rajapaksha,

203/3, Tharumalyaya,

Veyangoda,

Wegowwa.

2nd DEFENDANT-RESPONDENT

Before : Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J.

: Arjuna Obeyesekere, J.

: Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

Counsel : Primal Ratwatte with Avinda Silva instructed by

Shanika Kariyawasam for the 1st Defendant-

Appellant.

Page 3 of 10

: Avindra Rodrigo, P.C. with Nishika Fonseka

instructed by Danukshika Priyadarshani for

the Plaintiff-Respondent

Argued on : 09-05-2025

Written Submissions : 02-05-2025 (By the 1st Defendant-Appellant)

: 14-07-2023 (By the Plaintiff-Respondent)

Decided on : 01-08-2025

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

This is an appeal preferred by the 1st defendant-appellant (hereinafter referred

to as the 1st defendant) on the basis of being aggrieved of the judgment dated

30-06-2017 pronounced by the learned Judge of the Commercial High Court

of Colombo in Case No. HCC/470/2011/MR, which was determined in favour

of the plaintiff of the said action.

This is a matter where the plaintiff-respondent (hereinafter referred to as the

plaintiff) instituted proceedings before the Commercial High Court of Colombo

to recover a sum equivalent to United States Dollars 96,000 (Rs.

11,000,000/=) and for other related reliefs as sought for in the plaint dated

27-10-2011.

At the hearing of the appeal, this Court had the benefit of listening to the oral

submissions of the learned Counsel who represented the parties, as well as

the privilege of considering the written submissions tendered to Court by the

parties in order to determine the appeal.

The case of the plaintiff urged before the trial Court can be summarized in the

following manner.

He is a Korean national who came to Sri Lanka in the year 2010 to establish

a business venture and to enter into a transaction for the export of copper to

South Korea.

Page 4 of 10

He has been informed by one Ranasinghe, whom he came to know while in

South Korea, that the 1st defendant is engaged in exporting copper, which has

resulted in the plaintiff, together with the said Ranasinghe, meeting the 1st

defendant at his house.

After having shown about three tonnes of copper stored in his house, the

plaintiff has been made to believe that the 1st defendant is capable of

supplying copper, which in turn has resulted in the plaintiff entering into an

agreement with the 1st defendant for him to export 15 tonnes of copper to the

port of Busan in South Korea.

Accordingly, having signed the agreement (marked P-01 at the trial) for the

said purpose, the plaintiff has gotten in touch with his fathers company in

South Korea and has transferred USD 96,000 to the personal bank account

of the 1st defendant.

It had been the position of the plaintiff that although P-01 appears to be a

transaction entered between two companies, it was he who entered into the

agreement with the 1st defendant on behalf of his fathers company and

arranged for the payment. The plaintiff has also established at the trial that

although the 1st defendant had signed the agreement on behalf of a company

called Vilasa Oseas PLC, it had been a company that had been struck off from

the Register of Companies on 12-01-2010, which was more than 10 months

before the said agreement was entered into on 03-11-2010.

The fact that the personal account number 094010003431 belonging to the

1st defendant at the Minuwangoda branch of the Hatton National Bank was

credited with a sum equivalent to USD 96,000 from a bank in Korea as stated

by the plaintiff in his evidence was not a disputed fact at the trial, although

the only admission recorded in that relation has been as to the existence of

the bank account in the 1st defendants name.

However, the 1st defendant has failed to supply the agreed 15 tonnes of copper

or has failed to return the money, which has resulted in the plaintiff

instituting this action.

Page 5 of 10

The position taken up by the plaintiff in his evidence has been that the 2nd

defendant named in the action was the wife of the 1st defendant, and part of

the money credited to the bank account of the 1st defendant has been used

by the 2nd defendant of the High Court action for her own use with the

connivance of the 1st defendant.

The plaintiff has called the earlier mentioned Ranasinghe as a witness on his

behalf, where he has substantiated the evidence of the plaintiff as to the

matters that led to the deposit of money into the account of the 1st defendant

and his failure to supply copper as agreed.

The position taken up by both the defendants at the trial had been that the

agreement marked P-01 has been a one entered between a Korean company

and a local company where the 1st defendant was not a party, and the

signature in that agreement was not the 1st defendants signature, and that it

was a fraudulent document.

It has been contended further that there was nothing to show that it was the

plaintiff who deposited the money since he was not a party to the agreement,

and there was no authorization from the company that deposited the money

authorizing the plaintiff to sue on behalf of the company, and hence, the

plaintiff has no locus standi to proceed with this action.

Apart from the above positions, the 1st defendant has also taken up the stand

that the plaintiff has failed to show that the local company had a special

permit required to export copper to South Korea.

In his evidence, the 1st defendant has claimed that he entered into an

agreement, which he has marked and produced as V-01, between himself and

the plaintiff, who only acted as the agent of a Korean company named DAE-

HEUNG-TRADE, and has denied that he signed the document marked P-01.

Explaining the reason as to why he signed the document he produced as V-

01, it has been claimed that it was signed in order to facilitate a Korean

company to remit money to Sri Lanka, and since the plaintiff or the earlier

mentioned Ranasinghe had no company in Sri Lanka, and as he was promised

Rs. 150,000/- as a commission, he signed the same in order to facilitate the

Page 6 of 10

plaintiff to run a business in Sri Lanka. He has also claimed that he did not

know what the business was, but has stated that after he signed the

document, he came to know that the business was a one related to copper.

In the impugned judgment, it is manifestly clear that the learned Judge of the

Commercial High Court has considered the evidence placed before the Court

by both the parties in its totality in order to come to a finding whether the

plaintiff has established his case, or whether the defendants stand should

succeed. With that in mind, the learned trial Judge has considered the

evidence in the balance of probabilities, which is the standard of proof

required in a civil suit.

In view of the undisputed fact that the 1st defendant received a sum equivalent

to USD 96,000 to his account, and also the undisputed fact that no export of

copper has taken place, the learned High Court Judge has proceeded to

consider the evidence in that context, being mindful of the issues raised by

the parties, while reaching his conclusions.

In this process, the learned High Court Judge has considered the evidence of

the 1st defendant where he has claimed that he had no knowledge of exporting

copper to South Korea when the money was remitted to his account, but went

on the belief that it was only to facilitate the plaintiff to have money in Sri

Lanka to conduct his business.

However, as correctly observed by the learned High Court Judge, the answer

of the 1st defendant filed in Court was in complete contrast to the stand taken

by him in his evidence. In his answer, he has taken up the position that he

agreed to act as an intermediary on behalf of the Sri Lankan company Vilasa

Oseas PLC, where he was a director, and the plaintiff, who acted as an agent

of the Korean company in order to supply 15 tonnes of copper locally. It has

been claimed that he reached an agreement only in that regard with the

Korean company.

Page 7 of 10

Having considered and analysed the evidence placed before the Court, the

learned High Court Judge has come to a finding that the evidence of the 1st

defendant cannot be relied upon as to the manner the transaction occurred,

for which I have no reason to disagree.

The learned High Court Judge has also considered the stand of the 1st

defendant where he has claimed that he never signed the agreement marked

P-01, but only signed the contract he marked as V-01.

The learned High Court Judge has drawn his attention to the fact that the 1st

defendant, who claims that the document marked P-01 was a fraudulent

document, has failed to take any steps to establish that fact before the Court.

Having considered the contents of P-01 and V-01, it has been determined that

both the documents have been signed for the same purpose of supplying

copper as stated by the plaintiff, and the document marked P-01 was the soft

offer letter, and V-01 was the sales agency agreement entered between the

plaintiff as the agent of his fathers company in Korea and the 1st defendant.

It has been determined that since at the time of signing the said document,

the company which the 1st defendant claims that he represented was not in

existence, the 1st defendant has entered into the agreement in his personal

capacity.

The learned High Court Judge has also made a note of the fact that when the

1st defendant was arrested and produced before the Magistrate Court in

relation to a complaint lodged by the plaintiff to the police of this transaction

on the basis that a fraud has been committed, at no point the 1st defendant

has claimed that the documents produced by the plaintiff to the police are

fraudulent documents.

The argument that the plaintiff has no locus standi to institute an action

against the defendants as argued before this Court has also been a matter

considered by the learned High Court Judge in his judgment.

Page 8 of 10

It has been determined that at all times relevant to this transaction, it was

the plaintiff who had acted on behalf of his fathers company, and it was on

his behalf that USD 96,000 has been remitted to the 1st defendants personal

bank account.

Having considered and analysed the facts and the circumstances specific to

the matter, the learned trial Judge has come to a firm finding that the plaintiff

is entitled to sue the 1st defendant based on the agreement reached between

the parties.

The learned Presidents Counsel who represented the plaintiff-respondent

made extensive submissions both oral and written, regarding an agents right

to sue upon contracts.

At this juncture, I would like to cite the judgment made available to this Court

by the learned Presidents Counsel in that regard, which I find relevant.

In the case of Jack Hunt Vs. R. C. Wright, Supreme Court of Iowa, United

States - dated 17 November 1964, it was held;

1. Right of an agent to sue on a contract for disclosed principal if an

agent has a beneficial interest in a contract executed for a disclosed

principal he may sue in his own name.

2. Nominal and real party interest the law looks beyond the nominal

parties to the real parties in interest, and determined the case according

to the rights of the latter.

3. Real party in interest a party is to be regarded as the real party in

interest whenever a payment to him would protect the defendant from

the claims of third persons.

I am of the view that the principles discussed in the above-mentioned case is

directly applicable to the facts and the circumstances of the case under

appeal.

It is abundantly clear that although the money had been transferred by a

Korean company owned by the father of the plaintiff to the account of the 1st

defendant for him to supply copper, the actual party in interest had been the

Page 9 of 10

plaintiff, and the actual transaction had been between the plaintiff and the 1st

defendant.

Under the circumstances, it is my considered view that there exists no basis

to argue that the plaintiff has no locus standi to sue the defendants in order

to recover the money paid to the 1st defendant on the basis that he failed to

abide by the agreement to export 15 tonnes of copper to Korea.

I find that the learned High Court Judge has well considered all the relevant

legal aspects in that regard and has come to a correct finding with sound

reasoning that the plaintiff has locus standi to maintain this action, for which

I again find no reason to disagree.

In the impugned judgment, the learned High Court Judge has given extra

attention to the claim of the 1st defendant that it was a 3rd party called

Millapitiya that agreed to supply copper, and that he paid Rs. 7,000,000/- to

him, to conclude that such a claim has no basis, and it was only a claim to

justify the 1st defendants failure to supply copper as agreed.

Since this is a determination that has been reached after having considered

the evidence with utmost care, I find that the learned High Court Judge was

correct when he reached the said determination.

When it comes to the argument that the money was never demanded by the

Korean company from the 1st defendant, I find no merit under any

circumstances to sustain such an argument. The plaintiffs evidence is clear

and unambiguous that he, on numerous occasions, demanded from the 1st

defendant to abide by the agreement to send 15 tonnes of copper to Korea or

else to return the money. I am of the view that the demand has been well

established before the trial Court.

For the reasons as considered above, I find no reason to interfere with the

judgment of the learned Commercial High Court Judge, which is a judgment

pronounced after having considered the evidence placed before the Court by

both sides in its correct perspective, and after having given sound reasons as

to his conclusions.

Page 10 of 10

Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed. The judgment pronounced on 30-06-

2017 is hereby affirmed.

The 1st defendant shall pay a sum of Rs. 100,000/- as costs of this appeal to

the plaintiff.

I hold that the plaintiff is entitled to recover his costs in relation to the High

Court suit as well.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court