SC Appeal 70/2018 JUDGMENT Page 1 of 15

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

under Article 128 of the

Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. COMPLAINANT -VS-

Badde Liyanage Wasantha Kumara Fernando. No. 9, St Rita Mawatha, Dummaladeniya South, Wennappuwa. Presently at, Welikada Prison, Borella, Colombo 8. ACCUSED

AND BETWEEN

Badde Liyanage Wasantha Kumara Fernando. No. 9, St Rita Mawatha, Dummaladeniya South, Wennappuwa. Presently at, Welikada Prison, Borella, Colombo 8. ACCUSED-PETITIONER

-VS-

SC Appeal No: 70/2018 SC/SPL/LA No. 276/2017 CA (PHC) APN 133/2016 HC Chilaw 03/09

SC Appeal 70/2018 JUDGMENT Page 2 of 15

Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12. COMPLAINANT -RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

Badde Liyanage Wasantha Kumara Fernando. No. 9, St Rita Mawatha, Dummaladeniya South, Wennappuwa. Presently at, Welikada Prison, Borella, Colombo 8. ACCUSED-APPELLANT-APPELLANT -VS-

Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12. COMPLAINANT -RESPONDENT RESPONDENT

BEFORE : B.P. ALUWIHARE, PC, J.

S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

E.A.G.R. AMARASEKARA, J.

COUNSEL : Anil Silva, PC with D. Gunaratne for the Accused- Appellant -

Appellant.

Varunika Hettige D.S.G. for the Complainant – Respondent –

Respondent.

ARGUED ON: 12th May 2020.

SC Appeal 70/2018 JUDGMENT Page 3 of 15

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS : Accused- Appellant -Appellant on the 12th of July

2019.

Complainant – Respondent – Respondent on the 01st

of August 2019.

DECIDED ON : 11th September 2020.

S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

The Accused-Appellant-Appellant namely, Badde Liyanage Wasantha Kumara

Fernando (hereinafter referred to as the “Accused- Appellant”) was originally indicted

for murder punishable under section 296 of the Penal Code on 21/11/2004 for

causing the death of Anthonilage Pradeep Gamini Fernando (hereinafter referred to

as the “Deceased”). After the non-summary inquiry the indictment was forwarded in

2009. The Appellant initially pleaded not guilty and the matter was fixed for trial.

According to the journal entries and the proceedings, both parties had moved dates

on several grounds including the Accused-Appellant wanting to re-consider his plea.

The trial commenced on 8/6/2015 and the prosecution led the evidence of two eye-

witnesses and the Consultant Judicial Medical Officer (hereinafter referred to as

“JMO”). Thereafter the Appellant, through his Attorney-at-Law, informed the Court

that he wishes to withdraw his plea of not guilty and to plead guilty under Section

297 of the Penal Code for culpable homicide not amounting to murder on the basis

of grave and sudden provocation. Accordingly, the State Counsel considered and

amended the indictment and preferred a charge under section 297 of the Penal

Code. The Appellant unconditionally pleaded guilty to the amended indictment and

made submissions to mitigate his sentence.

After hearing submissions from both Counsel for the Appellant and the State,

the learned trial judge imposed 15 years rigorous imprisonment and a fine of

Rs. 7500/- in-default six months simple imprisonment.

SC Appeal 70/2018 JUDGMENT Page 4 of 15

The Appellant was convicted on 28/06/2016 and the sentence was imposed

on 12/07/2016. Thereafter the Appellant submitted a revision application to the

Court of Appeal on 19/10/2016. The Complainant- Respondent, the Attorney

General, raised two preliminary objections at the Court of Appeal. Firstly, although

the petitioner had a right of appeal which is a statutory right, he had without

exercising the same sought to invoke revisionary jurisdiction and secondly, that the

order of the learned High Court Judge is not irregular, illegal or capricious. The Court

of Appeal without considering the preliminary objections considered the revision

application, affirmed the conviction and reduced the sentence to 10 years rigorous

imprisonment from 15 years rigorous imprisonment.

Being aggrieved with the said order, the Appellant preferred an appeal to the

Supreme Court and on the 9/5/2018 this Court granted leave on the question of law

stated in paragraph 17(b) of the petition dated 07/12/2017. The said question of law

is reproduced here for easy reference.

17(b) “did the Learned Judges of the Court of Appeal misdirect themselves in

imposing a sentence of 10 years which is excessive considering the fact that 13

years has elapsed since the commission of the offence, this was not a

premeditated incident, there was no animosity between the parties and the

petitioner had led substantially blameless life?”

The Counsel for the Appellant made his submissions primarily about

intoxication, imposing a sentence after a long period of time and on the basis of

knowledge at the time of the offence.

It will be appropriate to first consider the facts of the case. According to the

evidence presented before the High Court, it is apparent that the Appellant had

consumed liquor with about 10 of his friends including the eye-witnesses and the

deceased. The wife of the Appellant had come there and addressed the Appellant in

a degrading manner.

SC Appeal 70/2018 JUDGMENT Page 5 of 15

“සක්කිලියා ම ොකද කරන්මන්?”

[Sakkiliya (a word used to degrade or humiliate a person in society) what are

you doing?]

Then the deceased had said,

“එමෙ කියන එක ෙරි නැෙැමන, නුස්සයා මන්ද?” (It’s not correct to say that, isn’t he your husband?)

Thereafter, the Appellant had tried to hit the deceased with an empty bottle

which did not strike him. Thereafter the Appellant had gone home, brought a knife

and stabbed the deceased. According to the eye-witnesses, the deceased had not

offered anything to provoke the Appellant. There is no evidence to substantiate that

there was animosity or any preparation for this offence. As per the submitted facts

the Accused- Appellant, deceased and their friends were consuming liquor when the

wife of the Appellant came there and scolded the Appellant, the Appellant got angry

with two of his friends including the deceased, went and brought a knife, stabbed the

deceased and chased the other person. According to the JMO there were three

superficial injuries other than the fatal injury which could have been caused in two

blows.

When considering intention and knowledge in the context of culpable

homicide, the type of weapon used (if any), the way the injuries were inflicted, the

nature, location and number of injuries inflicted on the victim are considerable facts.

As per the evidence of the JMO at pages 86 and 87 of the brief, he describes that the

injury was so serious that it would definitely result in the death of the deceased,

hence the Appellant’s intention is proved.

ප%: ම වැනි තුවාල මෙේතුමවන් පුද්ගලමයක්ට අනිවාර්යuමයන් රනය

මගනමදනවාද @ ස්වභාවික තත්ත්වයක් යටමත් රනය මගන මදනවාද@

(Q: Are such injuries necessarily fatal or could cause death in the ordinary

course of nature?)

SC Appeal 70/2018 JUDGMENT Page 6 of 15

උ: ම වැනි තුවාල සඳො ඉක් නින් ශල්Hකර් යක් සිදු කිරීම න් ජීවිතය මේරා

ගැනීමේ ෙැකියාව තිමෙනවා.

(A: There is potential to save lives by performing prompt surgery for such

injuries as this.)

ප%: ශලHකර් යක් සිදුකමල් නැත්නේ ස්වභාවික තත්ත්වයක් යටමත් රනය

මගන මදනවාද@

(Q: if no surgery is performed could death have resulted in the ordinary course

of nature?)

උ: රුධිරය ගලා යා මෙේතුමවන් ඉතා ඉක් නින් රනය මගන මදනවා.

(A: Because of bleeding, death results very quickly.)

As revealed from the evidence placed before the trial Court, the Appellant at

the time of the incident was married and had two children. The fingerprint report of

the Appellant was produced before the trial judge and according to the said report;

the Appellant had a previous conviction in 1998.

The Court of Appeal in the order of the revision application referred Ananda

vs Attorney General (1995 2 SLR 315), Attorney General vs Dewapriya

Walgamage and another (1990 2 SLR 212) and Liyana Mendis Gunadasa and

two others vs Attorney General (CA 141/2006 decided on 20/06/2014). The

Court of Appeal stated in the order as follows; “it is settled law that even a deserving

sentence made after a considerable period of time should not be imposed at a later

stage” (sic). There is no reference made in the judgment that the Court of Appeal had

considered the above judgments in making their decision.

Since it is mentioned, I perused the said judgments. In Ananda vs Attorney

General (supra) the Accused was convicted for causing grievous hurt and a sentence

of 10 months imprisonment was imposed. When it was appealed, the Court of

Appeal observed that implementing a sentence of 10 months after 18 years was

inappropriate. Court of Appeal held that,

SC Appeal 70/2018 JUDGMENT Page 7 of 15

“An accused has a right to be tried and punished for an offence committed

within a reasonable period of time, depending on the circumstances of each

case. A delay of over 18 years to dispose of a Criminal Case is much long period

by any standard, delays of this nature are generally regarded as mitigating

factors.”

In Attorney General vs Dewapriya Walgamage and another (supra) there

was a criminal breach of trust for which a sentence of 2 years rigorous imprisonment

and a fine were imposed. The Court of Appeal was reluctant to imprison him after

lapse of 13 years since the commission of the offence. Further it was observed that

the Accused in this case lost his employment and related benefits. He was further

ordered to pay a substantial fine of Rs. 50,000/-. Therefore, the Court of Appeal

suspended the sentence for 5 years.

In Liyana Mendis Gunadasa and two others vs Attorney General (supra)

three accused persons were initially charged for murder and attempted murder. After

the trial they were acquitted for murder and found guilty on attempted murder and a

sentence of 7 years rigorous imprisonment was imposed. The Court of Appeal

observed that imprisoning the Accused for a sentence of 7 years after the lapse of 30

years was inappropriate. Hence, Appellate Court reduced the sentence to 2 years,

suspended the same, imposed a fine and ordered to pay Rs. 30,000/- by each

accused as compensation. It was held that,

“In the case in hand the long delay of 30 years from the date of offence is a

mitigatory factor and no court would be able to decide otherwise mainly for the

reason that the court procedure, itself has taken to finally conclude the matter

by at least two decades. Such delays not only need to be avoided but

condemned in the interest of justice.”

Considering the aforementioned cases I find that the imprisonment imposed

in those cases is much less than in the present case. Here the learned trial Judge had

SC Appeal 70/2018 JUDGMENT Page 8 of 15

imposed 15 years rigorous imprisonment for an offence of culpable homicide not

amounting to murder and there is no award of compensation to the deceased. In the

present case, the indictment was served in 2009 and as per the journal entries trial

could not be taken up before the High Court as there were partly heard matters,

thereafter the Accused- Appellant sought time to re-consider his plea and later

withdraw his plea of not guilty and pleaded guilty under Section 297 of the Penal

Code for culpable homicide not amounting to murder. Trial was taken up on

8/6/2015 and evidence of 3rd, 1st and 13th witnesses were fully led and concluded on

25/04/2016 and judgment of the 12/07/2016 hence it is evident that all evidence had

been led and judgment delivered within a year from the commencement of the trial.

It is also observed in the available materials that the deceased had not in any way

provoked or was in no way involved in any manner towards the crime. In fact, he was

defending the Accused- Appellant from his wife who was insulting him in public.

The Court of Appeal has not indicated whether they are accepting or rejecting

the preliminary objections namely, although the petitioner had a right of appeal

which is a statutory right he had without exercising the same sought to invoke

revisionary jurisdiction and the order of the learned High Court Judge is not irregular,

illegal or capricious. When the State raises serious and valued preliminary objections,

it is the duty of the Court to accept or reject the same after giving due reasons.

Further it is also observed that the judgment of the Court of Appeal had not given

any reasonable grounds for reducing the sentence from 15 years to 10 years. This

was a revision application; the Appellate Court is reasonably expected to give

reasons for making a decision. Further the State has raised a specific objection

namely; the order of the learned High Court Judge is not irregular, illegal or

capricious. Considering those two objections even at this stage, I find that the order

of the learned Judge of the High Court is regular, legal and reasonable.

The right of an accused person to a fair trial is recognized in all the criminal

justice systems in the civilized world. Its denial is generally proof enough that justice

SC Appeal 70/2018 JUDGMENT Page 9 of 15

is denied. The right to a fair trial was formally recognized in International law in 1948

in the United Nations Declaration of Human Rights. Since 1948 the right to a fair trial

has been incorporated into many national, regional and international instruments.

The Sri Lankan Constitution by Article 13(3) expressly guarantees the right of a

person charged with an offence to be heard by person or by an Attorney-at-law at a

fair trial by a competent Court. In the Attorney-General vs. Segulebbe Latheef

and another (2008 SLR Volume 1, Page 225) Justice J.A.N. de Silva (as he was then),

held that, “the right to a “fair trial” amongst other things includes the following: -

….7. The right of an accused to be tried without much delay…”

I am mindful that any inordinate delay in the conclusion of a criminal trial

undoubtedly has highly deleterious effects on society generally and particularly on

the two sides of the case. But it will be a grave mistake to assume that delay in trial

does not cause acute suffering and anguish to the victim of the offence. In many

cases the victim may suffer even more than accused. Therefore, there is no reason to

give all the benefits on account of the delay in trial to the accused and to completely

deny all justice to the victim of the offence.

In Niranjan Hemachandra Sashittal and another v State of Maharashtra

(2013 4 SCC 642) it was held (at Para 18 and 19) that,

“Each case of delay in conclusion of a criminal trial has to be seen in the

facts and circumstances of such case. Mere lapse of several years since the

commencement of prosecution by itself may not justify the discontinuance

of prosecution or dismissal of indictment. The factors concerning the

accused‘s right to speedy trial have to be weighed vis-a -vis the impact of

the crime on society and the confidence of the people in judicial system.

Speedy trial secures right to an accused but it does not preclude the rights

of public justice.”

SC Appeal 70/2018 JUDGMENT Page 10 of 15

In Abdul Rehman Antulay v. R.S. Nayak (AIR 1992 SC 1701) it was held that,

several questions may be considered before deciding if the delay may be construed

to the advantage of the accused (page 1722). Further (at page 1730) it was held that,

“…in short it is not possible in the very nature of things and present day

circumstances to draw a time limit beyond which a criminal proceeding will not

be allowed to go…” also at page 1731 it was held that, “while determining

whether undue delay has occurred (resulting in violation of right to speedy trial)

one must have regard to all the attendant circumstances, including nature of

offence, number of accused and witnesses, the work-load of the court

concerned, prevailing local conditions and so on..” .

In the present case, the indictment was served in 2009 and as per the journal

entries trial could not be taken up as there were partly heard matters. Then the

Accused- Appellant sought time to re-consider his plea. Trial was taken up on

8/6/2015 less than one-year from the commencement of the trial, evidence of three

witnesses (witnesses 3, 1 and 13) were fully led and concluded, then the Accused-

Appellant pleaded guilty. Judgment of the High Court was delivered on 12/07/2016

hence it is evident that all evidence had been led and judgment delivered within a

year from the commencement of the trial. In this circumstance, I am of the view that,

there was no severe prejudice caused specifically to the Appellant as he claims when

imposing a sentence after a long period of time which was intractable.

Presently, I will proceed to deal with the sentence. The trial court imposed 15

years rigorous imprisonment and Court of Appeal considered the revision

application, and affirmed the conviction and reduced the sentence to 10 years

rigorous imprisonment from 15 years rigorous imprisonment. The counsel for the

Appellant urged intoxication as a defence (which was not pleaded before the trial

court) and the fact that the Appellant is a married person and father of two children

for mitigation of the sentence imposed on the Appellant by the High Court. In Rex.

Vs. Bazely (1969) C.L.R. held, that because of the criminal stupidity, when a person

SC Appeal 70/2018 JUDGMENT Page 11 of 15

loses his family life, it is not a ground for not imposing a severe sentence. Section

14(b) of the Judicature Act No. 2 of 1978 (as amended) states that, Right of Appeal in

Criminal cases- any person who stands convicted of any offence by the High Court

may appeal thereto to the Court of Appeal-

“(b) In a case tried without a jury, as of right, from any conviction or sentence

except in the case where-

(i) The accused has pleaded guilty; or

(ii) The sentence is for a period of imprisonment of one month of

whatsoever nature or a fine not exceeding one hundred rupees;

Provided that in every such case there shall be an appeal on a question of law

or where the accused has pleaded guilty on the question of sentence only.”

It is trite law that where an accused has pleaded guilty to the indictment an

appeal would not lie against the conviction but against the sentence or it would lie

where the appeal bears upon a question of law which in this case the Accused-

Appellant failed to do so.

Hence, the issue that has arisen for consideration is whether the learned High

Court Judge has disregarded the vital procedure of considering the facts in

mitigation, when he was imposing the sentence. Before that, it is relevant to note,

Section 13 of the code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 stipulates that: -

"That the High Court may impose any sentence or other penalty prescribed by

written law". In the instant case the said sentence or penalty prescribed by written

law is found in Section 297 of the Penal Code which deals with culpable homicide not

amounting to murder and reads as follows;

“Whoever commits culpable homicide not amounting to murder shall be

punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend

to twenty years, and shall also be liable to fine, if the act by which the death is

caused is done with the intention of causing death, or of causing such bodily

SC Appeal 70/2018 JUDGMENT Page 12 of 15

injury as is likely to cause death; or with imprisonment of either description for a

term which may extend to ten years, or with fine, or with both, if the act is done

with the knowledge that it is likely to cause death, but without any intention to

cause death, or to cause such bodily injury as is likely to cause death.”

The penalties for culpable homicide not amounting to murder depend on

whether the offence was committed with intention (in which case, the maximum is 20

years’ imprisonment) or knowledge (in which case, the maximum is 10 years’

imprisonment). Hence, Court may impose a sentence upto 20 years imprisonment for

an offence of culpable homicide not amounting to murder committed with intention.

In considering intention and knowledge in the context of culpable homicide, the type

of weapon used (if any), the way the injuries were inflicted, the nature, location and

number of injuries inflicted on the victim are considerable facts. As discussed above,

JMO described that the injury was so serious and will definitely result in the death of

the deceased, hence the Appellant’s intention is proved and the Court may impose a

sentence upto 20 years imprisonment and the Learned Judge of the High Court had

imposed 15 years rigorous imprisonment.

The Accused-Appellant took up the defense of intoxication before this Court

which was not pleaded before the High Court. In this case it is evidenced that the

Accused- Appellant consumed liquor with about 10 of his friends and there is no

evidence to show that the Accused- Appellant had reached the degree of

intoxication as envisaged by section 79 of the Penal Code to claim the defence of

intoxication in which he could not have formed a murderous intention. There is also a

gap between the time when he was allegedly found drinking and the time of the

crime.

I am of the view that the trial court saw and heard the parties and it is not an

easy task for an appellate court to replace its eyes and ears for those of trial court.

Findings of facts are made by a trial court based on evidence led by the prosecution

and State, thereby the learned trial judge weighs the evidence in the context of the

SC Appeal 70/2018 JUDGMENT Page 13 of 15

circumstances of the case. A finding of fact involves both perception and evaluation.

Since the appellate court does not have that advantage of the trial court, such

findings should not be treated lightly.

It is observed in many criminal appeals that the accused takes up a new

defence and a new stance which he had not taken at the trial court. When the

accused takes up a defence before the trial court, the learned trial judge has a

tedious duty to consider the facts of the case, victim, accused, social repercussions

and many other matters before he passes a sentence. Virtually, the trial judge has the

visual and audio of the place and area of the incident. He considers all those matters

with a judicially trained mind and evaluates the entire material before him and makes

the decision. When the matter is appealed, the Appellate Court should consider the

appeal in situ. Submitting a new defence or a material which was not before the trial

judge should not be tolerated. It is the duty of the Appellate Court to evaluate the

judgment and to see whether it is appropriate or not. If the Appellate Court accepts a

new defence and a new material and thereafter concludes that the trial judge is

wrong and/or the sentence it is inappropriate is very unfair to the judicially trained

minded trial judge who is not represented other than by his judgment. It is my view

that unless it is a question of law, a new defence and a new material which was not

submitted before the trial court should not be considered before the Appellate

Court.

Primarily, it is to be borne in mind that sentencing for any offence has a social

goal. A sentence is to be imposed by taking into account the nature of the offence

and the manner in which the offence has been committed. One of the fundamental

purposes of imposing a sentence is based on the principle that the accused must

realize that the crime committed by him has not only created a dent in his life but

also a concavity in the social fabric. It serves as a deterrent. It is equally true that the

proportionality between the offence committed and the penalty imposed must be

reflected in the conviction and the sentence.

SC Appeal 70/2018 JUDGMENT Page 14 of 15

In this context, I may refer with profit to the pronouncement in Dhananjoy

Chaterjee vs State of West Bengal [1994 SCR (1) 37, 1994 SCC (2) 220] at paragraph

14 and 15 as follows.

“ Some criminals get very harsh sentences while many receive

grossly different sentence for an essentially equivalent crime and a

shockingly large number even go unpunished thereby encouraging the

criminal and, in the ultimate, making justice suffer by weakening the

system's credibility. Of course, it is not possible to lay down any cut and

dry formula relating to imposition of sentence but the object of

sentencing should be to see that the crime does not go unpunished and

the victim of crime as also the society has the satisfaction that justice has

been done to it….

Imposition of appropriate punishment is the manner in which the

courts respond to the society's cry for justice against the criminals. Justice

demands that courts should impose punishment befitting the crime so

that the courts reflect public abhorrence of the crime. The courts must not

only keep in view the rights of the criminal but also the rights of the

victim of crime and the society at large while considering imposition of

appropriate punishment.”

As to the matter of assessing sentence in a particular instance, Basnayake A.C.

J in the case of Attorney-General v H.N. de Silva (57 NLR 121) as follows;

“... in assessing the punishment that should be passed on an offender, a Judge

should consider the matter of sentence both from the point of view of the public

and the offender. Judges are too often prone to look at the question only form

the angle of the offender. A Judge should, in determining the proper sentence,

first consider the gravity of the offence as it appears from the nature of the act

itself and should have regard to the punishment provided in the Penal Code or

other statute under which the offender is charged. He should also regard the

SC Appeal 70/2018 JUDGMENT Page 15 of 15

effect of the punishment as a deterrent and consider to what extent it will be

effective. "

As discussed above, every court has a duty to impose a proper sentence

having regard to the nature of the offence and the manner in which it was executed

or committed. The courts are expected to consider all relevant facts and

circumstances bearing on the question of sentence and proceed to impose a

sentence commensurate with the gravity of the offence.

We affirm the conviction and the sentence imposed by the Court of Appeal.

There is no appeal from the State. For the purpose of clarity, the Accused- Appellant

is convicted under section 297 of the Penal Code and imposed a sentence of 10 years

rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 7500/- in default 6 months simple

imprisonment. Further the High Court Judge is directed to implement the sentence

from the date the Accused- Appellant surrenders himself of his bail.

Accordingly, I answer the question of law negatively and dismiss the appeal.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

B.P. ALUWIHARE, PC, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

E.A.G.R. AMARASEKARA, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT