==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 15

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal against the

Judgment dated 10th February 2014 delivered

by the High Court of the North Western Province

in appeal bearing No. NWP/HCCA/KUR/36/

2009 (F); D.C. Kuliyapitiya Case No. 15148/L.

S.C. Appeal No: 1. Warnakulasooriya Vinsel Thamel

38/2016 (Deceased)

1A. Pandiwela Lekamge Janaka Pandiwela,

SC/HCCA/LA No: 2. Pandiwela Lekamge Janaka Pandiwela,

144/2024 Both of Pahalagama, Udubaddawa.

PLAINTIFFS

NWP/HCCA/KUR

36/2009 (F) Vs.

D.C. Kuliyapitiya Case No: 1. Warnakulasooriya Stanley Joseph Thamel,

15148/L 2. Warnakulasooriya Suji Nilosha Thamel,

3. Warnakulasooriya Suraj Dinuka Thamel,

All of Pahalagama, Udubaddawa.

DEFENDANTS

AND BETWEEN

1. Warnakulasooriya Vinsel Thamel,

(Deceased)

1A. Pandiwela Lekamge Janaka Pandiwela.

2. Pandiwela Lekamge Janaka Pandiwela,

Both of Pahalagama, Udubaddawa.

PLAINTIFF-APPELLANTS

Page 2 of 15

Vs.

1. Warnakulasooriya Stanley Joseph Thamel,

2. Warnakulasooriya Suji Nilosha Thamel,

3. Warnakulasooriya Suraj Dinuka Thamel,

All of Pahalagama, Udubaddawa.

DEFENDANT-RESPONDENTS

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Warnakulasooriya Stanley Joseph Thamel,

2. Warnakulasooriya Suji Nilosha Thamel,

3. Warnakulasooriya Suraj Dinuka Thamel,

All of Pahalagama, Udubaddawa.

DEFENDANT-RESPONDENT-APPELLANTS

Vs.

1. Warnakulasooriya Vinsel Thamel,

(Deceased)

1A. Pandiwela Lekamge Janaka Pandiwela.

2. Pandiwela Lekamge Janaka Pandiwela,

Both of Pahalagama, Udubaddawa.

PLAINTIFF-APPELLANT-RESPONDENTS

Before : Janak De Silva, J.

: K. Priyantha Fernando, J.

: Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

Counsel : Dr. Sunil F. A. Cooray instructed by Sudarshani

Cooray for the Defendant-Respondent-Appellants.

Page 3 of 15

: Niranjan De Silva with Navindu Mendis instructed

by Manjula Balasooriya for the Plaintiff-Appellant-

Respondents.

Argued on : 30-06-2025

Written Submissions : 02-03-2017 (By the 1A and 2nd Plaintiff-Appellant-

Respondents)

: 06-06-2016 and 05-08-2025 (By the Defendant-

Respondent-Appellants)

Decided on : 17-10-2025

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

This is an appeal preferred by the defendant-respondent-appellants

(hereinafter referred to as the defendants) on the basis of being aggrieved by

the judgment pronounced on 10-02-2014 by the High Court of the North

Western Province holden in Kurunegala while exercising its civil appellate

jurisdiction.

When this matter was considered for the granting of Leave to Appeal on 19-

02-2016, this Court granted leave on the questions of law as set out in sub-

paragraphs a, b, and c of paragraph 17 of the petition dated 21-03-2014.

In addition, the learned Counsel for the 1A and the 2nd plaintiff-appellants-

respondents (hereinafter referred to as the plaintiffs) was also allowed to

submit a consequential question of law for determination.

The said questions of law read as follows,

1. Have Their Lordships of the Provincial High Court erred in law when

forming the question “whether deed No. 376 can revoke deed of gift

No. 2234 dated 06-06-1982”, as one of the main questions to decide

the case, as it was not an issue framed by the respondents at the

trial stage.

Page 4 of 15

2. Have their Lordships of the Provincial High Court erred in law by

going against the inveterate practice of our Courts to decide the case

upon on the framed issue and not upon the entire pleadings of the

submissions of the Counsel.

3. Have their Lordships of the Provincial High Court erred in law when

failing to appreciate the District Court judgment when it is in length

that there is no issue as to whether the persons are governed by the

common law or the Kandyan law in the framed issues.

4. Whether the deed No. 376 was successful in revoking deed No. 2234

without a decision of a Court of law.

The plaintiffs-appellant-respondents (hereinafter referred to as the plaintiffs),

in their action instituted before the District Court of Kuliyapitiya of the plaint

dated 03-11-2005 have prayed for a declaration that two deeds bearing No.

376 and 377 be declared null and void, and for a declaration that the 2nd

plaintiff is entitled to the land in suit subject to the life interest of the 1st

plaintiff, among other reliefs sought.

During the pendency of the action, the 1st plaintiff has passed away, and the

2nd plaintiff has been substituted in place of the 1st plaintiff as well.

It has been averred in the plaint that the 1st plaintiff, being the owner of the

subject matter of the action, gifted the same by the deed of gift No. 2234 dated

04-06-1982 to the 2nd plaintiff subject to his life interest.

It has been claimed that on or about July 1998, the defendants, after making

certain false representations and by misleading the 1st plaintiff, obtained his

signature for several documents, and the 1st plaintiff came to know

subsequently that two deeds, namely, deed No. 376 and 377 dated 03-07-

1998, had been prepared and registered. The deed No. 376 had been prepared

as a revocation of the deed of gift No. 2234, while deed No. 377 has been

prepared as a deed of gift by the 1st plaintiff to the defendants.

It had been the position of the plaintiffs of the action that this was not a willful

act of the 1st plaintiff and the said deed Nos. 376 and 377 were null and void,

and have no force in law.

Page 5 of 15

In paragraph 8 of the plaint, they have set out the reasons as to why they

claim as such in the following manner.

a. The deeds had not been prepared in accordance with section 2 of the

Prevention of Frauds Ordinance.

b. The defendants of the action obtained the signature of the 1st

plaintiff by misleading him and by providing false and incorrect

facts.

c. The 1st plaintiff signed the said deeds as a result of the

misunderstanding of the matters as stated above.

At the trial, the parties have admitted the corpus of the action and the

jurisdiction of the Court, and also of the fact that the 1st plaintiff was the

owner of half share of the land mentioned in the schedule of the plaint. It has

also been admitted that the 1st plaintiff has signed the deed of gift No. 2234

(P-03) mentioned in the 3rd paragraph of the plaint. An admission also has

been recorded to the effect that deed No. 376 and 377 have been executed as

stated in paragraph 6 of the plaint.

It is clear from the issues raised by the parties that the plaintiffs have relied

on the matters stated in paragraph 8 of the plaint, as reproduced above, to

claim that the questioned deeds No. 376 and 377 are null and void. The issues

raised by the defendants show that they have relied on the said two deeds on

the basis that the said deeds are deeds executed in accordance with the law,

and it is the defendants who are entitled to the land mentioned in the schedule

of the plaint as stated in their answer.

After the trial, the learned District Judge of Kuliyapitiya of his judgment dated

05-02-2009 has determined that the main question need determination would

be whether the questioned deeds, namely, deed No. 376 dated 03-07-1998

marked P-04, which is a deed of a revocation of a gift, and deed No. 377 of the

same date marked P-05, which is a deed of gift written in favour of the

defendants, are legally valid deeds.

Page 6 of 15

After having analyzed the evidence led before the Court, the learned District

Judge has determined that the said two deeds are deeds executed in

accordance with the relevant provisions of the Prevention of Frauds

Ordinance, and hence, they are legally valid deeds. It has been determined

that the plaintiffs have failed to provide sufficient evidence to establish that

the said deeds were prepared fraudulently or by misrepresentation of facts to

the 1st plaintiff, and therefore, the plaintiffs’ contention as to the said

allegations has not been established.

The learned District Judge has also considered the contention that the

executer of the deeds marked as P-03, P-04, and P-05, the 1st plaintiff of the

action, was not a person governed under the provisions of Kandyan Law, and

hence, he had no legal status to revoke the deed marked P-03 on his own

accord. He has also observed that the deed of gift marked P-03, namely, deed

No. 2234, was not an irrevocable deed of gift.

However, it has been determined that there was no issue before the trial Court

as to whether the 1st plaintiff had a right to revoke the deed P-03 on his own

accord, and an issue whether the 1st plaintiff was a person governed under

the provisions of Kandyan Law or not are matters that should have been put

in issue and substantiated by the plaintiffs, if they sought a judgment as

prayed on that basis. In view of the above, the learned District Judge has

decided to disregard the contention as to the validity of the revocation of P-03

by the deed marked P-04 argued on the said basis.

After having considered the evidence, the learned District Judge has

determined that the plaintiffs have failed to prove their case, and had

answered the issues raised by the plaintiffs in the negative while answering

the issues of the defendants in the affirmative. Accordingly, the action of the

plaintiffs had been dismissed and the counterclaim of the defendants had

been allowed.

Page 7 of 15

When the judgment of the learned District Judge of Kuliyapitiya was appealed

against by the plaintiffs, the learned Judges of the High Court, after having

considered the facts placed before the Court, as well as the relevant law, have

proceeded to pronounce the impugned judgment on 10-02-2014.

It appears that the learned Judges of the High Court have considered whether

deed No. 376 (P-04) can legally revoke the deed of gift No. 2234 (P-03) and

whether the said deed No. 376 and 377 (P-05) are from its very beginning null

and void.

It has also been considered whether the action filed by the plaintiffs to get the

deeds P-04 and P-05, which were deeds executed on 03-07-1998, has been

prescribed as the action should have been instituted in that regard within 3

years of the execution of the deed in terms of section 10 of the Prescription

Ordinance.

Having considered whether the 1st plaintiff who executed the deed marked P-

03 in favour of the 2nd plaintiff had any right to revoke the same by way of

another deed, it has been decided that although there was no specific issue

in that regard, it was a matter that should have drawn the attention of the

learned District Judge.

The learned Judges of the High Court have considered the well settled law

that although a deed of gift is generally irrevocable, it can be revoked with the

permission of a competent Court.

It has been determined that the principles of Kandyan Law where a person

who is subjected to Kandyan Law can revoke a deed of gift on its own motion

does not apply in this instance as the 1st plaintiff, namely Warnakulasooriya

Vinsel Thamel, was not a person subjected to Kandyan Law of property. It was

the view of the learned Judges of the High Court that since the case has been

initiated to challenge the validity of deeds marked P-04 and P-05, the Court

can look into such a matter.

Page 8 of 15

It has been determined that the 1st plaintiff cannot revoke the deed of gift P-

03 which was in favour of the 2nd plaintiff on his own motion, and accordingly,

the judgment of the learned District Judge of Kuliyapitiya should stand set

aside.

After having set aside the judgment, the learned Judges of the High Court

have proceeded to re-answer the issues raised between the parties in line with

the above determinations and in favour of the plaintiffs of the action giving

reliefs in favour of the 2nd plaintiff of the action.

At the argument of the appeal before this Court, the main contention of the

learned Counsel who represented the defendants was that the question

whether the 1st plaintiff was governed under the provisions of the Kandyan

Law or not was never a matter raised as an issue by either party or pleaded

in the plaint or the replication.

It was argued that matters that were not in issue cannot be subjected to a

subsequent appeal, and therefore, the learned Judges of the High Court have

erred by going on a voyage of discovery as they did in the appellate judgment.

It was also submitted that, even in the evidence, the Notary who executed the

two deeds has stated that he executed the deed of revocation on the basis that

the plaintiff was a person governed under the provisions of Kandyan Law.

It was also pointed out that after determining that the action to set aside the

two deeds marked as P-04 and P-05 had been prescribed in terms of section

10, the appeal should have been dismissed by the learned Judges of the High

Court on that ground alone, and the plaintiffs could not have maintained the

action before the District Court. It was submitted that the judgment of the

learned High Court Judges should be set aside and the judgment of the

learned District Judge of Kuliyapitiya should be affirmed.

It is quite apparent to me that the question whether the 1st plaintiff, after

having executed a deed of gift in favour of the 2nd plaintiff could have revoked

it in the manner it has been done, was a matter that was not specifically put

in issue on the basis that being a non-Kandyan he could not have done so.

Page 9 of 15

It is also clear that when the plaintiffs instituted proceedings before the

District Court, they have challenged the deeds marked P-04 and P-05 not on

the incapacity of the 1st plaintiff to revoke the deed of gift which was in favour

of the 2nd plaintiff, but on the basis that the deeds P-04 and P-05 were not

deeds prepared in accordance with section 2 of the Prevention of Frauds

Ordinance, and on the premise that they were deeds executed due to false

representation made to the 1st plaintiff by the defendants.

It is clear from the evidence led before the District Court and the judgment of

the learned District Judge, the question whether the 1st plaintiff could have

revoked the deed of gift marked P-03 on his own motion without invoking the

jurisdiction of a competent Court in that regard has not come up by way of

any issues, but has drawn the attention of the learned District Judge. On the

basis that there had been no issues raised as to whether the 1st plaintiff comes

under the provisions of Kandyan Law or not, the learned District Judge has

decided not to consider the validity of the deed of cancellation of the gift on

such a basis.

However, when the matter was argued before the High Court, the learned

Judges of the High Court have considered this as a relevant question upon

which the matter should have been decided.

It was the contention of the learned Counsel for the defendants that the

question of applicability of Kandyan Law is a question of mixed facts and law,

and only a pure question of law can be considered for the first time in an

appeal, and hence, such a matter could not have been considered at the stage

of the appeal without having put the matter in issue at the trial stage.

In support of his contention, he cited the case of Arulampikai Vs. Thambu

(1944) 45 NLR 457 at 461, which stated:

“Under our procedure all the contentious matters between the parties to

a civil suit, is so to say, focused in the issues of law and fact framed.

Whatever is not involved in the issues is to be taken as admitted by one

party or the other and I do not think that under our procedure it is open

to a party to put forward in the Court below under someone or other of

Page 10 of 15

the issues framed and when such a ground that is to say, a ground that

might have been put forward in the Court below is put forward in appeal

for the 1st time, the cautions indicated in the case of Tasmania (1890) 15

AC 223 may well be observed.”

It is abundantly clear to me from the plaint and the issues raised by the

plaintiffs before the District Court that they relied purely on their pleadings

in paragraph 8 of the plaint, which I have reproduced earlier in the judgment.

They have claimed that the disputed deeds should stand null and void on that

basis and nothing else. The defendants have raised their issues based on the

same paragraph 8 of the plaint claiming that the deeds relied on by them are

deeds executed in accordance with the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance and

the Notaries Ordinance. Although it is settled law that issues need not be

confined to the pleadings alone, there should be an issue or issues on a

particular matter that needs determination by the trial Court so that the

opposing party is put on notice. In such a situation the opposing party should

be in a position to raise his or her own issues countering such an issue.

In the instant action, it has not been put in issue by the plaintiffs whether the

1st plaintiff who executed the initial deed of gift marked P-03 could have

revoked the same by executing the deed marked P-04 or whether the 1st

plaintiff is not a person governed under the provisions of Kandyan law. As a

result, there was no necessity for the opposing party to raise issues defending

the validity of the deeds marked P-04 and P-05 on such a basis, other than

claiming that their deeds are valid.

It is the 2nd plaintiff who has given evidence in order to assert the position

taken up by the plaintiffs. In his evidence-in-chief a question has been asked

whether the 1st plaintiff was a person subjected to the provisions of Kandyan

Law, for which he has answered that he is unaware.

The plaintiffs have called two other witnesses in order to establish their case.

The Registrar of the District Court of Kuliyapitiya has been called to produce

a case record. The other witness called has been the Notary who executed the

challenged deeds marked P-04 and P-05.

Page 11 of 15

He has testified that he executed the said deeds. When he was subjected to

cross-examination by the defendant’s Counsel, several questions had been

put to him to show that the Notary executed the deed of cancellation of the

previous deed of gift on the basis that the executant of the cancellation namely

Warnakulasooriya Vincent Thamel was a person governed under the

provisions of Kandyan law and that was the reason for him to prepare the

said deed as previous deed of gift had no specific statement that it was an

irrevocable deed of gift.

This line of friendly questioning by the defence Counsel, irrespective of the

fact that there were no issues on such a basis may be having taken a hint

from the question asked from the 2nd plaintiff by the Counsel who represented

the plaintiffs. Even after such evidence being placed before the Court, no

application has been made to record any further issues.

When the case for the plaintiffs was closed, only the 1st defendant had given

evidence for the defence to assert that the deeds upon which they claim title

are valid.

In the judgment of the District Court, it clearly appears that the learned

District Judge has considered the facts and the relevant law in that regard in

relation to the issues placed before the Court for determination by the parties.

Under the circumstances, I find it relevant to consider the case of Dona Podi

Nona Ranaweera Menike Vs. Rohini Senanayake (1992) 2 SLR 190, where

it was held:

1. A matter that has not been raised before might, nevertheless, be a

ground of appeal on which the appellate court might base its

decision provided it is a pure question of law; or, if the point might

have been put forward in the Court below under one of the issues

raised, and the Court is satisfied,

i. That it has before it all the facts bearing upon the new

contention, as completely as would have been the case

if the controversy had arisen at the trial.

Page 12 of 15

ii. That no satisfactory explanation could have been offered

by the other side, if an opportunity had been afforded it,

of adducing evidence with regard to the point raised for

the first time in appeal.

The matter is not one depending simply on the issue whether the

new point was one of law, on the other hand, or a question of fact or

a mixed question of law and fact, on the other.

In the averments of the plaint, the plaintiffs had not averred that they are not

persons subjected to the Kandyan Law and therefore, the 1st plaintiff could

not revoke the deed of gift marked P-03 on his own motion.

Although the plaintiffs have come before the Court on a different basis

challenging the deeds marked P-03 and P-04, it is my considered view that

the learned District Judge should have drawn his attention to the relevant

legal provisions in order to determine whether the 1st plaintiff could have

revoked his own deed of gift by the deed of revocation marked P-04, when the

case was determined in favour of the defendants effectually giving legal effect

to the deed of revocation marked P-04. It needs to be noted that it is the duty

of a trial judge to settle issues relevant to the determination of the matter

before the Court and the issues need not be confined to the pleading only

when framing such an issue relevant to the determination of an action.

It needs to be noted that the right for a person to subsequently revoke his own

deed of gift is an exception to the rule. It is well settled law that in terms of

our Common Law, a deed of gift is usually irrevocable.

The exception is the right for a person who is governed under the provisions

of the Kandyan Law to revoke such a deed of gift on his own free will unless

he has specifically stated in the deed of gift that the deed is irrevocable.

It is also well settled law that although a deed of gift is generally irrevocable,

it is revocable through an action filed before a competent Court in that regard.

Page 13 of 15

It was held in Dona Podi Nona Ranaweera Menike Vs. Rohini Senanayake

(Supra):

a. Although a gift is generally irrevocable it is revocable,

i. if the donee failed to give effect to a direction as to its

application (donatio sub mode), or

ii. on the ground of the donee’s ingratitude or

iii. if at the time of the gift the donor was childless but

afterwards became the father of a legitimate child by birth

or legitimation.

A donor is entitled to revoke a donation from account of ingratitude,

i. if the donee lays manus impias (impious hands) on the

donor

ii. if he does him an atrocious injury

iii. if he willfully causes him great loss of property

iv. if he makes an attempt on his life

v. if he does not fulfill the conditions attached to the gift

vi. other equally grave causes

b. Other conveyances not made out of pure liberality like a conveyance

propter nuptias are irrevocable on account of the donee’s ingratitude or

on account of appearance of progeny by birth or legitimation.

I find that the learned Judges of the High Court have correctly discussed the

principles of Kandyan Law and its applicability to the deed of revocation in

question, the irrevocability of a deed of gift under common law principles and

the mode of revoking such a deed.

High Court has considered that such a revocation is not automatic, and it

requires a decision of a competent Court. However, none of these are matters

where evidence has been led before the trial Court or put in issue.

Therefore, I am in agreement with the learned Counsel for the defendants that

these are matters mixed facts and law and matters that cannot be considered

for the first time in appeal when there was no evidence on offer to come to

such findings.

Page 14 of 15

However, I am mindful that the learned Judges of the High Court have been

very much aware of the fact that if the judgment of the District Court is

allowed to stand as it is, it would in effect give legal sanctity to a deed executed

by a person who cannot revoke a deed of gift in the manner as it was done by

executing the deed of revocation marked P-04. I find that it was in that context

the learned Judges of the High Court have decided to allow the appeal, set

aside the judgment of the District Court, and also to answer the issues raised

afresh, so that the judgment would be in favour of the appellants.

I am of the view that there was no legally tenable basis before the High Court

to proceed on such a path for the reasons as considered aforesaid. I find that

the only option that should have been considered by the learned Judges of

the High Court was to explore the possibility of ordering a retrial if it was

prudent to do so, which I think a matter that this Court should not venture

into.

For the reasons as considered above, I find no basis to agree with the

judgment of the learned Judges of the High Court.

Accordingly, I answer the questions of law no. 1, 2, 3 in the affirmative, while

answering the 4th question of law raised on behalf of the plaintiff holding that

this was not an issue under which the issues were framed before the trial

Court.

However, although the appellate judgment is set aside, I am of the view that

the judgment of the learned District Judge of Kuliyapitiya where the plaint of

the plaintiffs had been dismissed and the counterclaim of the defendants had

been allowed by answering their issues in their favour cannot also be allowed

to stand in its totality for the reasons earlier discussed.

Accordingly, while allowing the judgment of the learned District Judge on the

dismissal of the plaint, I set aside the part of the judgment where the learned

District Judge has allowed the counterclaim of the defendants by answering

the issues raised by them in their favour.

Page 15 of 15

Therefore, I hold that the claim of the plaintiffs before the District Court and

also the counterclaim by the defendants should stand dismissed, and no party

shall be entitled to any relief by the District Court.

The appeal is partly allowed up to the above extent.

There will be no costs of the appeal.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Janak De Silva, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

K. Priyantha Fernando, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court