==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCISLIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

In the matter of an Appeal from the Judgment of the High Court (Civil Appellate) of the Central Province holden in Kandy in terms of Article 127, 128 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka read with Section 5 (c) of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Amendment Act No.54 of 2006.

Merin Dinusha Aberathna,

No.434, Kandy Road,

Kadawatha.

Plaintiff

S.C.Appeal No.177/2023

SC/HCCA/LA Application

No. 392/2022

H.C. Civil Appeal (Gampaha No. Vs.

WP/ HCCA/ GAM/ 108/2019(F)

D.C. Gampaha, Case No. 1584/L

Henarath Mohottige Janaka Chaminda Perera,

No.114/1, Ihala Biyanwila,

Kandy Road, Kadawatha.

Defendant

S. C. Appeal No.177/2023

2

AND BETWEEN

Merin Dinusha Aberathna,

No.434, Kandy Road,

Kadawatha.

Plaintiff-Appellant

Vs.

Henarath Mohottige Janaka Chaminda Perera,

No.114/1, Ihala Biyanwila,

Kandy Road, Kadawatha.

Defendant- Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

Henarath Mohottige Janaka Chaminda Perera,

No.114/1, Ihala Biyanwila,

Kandy Road, Kadawatha.

Defendant—Respondent-Appellant

Vs.

Merin Dinusha Aberathna,

No.434, Kandy Road,

Kadawatha.

Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent

S. C. Appeal No.177/2023

3

BEFORE : S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J. K. K. WICKREMASINGHE, J. ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

COUNSEL : Rohan Sahabandu P.C. with Ms. Chathurika Elvitiagala and Ms. S. Senanayake for the Defendant-Respondent-Appellant Kapila Liyanagamage for the Plaintiff-Appellant- Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 01st July, 2024

DECIDED ON : 12th March, 2026

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

The Plaintiff instituted the instant action before the District Court of

Gampaha seeking for a declaration of title to the premises described in the

schedule to the Plaint and for the eviction of the Defendant, who occupies

the premises without paying any rent despite the issuance of notice to quit

and damages. The Plaintiff also averred in her Plaint that the premises in

suit is not covered by the provisions of the Rent Act No. 7 of 1972.

In his amended answer, the Defendant contested those claims and

averred that the premises in suit is covered by the provisions of the said

Act and, since a valid contract of rent is in operation, he seeks the

dismissal of the action of the Plaintiff.

After trial, the District Court dismissed the Plaintiff’s action. The

Plaintiff preferred an appeal against that judgment. In appeal, the High

S. C. Appeal No.177/2023

4

Court of Civil Appeal, held with the Plaintiff and granted reliefs as prayed

for after allowing her appeal.

The Defendant thereupon sought Leave to Appeal from this Court.

When the petition of the Defendant was supported on 21.11.2023, this

Court granted Leave to Appeal on the following two questions of law;

a. Did the learned Civil Appeal High Court Judge err in law when

he had concluded that the premises relevant to this case is an

excepted premises under the Rent Act?

b. If the answer to the above question of law is in the negative, is

the Plaintiff entitled to succeed with his action?

At the hearing of the Defendant’s appeal before this Court, the

learned President’s Counsel who represented him contended that the High

Court of Civil Appeal fallen into error when it held that the business

premises in suit, is an excepted premises, in terms of Section 2(4) of the

Rent Act. He submitted that the appellate Court has acted on the premise

that the first assessment of said business premises was carried out by the

Biyagama Pradesheeya Sabha in the year 1987, when there was clear evidence

presented before the trial Court to show the contrary. Learned President’s

Counsel also submitted that it was for the Plaintiff to establish that the

premises in suit was excepted premises and the High Court of Civil

Appeal had erroneously imposed that burden on the Defendant. He relied

on the judgment of Wickramasinghe v Atapattu (1986) 1 Sri L.R. 16 in

support of that submission.

Perusal of the proceedings before the trial Court reveals that, at the

very commencement of the trial, the parties have recorded several

S. C. Appeal No.177/2023

5

admissions. The set of admissions so recorded includes the admissions

that relate to the ownership of the premises in suit being with the Plaintiff

and that the Defendant operates a business under the title of “Wipulasiri

Cream House” as a tenant of the Plaintiff for a monthly rent of Rs. 1,000.00.

The instant appeal was argued primarily on the determination of the

issue No. 4 of the Plaintiff, which had been raised to the effect whether the

premises in suit is covered by the provisions of the Rent Act. The trial

Court held that the premises in suit is covered by the provisions of the

Rent Act on the basis that the Plaintiff had failed to establish that the

business premises was assessed for the first time by the Biyagama

Pradesheeya Sabha in the year 1987, as the witness called by the Plaintiff,

who represented that Sabha, said in evidence that there may have been a

prior assessment to the one conducted in 1987, although he could not trace

any records indicating that such an assessment had been made.

In appeal, the High Court of Civil Appeal held that the trial Court

was in error in coming to the conclusion that it was more probable that

there would have been a prior assessment, a conclusion which had reached

by the original Court in the absence of any such evidence confirming the

existence of such an assessment. The appellate Court was of the view that

there was no evidence that supported such a conclusion and thereby

satisfying the burden of proof to the requisite degree of proof, i.e., on a

balance of probability.

The question of fact that must be answered in relation to the first

question of law therefore could be identified as to whether the annual

assessment of the business premises made by the Biyagama Pradesheeya

S. C. Appeal No.177/2023

6

Sabha for the year 1987 was made for the first time, after 1st of January

1968, in terms of the Rent Act. If the High Court of Civil Appeal has

determined that question of fact correctly in allowing the appeal of the

Plaintiff, then the instant appeal by the Defendant must fail.

In relation to assessment of the correctness of the determination

made by the appellate Court on the said question of fact, this Court must

first consider the evidence presented before the trial Court, to assess the

correctness of the said determination of fact, as to when this building

became a business premises and whether an assessment made prior to

1987, not as a business premises but as a residential premises. The

property on which the building was built on, would not rope in the

premises in suit right into scope of the Rent Act.

The evidence of the father of the Plaintiff (Jerome Abeyratne) is that he

purchased the property, which the business premises relevant to the

instant appeal stands, from one of his uncles, Don Thedore Julian

Obeyesekere, in the year 1987. In the year 2001, he gifted same to his

daughter, the Plaintiff. Abeyratne admits that at the time he purchased the

property in 1987, the Defendant’s father was already occupying the

building. He acted on the understanding that the tenant would move out

whenever he wanted to occupy the building. Abeyratne also tendered an

extract (P3) obtained from the Assessment Register maintained by the

Biyagama Pradesheeya Sabha, in relation to the business premises located in

Ihala Biyanwila, under the assessment No. 1104, Kandy Road, Kadawatha, for

the period commencing from the year 1987 and ending at the year 2008.

S. C. Appeal No.177/2023

7

In order to formally prove the document P3, which was marked

‘subject to proof’, the Plaintiff called a witness from the Biyagama Pradesheeya

Sabha, who confirmed the authenticity of the said extract. The witness,

Kelum Pathirana, confirmed that the said business premises is still

registered under the ownership of one Obeyesekere and had been assessed,

for the purpose of assessment tax, at the annual value of Rs. 54,346.00.

During cross-examination, it was suggested by the Defendant to the

witness that the business premises under suit was placed under the Greater

Colombo Economic Zone Authority before the Biyagama Pradesheeya Sabha was

established. The witness said there had been an assessment made prior to

P3, but is unable to state when it was assessed for the first time.

The Defendant, Chaminda Perera, stated in his evidence that it was

his father who occupied the said business premises, before he succeeded

him, as its tenant since the death of his father in 1991. He did not offer any

evidence indicating when his father moved into occupy the business

premises or when that building was put up by Obeyesekere. During cross-

examination the Defendant conceded that he has no documentary

evidence to produce before Court in support of the position that he

succeeded as the tenant of the business premises or that he paid any rent

after succeeding his father as the tenant. He admitted that it was Abeyratne

who funded the concrete structure, after the original building was partly

demolished for the purpose of Kandy-Colombo Road widening project, but

once again failed to mention, when exactly this event had taken place.

The Defendant also called a witness in support of his case. Priyantha

Amaratunga, who claims that he owns a property situated about 100 meters

S. C. Appeal No.177/2023

8

away from Kadawatha town and personally aware of the business venture

undertaken by his friend, the Defendant in the premises in suit. The

important part in his evidence in relation to the determination of the

question of the first assessment of the business premises is that he paid

assessment to Greater Colombo Economic Commission before the area was

vested in the Biyagama Pradesheeya Sabha, with its creation in 1987.

Before dismissing the action of the Plaintiff, the District Court,

considered this aspect of making the first assessment as a business

premises, and arrived at the conclusion that, in the absence of any

evidence of an assessment made prior to 1987, and the Defendant’s father

was in occupation of the building before that year, the Plaintiff had failed

to establish the fact when was the business premises in suit was first

assessed. The trial Court therefore did not accept P3 as the first annual

assessment of the premises in suit.

In appeal, the High Court of Civil Appeal, interfered with that

finding of the District Court on this point on the basis that there was no

evidence to indicate there was an assessment prior to P3, and set aside the

said conclusion reached by the trial Court as a conclusion reached without

any evidence.

Learned President’s Counsel, in relation to this aspect of the case,

submitted to this Court that it was for the Plaintiff to establish by evidence

that the business premises was constructed in 1987 and assessed for the

first time in that year, in order to qualify to be excluded from the

application of the Rent Act, which he failed and the appellate Court is in

error when it interfered with the findings made by the trial Court.

S. C. Appeal No.177/2023

9

Let me identify the evidence relevant in the determination of this

factor and in that light, asses the validity of the impugned conclusion

reached by the appellate Court.

The Defendant in his original answer averred that it is his

grandfather who first came to occupy the premises in suit and that too in

the year 1965. In the amended answer, the Defendant omitted that

averment. However, in his evidence of course he named his own father

coming into occupation under Obeyesekere. The Defendant also tendered a

certified copy of the pleadings and proceedings of case No. 37373/L in the

District Court of Gampaha marked V1 to V6, instituted by Abeyratne against

him, seeking to evict him from the building. Abeyratne admitted V1 to V6

are copies of the case he instituted in 1994 seeking to evict the Defendant,

but was withdrawn halfway due to his ill health.

Of these documents, V1 refers to the Plaint filed by Abeyratne in that

action, where he averred that his predecessor in title, Obeysekere, had

acquired title to the premises by Deed No. 1, executed by Notary Public

B.R.S.D. Perera on 10.04.1982 and it was after execution of Deed No. 6309

by Notary Public Valentine Dias on 22.02.1987 that he became its owner.

Thus, there was material before the trial Court that Obeyesekere held

the property only for a period, slightly less than five years. The

proceedings of Court in case No. 37373/L containing the examination-in-

chief, cross-examination of Abeyratne are tendered as V4. Perusal of V4

indicates that Obeysekere acquired a larger land called Nedunagahawatta

alias Atambagahawatta by Deed No. 1 of 10.04.1982. The evidence does not

S. C. Appeal No.177/2023

10

clarify as to when the building (now the premises in suit) was erected by

Obeyesekere.

The schedule of the Plaint clarifies this aspect. It describes the 16

perch allotment of land on which the premises in suit stands, is a part of a

larger land called Nedunagahawatta alias Atambagahawatta, subdivided

according to Plan No. 9696 dated 16.04.1986, drawn by Licensed Surveyor

V.F.F. Perera. Thus, it is clear that at the time Abeyratne purchased the land

in 1987, it constituted a larger extent of land including the business

premises in suit. The subdivision was done only in the year 1986. This

Plan was not produced. But, it then follows that the building Obeyesekere

put up in that larger land is now caught up within the boundaries of the

parcel of land Abeyratne had purchased.

In view of these factors, it is reasonable to assume that the business

premises was put up on that land by Obeyesekere sometime after he became

the owner of it, between 1982 and 1987. It is uncontested between the

parties that the father of the Defendant came to occupy that premises as

the tenant of Obeyesekere and not as a tenant of Abeyratne.

The witness of the Defendant brought in very important evidence in

this regard. The fact that, prior to the entity called Biyagama Pradeshiya

Sabha, was created in 1987, the Greater Colombo Economic Commission,

established by the Parliament Act No. 4 of 1978, had the power to collect

assessment rates over the properties that are situated within the land area

in Kadawatha, was elicited through this witness.

S. C. Appeal No.177/2023

11

Section 22(1) of the Greater Colombo Economic Commission Act No. 4 of

1978 made provision that the said Commission deemed to be considered as

the successor to any local authority, including the ones established under

the Village Councils Ordinance (Village Councils Law No. 6 of 1964) and

therefore after March 1978, the land on which the premises in suit stood

on, came under the purview of the said Commission, by operation of law.

There is no evidence that the Greater Colombo Economic Commission

made the first assessment of the premises in suit as business premises

before its powers in this regard were vested in the Biyagama Pradesheeya

Sabha in 1987. Since the issue to be determined here is the first assessment

of the premises in suit as a business premises and not the assessment of the

land on which it was erected, the evidence relating to the time indicating

when the building came into existence must be considered as the foremost

consideration.

The Defendant’s consistent position is that it was his father who

rented out the premises from Obeysekere, apparently as the first tenant who

occupied that premises. Whether he was the first tenant or not, this could

take place only during the period Obeysekere had the premises under his

ownership, as already noted. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that

when Obeyesekere put up the building after acquiring the tile to the land on

which it stood, the construction process he commenced on the land would

have reached its completion any time around 1985 or 1986 and became

suitable to offer to a tenant as a secure business premises. Up until the

building was ready for occupation and the first tenant moved in to set up

his business, the premises could not have been assessed by Greater Colombo

S. C. Appeal No.177/2023

12

Economic Commission as a business premises and would have assessed as a

bare land.

When the building put up by Obeysekere was first occupied by the

Defendant’s father as business premises could be inferred from perusal of

evidence contained in V4. In those aborted proceedings and during cross-

examination of Abeyratne, it was elicited by the Defendant, that it was

Obeyesekere who accepted rent from his father, Elaris (who died in 1991),

commencing from the year 1989. It is important to note that the Defendant

did not suggest Abeyratne of any specific date on which the term of tenancy

commenced under Obeysekere. Abeyrante was shown receipts that confirm

accepting of rent during the period commencing from 15.09.1990 to

22.09.1993, which he accepts as payments made to Obeyesekere and

thereafter to him. The Defendant did not produce any receipts to indicate

that the premises was occupied by his father any time before 1987. Since

the Plaintiff admits that Elaris was occupying the premises when he

purchased the land in 1987, the totality of the evidence seems to suggest

that Elaris came to occupy the premisses around 1986- 1987, and the

annual assessment P3 made in 1987, assessing the value exceeding Rs.

1,000.00 of the said premises as a business premises for the first time.

The document P3 indicates that in 1987, when Biyagama Pradeshiya

Sabha made its annual assessment, there was a radio repair shop housed in

the premises in suit which it describes as a building with asbestos roofing.

At the commencement of the trial, the parties have admitted the Defendant

operates a business under the title “Wipulasiri Cream House” from the

business premises in suit. Although no evidence was led by the Defendant

that his father’s business was radio repair work, he nonetheless asserts that

S. C. Appeal No.177/2023

13

he continued his father’s business since 1991. When the Defendant himself

admitted that it was Abeyratne who funded the laying of the concrete slab

on top of the building after it was partly demolished for the purpose of

road widening, it is more probable that the building with asbestoses

roofing, which was put up by Obseyesekere and initially occupied by Elaris,

was first assessed as a business premises by the Biyagama Pradesheeya Sabha

in 1987.

The trial Court was troubled when the witness from Biyagama

Pradeshiya Sabha said there may have been prior assessments. The witness

in stating that there would have been prior assessments, did not claim that

prior assessment was made as a business premises. But that Court,

unfortunately failed to note what it ought to have looked for is whether P3

is the first assessment of the premises in suit as a business premises and

not in any other category. The High Court of Civil Appeal, in coming to

the conclusion that P3 is the first assessment of the premises as a business

premises, also considered the fact that the dispute that erupted between

the two parties when the building was partly demolished for the road

widening, the Defendant did not complain to Rent Board seeking

resolution.

Learned President’s Counsel placed heavy reliance on the statement

contained in the judgment of the appellate Court, indicating when it

concluded that there was no evidence to show that the premises in suit is

covered by the provisions of the Rent Act it had imposed the burden of

proof wrongly on the Defendant. The said sentence relied on by the

learned President’s Counsel to convince this Court of his contention that

the appellate Court had wrongly imposed a burden on the Defendant,

S. C. Appeal No.177/2023

14

whereas it was for the Plaintiff to establish that fact, as held by the Court of

Appeal in the case of Wickramasinghe v Atapattu (supra) reads “ ta wkqj

f.j,a l=,S mk;ska wdjrKh jk mrsY%hla njg ;yjqre flfrk lsisÿ idlaIshla bosrsm;aj

ke;’”.

This quoted statement from the judgment of the High Court of Civil

Appeal in itself makes no reference to a party to the action who had failed

in that task. If one considers the context in which this statement is made by

that Court, it becomes clear that it is an expression of its view, made after

considering the evidence presented before the trial Court, in relation to the

determination of issue No. 4 of the Plaintiff, which was framed to the effect

whether the premises in suit is a premises covered under the provisions of

Rent Act. The appellate Court was merely expressing its conclusion that

there was no evidence presented before Court to indicate otherwise. That

does not mean that it had imposed a burden on the Defendant to prove the

negative of that particular issue of the Plaintiff.

The Plaintiff had placed several items of evidence in support of her

assertion that the premises in suit is an excepted premises and the

appellate Court was making an observation that there was hardly any

evidence to hold otherwise. This pronouncement indicates that the

Plaintiff established the issue No. 4 in her favour by preponderance of

evidence. When there are no evidence to hold otherwise, the appellate

Court is well justified interfering with a conclusion reached by the trial

Court without sufficient evidence to hold the way it did.

In view of the reasoning contained in the preceding paragraphs of

this judgment I proceed to answer the two questions of law on which this

appeal was argued as follows;

S. C. Appeal No.177/2023

15

a. Did the learned Civil Appeal High Court Judge err in law when

he had concluded that the premises relevant to this case is an

excepted premises under the Rent Act?

No.

b. If the answer to the above question of law is in the negative, is

the Plaintiff entitled to succeed with his action?

Yes.

Therefore, the judgment of the High Court of Civil Appeal, which

had set aside the judgment of the District Court of Gampaha in exercising

appellate jurisdiction is hereby affirmed. Accordingly, the appeal of the

Defendant stands dismissed.

The Plaintiff is entitled to costs of this appeal.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT K. K. WICKREMASINGHE, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT