SC APPEAL 131/2017 JUDGEMENT Page 1 of 16

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for

special leave to appeal in terms of

Article 154(p) of the Constitution

read with Section 31DD of the

Industrial Disputes Act (as amended)

and Section 9 of the High Court of the

Province (Special Provisions) Act

No.19 of 1990.

I.A.S.N. Premalal (deceased),

No. 196/9,

Millange Kumbura,

Ranawana, Katugasthota.

APPLICANT

Badulpe Ramani Sepalika Pathirange,

No. 196/9,

Millange Kumbura,

Ranawana, Katugasthota.

SUBSTITUTED-APPLICANT

vs.

Peoples Bank,

No.75,

SC APPEAL 131/2017

SC (SPL) LA 252/2016

CP HCLTA 23/2015

LT NO 03/50/2004

SC APPEAL 131/2017 JUDGEMENT Page 2 of 16

Sri Chiththampalam A. Gardner Mw,

Colombo 02.

RESPONDENT

AND

Peoples Bank,

No.75,

Sri Chiththampalam A. Gardner Mw,

Colombo 02.

RESPONDENT-APPELLANT

vs.

Badulpe Ramani Sepalika Pathirange,

No. 196/9,

Millange Kumbura,

Ranawana, Katugasthota.

SUBSTITUTED-APPLICANT-RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

Badulpe Ramani Sepalika Pathirange,

No. 196/9,

Millange Kumbura,

Ranawana, Katugasthota.

SUBSTITUTED-APPLICANT-RESPONDENT-

APPELLANT

SC APPEAL 131/2017 JUDGEMENT Page 3 of 16

vs.

Peoples Bank,

No.75,

Sri Chiththampalam A. Gardner Mw,

Colombo 02.

RESPONDENT-APPELLANT-RESPONDENT

BEFORE : VIJITH K. MALALGODA, PC, J

S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J AND

MAHINDA SAMAYAWARDHENA, J

COUNSEL : Chanaka Kulatunga instructed by R. Thennakoon for the

Substituted-Applicant-Respondent-Petitioner.

Rasika Dissanayake with Shabbeer Huzair for the Respondent-

Appellant-Respondent.

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS: Substituted Applicant-Respondent-Appellant on 10th

August 2017.

ARGUED ON : 02nd November 2022

DECIDED ON : 06th October 2023

S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

The husband of the Substituted Applicant-Respondent-Appellant filed an application

in the Labour Tribunal of Kandy (hereinafter referred to as the Labour Tribunal)

SC APPEAL 131/2017 JUDGEMENT Page 4 of 16

against the Respondent-Appellant-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the

Respondent bank) for unlawful termination of his services. After an Inquiry, the

Learned President of the Labour Tribunal held that, the termination of the services of

the Applicant was unjust and inequitable and awarded compensation of Rs.1610105.20

(equivalent to 6 years salary and Rs. 250,000/- which was deducted from the

Applicants gratuity by the Respondent Bank after the domestic inquiry alleging that

the Appellant has defraud of Rs. 250,000/-) to the Applicant. Being aggrieved by the

order of the Labour Tribunal, the Respondent Bank appealed to the Provincial High

Court of the Central Province (hereinafter referred to as the High Court) seeking inter

alia, to set aside the order of the Labour Tribunal. The Learned High Court Judge by

her judgment had set aside the order of the Labour Tribunal. Being unsatisfied with

the said order, the Substituted Applicant had preferred this appeal before us, special

leave to appeal was granted on 29th June 2017, on the issues set out in paragraph 15

(i), (ii), (iii) and (iv) of the petition dated 28th November 2016. When this matter was

taken on 2nd November 2022, both parties have agreed to confine their arguments on

the questions of law referred to in paragraph 15 (i) and (ii) of the petition dated 28th

November 2016 reads as follows;

(i) Is the Order of the Honourable Judge of the High Court of the Central

Province against the weight of the evidence led at the inquiry before the

Labour Tribunal.

(ii) Is the Order of the Honourable Judge of the High Court of the Central

Province bad in law so far as coming into conclusion that there is no specific

procedure for substitution soon after the death of the Applicant in the

original Court.

Substituted Applicant-Respondent-Appellant filed her written submissions on 10th

August 2017 and both parties have advanced their oral submissions.

SC APPEAL 131/2017 JUDGEMENT Page 5 of 16

I find it pertinent to set out the material facts of the case prior to addressing the

question of law before us.

Iddamalgoda Arachchige Sunil Neksil Premalal (now deceased) (hereinafter sometimes

referred to as the Applicant) was an employee of the Peoples Bank (hereinafter

sometimes referred to as the Respondent Bank) from 1st August 1978 as a Grade VI-

Clerk. The Applicant gradually rose in rank and was appointed as a Staff Assistant-

Grade I of the Respondent Bank. In the material time relevant to this application,

Applicant worked as a Staff Assistant-Grade I at Peradeniya Branch of the Respondent

Bank and is alleged for defraud of Rs. 250,000/- and this was considered as a serious

misconduct. The Applicant was served with a charge sheet on 25th July 2002 setting out

three charges namely,

(1) On or about 6th September 2001 the applicant had committed theft and

dishonestly misappropriating the said sum of money Rs. 250000/- from the

cash bag of another employee namely Wijesundera who was on leave;

(2) Reporting for work on or about 19th September 2001 without the approval or

the authority of any superior officer and leaving the office without placing the

signature on the attendance register;

(3) As a result of the two acts referred to above failure to uphold the trust and

confidence the Respondent Bank had placed on the Applicant.

After this incident the Respondent Bank considered the past record of the Applicant,

there it was found that he had been warned, cautioned, punished with suspension of

increments and promotions. Further he was punished for gross acts of discipline.

Consequently, a domestic inquiry was conducted by the Respondent Bank against the

Applicant and was found guilty of serious misconduct and Applicant was dismissed

from his service by letter dated 19th December 2003. The Applicant filed an application

on 20th January 2004 before Labour Tribunal against the Respondent Bank for unlawful

termination of his services seeking, inter alia, re-instatement in his service and/ or

reasonable compensation.

SC APPEAL 131/2017 JUDGEMENT Page 6 of 16

The Respondent Bank filed its answer dated 20th February 2004 denying the position

taken up by the Applicant and fixed the matter for inquiry on 6th April 2004. Since the

Respondent Bank admitted the termination of service of the Applicant, the Respondent

Bank was directed to commence the inquiry on 6th April 2004. However, upon a

personal difficulty of the Counsel of the Respondent Bank, matter has been re-fixed for

7th July 2004 and 19th July 2004. When the matter was taken up for inquiry on the 19th

July 2004, the Counsel for the Respondent Bank moved the Labour Tribunal that there

is a criminal case regarding this issue is pending before the Magistrate Court and

moved to lay by the matter until final determination at the Magistrate Court, with the

consent of both parties the Labour Tribunal had laid by the case. This case was not

taken up for more than 2 years, then the Applicant filed a motion on 31st of January

2007 to re-open the inquiry. It was revealed that, the Honourable Attorney General has

instructed the learned Magistrate by letter dated 19th June 2006, that there is no

evidence against the Applicant, therefore that he be discharged from the charges

against him. Accordingly, the learned Magistrate had discharged the suspect

(Applicant).

The learned president of the Labour Tribunal has fixed this matter for inquiry for 25th

of April 2007 and evidence of Kalutharage Harreld Lal Fernando, the Deputy Manager-

Human Resource Management Department of the Respondent Bank was lead and

marked documents R-1 to R-7. Further inquiry was fixed for 6th May 2008. On that date

the Applicant was absent and his wife Badulpe Ramani Sepalika Pathirana appeared

before Labour Tribunal and informed that her husband had passed away on 1st of April

2008 and moved to substitute herself on behalf of her husband (Vide Journal entry

dated 6th May 2008 at page 30 of the High Court brief). The details of the substitution

will be discussed latter part of this judgment.

Thereafter, evidence of K. Surendra Premathilake- Retired Bank Officer, P. Premaratne

Rajapakse- Retired Bank Officer, S.M. Bandula Lal Kumara- Deputy Manager, Senarath

Palihawadana- Manager, W. M. Wijesundera- Retired Bank Officer, R.M. Nawarathna-

SC APPEAL 131/2017 JUDGEMENT Page 7 of 16

Retired Bank Officer, Indrani Harischandra- Retired Bank Officer and W.M.

Karunawathie Menike- Retired Bank Officer were lead on behalf of the Respondent

Bank. There was no evidence lead by the Applicant nor the Substituted Applicant. After

both parties closed their case, they filed their written submissions.

On 30th November 2015, the Learned President of the Labour Tribunal delivered her

Order and held that the termination of the Applicants service by the Respondent Bank

was unjustifiable and inequitable, and thus ordered the Respondent Bank to pay the

Appellant a sum of Rs. 1,610,105.20 being a sum equivalent to 06 years salary and Rs.

250,000/- (which was deducted from the Applicants gratuity) as compensation.

Being aggrieved by the order of the Labour Tribunal, the Respondent Bank appealed

to the High Court seeking inter alia, to set aside the order of the Labour Tribunal. The

Learned High Court Judge by her judgment had set aside the order of the Labour

Tribunal. Being aggrieved with the said Judgment, the Substituted Applicant had

preferred this appeal.

Now I wish to deal with the second question of law which deals with substitution at the

Labour Tribunal.

The learned High Court Judge decided in her judgment and says that,

%

.

However, this Court is unable to understand as to what provision of law relating

to Labour Tribunals applied to substitute an heir of the in room of the Applicant

-Respondent after his death.

SC APPEAL 131/2017 JUDGEMENT Page 8 of 16

I perused the petition submitted to the Provincial High Court of Kandy dated 29th

December 2015 by the Respondent Bank under CP/HCLTA 23/2015, and found that the

questions of law raised by referring to paragraph 10 of the Petition does not raised any

issue about the substitution procedure which was made before the learned President

of the Labour Tribunal. I am puzzled to understand how the learned Judge of the High

Court discussed and decided an issue about the substitution procedure which was not

raised by the said petition of appeal nor in the written submissions filed by the parties.

As I stated above, on 6th of May 2008, the wife of the Applicant was present before the

Labour Tribunal and she was informed of the procedure to be followed by the learned

President of the Labour Tribunal in the presence of the Respondent Bank officials and

the Substituted Applicant adhered to those instructions and filed an Affidavit, Death

Certificate of the deceased Applicant and Marriage Certificate of the deceased

Applicant and copy of her National Identity Card.

It is evident in the brief that she had filed an Affidavit, Death Certificate of the deceased

Applicant and Marriage Certificate of the deceased Applicant and copy of her National

Identity Card and same were served on the Respondent Bank.

On 28th July 2008 matter was called before the Labour Tribunal and Respondent Bank

was absent and unrepresented. The learned President of the Labour Tribunal ordered

the Assistant Secretary to send copies of the records to the Respondent Bank which

was sufficiently complied with.

The matter was fixed for 9th October 2008, on that date, both parties were present and

the Substituted Applicant supported for substitution. The Respondent Bank not only

not raised any objections but also agreed to continue with the proceedings before the

Labour Tribunal. The relevant portion of the proceedings dated 9th October 2008,

reproduced as follows; (vide page---- High Court appeal brief)

SC APPEAL 131/2017 JUDGEMENT Page 9 of 16

.

The above Sinhala proceedings were unofficially translated for the purpose of

understanding as follows:

Since the Applicant in this case died, his wife had made an application to

substitute her. Respondents had no objections regarding the said

application, and prepared to continue with the case further, Hence I am

taking it for inquiry

After the substitution of Badulpe Ramani Sepalika Pathirana in the room and place of

the Applicant I.A.S.N. Premalal, the inquiry proceeded and the Respondent Bank lead

the evidence of seven witnesses which were recorded and appears in the high court

brief from page no.39 to 520.

As discussed above there is no objection raised at the time of substitution. As per the

law, which I wished to discuss later, I do not see any illegality of the procedure adopted

by the learned President of the Labour Tribunal. The Respondent Bank is estopped

raising the issue of substitution before the High Court. Anyhow, I do not see that the

parties have raised an issue of substitution before the High Court. Since the matter was

mentioned in the judgment of the High Court and raised as a question of law before

this Court, I wish to analyse the legality of the provisions for substitution.

Section 31 C (2) of the Industrial Disputes Act (Amended) No.43 of 1950 reads as

follows;

31 C (2) - A labour tribunal conducting an inquiry shall observe the

procedure prescribed under section 31A, in respect of the conduct of

proceedings before the tribunal.

SC APPEAL 131/2017 JUDGEMENT Page 10 of 16

In numerous cases this Court held that there is no procedure prescribed in the

Industrial Disputes Act. But the President of the Labour Tribunal is empowered to make

provisions for substitution, subject to rules of natural justice. In Amerajeewa v

University of Colombo (1993) 2 SLR 327 (Five Judges Divisional Bench) Justice Mark

Fernando in agreement with all other Judges held as follows (at page 331),

While it is correct that the Industrial Disputes Act does not prescribe the

procedure to be followed in such a situation, yet section 31C (2) confers

powers upon the Labour Tribunal to devise a suitable procedure. It

was therefore incumbent upon the Tribunal to have taken some

appropriate steps to give notice to interested persons so as to satisfy the

basic requirements of Natural Justice.

(Emphasis added)

In the present case as I stated in detail above, the learned President of the Labour

Tribunal had asked the Substituted Applicant to file an Affidavit, Marriage Certificate

and Death Certificate and support the matter which is similar to the requirements

stated in the Civil Procedure Code for substitution. Considering the above judgement,

the President of the Labour Tribunal had complied with and proceeded for adoption.

With regret, the learned High Court Judge had not taken note of the judgment of the

Divisional Bench above mentioned. Considering all I am convinced that the learned

President of the Labour Tribunal had followed the proper procedure hence the

adoption is legal and compatible.

Now I see the learned Judge of the High Court dismissed the order of the President of

the Labour Tribunal at the stroke of a pen without giving reasons.

. -

.

SC APPEAL 131/2017 JUDGEMENT Page 11 of 16

.

An approximate unofficial translation of the above has been provided below for ease

of reference.

Regardless, the Labour Tribunal granted relief to the Applicant-

Respondent in his claim. However, the Respondent-Appellant states that

this conduct of the Applicant-Respondent has not been brought to its

notice by the Labour Tribunal through the evidence of witnesses and

documents. This conduct has, however, come to the attention of this Court

upon perusing the judgment passed by the Labour Tribunal.

Considering the evidence led before the Labour Tribunal which commenced from page

no. 14 to 720 and the order of the Labour Tribunal which consists of 23 pages., I find I

find there are contradictions per se and inter se in the evidence led by the Respondent

Bank. The judgment of the High Court Judge runs into four pages (actual content of

four pages in double space typed) has not analysed the evidence, corroborations and

nor contradictions. It is not a healthier practice to turn down a judgment of the original

court without giving adequate reasons. Superior Courts time and again insisted that

order/judgment made based on facts and evidence will not be rejected without giving

proper and satisfactory reasons hence the judgment of the learned High Court Judge

cannot be accepted of dismissing the order of the learned President of the Labour

Tribunal without giving reasons.

With the reasons mentioned above, I answer the first question of law affirmatively. After

careful consideration, I answer the second question of law affirmatively.

I find that the learned President of the Labour Tribunal has awarded a compensation

equivalent to 6 years of Applicants salary. I find that, the calculation was done from

the date of interdiction up to the date retirement. The President of the Labour Tribunal

slipped in her mind that the Applicant had died before reaching the age of retirement.

SC APPEAL 131/2017 JUDGEMENT Page 12 of 16

That is 4 years and 3 months from the date of interdiction and he had passed away.

But the President of the Labour Tribunal computed compensation up to the age of

retirement.

There is no scheme of calculating compensation in the Industrial Dispute Act. The

calculation of compensation is very subjective and it depends on several factors, to

name a few; type and nature of employment, period he had served, past conduct of

the employee, contribution to the employer/establishment, future prospects, type of

the offence committed or the reason for termination etc. Further, when computing the

compensation, the tribunal should be mindful the age of the Applicant, the service he

had rendered and the future capability of doing a job etc., A person cannot stay at

home and say that, he should be paid for not being employed. The employee should

find a suitable job either equivalent or less salary, within a reasonable period of time

and he cannot be unemployed without acceptable reasons.

In Ceylon Transport Board v A.H. Wijeratne (1975) 77 NLR 481, at page 487

Vythialingam. J held that,

The President also said that the workman was 51 years old and that he

had not been able to obtain employment elsewhere. At the time that he

gave evidence the workman said he was fifty-one years old. But nowhere

in his evidence did he say that he was unemployed or that he had not been

able to secure employment elsewhere. He did not produce any evidence

that he had tried to obtain alternative employment and was unsuccessful

or that having regard to his qualifications, his aptitude and his special

suitability for any particular type of work it was not possible to him to

secure alternative employment. He did not even say so. So that the

President's statement in regard to this matter is based on pure conjecture

and is based on no evidence at all. Except for the bald statements the

President has also given no reasons for the acceptance of the workman's

SC APPEAL 131/2017 JUDGEMENT Page 13 of 16

position that he has lost his pension rights and other benefits and the

President has also based his findings that the workman has not been able

to secure employment elsewhere on no evidence at all. There was no

warrant therefore to award compensation on the basis that he would

continue to be Unemployed for the rest of his life...

As Weeramantry, J. pointed out in the case of The Ceylon Transport Board Vs.

Gunasinghe (72 N. L. R. 76) at page 83,

Proper findings of fact are a necessary basis for the exercise by Labour

Tribunals of that wide jurisdiction given to them by statute of making such

orders as they consider to be just and equitable. Where there is no such

proper finding of fact the order that ensues would not be one which is just

and equitable upon the evidence placed before the Tribunal, for justice and

equity cannot be administered in a particular case apart from its own

particular facts. "

In Ceylon Transport Board v A.H. Wijeratne (supra) at page 498, Vythialingam J. after

carefully analysing the law and the just and equitable concept held as follows,

The Labour Tribunal should normally be concerned to compensate the

employee for the damages he has suffered in the loss of his employment

and legitimate expectations for the future in that employment, in the injury

caused to his reputation in the prejudicing of further employment

opportunities. Punitive considerations should not enter into its assessment

except perhaps in those rare cases where very serious acts of discrimination

are clearly proved. Account should be taken of such circumstances as the

nature of the employer's business and his capacity to pay, the employee's

age. the nature of his employment, length of service, seniority, present

salary, future prospects, opportunities for obtaining similar alternative

employment, his past conduct, the circumstances and the manner of the

SC APPEAL 131/2017 JUDGEMENT Page 14 of 16

dismissal including the nature of the charge levelled against the workman,

the extent to which the employee's actions were blameworthy and the

effect of the dismissal on future pension rights and any other relevant

considerations. Account should also be taken of any sums paid or actually

earned or which should also have been earned since the dismissal took

place. The amount however should not mechanically be calculated on the

basis of the salary he would have earned till he reached the age of

superannuation and should seldom if not never exceed a maximum of

three years' salary.

In Caledonian Tea & Rubber Estate Ltd. V Hillman (1977) 79(1) NLR 421, Justice

Sharvananda stated that he was unable to subscribe to Justice Vythialingams

proposition of 3 years salary and states that flexibility is essential and pointed out that

circumstances may vary in each case and the weight to be attached to any particular

factor depending on the context of each case, and accordingly, an amount equivalent

to 7 years of monthly salary was granted as compensation. In Cyril Anthony v Ceylon

Fisheries Corporation [S.C. 57/85 - SC Minutes dated 06. 03. 1986], the Supreme

Court awarded 7 years salary as compensation to a dismissed workman. In exercising

such a flexibility of determining the quantum of compensation, it was noted by Hon.

Justice Dr. Amerasinghe in Jayasooriya v Sri Lanka State Plantation Corporation

(1995) 2 SLR 379 as follows;

In determining compensation what is expected is that after a weighing

together of the evidence and probabilities in the case, the Tribunal must

form an opinion of the nature and extent of the loss, arriving in the end at

an amount that a sensible person would not regard as mean or

extravagant but would rather consider to be just and equitable in all the

circumstances of the case. There must eventually be an even balance of

which the scales of justice are meant to remind us.

SC APPEAL 131/2017 JUDGEMENT Page 15 of 16

After careful consideration, I find that the Applicant has not provided any evidence

before the Labour Tribunal therefore, the calculation and awarding 6 years salary as

compensation by the President of the Labour Tribunal is arbitrary. After due

consideration of the dictum pronounced by Justice Vythialingam in Ceylon Transport

Board v A.H. Wijeratne (supra), I am in agreement with his Lordship, hence I decide

to award compensation equivalent to 3 years salary to be paid to the Substituted

Applicant. While affirming the findings other than the computation of the

compensation, of the President of the Labour Tribunal, I am hereby varying the order

made regarding the compensation.

For the purposes of clarity, Two hundred and fifty thousand Rupees (Rs. 250,000/-)

which was deducted from the gratuity payable to the Applicant, and Applicants salary

for 3 years as compensation, the calculation for which has been provided below.

Gratuity deducted, now to be returned = Rs. 250,000.00

Applicants salary (monthly as November 2003) = Rs. 18,890.35

Applicants salary (3 years = 36 months) = Rs. 18,890.35 x 36

= Rs. 680,052.6

= Rs. 250,000.00

Total amount payable to Applicants Wife = Rs. 680,052.60

= Rs. 930,052.60

Therefore, the total amount of Nine hundred and thirty thousand fifty-two Rupees and

sixty cents (Rs. 930,052.60) is to be paid to the wife of the Applicant by the Respondent

Bank as Compensation within three months of this Judgement. If the money is

deposited at the Labour Tribunal, this amount plus proportionate portion of interest is

to be paid to the Substituted Applicant from the said deposit, and the balance money

and interest to be released to the Respondent-Bank.

SC APPEAL 131/2017 JUDGEMENT Page 16 of 16

Appeal Allowed subject to limitations.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

VIJITH K. MALALGODA, PC, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

MAHINDA SAMAYAWARDHENA, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT