SC Appeal 141/12 JUDGMENT Page 1 of 14

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms

of Article 127(2) of the Constitution

of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka and Section

5(C) of the High Court of the

Provinces (Special Provisions)

(Amendment) Act No. 54 of 2006

Abekoon Mudiyanselage Seelawathie

Kumarihamy of

Yapa Niwasa, Millawana,

Matale.

Through her Power of Attorney

Holder Yapa Mudiyanselage

Chandana Yapa Bandara of

Yapa Niwasa, Millawana,

Matale.

PLAINTIFF

-VS-

Galakumburegedara Wijerathna of

Madagama,

Millawana,

Matale.

DEFENDANT

AND BETWEEN

SC Appeal No: 141/2012

SC. HCCA.LA No. 168/2011.

CP/HCCA/Kandy/125/2008(F).

D.C. Matale No. 5463/L

SC Appeal 141/12 JUDGMENT Page 2 of 14

Abekoon Mudiyanselage Seelawathie

Kumarihamy of Yapa Niwasa,

Millawana,

Matale.

Through her Power of Attorney

Holder Yapa Mudiyanselage

Chandana Yapa Bandara of

Yapa Niwasa, Millawana,

Matale.

PLAINTIFF -APPELLANT

-VS-

Galakumburegedara Wijerathna of

Madagama,

Millawana,

Matale.

DEFENDANT -RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

Abekoon Mudiyanselage Seelawathie

Kumarihamy of Yapa Niwasa,

Millawana,

Matale.

Through her Power of Attorney

Holder Yapa Mudiyanselage

Chandana Yapa Bandara of Yapa

Niwasa, Millawana,

Matale.

SC Appeal 141/12 JUDGMENT Page 3 of 14

PLAINTIFF -APPELLANT-

APPELLANT

-VS-

Galakumburegedara Wijerathna of

Madagama,

Millawana,

Matale.

DEFENDANT -RESPONDENT-

RESPONDENT

BEFORE : JAYANTHA JAYASURIYA, PC, CJ.

S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

YASANTHA KODAGODA, PC, J.

COUNSEL : Rohan Sahabandu, PC with Nathasha Fernando for the Plaintiff-

Appellant-Appellant.

Amarasiri Panditharatne with Thushani Machado and Laknath

Pieris for the Defendant-Respondent-Respondent.

ARGUED ON: 09th March 2022.

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS: Plaintiff- Appellant -Appellant on 2nd September 2019 and

30th March 2022.

Defendant- Respondent- Respondent on 22nd of July 2019

and 27th April 2022.

DECIDED ON: 29th February 2024

SC Appeal 141/12 JUDGMENT Page 4 of 14

S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

The Background of the Case

The Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant, Abekoon Mudiyanselage Seelawathie Kumarihamy,

(hereinafter referred to as the Plaintiff or Appellant, as appropriate) instituted action

in the District Court of Matale by Plaint dated 30.06.2000 seeking to vindicate her title

against the Defendant-Respondent-Respondent, Galakumburegedara Wijerathna

(hereinafter referred to as the Defendant or Respondent, as appropriate) to a land

called Alawatta aliases Alawattehena and Medalanda (in extent of A1-R1-P16),

described in the schedule to the Plaint, for the ejectment of the Defendant-

Respondent-Respondent and for damages.

The Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant stated by her Plaint that she became the owner of

the disputed corpus by Deed of Transfer bearing No. 73 dated 25.06.1996 attested by

C. S. Wijeyratne Notary Public and her husband Yapa Mudiyanselage Agrapala was the

transferor.

In establishing this position, the Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant traced her title and

pleaded that the land originally belonged to the State. She stated that in terms of the

Land Settlement Ordinance, it was settled to one Jayawardena on 25.10.1941 and that

the said Jayawardena came into possession of the land described in the Schedule to

the Plaint. The corpus was shown as Lot 918 in the Surveyor Generals Final Village Plan

(FVP) No. 72, showing an extent of A1-R1-P16. It was the position of the Plaintiff-

Appellant-Appellant that the said Jayawardena possessed the land in question and by

Deed No.12703 dated 18.01.1946, he transferred same to Loku Manike. Subsequently,

Loku Manike had transferred the corpus to the Plaintiffs Husband, Agrapala, by Deed

No.1030 dated 24.7.1974. The Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant stated that the said

Agrapala then sold it to the Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant by Deed of Transfer No.73

dated 25.7.1996 as stated above.

SC Appeal 141/12 JUDGMENT Page 5 of 14

It was the position of the Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant that she was in possession of

the land in question and the Defendant-Respondent-Respondent had come to occupy

the land as a servant of her Husband. She states that after she became the owner of

the land, the Defendant-Respondent-Respondent continued to be in possession of the

land as a servant of the Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant. She mentions that following the

termination of the services of the Defendant-Respondent-Respondent, he has been

living in the land with the leave and license of the Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant.

The Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant states that the Defendant-Respondent-Respondent,

on or about 14.01.2000, had disputed the rights of the Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant

and thereafter the matter had been referred to the Magistrate Court and the said case

bearing No. 3331 was pending at the time of the filing of the Plaint. It is the position

of the Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant that she sent a notice dated 24.04.2000 through

her Attorney-at-Law informing the Defendant-Respondent-Respondent that she had

terminated the leave and license given to him and requesting him to vacate the

premises on or before 31.05.2000 and hand over vacant possession of the land to the

Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant.

It was the position of the Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant that, in spite of the said notice,

the Defendant-Respondent-Respondent continued to be in possession of the land and

that due to the notice, the said possession is illegal from 01.06.2000. In the

circumstances, the Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant sought a declaration that she is the

owner of the land in dispute and to eject the Defendant-Respondent-Respondent and

his agents therefrom. The Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant further sought damages of

Rs.3000/- per month from 01.06.2000 until the possession of the land is handed over.

In addition to the above, the Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant further claimed prescriptive

rights to the land.

The Defendant-Respondent-Respondent thereafter tendered his answer denying the

averments in the Plaint stating inter alia that the Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant and her

predecessor in title have never been in possession of the land, while the Defendant-

SC Appeal 141/12 JUDGMENT Page 6 of 14

Respondent-Respondent has acquired prescriptive rights by being in possession of the

land for more than 35 years. Further, the Defendant-Respondent-Respondent stated

that he was never a servant of the Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant and/or her predecessor

in title and that he is not living in the land with leave and license of the Plaintiff-

Appellant-Appellant.

In the circumstances, it was the position of the Defendant-Respondent-Respondent

that no cause of action has accrued to the Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant. The

Defendant-Respondent-Respondent sought dismissal of the Plaint and sought a

commission to prepare a Plan to show the area of land possessed by him and further,

in his claim in reconvention, sought a declaration that he has acquired prescriptive

rights to the land in dispute. The Defendant-Respondent-Respondent further claimed

the improvements he has made to the land worth Rs. 500,000/-.

After the trial, the learned Judge of the District Court dismissed the action of the

Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant subject to cost. The learned District Judge further held

that the Defendant-Respondent-Respondent was a licensee of the Plaintiff-Appellant-

Appellant and entered the judgment accordingly dismissing the Defendant-

Respondent-Respondents claim in reconvention.

Thus, the Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant had preferred an appeal to the Provincial High

Court of the Central Province (Civil Appeals) holden in Kandy. The learned High Court

Judges delivered the judgment on 21.04.2011 dismissing the action based on the non-

identification of the land.

Being aggrieved by the judgment of the High Court, the Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant

has filed a Petition dated 30.05.2011 before this Court, and leave was granted on

03.08.2012 on the following questions of law referred to in paragraph 16 of the Petition

as follows:

16. I. Was the identification of the corpus an issue in the present case?

II. In any event is there sufficient evidence adduced to identify the corpus?

SC Appeal 141/12 JUDGMENT Page 7 of 14

III. Did the High Court and the District Court err in law in not appreciating that

the burden of proof that was shifted to the defendant was not discharged by

him?

IV. In the circumstances are the judgments of the learned District Judge and the

High Court according to law and according to the evidence adduced in the

case?

Analysis

Issue No. 6, 7 and 8 raised before the District Court of Matale specifically dealt with

the question of license and termination of license and the same were answered

affirmatively, in favour of the Plaintiff. In effect, the learned Judge in his judgment holds

that the Defendant is a licensee by answering issue No. 6 as pleaded by the Plaintiff.

Said Issue No. 6 is as follows,

6.

?

[6. Was the defendant residing in the property described in the schedule to the

plaint as a servant of the plaintiff and her predecessors?]

[An approximate translation added]

Further, Issues No. 10 and 14 of the District Court were specifically in relation to

prescription as follows:

10.

?

[10. Does the defendant have no legal right to the property which is the subject

matter of this suit?]

.

SC Appeal 141/12 JUDGMENT Page 8 of 14

14. 10

, ,

?

[14. Have the defendant and his predecessors enjoyed possession of the

property that is the subject matter of the case for more than 10 years prior in

an uninterrupted, undisturbed manner, contrary to the rights of others over the

land?]

[An approximate translation added]

In answering the aforementioned Issues No. 10 and 14, it was held that Defendant had

not shown his prescriptive rights to the land in question.

I must note that despite a claim based on prescriptive rights being raised as

enumerated above in the lower courts, it is unnecessary to decide whether the learned

District Judge has duly evaluated the evidence on the question of prescription as the

issue of prescription has not been raised as a substantive question of law before this

Court when this matter was considered for granting of leave. Therefore, I do not wish

to go into this question in depth, nor do I wish to disturb the findings of the lower

courts.

Having decided the issues as to the prescriptive rights of the Defendant, the learned

Judge nevertheless dismissed the Plaintiffs action on the sole basis that the

Plaintiff did not identify the land.

At the very outset, it was submitted that Defendant-Respondent-Respondent sought

the position that the instant matter is a rei-vindicatio action and that Plaintiff has not

proved the essential requisites in a rei-vindicatio action. It was submitted that both the

District Court and Provincial High Court of the Central Province have held that the

identity of the corpus has been not established and it must be dismissed.

When this matter was argued before this Court, the Court inquired as to whether this

is a rei vindicatio action or an action based on a licensee. Counsel for the Plaintiff-

SC Appeal 141/12 JUDGMENT Page 9 of 14

Appellant-Appellant submitted that the Plaintiff comes to Court on the basis that the

Defendant is her licensee who has acted in violation of her rights as the Defendant has

not vacated and given vacant possession when the said license was terminated.

Moreover, as per paragraphs 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16 and 17 of the Plaint, the Plaintiff

stated that the Defendant worked on the land as a lessee and that he looked after the

property while residing in the building constructed on the said land by her family. The

Plaintiff by producing P16, P17 and P18 (payment receipts of money for plucking

coconuts), submitted that the Defendant had worked for her family for a long time.

The documents were produced to show the relationship that the Defendant had in

1981, 1982 and 1983 with one Agrapala who became the owner in 1974. It was

submitted that the said Agrapala is the predecessor in title of the Plaintiff and the

Plaintiff became entitled to the land in 1996 by virtue of the Deed marked P15.

The Defendant did not lodge a cross-appeal at the High Court on the issue of

Prescription and license which were held against him by the learned District Judge; nor

has he raised a question of law before this Court on the issue of Prescription.

Furthermore, at the trial, the Plaintiffs title deeds were marked and accepted without

challenge and it was proven that the Plaintiff has sufficient title over the land in

question.

As such, no question with regard to prescription arises in the instant Appeal before

this court as I have already noted and the findings of the learned District Judge as to

the prescriptive title of the Defendant need not be disturbed at this stage.

The questions of law set out in this case directly relate to the dismissal of the Plaintiffs

action by the learned District Judge, which as I noted previously, was done on the sole

basis that the Plaintiff did not identify the land.

SC Appeal 141/12 JUDGMENT Page 10 of 14

It is indeed true that in a rei vindicatio action, a Plaintiff is saddled with the burden of

identifying the property as well as proving his/her entitlement thereto. As it was held

in Wanigaratne v. Juwanis Appuhamy (1962) 65 NLR 167,

it is trite law that Plaintiff should set out his title on the basis on which

he claims a declaration of title to the land. The burden rests on the

Plaintiff to prove that title.

Further, in Jamaldeen Abdul Latheef and v. Abdul Majeed Mohamed Mansoor and

Another (2010) 2 SLR 333 it was held as follows;

It is trite law that the identity of the property with respect to which

a vindicatory action is instituted is a fundamental to the success of

the action as the proof of the ownership (dominion) of the owner

(dominus). Where the property sought to be vindicated consists of a

land, the land sought to be vindicated must be identified by reference

to a survey plan or other equally expeditious method.

As enumerated above, to succeed in a rei vindicatio action, the owner must prove on

a balance of probabilities, not only his or her ownership in the property but also that

the property exists and is clearly identifiable. The identity of the land is fundamental

for the purpose of attributing ownership, and for ordering ejectment. This exact

position has been stressed in Jamaldeen Abdul Latheef and v. Abdul Majeed

Mohamed Mansoor and Another (supra) as follows;

In a rei vindicatio action, it is not necessary to consider whether

the defendant has any title or right to possession, where the plaintiff has

failed to establish his title to the land sought to be vindicated, the action

ought to be dismissed without more.

An important feature of the action rei vindicatio is that it has to necessarily

fail if the plaintiff cannot clearly establish his title. To succeed in an action

rei vindicatio, the owner must prove on a balance of probabilities, not only

SC Appeal 141/12 JUDGMENT Page 11 of 14

his or her ownership in the property, but also that the property exists and is

clearly identifiable. The identity of the land is fundamental for the purpose

of attributing ownership, and for ordering ejectment.

However, if the subject matter is admitted, no further proof of the identity of the

corpus is required, for no party is burdened with adducing further proof of a fact

admitted. Similarly, where a Defendant does not object to the subject matter as

identified by the Plaintiff and proceeds on the Plaintiffs identification, that would

be tantamount to an admission as to the identification of the subject matter.

The identification of the land was not in dispute at the original trial. The

Defendant in paras 10 and 11 of the answer identified the land where he claimed

that he acquired prescriptive title to [the property subject

to this action]. It is apparent that the Defendant had no difficulty in identifying

the land nor did he have any objections to the Plaintiffs identification of the

property. How can one claim title to that which had not been identified? If the

land was not identified by the Plaintiff, the Defendant could not have claimed

prescriptive title thereto.

Furthermore, if there were any questions as to the identification of the land, the

Defendant could have raised Issues to that effect. Per contra, the Defendants 14th

Issue is 10

,

? If there was a problem as to the identification of the land, the

Defendant would not have raised such an issue.

In testimonial evidence, too, the Defendant did not question the identification of

land. In evidence-in-chief itself, at page 193 of the brief, he said that the case has

been filed . The evidence of the

Defendants wife was also to like effect. At no point did they question the

identification of the land.

SC Appeal 141/12 JUDGMENT Page 12 of 14

In light of the foregoing, it is clear that the identification of the corpus was not

an issue in the instant case. Therefore, I answer the first question of law in the

negative. Answering the first question of law negatively, I find that the second

question of lawwhich questions whether, in any event, there is sufficient

evidence adduced to identify the corpushas no bearing on the case for the

identification of land was not disputed at the District Court. For this reason, I see

no need to answer the second question of law.

The third question of law raised by the Appellant was Did the High Court and

the District Court err in law in not appreciating that the burden of proof that was

shifted to the defendant was not discharged by him?

The question of law on its own is too ambiguous and does not sufficiently

indicate the onus it is in reference to. However, it appears from the Petition dated

30.05.2011 of the Appellant that it is with reference to the onus on the Defendant

of proving superior title once the paper title is proved by the Plaintiff.

It is perplexing why the Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant raised this question of law,

seeing as the learned District Judge has held in favour of the Plaintiff, having

considered the Defendants claim of prescriptive title from pages 20-24 of the

Judgment dated 12.03.2008 (pages 298-302 of the brief). The Judgment of the

High Court does not disturb this finding as the Defendant had not filed a cross

appeal regarding the same. Therefore, the third question of law is answered in

the negative. However, this need not disturb the outcome of the instant appeal.

Finally, the fourth question of law, i.e., whether, in the circumstances, the

judgments of the learned District Judge and the High Court are according to law

and according to the evidence adduced in the case, have to be answered

negatively in light of the answer to the first question of law.

SC Appeal 141/12 JUDGMENT Page 13 of 14

Conclusion of the Court

I am of the view that the learned trial Judge had correctly come to the conclusion

when he concluded that the Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant had established the

contractual relationship between Plaintiff and Defendant in rejecting the

Defendants claim on prescriptive title. However, the learned Judge has

committed a serious error in dismissing the Plaintiffs action on the basis that he

failed to identify the land when the identification of the land was not in question.

The learned Judge of the High Court, too, has failed to duly appraise this element.

Hence, I am of the view that the judgment entered in the High Court of Civil

Appeal dismissing the appeal of the Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant is incorrect in

law and in fact. In these circumstances, I find merit in this application and

accordingly allow this Appeal.

I direct the learned District Court Judge to enter the judgment for the Plaintiff as

prayed for in paras (a) and (b) of the prayer to the plaint.

The Plaintiff is entitled to costs.

Appeal allowed with costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

JAYANTHA JAYASURIYA, PC, CJ.

I agree

CHIEF JUSTICE

SC Appeal 141/12 JUDGMENT Page 14 of 14

YASANTHA KODAGODA, PC, J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT