==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

H.M. Thilakarathna (Deceased),

R.A. Somawathi Ratnayake (Deceased),

Herath Mudiyanselage Chandana

Krishantha Thilakarathna,

5 Ela, Shravasthipura.

Presently of North Kaluvila, 6 Ela,

Hidogama, Anuradhapura.

Substituted Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant

SC/APPEAL/66/2024

NCP/HCCA/ANP/47/2022 (F)

DC ANURADHAPURA 20765/L

Vs.

1. Sirima Ratnayake,

2. D.M. Suriyabandara,

Both of Iskola Hena Watta,

3 Ela, Hidogama.

Defendant-Appellant-Respondents

Before: Hon. Justice Mahinda Samayawardhena

Hon. Justice K. Priyantha Fernando

Hon. Justice Menaka Wijesundera

Counsel: Kamran Aziz with Samadhi Mahagodage for the Plaintiff-

Respondent-Appellant.

Sapumal Bandara with Vishmi Yapa Abeywardena for the 1st

and 2nd Defendant-Appellant-Respondents.

2

SC/APPEAL/66/2024

Argued on: 09.09.2025

Written submissions:

By the Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant on 18.10.2025.

By the Defendant-Appellant-Respondents on 17.10.2025.

Decided on: 13.01.2026

Samayawardhena, J.

The plaintiff instituted this action in the District Court of Anuradhapura

against two defendants, seeking a declaration of title to the land described

in the schedule to the plaint, ejectment of the defendants therefrom and

damages. The defendants filed answer praying for the dismissal of the

plaintiff’s action and for damages. After trial, the District Court entered

judgment in favour of the plaintiff, granting only the reliefs prayed for in

paragraphs (a) and (b) of the prayer to the plaint.

On appeal, the High Court of Civil Appeal of Anuradhapura set aside the

judgment of the District Court on the ground that the District Court lacked

jurisdiction to hear and determine the action. Hence, this appeal by the

plaintiff. This court granted leave to appeal on the question whether the

High Court erred in dismissing the plaintiff’s action on that ground.

The wife of the plaintiff and the 1st defendant are sisters. Their father was

Punchi Banda. The land in suit is paddy land. K.S. Rajapaksha was the

owner of this land. By deed executed on 01.06.1998, K.S. Rajapaksha gifted

the land to his son, Dharmasoma Rajapaksha. The plaintiff purchased the

land from Dharmasoma Rajapaksha by deed executed on 12.11.2004

marked P1. The 1st defendant claims that she is the tenant cultivator of the

land under K.S. Rajapaksha. However, according to Dharmasoma

Rajapaksha and the plaintiff, Punchi Banda was the tenant cultivator under

K.S. Rajapaksha. In support of her claim, the 1st defendant places strong

3

SC/APPEAL/66/2024

reliance on the decision marked V3 dated 21.02.2000 made by the

Investigating Officer of Agrarian Services of Anuradhapura, under the

Agrarian Services Act. According to that decision, the landlord/owner of the

land was K.S. Rajapaksha and Punchi Banda. It is difficult to comprehend

how Punchi Banda came to be described as a landlord/owner. Even K.S.

Rajapaksha was not the owner of the land at the time that decision was

made. Be that as it may, there was no determination therein that

Dharmasoma Rajapaksha or the plaintiff was the landlord of the 1ˢᵗ

defendant tenant cultivator.

As learned counsel for the 1ˢᵗ defendant has admitted in the post-argument

written submissions, at the trial before the District Court, the plaintiff did

not accept that the 1ˢᵗ defendant was his tenant cultivator, and conversely,

the 1ˢᵗ defendant did not accept that the plaintiff was her landlord. Learned

counsel does not dispute that the plaintiff is the lawful owner of the paddy

land but contends that “the issue is with regard to whether the 1st defendant

could be considered as the tenant cultivator of the paddy land concerned”

and that “the moment evidence is adduced during the trial that the matter is

in fact between a landlord and a tenant cultivator”, the District Court ceases

to have jurisdiction. I cannot agree. Let me explain.

In the District Court, the 1st defendant did not raise any objection to

jurisdiction. On the contrary, the 2nd admission recorded was that the

District Court had jurisdiction to hear and determine the action. I accept

that, where there is a total want of jurisdiction, parties cannot, by consent

or acquiescence, confer jurisdiction upon a court. However, on the facts and

circumstances of this case, there is no patent lack of jurisdiction.

The High Court, relying on Mansoor v. OIC, Avissawella [1991] 2 Sri LR 75,

set aside the judgment of the District Court on the ground that “the

possessory rights of a tenant cultivator” shall be resolved under the

statutory scheme provided for in the Agrarian Development Act, No. 46 of

4

SC/APPEAL/66/2024

2000, and that the District Court lacks jurisdiction to inquire into such

issues. This is not the correct position of the law.

The judgment in Mansoor’s case is based on the well-established general

principle laid down in Wilkinson v. Barking Corporation (1948) 1 KB 721 at

724 that “where a statute creates a right and, in plain language, gives a

specific remedy or appoints a specific tribunal for its enforcement, a party

seeking to enforce the right must resort to that tribunal and not to others.”

The Agrarian Development Act is an undoubtedly a special Act passed, as

the long title of the Act suggests, to “provide for matters relating to landlords

and tenant cultivators of paddy lands”, and therefore, according to the

aforementioned general principle, the jurisdiction of the ordinary courts to

entertain and determine such disputes to the extent provided for under that

statutory scheme stands excluded. Section 98 of the Agrarian Development

Act enacts that “The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding

anything to the contrary in any other written law, and accordingly, in the

event of any conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of this Act and

such other law, the provisions of this Act shall prevail.”

However, the Agrarian Development Act does not oust the jurisdiction of the

Magistrate’s Court or the District Court merely because the dispute relates

to paddy land or it relates to the rights of a tenant cultivator of such land

or one of the parties before court is a tenant cultivator. For the provisions

of the Agrarian Development Act to apply and for the jurisdiction of the

ordinary courts to be excluded, there must exist a landlord and tenant

cultivator relationship between the contending parties before court. If one

party denies the existence of such a relationship, the court necessarily

retains jurisdiction to determine that issue. In the instant case, both parties

deny the existence of a landlord and tenant cultivator relationship between

them. This law was settled by Ranasinghe J. (as he then was), with the

concurrence of Sharvananda C.J. and Wanasundera J., in Suneetha Rohini

5

SC/APPEAL/66/2024

Dolawatte v. Buddhadasa Gamage (SC Appeal No. 45/83, SC Minutes of

27.09.1985), which was cited with approval in Herath v. Peter [1989] 2 Sri

LR 323 and followed in subsequent decisions.

For the aforesaid reasons, the judgment of the High Court cannot be allowed

to stand, as it proceeded solely on the basis that the land in question is

paddy land and that the dispute relates to tenant cultivation of such land.

The question of law on which leave to appeal was granted is answered in

the affirmative. I set aside the judgment of the High Court and restore the

judgment of the District Court. Let the parties bear their own costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

K. Priyantha Fernando, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Menaka Wijesundera, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court