==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA.

In the matter of a Rule in terms of Article 105(3) of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. And the provision of the Contempt of Court Act No.08 of 2024.

The Registrar, Supreme Court of Sri Lanka, Superior Court Complex, Colombo 12.

Petitioner SC/ Contempt No.01/2024 Vs.

Jayathunga Patabandige Susil Priyantha Jayathunga , Attorney-at-Law, No.294/A, Kotupathgoda Road, Kumbuka West, Gonapola.

Respondent

BEFORE : A.L. SHIRAN GOONERATNE, J.

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J.

COUNSEL : J.P.S.P. Jayathunga, Respondent, appears in person,

Chathura Galhena with Devmini Bulegoda for the Bar Association of Sri Lanka.

S.C. Contempt of Court No.01/2024

2

Nirmalan Wigneshwaran DSG, with Sureka Ahmed, SSC instructed by Rizni Firdouse, SSA for the Hon. Attorney General.

HEARING ON : 02nd October, 2025

DECIDED ON : 05th February, 2026

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

This is a matter, in which the person charged with Contempt of Court, is

an Attorney- at-Law, who practiced law since his admission into the Bar in the

year 2011.

This Court, after taking cognizance of certain acts committed by the said

Attorney-at-Law and, having satisfied itself that those acts attributed to him

prima facie established a case for contempt of Court, and acting in terms of the

provisions contained in the Contempt of Court, Tribunal or Institution Act No.

08 of 2024, directed the Hon. Attorney General to draft a Rule to be issued on the

said Attorney-at-Law, being “the person charged with contempt of Court” as

described such a person in the said Act, who shall be referred to hereinafter as

“the Respondent” merely for the purpose of convenience.

The Rule issued against the Respondent was signed by the Registrar of this

Court. It contained particulars of several acts of Contempt of Court with which

the Respondent said to have committed. A translated version of the said Rule

was read out to the Respondent in Sinhala language and the same was served on

him on 01.07.2024. This Court, thereupon, proceeded to hold a hearing into the

S.C. Contempt of Court No.01/2024

3

allegations contained in the said Rule, as the Respondent pleaded “not guilty” to

the charges set out therein. This Court decided to conduct amalgamate

proceedings in SC Contempt of Court No. 1/24 and Rule No. 5/24, since the acts

attributed to the Respondent in both these Rules are almost identical.

During the hearing into the Rule, the Registrar of the Supreme Court and

the Respondent presented their respective evidence under oath. The Respondent

was afforded an opportunity to tender his submissions in written form, after

perusing the proceedings conducted on that day, but were issued subsequently

by the Registry. This opportunity was provided to the Respondent, as he was

produced from remand custody, and with a view to provide him with sufficient

time to effectively address this Court of the defence put up by him. The

opportunity afforded by this Court to the Respondent was fully utilised by him

by submitting several sets of written submissions from time to time to the

Registry of this Court.

The circumstances that led to the issuance of the said Rule on the

Respondent are set out below albeit briefly.

The Respondent filed a petition No. SC/SPL/LA/112/2023 on 20.04.2023

before this Court, by which he sought to impugn the judgment of the Court of

Appeal dated 09.03.2023, pronounced in Case No. COC/02/2023. This was

following an action filed in the District Court by the Respondent.

The petition SC/SPL/LA/112/2023 was to be supported on 30.01.2024

before a division of this Court for the consideration of granting Special Leave to

Appeal against the impugned judgment. The Respondent, being the petitioner in

that application, appeared in person. During the process of supporting the said

S.C. Contempt of Court No.01/2024

4

petition, this Court wanted a certain clarification from the Respondent, who

thereupon sought further time to respond to same. The matter was accordingly

re-scheduled to be resumed on 20.03.2024 before the same division of this Court.

The Respondent has filed an additional petition dated 12.03.2024, in

SC/SPL/LA/112/2023, without obtaining prior leave of Court, in filing of same.

In that petition the Respondent alleged that;

a. the division of this Court, before which the petition of

SC/SPL/LA/112/2023 was supported, acted with strong malice

towards the 0Respondent,

b. the three Justices who constituted that division of this Court have

suppressed the truth and,

c. therefore, are guilty of an offence under Section 289 of the Penal

Code.

The Respondent, further alleged that the said three Justices have;

a. misled and deceived Court,

b. acted in Contempt of Court,

c. been partial towards the 1st Respondent,

d. acted in breach of the Rules of Court and

e. accorded special treatment to the 1st Respondent, who is a

serving judicial officer.

S.C. Contempt of Court No.01/2024

5

In addition, the Respondent alleged in the said petition that His Lordship

the Chief Justice and the Hon. Attorney General too have harboured malice

against him and acted with malice. The Respondent repeated these allegations in

open Court, when he appeared before Court on 20.03.2024.

The Registrar of this Court, in the matter titled SC Contempt of Court No.

01/24 has read out the said Rule to the Respondent, framed under the Act No. 08

of 2024 to the Respondent, which alleged that the latter, by making

aforementioned set of allegations in the said additional petition, followed by his

conduct in open Court on 20.03.2024, has acted in a manner evincing an intent to;

a. bring the authority of the Supreme Court into disrespect or

disregard,

b. interfere with, or cause grave prejudice to the judicial process in

relation to case bearing No. SC/SPL/LA 112/2023,

c. express and/or pronounce that which is false and -

(i) scandalize or lowers the judicial authority or dignity of the

Supreme Court,

(ii) cause grave prejudice, or unlawfully interfere with due course

of the case bearing reference No. SC/SPL/LA 112/2023,

(iii) interfere with, or obstruct the administration of justice;

d. scandalised the Supreme Court and/or their Lordships or the

Supreme Court with intent to-

(i) interfere with the due administration of justice;

S.C. Contempt of Court No.01/2024

6

(ii) or cast public suspicion on the administration of justice,

and thereby committed the Contempt of Court, as set out in Sections 3(1)(a),

3(1)(b), 3(2)(c), and 3(2)(e) of the said Act.

During his Examination-in-Chief in the hearing of the Rule, the

Respondent admitted the several acts attributed to him in the said Rule and

offered an explanation to his said conduct referred to therein. According to him ,

whilst acting in the manner described in the Rule, he neither had any

understanding that he was acting contrary to law nor to morals, (“ ta lrk ,o ls%hdj

iïnkaOfhka kS;shg mgyyeks nj fy` iodpdrhg mgyeks njg ug wjfn`Ohla ;snqfk keye”) Thus,

he attributed his acts to a mental condition, said to have prevailed in his mind

during that particular point in time, which he preferred to describe as “ ta fj,dfj

ysgmq udkisl;ajh”.

This he made by placing reliance on an assessment made by the

Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist attached to National Institute of Mental Health,

Dr. C.T.K. Fernando, on his mental condition, as described in the medical report

V1.

In his evidence the Respondent has described the state of his mind that

was prevalent during the relevant time to the Rule, as one which is “l,yldrS”

mSvdldrS” igkaldñ udkisl;ajhla”. These descriptions could be translated into English to

read as “pugnacious, oppressive and aggressive” mentality.

In support of his defence of insanity, the Respondent also relied two other

medical reports that were obtained from two other Consultant Psychiatrists. One

of the two Consultant Psychiatrist is attached to Polonnaruwa General Hospital

S.C. Contempt of Court No.01/2024

7

while the other, apparently engaged in private practice in Colombo. These reports

were tendered to Court marked V2 and V3 respectively.

Thus, it is clear that the Respondent relied on the specific defence of

insanity and thereby invoked the applicability of the statutory provisions

contained in Section 77 of the Penal Code.

Section 77 of the Penal Code is a section drafted and inserted to the Penal

Code, in the spirit of Mac Naughten Rules but “with some material modifications”

(vide Principles of Criminal Liability in Ceylon, Professor G.L. Peiris, at p.133).

Section 77 states thus; “[N]othing is an offence which is done by a person who, at the

time of doing it, by reason of unsoundness of mind, is incapable of knowing the nature of

the act, or that he is doing what is either wrong or contrary to law.”

The position taken up by the Respondent is that he neither had any

understanding that he acted contrary to law nor to the morals during the period

of time relevant to the Rule due to his unsoundness of mind. However, it must

be noted here that he does not rely on the first scenario described in Section 77 as

he did not state that he was incapable of knowing the nature of his acts by reason

of unsoundness of mind. Instead, he clearly placed reliance on the second

scenario described in that Section which states “… by reason of unsoundness of

mind, is incapable of knowing … that he is doing what is either wrong or contrary to

law”. Thus, if the Respondent is to be exonerated from imposition of criminal

liability attached to his acts that are referred to in the Rule, he must establish

before this Court that he was incapable of knowing what he was doing is either

wrong or contrary to law, by reason of his unsoundness of mind. He must

establish that on a balance of probability, vide judgments of the Court of Appeal

in Perera v Republic of Sri Lanka (1978-79) 2 Sri L.R. 84 Nandasena v Attorney

S.C. Contempt of Court No.01/2024

8

General (2007) 1 Sri L.R. 237 and the Court of Criminal Appeal in Barnes

Nimalaratne v Republic of Sri Lanka (1975) 78 NLR 51.

In this regard, the medical reports that were tendered before this Court

provide the most relevant and reliable evidence.

The medical report V1 indicates that the Respondent was assessed on

02.04.2024 by Dr. C.T.K Fernando, in the presence of Dr. W.W.L.I. Fernando, at the

Forensic Psychiatry Clinic of the Prison Hospital. During the assessment, it was

revealed that the Respondent had no past history of presentation to any

psychiatry services and also had no family history of mental illness.

Dr. C.T.K Fernando states in that report that the said assessment of the

Respondent revealed that he has “persecutory delusions against his wife mainly, but

he also developed persecutory delusions others are plotting against him.” In addition,

the Respondent was noted to have “grandiose delusion that he has superior

knowledge about law than any other individual”. Dr. C.T.K Fernando accordingly

concluded the assessment with a clinical interpretation that the Respondent has a

mental disorder called “bipolar affective disorder currently mania with psychosis”.

The Respondent, in his written submissions, invited attention of this Court

to the dicta of a judgment of the Court of Appeal pronounced in Nandasena v

Attorney General (supra), where Ranjith Silva J has held, in relation to the nature

of the burden cast on an accused, who relied on the defence of insanity, by

stating that (at p. 239) “ [I]t is the burden of the accused to prove that he was incapable

of (1) knowing the nature of the act (2) that he is doing what is either wrong or contrary

to law”. But the factors by which an accused might sought to discharge his

burden must be clearly established and not merely set out in “vague or desultory

S.C. Contempt of Court No.01/2024

9

fashion” and the conclusions must not be based on inadequate material and must

not be on hearsay either, (vide judgment of Barnes Nimalaratne v Republic of Sri

Lanka (supra) at p. 55).

In order to consider the impact of “bipolar affective disorder currently mania

with psychosis” on the cognitive ability of the mind of the Respondent, it is

necessary to examine the medical report V1, in a more detailed manner. This is

because, it is for this Court to satisfy itself that the Respondent is entitled to the

relief afforded to a person of unsound mind in terms of Section 77 of the Penal

Code.

The Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist, who issued the said report on

02.04.2024, states under the heading “Mental State Assessment” that the features

that are referred to in his report are “suggestive of manic episodes”. In relation to

the responsibility of his actions, the Consultant is of the view that the

Respondent would have been of “unsound mind at the time of the alleged offence”.

Understandably, this is a finding on which the Respondent has now placed very

heavy reliance. However, it must be observed that there is no mention of an exact

date of the any admitted acts that are referred to in the Rule in that report, which

indicated the position that it was probable that the Respondent was under that

mental condition during that specific time period.

The Rule was served on the Respondent only at a subsequent point of

time. Even if one were to act on V1, by giving the fullest weightage to its

findings, the mental illness of “bipolar affective disorder currently mania with

psychosis” that appears to have affected the Respondent at some point in time,

would occur only intermittently. The Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist described

such instances as “manic episodes”. Thus, it is clear that there are intervals of clear

S.C. Contempt of Court No.01/2024

10

comprehension in between these “manic episodes” that might last for an

unspecified period of time. During these intervals that exists in between such

manic episodes, the Respondent could act as a reasonably prudent member of

the society. However, this is not the only evidence before Court on this point.

The Respondent also relied on two other medical reports issued by two

other Consultant Psychiatrists, whom he consulted on his own volition.

The document marked V2, was issued on 30.04.2024 by Dr. P.A.I.

Wijayanayaka, Acting Consultant Psychiatrist of Teaching Hospital Polonnaruwa, a

few days after he was assessed by Dr. C.T.K Fernando. This six-page document,

mostly consists of illegible handwritten notes made by the Consultant. However,

it is clear that it made no indication to a specific diagnosis made or a finding of a

mental illness subsequent to the assessment conducted on the Respondent. Nor

did the Respondent invite attention of this Court to any such specific reference

made to that effect in that report. However, the evidence of the Respondent

indicated that, during that consultation, he was verbally informed of by the said

Consultant that he need not be treated for any psychiatric illness.

The said alleged clearance of the Respondent of any mental impairment by

Dr. P.A.I. Wijayanayaka, prompted him to lodge a complaint to the Medical

Council against Dr. C.T.K Fernando, who issued V1. The Respondent, by a letter

dated 06.06.2024 and addressed to that Council, complained that although he

was cleared of any mental impairment by Dr. P.A.I. Wijayanayaka, when he

consulted the latter on 30.04.2024, who issued a finding quite different to the one

made by Dr. C.T.K Fernando, which indicates that he has “bipolar affective disorder

currently mania with psychosis”. The Respondent, further alleged that the said

report was prepared by the Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist based on false

S.C. Contempt of Court No.01/2024

11

information attributed to him, which he did not provide during the assessment

session. Not only the Respondent challenged the validity of the medical report

V1, he has instituted a civil action against the said Consultant and the other

Psychiatrist, in the District Court Case No. DMR/620/24 on 12.06.2024, claiming

damages from them, in a sum of Rs. 100,000,000.00.

In that action, the Respondent referred to his causes of action accrued to

him against Drs. W.W.L.I Fernando and C.T.K Fernando on the basis, which he

describes as follows;

“ lS¾;su;a kS;s{jrfhl= jQ meñKs,slreg udkisl fr`.hla we;s njg fÉ;kdkaú;j

wmydi lsrSu” lS¾;shg ydks lsrSu” udkisl fr`.sfhl= f,ig idjoH u;hla ck.;

lsrSug bv ie,iaùu” meñKs,slre úiska mjrd mj;ajdf.k hk kvq bosrshg mj;ajdf.k

hdug wkHdldrhlska ndOd meñKùug ls%hd lsrSu” meñK,slref.a kS;s{ jD;a;sh

iodld,sl j wysñ lsrSug W;aidy lsrSu” ldhslj iy udkislj ksfr`.S mqoa.,hl= jQ

meñKs,slre udkisl fr`.sfhl= f,i yqjd oelaùu hkdoS jeros isÿ lsrSu u.ska ”

Despite the fact that the Respondent placing heavy reliance on the findings

contained in V1 to impress upon this Court that he is a person of unsound mind,

he continues to maintain the said action filed against the Consultant Forensic

Psychiatrist, by affirming to the said cause of action in his Plaint, and thereby

asserting that V1 was issued by the said Consultant to make him, an “eminent

lawyer” (lS¾;su;a kS;s{jrfhl= jQ meñKs,slreg) with a sound mental health condition,

being branded as a person with a serious mental illness. The Respondent did not

explain this obviously irreconcilable inconsistency in his evidence presented

before this Court, in support of his defence of insanity.

Remaining document to be considered by this Court is the one that was

marked V3 and with a title “Medical Report”.

S.C. Contempt of Court No.01/2024

12

This is a report issued by Dr. Jayan Mendis, a Consultant Psychiatrist, when

he was consulted by the Respondent at Nawaloka Hospital on 07. 06.2024. In the

assessment of Dr. Mendis, the Respondent only “appears to be slightly disinhibited”

and found to be a “mildly overtalkative” person. However, Dr. Mendis was firm in

his opinion that “… no clear manic disturbance or depressive symptoms noted” on the

Respondent. The said assessment of Dr. Mendis significantly reduces the

probabilities of any manic episode occurring in the mind of the Respondent on

20.03.2024. Dr. Jayan Mendis’s assessment of the Respondent clearly indicated

that the latter had no significant mental impairment. That finding would

therefore excludes the prospect of the Respondent, though appears to be of a

“slightly disinhibited” nature and a “mildly overtalkative” person, having any

impairment on the cognitive ability of his mind, that made him incapable of

knowing that he is doing what is wrong or contrary to law, due to unsoundness

of mind.

The all-important question of fact that must be determined in this instance

is whether the Respondent has proved on a balance of probabilities that he was

incapable of knowing that what he is doing is either wrong or contrary to law,

when he did the acts indicated in the Rule on 20.03.2024, due to his specific claim

of having “bipolar affective disorder currently mania with psychosis”.

The inconsistencies in these medical reports, indicating different states of

his mind, have the effect of significantly reducing the weightage that could be

attached to the mental impairment referred to in V1. In view of the contents of

the other reports, particularly V3, there is no noticeable mental impairment. The

Respondent, who now wishes to rely solely on V1 in support of his defence, a

medical report which he found in the past to be injurious to his good reputation

S.C. Contempt of Court No.01/2024

13

as a legal professional with sound mental health, a report that prompted him to

claim damages from its author by institution of civil action, has now become the

only item of evidence, in support of his claim of insanity.

This he said before this Court under oath. Similarly, the Respondent

affirmed in an affidavit, annexed to the Plaint, in the said action filed against Drs.

W.W.L.I Fernando and C.T.K Fernando that he is perfectly a sane person, who was

wrongly diagnosed by the two defendants as a person with a mental condition of

“bipolar affective disorder currently mania with psychosis”. Thus, the Respondent has

taken two diametrically opposite positions in these two situations, where he

vouched under oath of what he affirms therein is the truth.

Which of these two irreconcilable positions could be accepted by this

Court as the truthful statement of the Respondent?

This Court has no expertise to determine medically whether the

Respondent is of unsound mind, in terms of Section 77 of the Penal Code, when

the admitted acts of contempt of Court were committed by him. It is for this

purpose the Court called for the expert opinion from the Consultant Forensic

Psychiatrist. Whilst placing strong reliance on V1, the Respondent similarly relies

on V2 and V3, which completely nullifies any indication of him having “bipolar

affective disorder currently mania with psychosis”. This Court is therefore not in a

position to make a positive pronouncement either way on this question whether

the Respondent actually suffers from an unsoundness of mind or that he is a

normal person, who now pretends to be of unsoundness of mind for tactical

reasons. The contradictory positions taken up by the Respondent on this vital

issue made it impossible for this Court to determine the relative probabilities of

him having a manic episode during the acts done on 20.03.2024.

S.C. Contempt of Court No.01/2024

14

In order to get over the two irreconcilable positions that has arisen with

regard to his defence, the Respondent sought to explain in his evidence before

this Court that he now realises that it was wrong for him to have challenged the

validity of V1. The Respondent, in spite of accepting the contents of V1 as one

that reflects his state of mind on the date specified in the Rule, nonetheless wants

to proceed with the action he already instituted against the Drs. W.W.L.I Fernando

and C.T.K Fernando, indicating that he has no intention of withdrawing that

action. Thus, the aforementioned conduct poses a serious credibility issue on the

truthfulness of evidence that was presented before this Court by the Respondent,

in support of the defence of insanity.

It is already noted that the assessment made by Dr. C.T.K Fernando in V1 is

clearly at variance with the one made by Dr. Jayan Mendis in V3. This difference

of opinions expressed by the medial experts, who are eminently qualified in the

field of Psychiatry, could have been due to limited accessibility to relevant

information. In fact, Dr. C.T.K Fernando noted that there was “unavailability of

collateral information from a family member” during his session. All three reports

indicate that the assessment of the Respondent was made totally on the

information gathered during each of these three consultations. Thus, the

assessment would totally be dependent on the manner the Respondent presented

himself before each of the medical experts, during the respective assessment

sessions, thus resulting in varying conclusions.

In order to arrive at a finding on the question of fact that whether the

Respondent was incapable of knowing what he was doing is either wrong or

contrary to law, by reason of his unsoundness of mind, it is important to refer to

the circumstances leading up to the point of the issuance of the Rule, along with

S.C. Contempt of Court No.01/2024

15

the circumstances that tends to indicate his mental state, subsequent to those

indicated in the said Rule, even though he admitted the acts that were attributed

to him.

The Respondent filed application No. CA Writ 635/2021 naming several

Respondents (including a Judge of the original Court, cited as the 1st

Respondent), and made several allegations against two sitting Justices of that

Court. Thereafter, he filed another application (COC/02/2023) against the said

1st Respondent, alleging Contempt of Court of Appeal, when the latter failed to

appear before that Court, when the application No. CA Writ 635/2021 was

mentioned before that Court. The Court of Appeal, by its order dated 09.03.2023,

refused to issue notice on the 1st Respondent judicial officer, in case No.

COC/02/2023.

The Respondent thereupon sought Special Leave to Appeal from this

Court in SC SPL LA 112/2023, impugning the said order made by the Court of

Appeal in COC/02/2023. The Respondent, after filing the petition in case No.

SC SPL LA 112/2023, appeared before this Court in person on 30.01.2024 in order

to support the said application. When this Court sought a clarification from him,

whether there was any direction made by the Court of Appeal directing the 1st

Respondent in CA Writ 635/2021 to appear before that Court personally, the

Respondent moved for time and to have the matter re-fixed and thereby

allowing him to make further submissions on the next date i.e., 20.03.2024.

It is at that stage only the Respondent has filed the subsequent petition

along with an affidavit dated 12.03.2024 making serious allegations against the

panel of three Justices before whom his application No. SC SPL LA 112/2023 was

partially supported.

S.C. Contempt of Court No.01/2024

16

On 20.03.2024, when case No. SC SPL LA 112/2023 was resumed before

the same panel of Justices, the Respondent made serious allegations against the

panel of Justices hearing his application in open Court. Learned SDSG, who

appeared for the Hon. Attorney General, having witnessed the acts of the

Respondent, moved this Court to issue show cause on the Respondent, why this

Court should not punish him for contempt of the Supreme Court.

The said chronology of events indicates that the circumstances under

which the offending conduct was carried out and the manner in which he

conducted himself in the well of the Court, in addition to the allegations made in

his petition addressed to this Court. The reason for his offending conduct on

20.03.2024, is attempted to persuade the three Judges not to resume the hearing

of his application in SC SPL LA 112/2023, and forced them to recuse from

continuing with the hearing.

The intention of the Respondent, behind his conduct, is clearly reflected

from the narrative he provided to Dr. C.T.K Fernando, during his assessment on

02.04.2024, after a mere 13 days since 20.03.2024.

The Respondent has disclosed to the Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist that

(vide para 29 of V1);

“kvqj .;a;d iqmarsï fl`Ü tfla’ ;arS fnkaÉ mek,a tlla ;uhs ysáfha’ uu ta ;=ka

fokdg úreoaOj wmrdO kvqjla oeïud l,ska fld<U ufyaia;ard;a Widúh ^wxl 01&’ Bg

miafia uf.a kvqj wyoaos uu lsõjd " Tn ;=uka,dg úreoaOj uu kvq od, ;sfhkafka

tal ksid uf. kvqj l;d lrkav neye fu Widúfha lsh,d"

This particular admission made to the Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist

made it implicitly clear that the Respondent was determined to compel the three

S.C. Contempt of Court No.01/2024

17

Justices to desist from resuming the hearing of the application No. SC SPL LA

112/2023 on 20.03.2024, at whatever the cost. He has even taken the extreme step

of instituting a private Plaint in the Magistrate’s Court of Colombo against the

three Justices, and thereby expected to force them to recuse from taking part any

further in those proceedings, which their Lordships would have done in any

other ordinary situation, in terms of applicable Judicial Ethics.

The said conduct of the Respondent therefore appears to be of a person,

who acted with a clear and a rational mind, particularly in developing a strategy

to achieve his desired objective by creating a situation that would force the three

Justices to recuse themselves from further proceedings of the case and, executing

each of the stages of that strategy with meticulous care. If that in fact is the case,

then the Respondent has effectively designed a strategy in order to force the

three Justices not to proceed with the resumption of proceedings with the

unfounded and unsubstantiated allegation of bias.

Moreover, immediately after enlarging the Respondent on bail, he has

secured an interview with a private television presenter. During this interview,

he was afforded with yet another opportunity of repeating what he alleged in his

subsequent petition and to reach out to a larger population of television viewers

via audio-visual media. This action, in turn, has resulted in re-remanding the

Respondent.

In view of this reasoning, it appears to this Court that it is more probable

than not, that the Respondent at all times material to the Rule presented against

him, have acted with a rational mind, which is not clouded by any mental

condition that qualified to diminish that ability. Clearly, there was no family

S.C. Contempt of Court No.01/2024

18

history of mental illnesses and prior to the incidents which resulted in presenting

the charges, the Respondent had no episodes of any mental incapacity at all.

Even if there was some temporary derangement, as assessed by Dr. C.T.K

Fernando, the evidence clearly supports a reasonable proposition that he may

have experienced such episodes with long time intervals in between them. But,

when he acted contemptuously towards this Court on 20.03.2024, in the absence

of any material to satisfy to the contrary, it is more probable that he was acting

rationally and was not under any mental derangement, as confirmed by Drs.

P.A.I. Wijayanayaka and Jayan Mendis, Consultant Psychiatrists, who have had the

benefit and the opportunity of making a personal assessment of the Respondent

with an unrestricted flow of information.

In this regard, it must be noted that all three Consultants have assessed the

mental condition of the Respondent solely by interviewing him and without

having the benefit of any clinical reports obtained through investigative testing

procedures to assist them.

Furthermore, we derive support for aforementioned view from the

reasoning of the judgment of Dias J in The King v Jayawardene (1947) 48 NLR

497. This was a situation where the accused, in support of his plea of insanity,

has relied on the evidence that his father, brother and sister had been insane; he

himself in his childhood had suffered from epileptic fits, that when the detection

of his fraud and his arrest became imminent his mental condition deteriorated to

the extent that he attempted to commit suicide and was subsequently

adjudicated to be of a person of unsound mind. But the evidence before Court

also proved that during the thirty years the accused had been a public servant, he

had displayed no signs of any mental aberration.

S.C. Contempt of Court No.01/2024

19

His Lordship, having considered the circumstances in support of the

defence of insanity by the accused, has held (at p. 503) that;

“[T]he modus operandi of the accused, as detailed by the learned Judge at

pages 51 and 52 of his judgment, clearly shows that the accused needed

considerable skill and mental acumen in order to falsify the books and

vouchers received by him during this period in order to deceive, not only

his station staff, but also the head office at Colombo. A person who was of

unsound mind and did not know the nature of his acts could not have

perpetrated this somewhat intricate fraud in the manner in which the

accused carried it out”.

The Respondent is charged under Sections 3(1)(a), 3(1)(b), 3(2)(c), and

3(2)(e) of the Contempt of a Court, Tribunal or Institution Act. Section 3(1)(a)

refers to certain acts committed with the intent to bring the authority of a Court

and the administration of justice into disrespect or disregard, whereas Section

3(1)(b) refers to acts done with a view to interfere with, or cause grave prejudice

to the judicial process in relation to any ongoing litigation. Section 3(2)(c) in turn

deals with situations where a person expresses, pronounces or publishes any

matter that is false or doing an act that scandalizes or lowers the judicial

authority or dignity of Court, that gravely prejudices or unlawfully interferes

with due course of any judicial proceeding and interferes with or obstructs the

administration of justice.

Perusal of the acts that are attributed to the Respondent in the Rule

indicate that those acts, if committed by a person, are indeed qualifies to be taken

as acts that ;

S.C. Contempt of Court No.01/2024

20

a. brings the authority of a Court and administration of justice into

disrespect or disregard,

b. interfering with, or causing grave prejudice to the judicial process

in relation to an ongoing litigation.

The act of filing the petition containing false allegations against sitting

Justices of this Court by the Respondent certainly qualifies to be taken as both;

an expression, pronouncement or publishing any matter that is

false or doing an act that;

i. scandalizes or lowers the judicial authority or dignity of

Court,

ii. that gravely prejudices or unlawfully interferes with due

course of any judicial proceeding and

iii. interfering with or obstructing the administration of

justice.

It is already noted earlier on in this judgment that the Respondent has

admitted the acts attributed to him but unsuccessfully pleaded that he was

incapable of knowing that he is doing what is either wrong or contrary to law

due to unsoundness of mind. There was no attempt made by the Respondent to

bring any of his acts under Section 4(1) of the Contempt of a Court, Tribunal or

Institution Act, instead opted to act under Section 4(3) by placing reliance on

“any other valid defence for contempt of Court” by placing total reliance on Section

77 of the Penal Code.

S.C. Contempt of Court No.01/2024

21

It was for the Respondent to establish the defense he put up against the

Rule on a balance of probabilities. The Respondent should have established that

he was incapable of knowing what he did at that time is either wrong or contrary

to law, when he committed those acts that are referred to in the Rule due to

“bipolar affective disorder currently mania with psychosis”. Having carefully

considered the evidence presented before this Court, we are of the considered

view that the Respondent failed to discharge the burden of proof imposed on

him by law, in taking up the defense of insanity.

Therefore, in view of the reasons set out in the preceding paragraphs of

this judgment, we find the Respondent has committed acts that are referred to in

the Rule in contempt of the Supreme Court, which were criminalized in terms of

Sections 3(1)(a), 3(1)(b), 3(2)(c), and 3(2)(e) of the Contempt of a Court, Tribunal

or Institution Act, and he acted with the requisite mental element, as indicated in

the said Rule.

This Court, in imposing sentence on the Respondent, already considered

the appropriate punishments that could be imposed on persons, who found to

have acted in contempt of Court. In its sentencing order, in Sumanthiran and

two Others v Illukpitiya (SC/Contempt/03/2025 – pronounced on 23.09.2025)

where Kodagoda J, having noted that the Act No. 8 of 2024 does not provide for

any restriction on the nature or to the extent of the punishment that may be

imposed on a person found have committed Contempt of Court, proceeded to

hold that;

“[O]n a consideration of a multitude of factors, this Court has formed the

assumption that additional reasons which justify why there should not be

any restriction placed in Court are that; (a) Article 105(3) which

S.C. Contempt of Court No.01/2024

22

concurrently confers jurisdiction on the Supreme Court and the Court of

Appeal to deal with instances of contempt of court, does not impose any

restriction on the punishment that may be imposed on a person who has

been found “guilty” of having committed contempt of court, and (b) the

very nature of the circumstances that constitutes contempt of court are so

varied and its impact and consequences can range from being minor to

extremely serious, there can be certain instances of contempt of court which

warrants in public interest the imposition of a very high (severe)

punishment.”

In relation to the appropriate sentence that should be imposed on a person

who is found to have committed contempt of Court, it was further held by

Kodagoda J, as follows;

“[G]iven the plethora of situations and manifestations of contempt of Court

that may be committed in a varying range of situations, the scheme of

punishment contained in the Penal Code for various offences, including

offences relating to the administration of justice, and previous judgments of

this Court relating to instances where persons have been convicted of

having committed contempt of Court and punished, this Court fixes a

hypothetical upper limit of seven (7) years imprisonment of either

description, as being the maximum imprisonment that may be imposed on a

person convicted of having committed the offence of contempt of court,

together with or without an order for the payment of a fine”.

This Court respectfully agrees with the said range of imprisonment that

had been identified in relation to acts of contempt of Court, but wish to

emphasize that where the act of contempt is committed against the apex Court of

S.C. Contempt of Court No.01/2024

23

the country, the deterrent component in the sentencing ought to be given extra

weightage, in view of the nature of the multifaceted jurisdiction conferred on it

by the Constitution of the Republic.

In determining the appropriate sentence to be imposed on the Respondent

in this particular instance, we, in mitigation, consider that he has no apparent

record of any previous instances of offending. He is a married individual with

three children. Due to certain reasons his family life suffered several setbacks. He

was deprived of the wealth he has accumulated over the years. He has taken to

law only a few years back, after engaged in various business activities

However, we also consider the several aggravating circumstances, which

are identified and listed as follows;

1. The instances referred to in the Rule are not at all related to

instances of exercising the freedom of expression and fair

comment,

2. Only purpose for the committing the acts referred to in the Rule

by the Respondent to achieve the specific result which he

desperately wanted to achieve,

3. In order to achieve that purpose he chose to scandalise the all the

Judges who happened to adjudicate the cases instituted by him,

ranging from the original Courts to the apex Court, and they

were indiscriminately vilified and humiliated by making serious

allegations and instituting criminal prosecutions against them,

S.C. Contempt of Court No.01/2024

24

4. In doing so, he acted with cunning and carefully strategizing

each distinct step in his approach to achieve the result he wanted,

5. He executed each step of that strategy with meticulous care,

6. He had no remorse to express at any time for the adverse impact

made on reputation of the institution of the Judiciary or to the

Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist and the Psychiatrist, by the

institution of actions, as a form of revengeful actions,

7. He still maintains the multiple actions that were already

instituted against the members of the Judiciary, despite

undertakings given by him quite voluntarily at various times to

withdraw them with a view to entice the Hon. Attorney General

to initiate a process of plea bargaining seeking to reduce the

criminality of his acts, in return for withdrawal of those cases,

8. The prospect of general public accepting these multiple

allegations, made by the Respondent, as genuine grievances

suffered by an Attorney at Law in performing his duty, due to

him being an Attorney-at-Law, would be significantly high when

compared with similar allegations made by an ordinary litigant.

In view of these multiple factors aggravating the impact of the acts of

contempt of Court, and with due consideration of the circumstances already

referred to in this judgment in mitigation, we are of the view that the Respondent

should be punished with a deterrent sentence, that commensurate with the acts

committed by him. Therefore, we are of the view that a term of imprisonment for

a period of three years (03) would serve the ends of justice. Of course, we take

S.C. Contempt of Court No.01/2024

25

note of the fact that the Respondent is in remand since 01.07.2024. Therefore, we

make order that the said sentence of three years of imprisonment to run from

that date, i.e., 01.07.2024.

The Registrar of this Court is directed to issue a Warrant of Detention in

respect of the person found to have committed Contempt of Court, in line with

terms set out by this Court in this judgment.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

A.L. SHIRAN GOONERATNE, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT