SC Appeal 39/2013 JUDGMENT Page 1 of 8

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

Leave to Appeal against Judgment of

the Provincial High Court of North

Central Province dated 24/02/2011 in

Case No. NCP/HCCA/ANU 688/2009

D.C. Anuradhapura Case No.10596/L.

W. Justin Fernando. (Deceased)

Thambarawila, Waikkala.

(Plaintiff)

K. Mary Margaret Fernando.

Thambarawila,

Waikkawala.

Substituted Plaintiff

Vs.

W.M. Seneviratne,

No. 402, Eliya Diwulwewa,

Eppawala.

Defendant

And then,

W.M. Seneviratne,

No. 402, Eliya Diwulwewa,

Eppawala.

Defendant-Appellant.

SC APPEAL NO.39/2013 SC/HCCA/LA No.105/2011 NCP/HCCA/ANU 688/2009. D.C. Anuradhapura case No.10596/L

SC Appeal 39/2013 JUDGMENT Page 2 of 8

Vs.

K. Mary Margaret Fernando.

Thambarawila,

Waikkawala.

Substituted Plaintiff-Respondent.

AND NOW BETWEEN,

K. Mary Margaret Fernando.

Thambarawila,

Waikkawala.

Substituted Plaintiff-Respondent-

Petitioner

Vs.

W.M. Seneviratne,

No. 402, Eliya Diwulwewa,

Eppawala.

Defendant-Appellant-Respondent

BEFORE : BUWANEKA ALUWIHARE, PC, J.

L.T.B. DEHIDENIYA, J.

S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

COUNSEL : Sudarshani Cooray Attorney-at-Law for the Substituted Plaintiff-

Respondent- Petitioner.

Defendant- Appellant- Respondent is absent and unrepresented.

ARGUED ON : 01st February 2019.

SC Appeal 39/2013 JUDGMENT Page 3 of 8

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS : Substituted Plaintiff- Respondent-Appellant filed

on 12th February 2019.

DECIDED ON : 5th April 2019.

S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

Justin Fernando had instituted an action in 1982, against Wijekoon Mudiyanselage

Seneviratne (the Defendant-Appellant-Respondent) for declaration of title to the

land described in the schedule to the plaint (as amended) dated 29th October 1993

and to eject the Defendant-Appellant- Respondent and Rs.1000/- per month as

damages from October 1980 on the basis that, the Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant is

the owner of the said land on deeds and possession. The Defendant-Appellant-

Respondent resisted the action and took the defence of prescription. During the case

was pending Justin Fernando passed away and he was substituted by his wife K. Mary

Margret Fernando (Substituted Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant). The case was fixed

for trial on 17th June 2005, the Defendant-Appellant-Respondent was absent and the

Court fixed this case for trial for the 13th time (as per the journal entry) on 26th

August 2005 and marked it as final date.

On the said date, the Defendant-Appellant-Respondent was absent and his regular

Counsel informed Court that, he has no proper instructions from his client. It is also

observed, even though it was the final date for trial; the Defendant-Appellant-

Respondent had not filed the list of witnesses and documents. The Learned District

Judge considering all factors, decided to take up this case ex-parte. All procedures

were followed and the trial was taken up on the same day and order was delivered

on 14th November 2005 (page 137 of the Appeal Brief). The order was delivered in

favour of the Substituted Plaintiff- Respondent- Appellant and served the said order

to the Defendant-Appellant-Respondent.

SC Appeal 39/2013 JUDGMENT Page 4 of 8

According to the available documents, the Defendant-Appellant- Respondent had

filed papers to purge his default (page 113 of the Appeal Brief). Substituted Plaintiff-

Respondent-Appellant objected to the said application of purge in default of the

Defendant- Appellant- Respondent and to set aside the said ex-parte judgement (at

page 11 of the Appeal Brief) dated 21st July 2006. When we go through the journal

entries of the proceedings in the District Court, it is evident that, the Defendant-

Appellant- Respondent had not been present before the District Court on several

dates and the Counsel appeared for the Defendant-Appellant- Respondent had

moved for dates.

Defendant-Appellant-Respondent’s position is that, he was seriously ill and that, he

had to go to the clinic on 26th August 2005 and as such, he could not come to Court

(vide page 03 of the proceedings dated 23rd January 2007) and in the cross-

examination it was revealed that, though he went to the Clinic as scheduled by his

Doctor on the previous date of the Clinic, on 26th August 2005, he was not admitted

to the Hospital on that day.

After a proper inquiry, Learned District Judge dismissed the application and refused

to vacate his original judgment.

Being aggrieved with the said order, the Defendant-Appellant-Respondent appealed

to the Provincial High Court (Holden in Anuradhapura) and the Learned Judges of

the said Provincial High Court had decided that, under Section 86(2) of the Civil

Procedure Code, that the Defendant-Appellant-Respondent had purged his default.

Hence, he had directed the Learned District Judge to re-hear the case.

Being aggrieved with the said order of the Provincial High Court, the Substituted

Plaintiff-Respondent- Appellant had preferred this appeal to the Supreme Court. The

Counsel alleges that, the Learned Judge of the Provincial High Court had misdirected

SC Appeal 39/2013 JUDGMENT Page 5 of 8

himself with the medical certificates. Hence the order is perverse. Further, it was

submitted that, the evidence at the inquiry does not revealed “a reasonable ground”

to set aside the Order dated 26th August 2005. Leave was granted on the question of

law raised in paragraphs 9 (b) and (c) of the Petition dated 1st of April 2011 which

reads as follows.

I. (b) Did the Learned High Court Judges gravely err in holding that the Learned

District Court Judge did not consider the seriousness of the illness of the

Defendant-Appellant whereas the vital question that has to be considered in a

purging default application is that whether the Defendant was so sick that he

could not attend Court or give instruction to his lawyers to appear on the

26.08.2005?

II. (c) Did the Learned High Court Judges gravely err in holding that the

Defendant was an inpatient at the Hospital on 26/08/2005, when actually he

was not an inpatient and had only attended the Clinic on 26/08/2005?

The Defendant-Appellant-Respondent was absent and unrepresented from the

inception of the case before this Court. This Court has taken all necessary steps

including publishing notices in National Newspapers, but, the Defendant-Appellant-

Respondent was both absent and unrepresented.

Considering the available materials before this Court we find that, the Defendant-

Appellant- Respondent was present at the District Court of Anuradhapura for a

considerable period of time. When the matter was fixed for trial finally, the

Defendant-Appellant-Respondent was absent and unrepresented.

It is noted on the relevant date namely 26th August 2005; his Attorney-at-Law was

present and informed Court that, he had no instructions from his client. Since, the

SC Appeal 39/2013 JUDGMENT Page 6 of 8

matter was fixed for trial and that was the 13th date of trial. Further, parties were

informed, that was the final date. Perusing the trial proceedings, it is observed that

the Defendant-Appellant-Respondent had not taken meaningful steps including

filing of list of witnesses and documents to proceed with the trial. The Learned

District Court Judge had taken necessary precautions and reasonable steps to

conduct an ex-parte trial and proceeded with the trial. Subsequently, judgment was

delivered on 14th November 2005.

Thereafter, the Defendant-Appellant–Respondent filed petition and affidavit dated

26th February 2006 to purge the default and moved to have the ex parte judgment

set aside. The Defendant-Appellant–Respondent made an application under Section

86(2) of the Civil Procedure Code to the Judge of the District Court, to purge his

default. He mainly relied on a medical certificate issued by an Ayurvedic Doctor.

Where it says, he had attended a clinic on the 26th of August 2005. Further he had

submitted medical records (exercise book) to Courts. It appears that he was

attending clinic regularly for some time. He was attending the General Hospital for

illness regarding kidney and taking medicine at Ayurvedic Hospital for swelling of his

legs (page 152 of the Appeal Brief).

The Learned District Judge had comprehensively analysed the evidence before him

and concluded that the reasons are insufficient/inadequate to purge his default.

Being aggrieved with the said order Defendant-Appellant- Respondent made an

appeal to the High Court (Civil Appeal). There, the same materials were analysed and

the Learned Judges of the High Court (Civil Appeal) had concluded that, the

Defendant-Appellant-Respondent had substantially purged his default and the

Judgment was delivered on 23rd February 2011 (marked as ‘P4’).

SC Appeal 39/2013 JUDGMENT Page 7 of 8

It appears that the High Court of Civil Appeal had come to the conclusion that, the

finding of the District Judge is wrong because, medical certificates submitted by the

Defendant-Appellant-Respondent were not properly considered. The High Court of

Civil Appeal had concluded that, the Defendant-Appellant- Respondent had purged

his default.

Purge in Default is discussed in Section 86(2) of the Civil Procedure Code and it reads

as follows:

"Where, within fourteen days of the service of the decree entered against' him

for default, the defendant with notice to the plaintiff makes application to and

thereafter satisfies court, that he had reasonable grounds for such default, the

court shall set aside the judgment and decree and permit the defendant to

proceed with his defence as from the stage of default upon such terms as to

costs or otherwise as to the court shall appear proper.”

Considering the submissions made by the Counsel for the Plaintiff-Respondent-

Petitioner, we find that the materials submitted before the District Court and the

High Court of Civil Appeal were differently considered. Hence, we perused the

relevant medical certificates which are submitted as sole evidence. According to the

medical certificate submitted by the Defendant-Appellant-Respondent, it was

obtained from the Ayurvedic doctor of Anuradhapura. The medical records revealed

that, he had taken treatment for illness in kidney at the General Hospital of

Anuradhapura. It is evidenced before the Court that on the said date ie. 26/08/2005

the Defendant-Appellant-Respondent had attended Ayurvedic Clinic at the

Anuradhapura Hospital and he was never hospitalised on the said date. Hence, the

finding of the District Judge is correct.

SC Appeal 39/2013 JUDGMENT Page 8 of 8

In David Appuhamy Vs. Yasassi Thero (1987 SLR 253) it was held that,

“an ex- parte order made in default of appearance of a party will not be vacated

if the affected party fails to give a valid excuse for his default..”

Considering all, we find that the Learned District Judge had carefully considered the

evidence and all the materials before him and concluded that, the Defendant-

Appellant-Respondent has not adequately purged his default. Further we find that,

the Learned Judge of the High Court of Civil Appeal has misconceived the facts,

especially the medical certificates and hospitalization. As such I answer the questions

of law on which leave to appeal was granted in the affirmative. Accordingly, I allow

the appeal and vacate the order made by the High Court of Civil Appeal;

Anuradhapura dated 23rd February 2011 and affirm the order of the Learned District

Judge dated 14th November 2005.

Appeal allowed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

B.P. ALUWIHARE, PC, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

L.T.B. DEHIDENIYA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT