IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application under and

in terms of Article 12(1) and 14(1)(g),

read with Articles 17 and 126 of the

Constitution.

1.Ranasinghe Arachchige Nadeesha

Seuwandi Ranasinghe,

No. 130D, “Saman”

Walpola Road,

Ragama.

2.Mohamed Huwais Mohamed

Naleef,

No.7,

Salawatta Lane,

Wellampitiya.

PETITIONERS

SC No: SC FR 244/2017Vs

1.Ceylon Petroleum Storage Terminals

Limited,

Oil Installation,

Kolonnawa.

2.Chairman,

Ceylon Petroleum Storage Terminals

Limited,

Oil Installation,

Kolonnawa.

3.Managing Director,

1

Ceylon Petroleum Storage Terminals

Limited,

Oil Installation,

Kolonnawa.

4.P.D.P.Dharmawansa,

Deputy General Manager (HR and

Admin),

Ceylon Petroleum Storage Terminals

Limited,

Oil Installation,

Kolonnawa

5.W.V.S.A. Fonseka,

Chief Accountant,

Ministry of Petroleum Resources

Development,

No. 80, Sir Ernest de Silva Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

6.D.M.H.B.Dasanayake,

Manager (Internal Audit),

Ceylon Petroleum Storage Terminals

Limited,

Oil Installation,

Kolonnawa.

7.K.M.N.A.C.Perera,

Human Resource Manager,

Ceylon Petroleum Storage Terminals

Limited,

Oil Installation,

Kolonnawa.

8.Manoj Siriwardene,

2

Senior Deputy Manager (Finance),

Ceylon Petroleum Storage Terminals

Limited,

Oil Installation,

Kolonnawa

9.R.M.S.K. Rathnayake (11536)

10. R.M.S.M.T. Mahanama (14104)

11. D.R.C.S.Thennakoon (14629)

12. E.G.C.B.Ellagama (16096)

9th to 12th Respondents all of and to be

served through the Manager (Internal

Audit),

Ceylon Petroleum Storage Terminals

Limited,

Oil Installation,

Kolonnawa.

13. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

Before:

Buwaneka Aluwihare, PC. J,

L.T.B Dehideniya, J. and

Murdu N.B.Fernando, PC. J.

Counsel: Harsha Fernando with Chamith Senanayake and Ruvendra Weerasinghe

instructed by Jagath Talgaswattage for the Petitioners.

Sanjeewa Jayawardena, PC for the 1st to 4th, 6th to 12th Respondents.

Yuresha de Silva, SSC for AG.

3

Supported on: 13.06.2018

Decided on: 22.02.2019

Murdu N.B. Fernando, PC.J,

This order is in respect of the Preliminary Objection raised by the 1st to 4th and 6th to 12th

Respondents (the Respondents) that the Petitioner’s application to this Court is time barred.

The respondents raised the above preliminary objection, when this application in which

the petitioners alleged that their fundamental rights were infringed by the respondent’s failure to

grant the promotion which the petitioners alleged they were duly entitled to, was taken up for

support, on the premise that Articles 17 and 126 of the Constitution requires a fundamental rights

application to be filed within one month of the alleged violation but the present application had

been filed in this Court four months and eight days after the alleged violation.

The petitioners response was that prior to coming before this Court, a complaint was filed

with the Human Rights Commission and in view of the provisions of Section 13(1) of the Human

Rights Commission Act No 21 of 1996, time freezes and thus, this application is not time barred.

In the extensive written submissions filed before this Court substantiated by judicial

authority, the respondents takes up the position that a mere filing of a complaint is not sufficient

and that the petitioners should place material before Court to demonstrate that an inquiry is

pending, whilst the petitioners takes up the position that up to now, no formal notification has

been published indicating the date of promotion of 9th to 12th Respondents and by the inaction of

the respondents an artificial lacuna has been created in ascertaining the exact date from which

the 30 day time period begins to run and in any event the complaint to the Human Rights

Commission has been made within 30 days on the assumption that the promotions were made on

a given date, which is in line with the position taken up by the respondents in its written

submissions.

4

In order to consider the time bar objection, certain dates are material and this Court will

place reliance only on documents tendered to Court supported by affidavits.

- date of interview- 20-01-2017

- date of filling the complaint before the HRC- 23-03-2017 and 24-03-2017

(by the two petitioners)

- date of acknowledgement by the HRC- 29-03-2017

- date of the Fundamental Rights Application- 14-07-2017

The grievance of the petitioners before this Court is arbitrarial denial of a promotion

despite being duly qualified but there is no documentation before Court to ascertain the exact

date of promotion. The petitioners position is that up to date no formal notification had been

published and becoming aware on or about 03-03-2017 that promotions have been made,

complained to the Human Rights Commission within the stipulated time of one month.

The respondents on the other hand takes up the position that on the date the petition was

filed before this Court viz. 14-07-2017, there was no pending inquiry at the Human Rights

Commission and thus the petitioners cannot rely upon Section 13(1) of the Human Rights

Commission Act of No 21 of 1996. No documents have been produced by either party before

this Court supported by an affidavit to demonstrate that an inquiry is being held or was held

before the Human Rights Commission, excepting the original complaint filed before the Human

Rights Commission by the petitioners.

Article 126(2) of the Constitution reads as follows:-

“Where any person alleges that such fundamental right or language

right relating to such person has been infringed or is about to be

infringed by executive and administrative action, he may himself or by

an Attorney-at-Law on his behalf, within one month there of, in

accordance with such rules of Court as may be in force, apply to the

Supreme Court………”

5

Section 13(1) of Human Rights Commission Act No 21 of 1996 reads as follows:-

“Where a complaint is made by an aggrieved party in terms of Section

14 to the Commission, within one month of the alleged infringement

or imminent infringement of a fundaments right by executive or

administrative action, the period within which the inquiry in to such

complaint is pending before the Commission, shall not be taken into

account in computing the period of one month within which an

application may be made to the Supreme Court by such person in

terms of Article 126 (2) of the Constitution.”

The above sections clearly and precisely state that within one month of an

infringement, any person may come before the Supreme Court or make a complaint to the

Human Rights Commission. Thus, the key word in the above section is the word ‘infringement’

in order to ascertain the time period of one month for a party to come before the Supreme Court

or the Human Rights Commission. The documents produced before this Court does not indicate

the date of promotion which the petitioners alleged, infringed their fundamental rights. The

petitioners position is that up to date no formal notification had been published and on or about

03-03-2017 becoming aware of the infringement, the two petitioners went before the Human

Rights Commission on 23rd and 24th March 2017 respectively, which is within one month of

having knowledge of the infringement.

This position is not controverted by the respondents. No documents up to now have

been produced before this Court to indicate the date of promotion and or notification of such date

of promotion. However, the written submissions of the respondents have been filed upon the

basis that promotions to the 9th to 12th respondents were given on 03.03.2017 to be effective from

01.02.2017. The applications before the Human Rights Commission had been filed by the

petitioners on 23rd and 24th of March 2017 respectively and acknowledged by the Human Rights

Commission on 29.03.2017.

6

In the above circumstances, the petitioner’s contention that they went before the Human

Rights Commission within the stipulated period of one month is accepted.

The next question that this Court is called upon to answer is whether the petitioners

application dated 14-07-2017 filed before this Court is time barred or not in view of the

provisions of Section 13(1) of the Human Rights Commission Act, which stipulates that if a

complaint is made to the Commission within one month of the alleged infringement, then the

period within which such inquiry into such complaint is pending before the Commission shall

not be taken into account in computing the period of one month within which an application may

be made to the Supreme Court in terms of Article 126(2) of the Constitution.

The time limit of one month prescribed by Article 126(2) has been considered by this

Court on many an instant and consistently the said provision has been treated as mandatory.

Mark Fernando, J. in Gamaethige Vs Siriwardana 1988 (1) SLR page 384 at pages

401 and 402 stated as follows:-

“The time period of one month prescribed by Article 126(2) has been

consistently treated as mandatory; where however by the very act

complained of as being an infringement of a petitioners fundamental right, or

by an independent act of the respondents concerned, he is denied such

facilities and freedom (including accent to legal advice) as would be

necessary to invoke the jurisdiction of this Court, this Court has discretion,

possibly even a duty to entertain an application made within one month after

the petitioner ceased to be subjected to such restraint. The question whether

there is a similar discretion where the petitioners failure to apply in time is

on account of a third paty or some nature or man-made disaster, would have

to be considered in an appropriate case when it arises….”

“ Three principles are thus discernible in regard to the operation of time

limit prescribed by Article 126(2); Time being to run when the infringement

takes place; if knowledge on the part of the Petitioner is required ….. time

begins to run only when both infringement and knowledge exist….; the

7

pursuit of other remedies, judicial or administrative, does not prevent or

interrupt the operation of time limit. While the time limit is mandatory, in

exceptional cases, on the application of the principle lex non cogit ad

impossibilia, if there is no lapse, fault or, delay on the part of the petitioner,

this Court has a discretion to entertain an application made out of time”

Thus in very clear terms, this Court has held that one month time period is mandatory,

but in an exceptional case or in an appropriate case, court has a discretion, possibly even a duty

to entertain an application made out of time.

Human Rights Commission Act No 21 of 1996 was enacted subsequent to the said

pronouncement of Fernando, J. in Gamaethige Vs Siriwardena.

Aluwihare, J. in Alawala Vs IGP S.C.F.R 219/2015 – S.C.M. 15.02.2016 at page 8

referring to the provisions of Article 126(2), stated that

“An exception to this rule, however is found in the Human

Rights Commission Act. This Act empowers the Human Rights

Commission to entertain complaints in respect of violations of

fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution.”

“In the light of Section 13(1) of the said Act, it is evident

that the petitioners could avoid the time bar, if the application to

the Human Rights Commission was made within one month of the

alleged infringement. By virtue of the aforesaid provision time

would not run during the pendency of proceedings before the

Commission. This view was fortified in the case of Romesh

Coorey Vs Jayalath (2008) 2 SLR page 43.”

In the above referred case, viz Romesh Coorey Vs Jayalath, Shirani Bandaranayake J

(as she then was) held, that although the petitioner in the said case had come before the Supreme

Court five months after the alleged infringement, since the petitioner had complied with the

provisions of the Human Rights Commission Act and had complained to the Human Rights

Commission within one month of the alleged infringement of his fundamental right and the

8

inquiry before the Human Rights Commission was pending, it was quite clear that the Petitioner

has filed the fundamental rights application before the Supreme Court within the stipulated time

and over ruled the preliminary objection pertaining to time bar raised by the respondent.

Similarly, in the case of Alles Vs Road Passenger Services Authority S.C.F.R.

448/2009 – S.C.M 22.02.2013 Marsoof, J. relying upon the above referred case of Romesh

Coorey Vs Jayalath, over ruled the preliminary objection raised by the respondents with regard

to the time bar. The petitioners in the said case had taken up the position that upon being aware

of the alleged violation of fundamental rights, a complaint was promptly preferred to the Human

Rights Commission and even when the petitioners invoked the jurisdiction of this Court the

complaint was pending before the Human Rights Commission.

In the case presently before us, the petitioners have promptly gone before the Human

Rights Commission upon being aware of the alleged infringement of fundament rights. Thus,

based on the above referred line of judicial authority, as the petitioners have gone before the

Human Rights Commission promptly and the matter is pending before the Human Rights

Commission and during the pendency of the matter before Human Rights Commission time

freezes, the petitioners contention that the application before the Supreme Court has been filed

within the stipulated time is accepted. However, the question raised by the respondents is that

filling a complaint is not sufficient and an inquiry should commence for the petitioners to rely on

the provisions of Section 13(1) of the Human Rights Commission Act.

The respondents heavily relied upon the Judgment of Kithsiri Vs Faizer Musthapa –

S.C.F.R 362/2017 - S.C.M. 10.01.2018 to buttress their argument.

In the said case, the application was filed by the petitioner against the Minister of

Provincial Councils and Local Government, Speaker of Parliament and the Election Commission

alleging infringement of the petitioner’s and such other similarly circumstanced persons

fundamental rights by introducing amendments to the Local Authority Elections (Amendment)

bill, in violation of the procedure established by law, particularly in terms of the Constitution. In

the said case on behalf of the respondents it was pointed out, referring to the dates of the said Bill

being published in the gazette, placed in the Order Paper of Parliament, debated in Parliament,

Speakers certification and the Bill coming into force as a Law, that the application was time

9

barred. Although the petitioner relied on the application he made to the Human Rights

Commission to get over the time bar objection it was established that the petitioner was very

much aware of the impugned acts and had gone before the Human Rights Commission not to

have an inquiry conducted by the Human Rights Commission but with the desire of invoking the

jurisdiction of this Court and thus, upheld the preliminary objection pertaining to time bar raised

on behalf of the respondents.

Aluwihare, J. (with Malalgoda, J. agreeing) further held that the petitioner in his

complaint to the Human Rights Commission in his own hand writing had stated his intention of

going before the Supreme Court in the future and relied on the said complaint to circumvent the

period of limitation referred to in Article 126(2) of the Constitution and thus, the petitioner had

not filed the said application with the intention of pursing it before the Human Rights

Commission in seeking redress but only to obtain an advantage by bringing the application

within the provisions of Article 126(2) of the Constitution.

The case before us can easily be distinguished from the case Kithsiri Vs Mustapha

referred to above, as the two petitioners in the present case had gone before the Human Rights

Commission well within the stipulated period of time to obtain relief for themselves. There is not

even an iota of evidence before this Court, to suggest that the petitioners went before the Human

Rights Commission with the desire of invoking the jurisdiction of this Court or to circumvent the

period of limitation or for any other intention or an ulterior motive. Thus, Kithsiri’s case referred

to above, has no bearing on the present case as the petitioners in the present case went before the

Human Rights Commission in good faith and well within the stipulated time period.

The respondents also placed much reliance on the dicta of Wanasundera, J. in the case of

Manoranjan Vs Chandrasiri S.C.F.R. 261/2013 - S.C.M. 11.09.2014. The facts of the said

case are vastly different to the case before us and can be distinguished. In Manoranjan case, the

petitioner who was serving in Jaffna was initially transferred out of the work station he was

serving to another work station in Jaffna itself and the petitioner complied with the said transfer.

Four months thereafter he was transferred again to Mannar and he made an appeal requesting

that he be authorized to resume duties at his original work station. He went before the Human

Rights Commission against the second transfer and then came before this Court. The Court

10

upheld the preliminary objection raised by the respondents that the application made to this

Court was time barred, placing reliance that the infringement took place when the petitioner was

initially transferred out of his original work station four months earlier and the application made

to the Human Rights Commission based on the second transfer was not within the stipulated time

period of one month from the alleged violation as specifically provided for in the Human Rights

Commission Act, among other reasons. Thus, the dicta of Wanasundera, J. made in obiter,

should be viewed under the circumstances pertaining to the said case.

In the case before us the petitioners have established that they went before the Human

Rights Commission within the stipulated period of one month and thus the application falls

within the provisions of Section 13(1) of the Human Rights Commission Act. The said section

clearly states the period within which the matter is pending before the Commission should not be

taken into account in computing the period of one month for a person to come before the

Supreme Court in terms of Article 126 (2) of the Constitution. Therefore I am inclined to accept

the position taken up by the petitioners, that the present application to this Court is not time

barred as the complaint of the petitioners to Human Rights Commission clearly falls within the

four corners of Section 13(1) of the Human Rights Commission Act.

In the written submissions filed before this Court, much emphasis is placed on the

English and Sinhala terms ‘complaint’, ‘inquiry’, and ‘investigate’. I do not think it is necessary

to analyze the said terms and or to come to a finding with regard to the workings of the Human

Rights Commission, definition of ‘pending’ viz-a-viz inquiry and investigation and the effect of

Section 15(1) of the Human Rights Commission Act at this juncture, as the petitioners in the case

before us, have clearly established that the petitioners complaint to the Human Rights

Commission is well within one month of becoming aware of the alleged infringement of the

fundamental right unlike in the two cases referred to earlier, where the complaint was made to

the Human Rights Commission in order to circumvent the period of limitation laid down by

Article 126(2) of the Constitution and way outside the stipulated time frame given in section

13(1) of the Human Rights Commission Act respectively.

In my view, what is material is for an aggrieved party to make a complaint within the

mandatory period. The acknowledgment of the complaint by the Human Rights Commission

11

would trigger in and set in motion the mechanics and workings of the Human Rights

Commission, culminating in a communiqué pertaining to the findings on the complaint. An

aggrieved party has no say or control over the proceedings before the Human Rights

Commission and cannot be faulted for the delay or non-holding of an inquiry by Human Rights

Commission which may be for good and justifiable reasons. The manner and speed of the

working of the Human Rights Commission is not within the purview of an aggrieved party and

an aggrieved party cannot be penalized for the delay, if any at the Human Rights Commission.

The 3rd case relied on by the respondents, is the case of Ranaweera Vs Siriwaradena

2008 (1) SLR page 260. In the said case the petitioner challenged the actions of a fiscal who

executed a writ of possession issued by the District Court. Ameratunge, J. overruling the

objection raised by the respondents held that an execution of a writ is purely a ministerial act

done with judicial sanction and although the Civil Procedure Code sets out the protection

available to an officer executing process issued by Court and limits of such protection, that there

was no justification to exclude all such acts from the purview of fundamental rights jurisdiction

of the Supreme Court. He further went on to state that the plea of time bar is available to the

respondent and when the petitioner is put on notice the petitioner has to adduce material before

this Court to show that an inquiry is pending before the Human Rights Commission. In

Ranaweera’s case since the respondent in its objections raised the plea of time bar and the

petitioner failed to place any material before Court that an inquiry was pending at the Human

Rights Commission, Amaratunga, J. upheld the time bar objection raised on behalf of the

respondent.

In the present case before us (unlike in the above case and the two cases referred to

earlier and heavily relied upon by the respondents) the plea of time bar has been raised at the

stage of supporting for leave to proceed as a preliminary objection and the petitioner as well as

the respondents have had no opportunity to place material before Court to show that an inquiry

into the complaint has been held by the Human Rights Commission or that an inquiry is still

pending. In the said circumstances, I re-iterate the words of Amaratunga, J. (at page 271) in the

above said Ranaweera’s case, that “in exercising the fundamental rights jurisdiction this Court is

12

under a duty to act in compliance with the letter and the spirit of Article 4(d) of the

Constitution.”

I am also mindful of the dicta of Amaratunga, J. in the case of Kariyawasam Vs

Southern Provincial Road Development Authority 2007 (2) SLR page 33 where dismissing

the respondents objection that the petitioners application to the Supreme Court was time barred,

he stated that since the petitioners application to the Human Rights Commission was within the

mandatory period of one month and the Human Rights Commission by calling for a report from

the respondent has set in motion the process of holding of an inquiry into the petitioners

application, ‘the petitioner is entitled to claim the benefit’ conferred by Section 13(1) of the

Human Rights Commission Act.

When considering the above referred judicial authorities, it is clearly established in a long

line of cases this Court has consistently held, that when a matter is promptly referred to and

pending before the Human Rights Commission, the time freezes and the said time period is not

taken into account in computing the period of one month within which an application may be

made to the Supreme Court in terms of Article 126 (2) of the Constitution. The three cases relied

on by the respondents, analyzed and considered in detail by me, are unique in nature and in facts

and circumstances and can be easily distinguished from the present application before this Court.

In the matter before us, where non-granting of a promotion is being challenged petitioners went

before the Human Rights Commission well within time whereas in the afore said three instances

respectively, the complaint to the Human Rights Commission was made to circumvent the

provisions of the Act, the complaint made was not within the stipulated period of one month as

laid down in the Act and the petitioner had failed to place material to rebut the objection raised

by the respondent before this Court.

Thus, considering the facts of the case presently before us, I am inclined to take the view

that the petitioners are entitled to claim the benefit conferred by Section 13(1) of the Human

Rights Commission Act.

13

In the case of De Zoysa Vs Dissanayake SC FR 206.2008 –S.C.M. 09.12.2016 Prasanna

Jayawardena, J. considering the one month rule enunciated in Article 126 (2) of the Constitution,

traced the history and the development of the law pertaining to time bar and whilst holding that it

is mandatory, went on to state at page 9, that

“this Court has consistently recognized the fact that, the duty entrusted to

this Court by the Constitution to give relief to and protect a person

whose fundamental rights have been infringed by executive and

administrative action, requires Article 126 (2) of the Constitution to be

interpreted and applied in a manner which takes into account the reality

of the facts and circumstances which found the application. This Court

has recognized that it would fail to fulfill its guardianship if the time

limit of one month is applied by rote and the Court remains blind to facts

and circumstances which have denied a petitioner of an opportunity to

invoke the jurisdiction of Courts earlier.”

For completion of the analysis of the one month rule, Jayawardena, J. (at page 13)

referred to Section 13 (1) of the Human Rights Commission Act and stated, that it is a statutorily

created interruption but did not delve into greater detail on the provisions of the Human Rights

Commission Act, as the Human Rights Commission and a complaint made to the Human Rights

Commission were not matters in issue in the said case.

Nevertheless, the rationale referred to in the above quotation that a Court would fail to

fulfill its guardianship, if it remains blind to facts and circumstances, and also the dicta of

Fernando, J. in Gamaethige case, whether the Court has a discretion where the petitioners failure

to apply in time (on account of a third party or some nature or man-made disaster) would have to

be considered in an appropriate case when it arises, should be borne in mind when considering

the time bar objection raised before this Court.

In the present case, the Petitioners complained to the Human Rights Commission within

one month of becoming aware of the promotions being given to the 9th to 12th respondents and

came before this Court for alleged violation of fundamental rights after obtaining additional

14

information under the Right to Information Act No 12 of 2016 and declaring in the petition that a

complaint was made to the Human Rights Commission and that the said complaint was

acknowledged by the Human Rights Commission.

In the absence of any material adduced before this Court to indicate that the Human

Rights Commission had come to a finding pertaining to the complaint made by the petitioner,

this Court has to assume that the matter is still pending before the Human Rights Commission

and the Human Rights Commission is taking steps with regard to the complaint within the four

corners of the Human Rights Commission Act. This Court refrains from commenting on the

mechanics and the workings of the Human Rights Commission specifically with regard to the

complaint of the petitioner, in view of paucity of documentation before same.

In the above circumstance, I hold that the complaint made by the Petitioners to the

Human Rights Commission under Section 14 of the Human Rights Commission Act is within the

stipulated time period and in view of the provisions of Section 13(1) of the Human Rights

Commission Act, time would not run during the pendency of proceedings before the Human

Rights Commission and such time will not be taken into account in computing the period of one

month within which an application may be made to this Court in terms of Article 126(2) of the

Constitution. Thus, the Petitioners application filed before this Court is not time barred.

For the reasons aforesaid, the Preliminary Objection raised on behalf of the 1st to 4th and

6th to 12th respondents is overruled.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Buwaneka Aluwihare, PC.J.

I agree

Judge of the Supreme Court

15

L.T.B Dehideniya, J.

I agree

Judge of the Supreme Court

16