IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

SC APPEAL NO: SC/APPEAL/76/2021

SC LA NO: SC/HCCA/LA/313/2019

CA NO: SP/HCCA/GA/0104/2012 (F)

DC GALLE NO: 14252/Land

Ven. Habarakada Soratha Thero,

The Chief Incumbent,

Sri Wardhanarama Purana Viharaya,

Kaluwella, Galle.

Plaintiff

Vs.

1. Palpola Kankanamge

Gunadasa (Deceased)

1A. Maddekandege Lilawathie

1B. Palpola Kankanamge Jayawathie

1C. Palpola Kankanamge Sunila

1D. Palpola Kankanamge Mangalika

All of Unnanse Liyadda,

Paragaha Owita, Kirimatimulla,

Godakanda, Galle.

2. Game Kankanamge Daya alias

Dayawathie,

2

SC/APPEAL/76/2021

Godakanda, Galle.

Defendants

AND BETWEEN

Ven. Habarakada Soratha Thero,

The Chief Incumbent,

Sri Wardhanarama Purana Viharaya,

Kaluwella, Galle.

Plaintiff-Appellant

Vs.

1A. Maddekandege Lilawathie

1B. Palpola Kankanamge Jayawathie

1C. Palpola Kankanamge Sunila

1D. Palpola Kankanamge Mangalika

All of Unnansege Liyadda,

Paragaha Owita, Kirimatimulla,

Godakanda, Galle.

2. Game Kankanamge Daya alias

Dayawathie,

Godakanda, Galle.

1A, 1B, 1C, 1D & 2nd Defendant-

Respondents

AND NOW BETWEEN

1A. Maddekandege Lilawathie

3

SC/APPEAL/76/2021

Before: P. Padman Surasena, J.

Achala Wengappuli, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

1B. Palpola Kankanamge Jayawathie

1C. Palpola Kankanamge Sunila

1D. Palpola Kankanamge Mangalika

All of Unnansege Liyadda,

Paragaha Owita, Kirimatimulla,

Godakanda, Galle.

Correctly,

All of Unnansege Liyadda,

Karapitiya, Godakanda, Galle.

1A, 1B, 1C, 1D Defendant-

Respondent-Appellants

Vs.

1. Ven. Habarakada Soratha Thero,

The Chief Incumbent,

Sri Wardhanarama Purana Viharaya,

Kaluwella, Galle.

Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent

2. Game Kankanamge Daya alias

Dayawathie,

Godakanda, Galle.

2nd Defendant-Respondents-

Respondent

4

SC/APPEAL/76/2021

Counsel: Ranjan Suwandaratne, P.C., with Anil Rajakaruna for the

Substituted Defendant-Respondent-Appellants.

Sarath Vidanapathirana for the Plaintiff-Appellant-

Respondent.

Argued on : 26.11.2021

Written submissions:

by Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent on 17.11.2021.

by Defendant-Respondent-Appellants on 21.10.2021.

Decided on: 16.12.2022

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The plaintiff (a Buddhist monk) filed this action in the District Court of Galle

against the two defendants seeking a declaration that the land described in

the second paragraph of the plaint belongs to the Sri Wardhanarama

Purana Viharaya of Galle, a declaration that he is the controlling

Viharadhipati of this temple, ejectment of the 1st defendant from the land

and damages. The plan marked P1 was prepared to depict the land for the

purpose of this case. The 1st defendant filed answer seeking prescriptive

title to the land. After trial, the District Court dismissed the plaintiff’s action

on the basis that the plaintiff had not proved title to the land, and entered

judgment for the defendant on the basis that the 1st defendant had acquired

prescriptive title to it. On appeal, the High Court of Civil Appeal set aside

the judgment of the District Court and entered judgment for the plaintiff

except damages. Being aggrieved by the judgment of the High Court of Civil

Appeal, the 1st defendant filed this appeal with leave obtained from this

Court on the following questions of law:

5

SC/APPEAL/76/2021

1. Did the High Court of Civil Appeal err in law by failing to consider that

the plaintiff has failed to identify the land described in the second

paragraph of the plaint as required by law?

2. Did the High Court of Civil Appeal err in law by failing to consider that

the land referred to in deed marked P2 is different from the land

referred to in the second paragraph of the plaint?

3. Did the High Court of Civil Appeal err in law by failing to consider that

the plaintiff has failed to strictly prove title to the land described in the

second paragraph of the plaint?

The 1st question of law in my view cannot be a contentious issue because

the learned District Judge in the judgment has rightly accepted that the

land described in the second schedule to the plaint is depicted in the plan

marked P1. The High Court did not disturb that finding. As I stated earlier,

the District Court dismissed the plaintiff’s action on the basis that the

plaintiff did not prove title to the land depicted in P1, which is in the

possession of the 1st defendant.

The title deed of the plaintiff is the deed marked P2, which has been

executed in 1838 (184 years ago). This was marked without any objection.

The transferee is Navungala Samanera Unnanse who had been the

Viharadhipathi of this temple. The land is described as Kirimatimulle Owita

alias Paragaha Owita and the extent is given as 20 Kurunis of paddy sowing

extent. The land had not been identified by way of a survey plan, which was

not uncommon at that time. The boundaries are not given in the deed.

According to the plaintiff, this land had been given on lease/mortgage by

succeeding Viharadhipathies to the 2nd defendant’s father (Babunhamy),

mother (Karoline) and the 2nd defendant. These deeds P8-P14 were marked

without any objection and they have been executed successively in 1937,

1951, 1961, 1971, 1977, 1978 and 1999. In these deeds, P2 is not referred

to but boundaries are given, which tally with the boundaries in plan P1.

6

SC/APPEAL/76/2021

The learned District Judge in the judgment states that the nexus between

these deeds and the title deed of the plaintiff marked P1 is not established.

The 2nd defendant in her evidence states that, after the death of her father,

the 1st defendant was employed to look after the land, to pluck coconuts,

but he thereafter continued to possess the temple land. It is significant to

note that not a single question has been asked from the 2nd defendant by

the 1st defendant during the cross-examination controverting or challenging

this position.

The 1st defendant did not give evidence. Instead, her daughter gave

evidence. She denied that her father came to this land as a licensee of either

the 2nd defendant or the Viharadhipathi of the temple.

The name of the land described in the deeds P8-P14 is Kirimatimulle

Paragahaowita. The land described in the second paragraph of the plaint is

Kirimatimulle Paragahaowita alias Unnansege Liyadda. The daughter of the

1st defendant in her evidence admits that this land is known by villagers in

the area as Unnansege Liyadda. But she says this land was at one time

owned by a village headman and because of that the land is known as

Unnansege Liyadda. On the facts and circumstances of this case, in my

view, this is a false position. There is no evidence to say that this land was

at one time owned by a village headman and that he was called Unnanse

by the villagers; villagers call Buddhist priests Unnanse or Unwahanse. It

is the position of the plaintiff that since this land belongs to the temple, it

is called Unnansege Liyadda, which is acceptable.

The land has been sufficiently identified and the title to the land has been

sufficiently proved. In a rei vindicatio action the plaintiff need not prove

identification of the land and the title to the land beyond reasonable doubt

but on a balance of probability. This needs to be properly understood. This

duty has satisfactorily been discharged by the plaintiff in this case.

7

SC/APPEAL/76/2021

Banda v. Soyza [1998] 1 Sri LR 255 is a rei vindicatio action filed by a trustee

of a temple seeking a declaration of title, the ejectment of the defendant and

damages. The facts are similar although not identical. The Court of Appeal

set aside the judgment of the District Court and the plaintiff’s action was

dismissed on the ground that the plaintiff had failed to establish title to the

subject matter of the action or even to identify the land in suit. But the

Supreme Court set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal and restored

the judgment of the District Court on the basis that there was “sufficient

evidence led on behalf of the plaintiff to prove the title and the identity of the

lots in dispute.” Chief Justice G.P.S. de Silva, at page 259, laid down the

criterion to be adopted in a rei vindicatio action in respect of the onus of

proof in the following manner:

In a case such as this, the true question that a court has to consider on

the question of title is, who has the superior title? The answer has to

be reached upon a consideration of the totality of the evidence led in

the case.

The evidence of the daughter of the 1st defendant is that her father had come

to a no-man’s-land and acquired the land by prescriptive possession. This

position has been accepted by the learned District Judge. As Chief Justice

G.P.S. de Silva held in Sarajudeen v. Abbas [1994] 2 Sri LR 365 “A facile

story of walking into abandoned premises after the Japanese air raid

constitutes material far too slender to found a claim based on prescriptive

title.”

In any event, in terms of section 34 of the Buddhist Temporalities

Ordinance, no prescription operates against temple properties.

In the case of any claim for the recovery of any property, movable or

immovable, belonging or alleged to belong to any temple, or for the

8

SC/APPEAL/76/2021

assertion of title to any such property, the claim shall not be held to be

barred or prejudiced by any provision of the Prescription Ordinance:

Provided that this section shall not affect rights acquired prior to the

commencement of this Ordinance.

Vide the judgment of Chief Justice Samarakoon in Waharaka alias Moratota

Sobhita Thero v. Amunugama Ratnapala Thero [1981] 1 Sri LR 201.

I answer the questions of law upon which leave to appeal was granted in

the negative, affirm the judgment of the High Court of Civil Appeal and

dismiss the appeal but without costs.

The District Judge will enter judgment as prayed for only in paragraphs (i),

(iii) and (iv) of the prayer to the amended plaint dated 19.03.2004.

Judge of the Supreme Court

P. Padman Surasena, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Achala Wengappuli, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court