1 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for leave to appeal under

section 5C of the High Court of the Provinces (Special

Provisions) Act No. 54 of 2006

Asan Kalenderlebbe, (deceased)

Sinnaulla, Pottuvil.

Plaintiff

Ismail Fathima,

Sinnaulla, Pottuvil.

Substituted Plaintiff

SC Appeal 48/2013 Vs,

SC/C.H.C/LA 48/2013

EP/HCCA /KAL 241 /2011 1. Weeragoda Arachchige Pathmasiri Silva,

DC Potuvil Case No. 298L No. 90/A/1, Rajapihilla Mawatha, Kandy

DC Kalmunai Case No. 2364L

2. Srikathuge Sunantha Deepal Fernando,

No. 43, Saranankara Street, Kandy

3. Srikathuge Wimalasurendra Fernando,

Pasyala

4. Justin Chandrapala de. Silva,

No. 102/1, Rajapihilla Mawatha, Kandy

5. Kalander Asiya Umma,

Sinna Ulla, Arugambay, Pottuvil

2

6. Peter Goodman, (deceased)

Star Dust Beach Hotel, Pottuvil

7. Mohomed Ismail Cadre Mohaideen,

Pottuvil

Defendants And between Mohideen Bawa Abdul Cassim,

Pottuvil

Petitioner

Vs,

1. Weeragoda Arachchige Pathmasiri Silva,

No. 90/A/1, Rajapihilla Mawatha, Kandy

2. Srikathuge Sunantha Deepal Fernando,

No. 43, Saranankara Street, Kandy

3. Srikathuge Wimalasurendra Fernando,

Pasyala

4. Justin Chandrapala de. Silva,

No. 102/1, Rajapihilla Mawatha, Kandy

5. Kalander Asiya Umma,

Sinna Ulla, Arugambay, Pottuvil

6. Peter Goodman, (deceased)

Star Dust Beach Hotel, Pottuvil

3

7. Mohomed Ismail Cadre Mohaideen,

Pottuvil

Defendants-Respondents

And between

Kalander Asiya Umma,

Sinna Ulla, Arugambay, Pottuvil

5th Defendants-Respondents-Appellant

Vs,

Mohideen Bawa Abdul Cassim,

Pottuvil

Petitioner-Respondent

And now between

Kalander Asiya Umma,

Sinna Ulla, Arugambay, Pottuvil

5th Defendants-Respondents-Appellant-Petitioner

Vs,

Mohideen Bawa Abdul Cassim,

Pottuvil

Petitioner-Respondent-Respondent

4

1. Weeragoda Arachchige Pathmasiri Silva,

No. 90/A/1, Rajapihilla Mawatha, Kandy

2. Srikathuge Sunantha Deepal Fernando,

No. 43, Saranankara Street, Kandy

3. Srikathuge Wimalasurendra Fernando,

Pasyala

4. Justin Chandrapala de. Silva,

No. 102/1, Rajapihilla Mawatha, Kandy

5. Kalander Asiya Umma,

Sinna Ulla, Arugambay, Pottuvil

6. Peter Goodman, (deceased)

Star Dust Beach Hotel, Pottuvil

7. Mohomed Ismail Cadre Mohaideen, (deceased)

Pottuvil

Defendants-Respondents-Respondents

7A Abdul Jabbar Nona Jesmine

Pottuvil 01

7B Farzan Mohideen

Pottuvil 01

5 7C Fowzi Mohideen

Pottuvil 01

7D Faizal Mohideen

Pottuvil 01

7E Farzana

Pottuvil 01

7F Firosa

Pottuvil 01

Parties seeking substitution in place of the 7th

Defendant- Respondent-Respondent

Before: Hon. Justice Buwaneka Aluwihare PC

Hon. Justice Vijith K. Malalgoda PC

Hon. Justice Murdu N.B. Fernando PC

Counsel: Manohara de. Silva, PC with Ms. Pubudini Wickramarathne for the 5th Defendant-

Respondent-Appellant-Petitioner

N.R. Sivendran with Ms. Anushiya Ramen for the Petitioner-Respondent-Respondent

Nuwan Rupasinghe with Ms. Dhanushka Elpitiya for the 7A-7F Substituted Defendant-

Respondents-Respondents

6 Argued on: 18.02.2019

Decided on: 04.09.2019

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J

This Appeal had been filed before the Supreme Court challenging the decision of the Provincial High

Court of Civil Appeal of the Eastern Province holden in Kalmunai dated 13.09.2012 in HC CA

Application No. 241/11.

The 5th Defendant-Respondent-Appellant-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Appellant) who is

the Petitioner in the instant appeal had raised several grounds in appeal but, leave was granted only

on the following grounds of appeal.

1. The High Court erred in considering section 404 of the Civil Procedure Code as the

relevant section applicable to the instant case for substitution of the Petitioner-

Respondent and failed to give due consideration to the other provisions of Chapter XXV

of the Civil Procedure Code

2. The High Court misdirected itself in failing to consider that the wording “other cases of

assignment, creation or devolution of any interest pending the action” in section 404

denotes that the section would apply to a situation where the alternation of a party’s

status has occurred other than by the modes stipulated in section 392 to 398 of the Civil

Procedure Code and thus where there is assignment, creation or devolution of any

interest other than due to the death of a party, section 404 would apply

7

3. The High Court failed to consider that the relevant sections under which the application

for substitution should have been made by the Petitioner-Respondent are section 395

read with section 392 of the Civil Procedure Code

When this application was supported for leave, court granted permission for the learned President’s

Counsel who represented the contesting party i.e. substituted Petitioner-Respondent-Respondent

(hereinafter referred to as the Respondent) to raise the following question of law

4. Has the High Court acted appropriately where there has been no contesting application

for substitution in the circumstances of this case?

The deceased Plaintiff instituted action against the 1st to the 7th Defendants on 03.10.2000 and

averred in his plaint that he become entitle to occupy and possess the land more fully described in

the schedule to the plaint under and by virtue of a permit issued under the provisions of the Land

Development Ordinance. The Plaintiff had further averred that the defendants are in unlawful

possession of the same and prayed for declaration of title, ejectment and to set aside and declare

the deed nos. 120 and 302 attested by S.M. Gaffoor Notary Public are null and void.

When the said trial was proceeding before the District Court, the original Plaintiff had passed away

and steps were taken to substitute, the living spouse of the deceased plaintiff as the substituted

Plaintiff and the trial proceeded to the end and the case was fixed for judgment on 01.08.2007.

The court delivered its judgment entering the judgment in favour of the Plaintiff.

Being dissatisfied with the said judgment the 7th Defendant to the District Court action had filed a

petition of appeal and the said appeal was taken up before the High Court of Civil Appeal of the

Eastern Province holden in Kalmunai. During the appeal before the said High Court it was revealed

8 that the Substituted Plaintiff had passed away prior to the delivery of the judgment by the District

Judge on 01.08.2007. Accordingly the appeal was sent back to the District Court for substitution of

the Substituted Plaintiff.

As revealed before us, prior to the death of the original Plaintiff, one Mohideen Bawa Abdul Cassim

had been nominated as the successor for the said land under the provisions of the Land

Development Ordinance by the deceased permit holder Asan Kalender Lebbe and the said

Mohideen Bawa Abdul Cassim had filed a petition and affidavit before the District Court under

section 404 of the Civil Procedure Code seeking the Court to substitute his name in the place of the

deceased Substituted Plaintiff in order to continue with the said case.

The learned District Judge who inquired into the said Petition and affidavit filed by the Petitioner

(before the District Court and the Petitioner-Respondent-Respondent or the Respondent before this

court) allowed the said application for substitution on 14.12.2011.

The said order of the District Court allowing the application filed by the Respondent to be substitute

in the room and place of the deceased substituted Plaintiff was challenged before the High Court of

the Civil Appeal of the Eastern Province holden in Kalmunai by way of a leave to appeal application

filed by the 5th Defendant Appellant.

By order dated 13.09.2012 the High Court of the Civil Appeal of the Eastern Province dismissed the

appeal before the said court and affirmed the order of the District Court dated 14.12.2011.

Being dissatisfied with the said order of the High Court of the Civil Appeal of the Eastern Province,

the 5th Defendant Appellant Petitioner had filed the instant application.

As revealed before us the subject matter before the District Court was based on a permit issued

under the Land Development Ordinance in the name of the original Plaintiff Asan Kalender Lebbe.

9 As further revealed during the trial before the District Court, on 31st December 1964 the permit

holder had nominated his daughter Cassia Umma as the successor to the land referred to the permit

but, the said name was deleted on 27.06.2000 and the name of Mohideen Bawa Abdul Cassim, the

grandson of the permit holder was inserted as the successor to the land referred to in the said

permit.

Section 62 of the Land Development Ordinance which allows the fresh nomination of successor

reads as follows;

Section 62 1) After the registration of a document whereby a person is nominated as successor

to a holding or a land alienated on a permit, a document which purports to nominate

any other person as successor to that holding or land shall not be registered unless

the nomination effected by the registered document has been duly cancelled by the

registration of a document of cancellation.

Provided that it shall be lawful in one and the same document to cancel a registered

nomination and to make some other nomination in lieu thereof; and in that event,

notwithstanding anything in this section contained, the document in which such

cancellation and nomination are combined may be registered and shall upon due

registration operate both as cancellation of a previously registered nomination and as

a nomination of a new nominee.

During the trial before the District Court of Kalmunai, several officers from the Divisional Secretariat

Pothuvil including the Land Officer, Divisional Secretary, Clerk attached to the land division at the

Divisional Secretariat were called to give evidence with regard to the cancellation of the previous

nomination and the registration of the fresh nomination.

10 In the said circumstances it is clear that, Mohideen Bawa Abdul Cassim was considered as the lawful

nominee by the permit holder at the time the permit holder instituted proceedings before the

District Court on 03.10.2000.

As far as the present case is concerned, the matter to be decided is the substitution and nothing

else. However the main case that was pending before the District Court and was appealed to the

Provincial High Court of Civil Appeal was, with regard to a permit that was issued under the

provisions of the Land Development Ordinance in the name of the original plaintiff Asan Kalender

Lebbe. Relevant government officials were summoned during the District Court trial and their

evidence was led to establish that fact. As observed by this court, the Distract Court had entered

judgment in favour of the Substituted Plaintiff and what was appealed against was the said decision.

In the said circumstances until otherwise decided by a competent court, it was accepted that the

land in question is state land which was granted to the deceased Plaintiff by way of a permit. The

Land Development Ordinance has its own provisions with regard to the succession and therefore

what should follow after the death of a permit holder is the provisions of the Land Development

Ordinance and not the principles of General Law.

Section 170 of the Land Development Ordinance provides that,

“No written law (other than this Ordinance) which provides for succession to land upon an

intestacy and no other law relating to succession to land upon an intestacy shall have any

application in respect of any land alienated under this Ordinance”

In the case of Dharmalatha Vs. Davis De. Silva (1995) 1 Sri LR 259 it was held that,

“Under section 170 of the Land Development Ordinance, no written or other law which

provides for succession to land upon intestacy has application in respect of land alienated

under the Land Development Ordinance.”

11 Section 48A (1) of the Land Development Ordinance refers to a right of a wife of a permit holder as

follows;

Section 48A (1) Upon the death of a permit holder who at the time of his or her death was

paying an annual sum by virtue of the provisions of subsection (3) of section

19A the spouse of that permit holder, whether he or she has or has not been

nominated as successor by that permit holder, shall be entitled to succeed to

the land alienated to that permit-holder on the permit and the terms and

conditions of that permit shall be applicable to such spouse.

The rights of a person who was nominated, other than the spouse of the permit holder and at what

time he can succeed to such property is referred to in section 49 of the Land Development

Ordinance as follows;

Section 49; Upon the death of permit-holder who at the time of his or her death was

paying an annual sum by virtue of the provisions of subsection (3) of section

19A or of an owner of a holding, without leaving behind his or her spouse, or,

where such permit holder or owner died leaving behind his or her spouse,

upon the failure of such spouse to succeed to that land alienated to that

permit holder on the permit or holding or upon the death of such spouse, a

person nominated as successor by such permit holder or owner shall succeed

to that land or holding.

In the said circumstances it is clear, that according to the above provisions of the Land Development

Ordinance, a nominated person can only succeed to a land to which he is lawfully nominated, is

either after the death of the spouse or when the said spouse failed to succeed to the said property.

When going through the above provisions it is further observed that the nominee is not entitled by

law to succeed to a property until the death (or failure to succeed to the land) of the spouse of the

original permit holder. In other words he becomes entitled by law to succeed to the property only

after the death (or failure to succeed) of the spouse of the original permit holder.

12 Section 404 of the Civil Procedure Code provides that;

“In other cases of assignment, creation or devolution of any interest pending the action, the

action may, with leave of the court, given either with consent of all parties or after service of

notice in writing upon them, and hearing their objections, in any, be continued by or against

the person to whom such interest has come, either in addition to or in substitution for the

person form it has passed; as the case may require.”

As observed by this court the above provision of the Civil Procedure Code makes provision for a

person acquiring an interest pending the action, continue with the action with leave obtained from

that court Paaris and another Vs. Bridget Fernando 1992 (1) Sri LR 36.

As discussed in this judgment, a person nominated to succeed to a state land, which is on a permit

issued under the Land Development Ordinance will only “acquire interest” at the time of the death

of the spouse (or failure to succeed) of the original permit holder and therefore the correct cause of

action available to him is to act under section 404 of the Civil Procedure Code, at the time he

acquire such interest.

In the Court of Appeal decision in Brunswick Exports Ltd. Vs. Hatton National Bank Ltd CA 581/93

CA minute dated 05th May 1994 BALJ 1994 Vol. V part II, a bench comprising of S.N. Silva P/CA (as he

was then) and Ranaraja J had considered the term “assignment” in section 404 as follows;

Section 404 of the Civil Procedure Code makes provision for a person acquiring an interest in

an action to continue with it having obtained leave of court. It does not provide that, if he

does not obtain the leave of court to continue the action, the action should stand dismissed.

The Plaintiff is still entitled to continue the suit and his successor will be bound by the result

13

of the litigation even though he is not represented at the hearing. (See Chittambaram

Chettiar V. Fernando, 49 NLR 49)

It is also settled law that a right of action can be assigned after litis contestatia. In such an

event section 404 of the Civil Procedure Code applies. (See Pless Pol V. De Soysa, 10 NLR

252, where Hutchinson, C.J. observed “On these authorities it does not seem to me quite

clear that the Roman Dutch Law forbids such an assignment. But if it did, think it cannot have

been intended to make the transaction altogether illegal and void as between the parties to

it, but that the rule was only a rule of procedure and that section 404 overrides it. That

section gives the court power to allow the assignee to be added as a party when the

assignment was made any time pending the action; and the court ought to do so in proper

case when it appears convenient and possible without prejudice to the other party.”

On the facts of the present case, it was open to the 2nd Respondent to continue with the

action or as was done for the 1st Respondent to seek leave of court to be substituted in place

of the 2nd Respondent. The court has the discretion to permit such a course provided it was

convenient and possible without prejudice to the Petitioner.

The learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioner submitted that the 1st Respondent had no

status as an assignee to be substituted in place of the 2nd Respondent for the five reasons

that the mortgage bond No. 2245 did not provide for an assignment of the mortgage to third

parties. In terms of the bond, one of the parties, namely the Union Bank of the Middle East

was to include only the said bank and its “successors”. It was submitted the word

“successors” does not include assigns,-Stroud’s Legal Dictionary. 5th Ed. p203 defines the

word “assign” thus:

14

“So generally, of assignable contracts eg.: ordinary trade contracts, and those

contracts which can be performed “vicariously” (per Knight –Bruce L.J.) and involve

no element of personal skill or confidence through “assigns” be not named, the

contracts should be read and construed as through it contained an interpretation

clause extending its operation to the heirs (where lands of inheritance are

concerned), executors, administrators and assigns of the parties respectively and, if a

company, its successors and assigns (per Lord Macnaghten-Tolhurst vs. Associated

Portland Cement Manufacturers (1903 AC 417 at p420).”

I would prefer to adopt the broader definition given above of the word “assigns” and

hold that the term “successors” used in the relevant Mortgage Bond would also

include “assigns”, thus covering the 1st Respondent to the present application”

The learned President’s Counsel who represented the Appellant before us, whilst relying on section

68 (1) (2) of the Land Development Ordinance had further argued that both the spouse and the

nominee had failed to succeed to the land held by such permit holder and had also failed to obtain a

permit under section 84 (1) and (2) of the said Ordinance and therefore not entitled to succeed to

the land held by the original permit holder.

However when going through the questions of law under which this court had granted leave, I see

no relevance in the said argument to the questions before this court but as observed by me the said

argument does not hold water, for the reason that the original Plaintiff was before the District Court

seeking declaration of title and possession with regard to the land in question by virtue of a permit

issued under the provisions of the Land Development Ordinance at the time of his death. The right

acquired by the deceased Plaintiff, his spouse and the nominee under the said permit was explained

before court by the official witnesses summoned before court.

15 When considering the matters considered above, I answer the 1st, 2nd and the 3rd questions of law

raised on behalf of the 5th Defendant-Respondent-Appellant in negative and dismiss this appeal with

costs.

Appeal dismissed with costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Hon. Justice Buwaneka Aluwihare PC I agree, Judge of the Supreme Court

Hon. Justice Murdu N.B. Fernando PC

I agree, Judge of the Supreme Court