1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

SC Appeal No. 159/23

SC.SPL.LA.No: SC/SPL/LA/06/23

Court of Appeal No. CA/HCC/55/2022

HC Colombo Case No. 553/18

Attorney General,

Attorney-General’s Department,

Hultsdorp,

Colombo 12

COMPLAINANT

- VS -

Wickramathilake Don Susantha

Kumara,

No.45, Kala Wewa,

Wijithapura, Anuradhapura.

ACCUSED

AND BETWEEN

Attorney – General

Attorney-General’s Department,

Hultsdorp,

Colombo 12

COMPLAINANT – APPELLANT

SC Appeal No. 159/23

2

- VS -

Wickramathilake Don Susantha

Kumara

No.45, Kala Wewa,

Wijithapura, Anuradhapura

ACCUSED – RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

Attorney – General

Attorney-General’s Department,

Hultsdorp,

Colombo 12

COMPLAINANT – APPELLANT –

PETITIONER – APPELLANT

- VS -

Wickramathilake Don Susantha

Kumara

No.45, Kala Wewa,

Wijithapura, Anuradhapura

ACCUSED – RESPONDENT –

RESPONDENT – RESPONDENT

SC Appeal No. 159/23

3

E. A. G. R. Amarasekara, J.

This Appeal has been made by the Complainant – Appellant – Petitioner – Appellant, the

Attorney General of the Republic of Sri Lanka (Hereinafter sometimes referred to as

“Prosecution” or “Appellant”), against the Judgment of the Court of Appeal in Appeal No.

CA/HCC/55/2022. Accused – Respondent – Respondent – Respondent, Wickramathilake Don

Susantha Kumara, is an expatriate workman in the Republic of Korea deported to Sri Lanka on

26.07.2017 (Hereinafter sometimes referred to as “Accused”). He was the accused in High

Court Colombo Case No. 553/18 where he was accused of committing sexual harassment to

one Jeong Eun-Hui, an 18-year-old female undergraduate at the University of Keimyung,

(Hereinafter sometimes referred to as “Jeong” or “Victim of the accident”) by removing her

underwear, which is an offence under Section 345 of the Penal Code as amended by Act No.

22 of 1995.

The learned High Court Judge in High Court of Colombo Case No. 553/18, by his Order dated

10.12.2021, held that the Prosecution had not established a case for the Accused to answer and

thereby, acquitted the Accused without calling for his defence. Being aggrieved by the said

Before : E. A. G. R. Amarasekara, J.

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J.

Janak De Silva, J.

Counsel : Ayesha Jinasena, SASG with M. Azeez, SC for the Complainant –

Appellant – Appellant.

Mohan Weerakoon, PC with Sandamali Peiris for the Accused –

Respondent – Respondent.

Argued on : 27.02.2024

Decided on : 13.06.2025

SC Appeal No. 159/23

4

Order, the Appellant appealed to the Court of Appeal for which the above Case No.

CA/HCC/55/2022 was given. The learned Court of Appeal Judges, whilst not approving some

of the observations made by the learned High Court Judge and also not agreeing with some of

findings in the Order of the learned High Court Judge, agreed with the conclusion of the learned

High Court Judge to acquit the Accused without calling his defence. Thus, the Appellant filed

the Special Leave to Appeal Application No. SC.SPL.LA.No: SC/SPL/LA/06/23 in this Court

and when it was supported, this Court granted leave on the following questions of law found

under paragraph 45(a), (b) and (c) of the Petition dated 05.01.2023 - vide minutes dated

24.10.2023.

a) Did the Courts below err in law by their failure to correctly appreciate and apply

Section 200(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, No. 15 of 1979?

b) Did the Courts below err in law by their failure to evaluate the available evidence in

light of the admissions of the Respondent to draw a reasonable inference on application of the

principles in relation to the evaluation of the circumstantial evidence?

c) Did the Courts below err in law by their failure to appreciate that an explanation was

clearly warranted from the Respondent in light of the highly incriminating items of evidence

available against the Respondent [on the basis of DNA evidence] on proper application of

Section 200(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure?

Further, as per minutes dated 27.02.2024, another question of law was allowed:

e. Whether the learned High Court Judge was correct in law since the main ingredient

namely, the absence of consent is not being proved by the prosecution?

Even though it is apparent from the aforesaid Order that the learned High Court Judge had

included certain extreme hypothetical or imaginary examples to indicate that the circumstantial

evidence proved does not lead to the sole inference that the accused is guilty, the basis of his

Order seems to be that, since there was no direct evidence, if any inference of guilt of the

Accused is to be made based on the circumstantial evidence, such an inference must be the one

and only irresistible and inescapable inference. In this regard, the learned High Court Judge

has referred to Don Sunny v. Attorney-General (Amarapala Murder Case) [1998] 2 Sri

SC Appeal No. 159/23

5

L.R. 01, which held that when a charge is sought to be proved by circumstantial evidence, the

proved items of circumstantial evidence, when taken together, must irresistibly point towards

the fact that the accused committed the offence. It was further held: “Therefore, if upon a

consideration of the proved items of circumstantial evidence if the only inference that can be

drawn is that accused committed the offence then they can be found guilty. That is not all, the

prosecution must prove that no one else other than the accused had the opportunity of

committing the offence. Therefore, the accused can be found guilty only and only if the proved

items of circumstantial evidence is consistent with their guilt and inconsistent with their

innocence” - at Pg 6- 7.

The learned High Court Judge had also referred to the decision in Kusumadasa v. State (2011)

1 Sri L.R. 240 which held: “Applying the principles laid down in the above judicial decisions1,

I hold that in a case of circumstantial evidence if proved facts are consistent with the innocence

of the accused, he must be acquitted. Further if the proved facts are not consistent with the

guilt of the accused, he must be acquitted. I have earlier pointed out that some proved facts are

consistent with the innocence of the accused and also not consistent with the guilt of the

accused. Therefore the appellant should be acquitted.”

While stating that the only incriminating evidence against the accused is the DNA Report

compiled from the traces of semen found on the panty and girdle, which tallies with the DNA

profile of the Accused, the learned High Court Judge at the end of his Order had stated that

evidence at its highest can only create suspicion against the accused. The learned High Court

Judge had expressed his view that the Prosecution fell well short of the degree of proof required

in a case solely dependent on circumstantial evidence to establish the standard of inference to

prove the guilt of the Accused.

Irrespective of any shortcomings in the reasoning of the learned High Court Judge, it is clear

that it was his view that the inferences that can be drawn on proved circumstantial evidence

were not consistent with the guilt of the Accused and the guilt of the Accused is not the only

inference that can be drawn from the circumstantial evidence and that the Prosecution failed in

proving its case and therefore it is not necessary to call for the defence in terms of Section 200

1 Referring to the decisions in King v Abeywickrama 44 N L R 254, King v Appuhamy 46 N L R 128, Podisingho v King 55 N L R 49, Emperor v Browning 1918-18 Cr LJ 482, and Don Sunny v AG (1998) 2 Sri L R 1

SC Appeal No. 159/23

6

of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act. With regard to the burden of proof in a criminal case,

the learned High Court Judge has cited Ajith v Attorney General (2014) 1 Sri L R 408 where

it was stated: “In criminal cases the burden of proof remains the same. Even if the Accused

remains silent or has given evidence on oath or a dock statement will not alter the burden of

proof for the prosecution.”

The learned Court of Appeal Judges in their Judgment has been more concerned with the

fundamental thing in proving an offence, namely that the contents of the charge and elements

of the offence. The learned Court of Appeal Judges observed that the charge states of a causing

sexual harassment by removing the undergarments of the Victim of the Accident and there is

no evidence to establish that. The learned Court of Appeal Judges have also pointed out that

there must be some evidence on each element of the offence to call for defence, thereby

indicating that if one element is not established, there is no need to call for defence. In this

regard, the learned Court of Appeal Judges, while referring to Sunil and Another v The

Attorney-General (1986) 1 Sri L R 230, has highlighted that to prove sexual offences, such

as one that falls under Section 345, between man and a woman over the age of 18 (except for

unnatural sexual acts, incest), lack of consent has to be proved as an element. Thus, the learned

Court of Appeal Judges indicate that it is the burden of the Prosecution to prove the lack of

consent of the Victim but it has not been established. It is also highlighted that as per the charge,

two main elements have to be established, namely;

1. The Accused removed the Victim’s undergarments

2. It was by using criminal force

In the absence of evidence to establish that the Accused removed the Victim’s undergarments,

the learned Court of Appeal Judges opined that use of criminal force does not arise.

The learned Court of Appeal Judges have cited Harold Rex Jansen v. Hon. Attorney General

(2014) C.A. Application No. 151/13 where it was held that a High Court Judge is empowered

to acquit an accused under Section 200(1) of Code of Criminal Procedure when the evidence

fails to establish the commission of the offence. Thus, the basis for the Court of Appeal seems

to be the failure of the Prosecution to establish the elements of the charge and the offence.

If the view expressed by the learned Court of Appeal Judges is acceptable, it is not necessary

to evaluate the learned High Court Judge’s Order in detail as the correctness of Court of Appeal

SC Appeal No. 159/23

7

Judgment is sufficient to confirm the conclusion of the learned High Court Judge not to call

for defence.

However, it appears that the learned High Court Judges concentration was more on the aspect

of criminal force. This would have happened due to the nature of the charge framed. The

Charge complained of an act of removing underpants which needs a physical force used against

the purported Victim of the crime. As per the interpretation contained in Section 341 of the

Penal Code for the term ‘Criminal Force’, it is apparent that lack of consent of the purported

victim is a must. As per the interpretation given to the word ‘Assault’ in Section 342 of the

Penal Code, it is clear that the ‘gesture or preparation’ of the perpetrator must give the

impression that he is about to use ‘Criminal Force’ against the victim of the crime. Thus, it also

refers to something that would happen against the consent of the purported victim. What is

more important is the two words ‘annoyance or harassment’ found in Section 345 of the Penal

Code, of which section the relevant portion is quoted below in this Judgment. These two words

innately indicate that the offensive act has to be done against the consent or wishes or likings

or expectations (hereinafter these mental elements will be referred to as ‘against the consent or

wishes’ or ‘without the consent or wishes’ or by using similar terms) of the purported victim.

Thus, there is always a mental element involved in proving the offence contained in Section

345 of the Penal Code. If the alleged offense contains a mental element, it has to be proved by

the Prosecution. The learned SASG attempts to contend that the concept of ‘volenti non fit

injuria’ contained in Section 80 of the Penal Code under the General Exceptions applies, and,

as per Section 105 of the Evidence Ordinance, it is the Accused who must prove that there was

consent. However, it applies to situations where the party who suffers harm has given consent,

expressly or impliedly, to suffer such harm. However, when the elements of the offence contain

a mental element, as the offense has to be proved by the Prosecution, that mental element also

has to be proved by the Prosecution. To call for defense, as the learned SASG contends, at least

there must be a prima facie case placed before the Judge including facts relevant to such mental

elements before the Judge. If mere presence of semen on a dress is sufficient to prove a sexual

offence, no sexual relationship is safe before law.

The factual matrix indicates that Jeong, the Victim of the Accident, was student studying at

Keimyung University. She was last seen leaving the said University premises at about 10.30

pm on 16.10.1998 where a function took place and she consumed alcohol. Later, her body was

found on Guma Expressway about 300 hundred meters away from the Nam Daegu interchange,

SC Appeal No. 159/23

8

on the lane running from Daegu to Masan, on the early morning of 17.10.1998. Her death was

due to a Motor Traffic accident that happened on the expressway and the cause of death was a

rupture of the brain. Even though her body was clothed, her under garments were not found on

the body and later on the same day, those undergarments, namely underpants with a sanitary

pad attached to it and a girdle, were found about 100 meters away from the place of the

accident. DNA analysis confirmed that the blood on the sanitary pad matched with the Victim

of the accident, Jeong. Further, expert evidence confirmed the presence of semen on the

underpants and girdle, which was established to be the semen of the accused by DNA analysis.

It is not in dispute that Jeong died as a result of the said accident, and there was no direct

evidence or eye witness to establish any sexual act of the Accused with Jeong, the Deceased.

Further, there was no evidence of any communication, either through a phone or any other

mode, made by Jeong, the Deceased or the Victim of the accident, prior to her death, indicating

any sexual harassment. There were 157 proposed agreed facts at the Trial, and the Accused,

through his Counsel, admitted all but except item 50 and matters incidental to that item. Thus,

the learned High Court Judge correctly recorded all those proposed agreed facts as admissions

except item 50 and 51 which are interrelated. Even those admitted facts do not suggest that the

Accused removed the undergarments of Jeong nor that, irrespective of removing her under

garments, he engaged in any sexual act against the consent or wishes of the Deceased, Jeong.

I do not think, this will be changed even when one considers item 50 and 51 which were not

considered as admitted facts. Recovery of the undergarments with semen of the Accused, away

from the Deceased’s dead body, does not suggest that those undergarments were removed by

the Accused.

As correctly observed by the learned High Court Judge, there was no other evidence to connect

the Accused to the incident other than the DNA evidence found on the undergarments of the

Deceased. The fact that the Accused’s working place is in the same area does not suggest that

he removed the Deceased’s undergarments as stated in the charge sheet where it is the mode

of commission of the offence nor it suggests any sexual act against the consent or wishes of

the Deceased.

Mere presence of the Accused’s semen by any stretch of imagination cannot establish that the

Accused removed the Deceased’s undergarments, and, even if it is assumed that he removed

the undergarments that it was against her consent or wishes. The charge was under Section 345

SC Appeal No. 159/23

9

of the Penal Code as amended by the Act no.22 of 1995, the relevant part of which reads as

follows:

“Whoever, by assault or use of criminal force, sexually harasses another person, or by the use

of words or actions, causes sexual annoyance or harassment to such other person, commits the

offence of sexual harassment …”

Can the mere presence of semen of the Accused on the undergarment establish assault or

criminal force? The answer should be in the Negative. It needs some more facts to be proved.

On the other hand, harassment and annoyance contemplated in the said Section cannot be

established unless it is established that it was done without consent or against the wishes of the

person who was subjected to the offense. Mere presence of semen does not establish a prima

facie case against the Accused that it is a result of an act done against the Deceased’s consent

or wishes.

As stated in Ajith v Attorney General (supra), the burden of proving the offence is always on

the prosecution.

I would prefer to consider the possible inferences that can be made based on the presence of

Accused’s semen on the undergarments of the Deceased, Jeong. In my view, the possible

inference would be that ejaculation of the Accused’s semen happened in very close proximity

to the undergarments of the Deceased, Jeong, or that those undergarments were used to wipe

away the semen of the Accused by someone; it may be the Accused or the Deceased or someone

else. However, this does not establish that there was sexual assault, criminal force, or that the

sexual act or advance was against her consent or wishes. Without those being established, there

cannot be a prima facie case to call for defence.

As suggested by the Prosecution, it could have happened against the consent or wishes of the

Deceased or by using criminal force, but at the same time it could have happened as a

consensual act. The Prosecution has not been able to place any reliable evidence to vitiate the

possibility of the latter, namely the consent or willingness of the Deceased.

The learned SASG contended that as per Section 106 of the Evidence Ordinance when any fact

is especially within the knowledge of any person, the burden of proving that fact is upon him.

SC Appeal No. 159/23

10

In the matter at hand, the specific knowledge was with the Deceased. Unfortunately, she is no

more. It is only when from her side it is shown that there was no consent or willingness, it falls

upon the Accused to show that there was consent or willingness and how he perceived such

consent or willingness. Even to effectively suggest that there was consent or willingness in

cross examination, she was not available for the trial due to her death by the accident.

I would now refer to the Medical Examination Report marked P3 with the Petition to this Court.

It clearly shows that no sperm was found in the vaginal fluid samples. Thus, it excludes any

vaginal intercourse. After recording his findings as to the injuries found on the Deceased’s

body, under the topic interpretation, the medical examiner has described the cause of death, but

after that, he has included the following paragraph.

“In addition, given that JEONG left her friend and headed home at 23.40 on October 16, 1998;

crossed the expressway; tried to go in the opposite direction of her house with a blood alcohol

concentration of 0.13% which had little influence on the body movements, this accident far

from typical pedestrian vehicle accidents. The above facts suggest JEONG was fleeing from

a life-threatening situation before the accident. To ascertain this, further investigation is

necessary.” (emphasis in bold letters by me).

I cannot find what is his expertise to express the last highlighted sentence in the quoted

paragraph as it is an evaluation of facts which has to be done by a Court. On the other hand,

the opinion expressed there as to the life-threatening situation seems to be mere surmise and

conjecture. He himself says that to ascertain that further investigation is necessary. I do not see

any evidence that suggest any life-threatening incident causing her to flee. It is true that one

may become hysterical and lose constant awareness after a criminal attack such as rape or an

attempted rape. At the same time, one may lose constant awareness to meet with an accident

due to overwhelming happiness. A Criminal Court cannot base its decision on what is surmise

and conjecture.

Section 200(1) Code of Criminal Procedure states : “When the case for the prosecution is

closed, if the Judge wholly discredits the evidence on the part of the prosecution or is of opinion

that such evidence fails to establish the commission of the offence charged against the accused

in the indictment or of any other offence of which he might be convicted on such indictment, he

SC Appeal No. 159/23

11

shall record verdict of acquittal ; if however the Judge considers that there are grounds for

proceeding with the trial he shall call upon the accused for his defence.”

It is the view of this Court that the Prosecution failed to establish a prima facie case as the

evidence led at the Trial fails to establish the commission of the offence charged against the

Accused in the indictment or of any other offence of which he might be convicted on such

indictment as it cannot be inferred as per the evidence led that it was the Accused who removed

the undergarments of the Deceased as stated in the charge indicating the mode of commission

of the offence as well as, irrespective of the removal of the undergarment, it cannot be inferred

that the semen of the Accused came in contact with the undergarments of the Deceased without

her consent or against her wishes or willingness. Thus, the learned high Court Judge’s decision

not to call defence is correct and approval of that decision by the Court of Appeal is also correct.

I do not think that there was any issue with regard to the number of witnesses called or

reliability of the witnesses called as indirectly contended by the learned SASG. Even the R-v-

Galbraith (1981) 73 Cr. App. R124 cited by the learned SASG, states that when there is no

evidence that the crime alleged has been committed by the accused the Judge has to stop the

case. Even as per the Sri Lankan case Attorney-General v Baranage (2003) 1 Sri L R 340,

before calling for the defence, the Judge is entitled to consider the probability of the prosecution

case, the weight of evidence and the reasonable inferences to be drawn from the proven facts.

After considering them, if the Judge sees that there is no prima facie case to call the defence,

calling defence becomes a futile exercise as he cannot rely on the Prosecution’s case as to the

proof of the charge.

It is not the function of a Criminal Court to call for defence to fill the gaps of the Prosecution.

The charge has to be proved by the Prosecution, and to call for defence, there must be prima

facie case for the prosecution. In the matter at hand, as discussed above, the Prosecution failed

to prove the contents of the charge as well as the lack of consent or willingness of the Deceased

for the alleged sexual act.

As per the reasons discussed above, I answer the questions of law (a), (b), and (c) mentioned

above in the negative and the question of law (e) in the affirmative.

SC Appeal No. 159/23

12

Hence this appeal is dismissed. No costs.

………………………………………………

Judge of the Supreme Court

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J.

I agree.

………………………………………………

Judge of the Supreme Court

Janak De Silva, J.

I agree.

………………………………………………

Judge of the Supreme Court