1

SC.Appeal No. 22/2016 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA In the matter of an application for Leave to Appeal from the Judgment of the High Court of the Western Province, holden in Colombo under and in terms of, inter alia, Section 31DD of the Industrial Disputes Act as amended and Act No. 19 of 1990. SC.Appeal No. 22/2016 SC.HCLA.No. 42/2014 HC.Appeal No. HC.ALT. 37/2012 LT.Colombo Case No. LT/32/RM/82/2009 Ceylon Bank Employees Union, No.20, Temple Road, Colombo-10 on behalf of K.L.S. Mendis. Applicant -Vs- Hatton National Bank, PLC, Head Office, Colombo-10. Respondent AND BETWEEN

2

K.L.S. Mendis, No. 28, St. Peters Lane, Moratuwella, Moratuwa. Applicant-Appellant -Vs- Hatton National Bank, PLC, Head Office, Colombo-10. Respondent-Respondent AND NOW BETWEEN K.L.S. Mendis, No. 28, St. Peters Lane, Moratuwella, Moratuwa. Applicant-Appellant-Petitioner -Vs- Hatton National Bank, PLC, Head Office, Colombo-10. Respondent-Respondent-Respondent

3

Before: Sisira. J de Abrew, J Nalin Perera, J & Vijith K. Malalgoda, PC, J Counsel: Shantha Jayawardena for the Applicant-Appellant-Petitioner-Appellant. Shammil J. Perera PC with Duthika Perera for the Respondent- Respondent-Respondent-Respondent. Argued & Decided on: 02.10.2017 Sisira J. de Abrew, J Heard both counsel in support of their respective cases. In this case Ceylon Bank

Employees Union filed a case in the Labour Tribunal on behalf of Mrs. K.L.S. Mendis who

was an employee of the Hatton National Bank alleging that her services were unjustifiably

terminated by the Bank.

Learned President of the Labour Tribunal after inquiry dismissed the said

application of the Bank Union . The application was filed in the Labour Tribunal by the

Ceylon Bank Employees Union on behalf of Mrs. K.L.S.Mendis.

4

Being aggrieved by the said order of the Labour Tribunal, Mrs. K.L.S. Mendis (

hereinafter referred to as the Applicant-Appellant) appealed to the High Court. The High Court

by its order dated 26.05.2014 dismissed the appeal of the Applicant-Appellant. Being aggrieved by

the said judgment, the Applicant-Appellant has appealed to this Court. This Court by its order

dated 03.02.2016 granted leave to appeal on the questions of law set out in paragraphs 8 ( a,b,c

and d) of the Petition of appeal dated 03.07.2014 which are set out below.

a) Did the High Court of the Western Province ( Holden in Colombo ) err in law by failing

to appreciate that the learned President of the Labour Tribunal was wrong in law and fact

in holding that the termination of the Petitioner's service was justified ?

b) Did the High Court of the Western Province ( Holden in Colombo) err in law by failing to

appreciate that the Learned President of the Labour Tribunal was wrong in law and fact

in holding that the Petitioner is guilty of the charges levelled against her ?

c) Did the High Court of the Western Province ( Holden in Colombo) err in law by

failing to appreciate that the Order of the Labour Tribunal was unjust and inequitable ?

d) Did the High Court of the Western Province ( Holden in Colombo) err in law by

holding that the termination of the Petitioner's service was justified ?

5

In addition to the said questions of law, the learned counsel appearing for

the Respondent-Respondent-Respondent ( hereinafter referred to as the Respondent-

Respondent) raised the following question of law which is set out below. “ In any event

can the Petitioner maintain this application in the light of the fact that the evidence led by

the Respondent with regard to the charges set out in the charge sheet have not been

contradicted in the evidence before the Labour Tribunal.”

The case for the Applicant-Appellant was that Mrs. K.L.S. Mendis who was a

typist attached to the Hatton National Bank committed certain frauds. During the course of the

investigation by the Audit Officer, said Mrs. Mendis has admitted the fraud committed by

her. However she was exonerated by the domestic inquiry held by the Bank. Learned counsel

for the Applicant-Appellant contends that the termination of her services was not justified

especially when she was exonerated by the inquiring officer who conducted the disciplinary

inquiry. However the Bank relied upon the admission signed by Mrs. Mendis which was

produced as R31. The most important charge that must be considered in this case is that Mrs.

Mendis being a Bank typist transferred Rs. 73,000/- from the account of one Jayasinghe to

the account of Mrs. Mendis's husband ( Mr. Mendis). This transaction had taken place on

15.07.2005. Later said Mrs. Mendis transferred Rs. 73,000/- from her account to Mr.

Jayasinghe's account. The Bank has considered R31. In R31, Mrs. Mendis has admitted the

offences committed by her. But she takes up the position that it was taken under duress. The

charge No. 5 in R31 is important. She has, in R31, admitted that she transferred Rs. 73,000/-

from Jayasinghe's account to her husband's account and later she transferred the said amount

from her account to Jayasinghe's account. This was an admission by her. If she takes up the

6

position that the above matters are false and R31 was obtained under duress, she could have

produced statements of accounts relating to her and her husband and disproved the above

facts. But she has not produced the said documents. Therefore her allegation that the above facts

are false and R31 was obtained under duress cannot be accepted. The Bank relying on the said

document marked R31 terminated the services of Mrs. Mendis. The argument on behalf of

the Applicant-Appellant is that Mrs. Mendis transferred Rs. 73,000/- from her account to

Jayasinghe's account as there was a transaction between Jayasinghe and Mr. Mendis. But it is

important to note that although learned counsel takes up the said argument, Mr. Mendis who is

the husband of Mrs. Mendis did not give evidence at the inquiry to prove that there was a

transaction between him and Jayasinghe.

When we consider the above matters, there is sufficient evidence to prove that she had

engaged in misconduct in the Bank service. If a Bank employee commits misconduct whilst

being employed in Bank service, it is not proper for the Bank to keep such a person in the bank

service. The Bank has come to the conclusion that it is not proper for the Bank to keep Mrs.

Mendis in the bank service and decided to dismiss her.

When we consider all the above matters, we feel that the termination of Mrs. Mendis

by the bank is justified on the ground that the Bank has lost confidence. When we consider all

the above matters, I feel that there are no reasons to interfere with the judgment of the learned

High Court Judge.

7

Considering all these matters, we answer the questions of law raised by the Applicant-

Appellant in the negative. The questions of law raised by the Respondent-Respondent does not

arise for consideration. For the above reasons, we affirm the judgment of the High Court dated

26.05.2014 and dismiss this appeal.

Considering the facts of this case we do not make an order for costs.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Nalin Perera, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Vijith K. Malalgoda, PC, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

kpm/-