==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 10

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for leave to

appeal against the judgment dated 08/11/2011 of the Civil Appeal High Court of Kurunegala in the case No. NWP/HCCA/KUR/120/2004(F) S.C. Appeal No. 105/2012

S.C.(HC) CALA Application

No. 532/11

Civil Appeal, High Court of NWP

Kurunegala Appeal No.

NWP/HCCA/KUR/120/2004(F)

DC Kurunegala Case No.

5094/L/96

01.Hitihamy Mudiyanselage Tilakaratna Banda Waraddana, Wellawa. 02.Hitihamy Mudiyanselage Punchiralage Ran Banda Waraddana, Wellawa.

Plaintiffs Vs. 01.Hitihamy Mudiyanselage Subarath Menike Rangama, Wellawa. 02.Hitihamy Mudiyanselage Punchi Menike Hunupola. 03.Hithihamy Mudiyanselage Sittamma Basnayake “Mawatte”, Deliwala, Rambukkana. 04.Hithihamy Mudiyanselage Pemawathi Wickremaratne No. 121, Municipal Road, Matale

Page 2 of 10

05.Alkegama Alahakoon Mudiyanselage Wimala Panamaldeniya Kaluhendiwela No.119, Wadakada, Pothuhera

Defendants And between 01.Hitihamy Mudiyanselage Subarath Menike Rangama, Wellawa. 02.Hitihamy Mudiyanselage Punchi Menike Hunupola. 03.Hithihamy Mudiyanselage Sittamma Basnayake “Mawatte”, Deliwala, Rambukkana. 04.Hithihamy Mudiyanselage Pemawathi Wickremaratne No. 121, Municipal Road, Matale

1st to 4th Defendants-Appellants

Vs. 01.Hitihamy Mudiyanselage Tilakaratna Banda Waraddana, Wellawa. 02.Hitihamy Mudiyanselage Punchiralage Ran Banda Waraddana, Wellawa.

Plaintiff-Respondents

Page 3 of 10

05.Alkegama Alahakoon Mudiyanselage Wimala Panamaldeniya Kaluhendiwela No.119, Wadakada, Pothuhera

5th Defendant-Respondent AND NOW BETWEEN 01.Hitihamy Mudiyanselage Tilakaratna Banda Waraddana, Wellawa.

1st Plaintiff-Respondent-

Appellant

02.Hitihamy Mudiyanselage Punchiralage Ran Banda (Deceased) Waraddana, Wallawa. 02(A). Jayasundara Mudiyanselage Podimenika (Deceased) Waraddana, Wellawa. 02(A)(1). Hitihamy Mudiyanselage Abeyratne Bandara Waraddana, Wellawa.

Substituted 2nd Plaintiff-Respondent-

Appellant Vs. 01.Hitihamy Mudiyanselage Subarath Menike Rangama, Wellava. 02.Hitihamy Mudiyanselage Punchi Menike Hunupola.

Page 4 of 10

Before: Counsel: Written Submissions: Argued on: Decided on:

Hon. S. Thurairaja, PC, J. Hon. A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J. Hon. Janak De Silva, J. Chula Bandara with Lakmini Edirisinghe for the Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellants Lakshman Perera P.C. with Tharika Jinadasa for the 1st Defendant– Appellant-Respondent Instructed by Niluka Dissanayake 08.08.2012 and 30.08.2024 by the Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant 16.08.2012 and 12.08.2024 by the 1st Defendant-Appellant Respondent 26.07.2024 07.11.2025

03.Hithihamy Mudiyanselage Sittamma Basnayake “Mawatte”, Deliwala, Rambukkana. 04.Hithihamy Mudiyanselage Pemawathi Wickremaratne No. 121, Municipal Road, Matale

1-4 Defendant-Appellant-

Respondents 05.Alkegama Alahakoon Mudiyanselage Wimala Panamaldeniya Kuluhendiwela No.119, Wadakada, Pothuhera.

5th Defendant-Respondent-

Respondent

Page 5 of 10

Janak De Silva, J.

The 1st Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant and Substituted 2nd Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant

(Plaintiffs) instituted this action against the 1st to 4th Defendants-Appellants-Respondents

(Defendants), seeking a declaration that the Plaintiffs are the lawful owners of the land

described in the schedule to the plaint, delivery of vacant possession thereof to the

Plaintiffs and damages until possession is delivered.

The District Court entered judgment as prayed for by the Plaintiffs. The 1st to 4th

Defendants appealed.

The Civil Appellate High Court allowed the appeal and set aside the judgment of the

District Court. It was held that the Plaintiffs had failed to identify the corpus as required

in a rei vindicatio action.

Leave to appeal has been granted on the following questions of law:

(1) Did the Honorable Judges of the Civil Appeal High Court of Kurunegala err in law

by coming to the conclusion that "the land in dispute has sufficiently been

identified by the Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondents is based completely on an

assumption which is not sustainable in law"?

(2) Did the Honorable Judges of the Civil Appeal High Court of Kurunegala err in law

by allowing the appeal on the basis that the corpus had not been properly

identified?

In Latheef v. Mansoor [(2010) 2 Sri LR 333 at 378], Marsoof, J. held:

“The identity of the subject matter is of paramount importance in a rei vindicatio

action because the object of such an action is to determine ownership of the

property, which objective cannot be achieved without the property being clearly

identified. Where the property sought to be vindicated consists of land, the land

Page 6 of 10

sought to be vindicated must be identified by reference to a survey plan or other

equally expeditious method…” (emphasis added)

Thus, it is well established that to succeed in a rei vindicatio action, the owner must prove

on a balance of probabilities, not only his or her ownership in the property, but also that

the property exists and is clearly identifiable.

The learned President’s Counsel for the 1st to 4th Defendants submitted that the Plaintiffs

had failed to establish the identity of the corpus and that the learned High Court Judges

were correct in dismissing the Plaintiffs’ action.

The learned President’s Counsel for the 1st to 4th Defendants submitted that whereas the

land claimed by the Plaintiffs is identified as “Kongolle Hena”, the Defendants claimed a

portion of the land called “Batugollawatta”.

I observe that on 19.03.1999, when admissions and issues were framed, the following

admission was recorded:

“දෙපාර්ශවදේ ආරවුලට සම්බන්ෙ ඉඩම දේබර් මානක තැන විසින් මැන සාෙන ලෙ අංක

1247/කුරු ෙරණ පිඹුදර් නිරූපනය කර ඇති බව පමණක් පිළි ගනී.”

Moreover, on 05.01.2001, learned Counsel for the 1st to 4th Defendants made the

following admission:

“දම් අවස්ථාදේදී 99.03.19 දින කර ඇති පිළිගැනීමට මූලික පිඹුර අොල බවත්, එයින් අෙහස්

කරන්දන් ආරවුලට අොලව දෙපාර්ශවය අතර ද ෞතිකව දමම පිඹුදරන් නිරූපනය වන

බව පමණක් නීතිඥ ජයදස්කර මහතා ෙන්වා සිටී.”

Thus, it is clear that both parties have expressly admitted that the land in dispute is the

land described in Plan No. 1247/කුරු made by A.B.M. Webber, which is the plan

specifically described in the Second Schedule to the plaint.

Page 7 of 10

According to Section 58 of the Evidence Ordinance:

“No fact need be proved in any proceeding which the parties thereto or their

agents agree to admit at the hearing, or which, before the hearing, they

agree to admit by any writing under their hands, or which by any rule of

pleading in force at the time they are deemed to have admitted by their

pleadings:

Provided that the court may, in its discretion, require the facts admitted to

be proved otherwise than by such admissions.”

In this case, the admission regarding the identification of the land in dispute was made at

the beginning of the trial. Thus, it is admissible under Section 58 of the Evidence

Ordinance, and there is no necessity to adduce further evidence to establish that fact.

Moreover, no attempt was made to withdraw the admission as to the identity of the

corpus. In the absence of such an attempt, the admission by both parties on the identity

of the corpus as the land identified in Plan No. 1247/කුරු of A.B.M. Webber, conclusively

settles the issue on the identity of the corpus, and no further proof is necessary.

There are further reasons why the 1st to 4th Defendants could not have challenged the identity of the corpus.

In their answer dated 19.08.1998, 1st to 4th Defendants pleaded prescriptive title to the

following land identified in the schedule to the answer:

ඉහත කී උපලේඛනය

“වයඹ පළාදත් කුරුණෑගල දිස්ික්කදේ වෑඋඩ විල්ලලි හත්පත්ුදේ මහගල්ලදබාඩ දමදගාඩ

දකෝරදල්ල වරද්ෙන පිහිටි බටුදගාල්ලලවත්ත නමැති අක්කර එකක් (අ.1. රූ .0 පර් .0) විශාල

දද්පළට මායිම්ව උුරට - එච් .එම් උක්කුබංඩාට අයිති ඉඩමෙ, නැදගනහිරට - රන්හාමි දකෝරාලට

අයිති කුඹුර ෙ, ෙකුණට - වෑදබාදේ කුඹුරෙ, බස්නාහිරට - පංච් රාලදේ ඉඩම යන මායිම් ුළ පිහිටි

දද්පළ හා එය ුළ පිහිටි ගහදකාළ පලුරු ආදී සියලු දද්ත් ඇුළු දද්පළ දේ.

Page 8 of 10

දමම දද්පළ ෙැනට ඒ.බී.එම්.දවබර් මානක නිලධාරී තැන විසින් ඔහුදේ වර්ෂ 1986.10.27 දින හා

අංක 1247/කූරු ෙරන පිඹුදර් ෙක්වා ඇති අතර එහි පිඹුර ප්‍රකාරව එම දද්පලට මායිම් උුරට-

රන්හාමි දකෝරාලට අයිතිව තිබී ෙැනට මුු බන්ඩාට සහ රන්බන්ඩාට අයිති කුඹුරෙ, නැදගනහිරට

-බංඩා දකෝරාලට සහ තවත් අයට අයිතිව තිබී ෙැනට එස්.බී.එම්.බංඩාට හා ටිකිරි බංඩාට අයිති

කුඹුරෙ, ෙකුණු බස්නාහිරට - ඩංගිරිබංඩාට සහ තවත් අයට අයිතිව තිබී ෙැනට එච්.එම් පංචිරාලට

අයිති ඉඩම, උුරු බස්නාහිරට-කලු බණ්ඩාට සහ තවත් අයට අයිතිව තිබී ෙැනට උක්කු බණ්ඩාට

අයිති බටුදගාල්ලදල්ලදහ්න ෙැනට වත්ත යන මායිම් ුළ පිහිටි රූඩ ුනකුත් පර්චස් විසිහය( අ0 රූ3

පර්.26) විශාල හා එහි ුල පිහිටි සියලුදද්ත් ඇුලු දද්පල දේ.”

Accordingly, this expressly refers to the Plan No. 1247/කුරු made by A.B.M. Webber.

The corpus was identified in the plaint as follows:

ඉහත කී උපලේඛනය

“වයඹ පළාදත් කුරුණෑගල දිස්ික්කදේ වෑඋඩවිල්ලලි හත්පත්ුදේ මහගල්ලදබාඩ දමදගාඩ

දකෝරදල්ල වරද්ොන පිහිටි දකෝන්දගාල්ලදල්ල දහ්න ෙැනට වත්ත නැමැති, උතුරට :රන්හාමි

දකෝරාල්ලදේ ඉඩම කියා ඇතත් ෙැනට නිවැරදිව කලු බංඩා සහ තවත් අයට අයත් බටුදගාල්ලලදහ්න

ෙැනට වත්තෙ, නැලෙනහිරට:රන්හාමි දකෝරාලදේ කුඹුරෙ, දකුණට:කලුබංඩාදේ බටුදගාදල්ලවත්ත

ෙැනට නිවැරදිව බංඩාදකෝරාල සහ තවත් අයට අයත් කුඹුරෙ, බස්නාහිරට: ඩංගිරිබංඩා සහ තවත්

අයට අයිති ඉඩමෙ, යන දමකී මායිම් ුළ පිහිටි කුරක්කන් දස්රු ුනක වපසරිය ඇති ඒ 353/155

යටදත් ලියාපදිංචි කර ඇති ඉඩම සහ එහි ුළ පිහිටි ගහදකාළ පලුරු යනාදී සියලු දද්ත් සමගි ෙ

දේ.

ඉහත කී ලදවන උපලේඛනය

දමම ඉඩම 1986.10.23 දවනි දින ඒ.බී.එම් දවබර් මානක තැන විසින් මැන සාෙන ලෙ අංක 1247

ෙරන පිඹුදර් සෙහන් ඉහත කී වරද්ෙන පිහිටදකෝන්දගාල්ලදල්ල දහ්න නමැති උතුරට : කලුබණ්ඩා

සහ තවත් අයට අයිතිව තිබී ෙැනට උක්කුබංඩාට අයිති බටුදගාල්ලදල්ල දහ්න ෙැනට වත්තෙ,

නැලෙනහිරට :රංහාමි දකෝරාලට අයිතිව තිබී ෙැනට මුුබණ්ඩාට සහ රන්බණ්ඩාට අයිති කුඹුරෙ,

දකුණට : බන්ඩාදකෝරාලාට සහ තවත් අයට අයිතිව තිබී ෙැනට එස්.බී.එම් බංඩාට සහ ටිකිරි බංඩාට

අයිති කුඹුරෙ(බටුදගාල්ලදල්ල දහ්න ෙැනට කුඹුර) බස්නාහිරට: ඩංගිරිබංඩාට සහ තවත් අයට අයිතිව

Page 9 of 10

තිබී ෙැනට එච්.එම් පංචිරාලට අයිති ඉඩමෙ,යන දමකී මායිම් ුළ පිහිටි රූඩ ුනයි පර්චස් විසිහයක්

(අ,00.රු.03.පාර්.26) විශාල ඉඩම් දේ”

Thus, both parties sought to identify the land they are claiming by reference to Plan No.

1247/කුරු prepared by A.B.M. Webber, which appears at page 209 of the Appeal brief

marked as “X”.

In these circumstances, the learned High Court judges made a grave error in law by

seeking to revisit the question of the identity of the corpus.

Moreover, the 1st to 4th Defendants pleaded prescriptive title. A person who claims a

prescriptive title must demonstrate possession over a specifically identified corpus; failure

to do so renders such a claim untenable, as a prescription cannot operate over an

uncertain or unidentified land.

Accordingly, when a party claims prescriptive title to a particular corpus, that party cannot

thereafter contend that the corpus has not been properly identified. The rationale is that,

in order to claim prescriptive title, the land must first be clearly and specifically identified,

as only then can the claimant rely on undisturbed and uninterrupted possession to

establish ownership by prescription. Therefore, in the present case, the 1st to 4th

Defendants are estopped from asserting that the corpus has not been identified.

For all the foregoing reasons, I answer the two questions of law in the affirmative.

Accordingly, I set aside the judgment of the Civil Appeal High Court of Kurunegala dated

08.11.2011 and affirm the judgment of the learned District Judge of Kurunegala dated

20.09.2004.

Page 10 of 10

The appeal is allowed with costs fixed at Rs. 75,000/=.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

S. Thurairaja, PC, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J. I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT