==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

In the matter of an Appeal against the order dated 09th October, 2015, of the High Court of the Western Province in the Exercise of its Appellate and Revisionary Jurisdiction [Holden at Colombo] in case bearing No. WP/ HCCA/ Col/ 98/2015 (LA), under and in terms provisions of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No.19 of 1990 as amended by the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) (Amendment) Act No. 54 of 2006.

1. Ramya Nirmali Illeperuma 2. Ajith Bhathiya Illeperuma Appearing by their power of attorney-holder Opheila Eileen Illeperuma, all of No. 141, Ketawallamulla, Colombo 09.

Plaintiffs

S.C. Appeal No.76/2016 SC/HCCA/LA No. .341/15 Vs. WP/HCCA/Col/98/2015(LA) D.C. Colombo Case No. 21371/L 1. Sandya Rajapakse, Chairman Janatha Estate Development Board. No.55/75, Vauxhall Street, Colombo 02.

S.C.Appeal N0.76/2016

2

2. Janatha Estate Development Board. No.55/75, Vauxhall Street, Colombo 02.

1st &2nd Defendants

And

1. Ramya Nirmali Illeperuma 2. Ajith Bhathiya Illeperuma Appearing by their power of attorney-holder Opheila Eileen Illeperuma, all of No. 141, Ketawallamulla, Colombo 09.

Plaintiff-Petitioners

Vs.

1. Sandya Rajapakse, Chairman Janatha Estate Development Board. No.55/75, Vauxhall Street, Colombo 02. 2 Janatha Estate Development Board. No.55/75, Vauxhall Street, Colombo 02. 1st &2nd Defendant-Respondents.

And then 1. Sandya Rajapakse, Chairman Janatha Estate Development Board. No.55/75, Vauxhall Street, Colombo 02. 2. Janatha Estate Development Board.

S.C.Appeal N0.76/2016

3

No.55/75, Vauxhall Street, Colombo 02. 1st &2nd Defendant-Respondent- Petitioners. Vs.

1. Ramya Nirmali Illeperuma 2. Ajith Bhathiya Illeperuma Appearing by their power of attorney-holder Opheila Eileen Illeperuma, all of No. 141, Ketawallamulla, Colombo 09.

Plaintiff-Petitioner-Respondents

AND NOW 1. Sandya Rajapakse, Chairman Janatha Estate Development Board. No.55/75, Vauxhall Street, Colombo 02. 2. Janatha Estate Development Board. No.55/75, Vauxhall Street, Colombo 02.

1st &2nd Defendant-Respondent- Petitioner-Appellants.

-Vs-

1. Ramya Nirmali Illeperuma 2. Ajith Bhathiya Illeperuma Appearing by their power of attorney-holder Opheila Eileen Illeperuma, all of No. 141, Ketawallamulla, Colombo 09.

S.C.Appeal N0.76/2016

4

Plaintiff-Petitioner-Respondent- Respondents The Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General’s Department Colombo 12. Added-Respondent

BEFORE : VIJITH K. MALALGODA, PC., J. KUMUDINI WICKREMASINGHE, J. ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J. COUNSEL : S.A. Parathalingam P.C. with Nishkan Parathalingam and Upeka Sooriya Patabendige instructed by G. G. Arulpragasam for the Defendant-Respondent-Petitioner- Appellant. R.C. Gooneratne for the Plaintiff-Petitioner-Respondent- -Respondents. Nirmalan Wigneswaran DSG with Ms. H. Senanayake, SSC for the Added-Respondent. ARGUED ON : 29th September, 2022 DECIDED ON : 09th August, 2024

********* ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

This is an appeal by the 2nd Defendant- Respondent-Petitioner-

Appellant, Janatha Estate Development Board (the “2nd Defendant”), by

which it is sought to challenge the validity of an order made by the High

Court of Civil Appeal, in affirming an order of dismissal of an application

under Section 839 of the Civil Procedure Code of the District Court. The

2nd Defendant seeks to have the said orders set aside by this Court.

S.C.Appeal N0.76/2016

5

The 1st and 2nd Plaintiff-Petitioner-Respondent-Respondents (the

“Plaintiffs”), instituted an action in the District Court of Colombo against

the then Chairperson and the Janatha Estate Development Board, citing

them as the 1st and 2nd Defendants respectively. In that action, the

Plaintiffs sought a declaration of their title to a land in an extent of 100

acres from Bohil estate at Ketabula and ejectment of the said defendants

therefrom.

In addition, they also sought an award of damages assessed at Rs.

500,000.00 per month, until they are restored in possession of the said

100-acre land. After trial, the District Court held with the Plaintiffs and

issued decree as prayed for by them. The 2nd Defendant preferred an

appeal against the said judgment. Pending the said appeal, the Plaintiffs

sought execution of writ of possession, whilst reserving their right to

execute the part of the decree that had been issued for the recovery of

damages with costs, at a later stage. During the ensuing inquiry, the 2nd

Defendant, by way of a settlement, agreed to place the Plaintiffs in

possession of the said 100-acre land.

The 2nd Defendant’s appeal against the judgment of the District

Court was dismissed for non-prosecution by the High Court of Civil

Appeal.

Owing to the failure on the part of the 2nd Defendant to fulfil its

part of the terms of settlement, the Plaintiffs sought to execute writ of

possession. Multiple legal obstacles were placed by several parties

preventing the Plaintiffs from executing the writ of possession and to

place them in possession of the land. Thereupon, the Plaintiffs moved

Court for issuance of a money decree over their entitlement to damages.

The District Court, by its order dated 10.12.2013, issued a writ enabling

the Plaintiffs to recover damages, in a sum of Rs. 41,500,000.00, and to

S.C.Appeal N0.76/2016

6

seize monies lying in specified bank accounts maintained by the 2nd

Defendant. In addition, the Plaintiffs sought to have the property

occupied by the 2nd Defendant at No. 5/75, Vauxhall Street, Colombo 2,

seized. The District Court granted the writ. The Registrar of that Court,

upon the 2nd Defendant’s failure to pay the debt, proceeded to execute

the writ. He inserted a notice of auction of the said property in print

media after the property was seized.

The 2nd Defendant, thereupon moved the District Court by its

application dated 30.03.2015, invoking its jurisdiction under Section 839

seeking to release the said property from seizure. The 2nd Defendant

claimed that the property under seizure at No. 5/75, Vauxhall Street,

Colombo 2, is owned not by it but by the Republic of Sri Lanka. The Court,

in view of the said factual assertion, issued summons on the Attorney

General, before proceeding to investigate into the said application under

Section 839. On the day fixed for inquiry however, there was no

representation for the State. The Court, nonetheless, commenced the

inquiry, as summons was duly served on the Attorney General. During

the inquiry, the 1st Plaintiff gave evidence and adduced evidence to

indicate that the said property is being possessed and owned by the 2nd

Defendant as its own property. The 2nd Defendant, however, was content

only with an opportunity to present its position through a set of written

submissions, which it did tender to Court after the conclusion of the

inquiry. After considering the evidence adduced before it, the District

Court dismissed the 2nd Defendant’s application. The appeal preferred

by the 2nd Defendant against the said order too was dismissed, which

made it to seek Leave to Appeal from this Court against the said order.

During the support stage of the 2nd Defendant’s application

seeking Leave to Appeal, the Attorney General, by way of a petition

S.C.Appeal N0.76/2016

7

addressed to this Court, made an application to intervene. After

affording an opportunity for the parties as well as to the intervenient

petitioner to make submissions, this Court by its order dated 29.03.2016,

permitted the intervention under Article 134(3) of the Constitution and

ordered that the Attorney General be named in the caption as an Added-

Respondent.

This Court thereupon proceeded to grant leave to appeal on the

following questions of law.

The questions of law that were suggested by the 2nd Defendant and

accepted by Court

a. Did the High Court of Civil Appeal incorrectly, and not

properly considered whether the District Court was duty

bound in terms of Sections 241-243 of the Civil Procedure Code

to conduct a full and proper investigations or inquiry, in order

to fully satisfy itself that the land sought to be seized was not in

fact State land, in its order dated 09.10.2015 ?

b. Is the said order incorrect in its understanding of Sections

241,242 and 243 of the Civil Procedure Code ?

c. Did not the High Court of Civil Appeal fully and properly

consider the effect of the findings in its said order that in terms

of Section 243 of the Civil Procedure Code, the District Court

could not hear the Hon. Attorney General unless he was

represented on the day fixed for the inquiry into the Appellant’s

application ?

S.C.Appeal N0.76/2016

8

d. Did the High Court of Civil Appeal fail to consider whether the

District Court failed to appreciate that in the facts and

circumstances of the case before it, the overriding

considerations for that Court was to satisfy itself that the land

sought to be sold/auctioned was not a State land ?

Consequential questions of law that were suggested by the Plaintiff and

accepted by Court

a. It is admitted that the State made an application to intervene in

this action in the District Court of Colombo over the subject

matter of this case, that application was refused by that Court

on 20.07.2015, the State failed to appeal against the said order,

if so, is the said order Res Judicata against the State ?

Consequential questions of law that were suggested by the Added

Respondent and accepted by Court

a. Is the absolute title of the subject land remains in the State ?

b. If so, as per admission that subject land is a State land, can the

subject to be auctioned and be seized in view of the notice

marked as “X1” ?

At the hearing of the instant appeal, learned President’s Counsel

for the 2nd Defendant contended that, prior to the District Court making

its order on 24.07.2015 in relation to its application under Section 839, the

Attorney General had appeared before the District Court on 20.07.2015,

but was precluded from intervening into the investigation on the basis

that he failed to appear before that Court on the date of inquiry.

Learned President’s Counsel further contended that the said

decision of Court resulted in a wrong order, as the Court could have, if it

S.C.Appeal N0.76/2016

9

was so inclined, rejected the submissions of the Attorney General, but

only after hearing him. According to him, this is due to the reason that in

terms of Section 241, it was incumbent on that Court to cause an

investigation to be conducted so as to satisfy itself that the land sought to

be seized was at least ex facie not State land. The District Court failed to

conduct such an investigation or an inquiry into the application of the 2nd

Defendant. Owing to that failure, the District Court had completely

ignored the submissions made on behalf of the State and thus resulting

in an erroneous order.

Learned President’s Counsel also submitted that although Sections

241 to 245 refer to two kinds of persons; ‘claimant’ and ‘objector’ who

could move to have a property under seizure released, there was no

complete bar to a judgment debtor for being an objector in appropriate

circumstances.

When this order was being challenged before the High Court of

Civil Appeal, it was urged on behalf of the 2nd Defendant that the original

Court was under a mandatory duty to investigate the claim or objection,

as Sections 241 to 245 of the Civil Procedure Code refer to two types of

persons (‘claimants’ and ‘objectors’), and particularly to consider the

position that the property in question was State land, as a judgment

debtor could also be an ‘objector’ although he could not be a ‘claimant’.

Learned President’s Counsel submitted that, in making the

impugned order, the High Court of Civil Appeal relied on certain

pronouncements made by the superior Courts in the judgments of

Karuppan Chetty v Anthonnnayake Hamine 5 NLR 300, Ghouse v

Mercantile Credit Ltd., (1997) 2 Sri L.R. 127, and Chandana

Hewavitharana v Urban Development Authority (2005) 1 Sri L.R. 107,

which, according to learned Counsel, did not decide the question

S.C.Appeal N0.76/2016

10

whether a judgment debtor could also be an ‘objector’ within the

meaning of Sections 241 to 245 of the Civil Procedure Code.

Learned President’s Counsel further submitted that these

statements ought to have been considered as obiter dicta. He therefore

contented that the finding arrived at by appellate Court on the basis that

the only question to be decided in an investigation under Section 241 was

limited to what had been suggested by the Supreme Court in Karuppan

Chetty v Anthonnnayake Hamine (ibid), i.e., whether the 2nd Defendant

was in possession of the property at the time of its seizure, and not

whether the 2nd Defendant is its owner, is an erroneous one.

Learned Senior State Counsel, on behalf of the added Respondent,

submitted that in terms of Section 462 of the Civil Procedure Code, no

writ could have been issued against the State and Section 456 states that

all actions against the State shall be instituted by or against the Attorney

General. In the original action related to the instant appeal, the Attorney

General had not been named as a party before the District Court, and the

Court issued the said order against the 2nd Defendant, who only had a

right to possess the land under seizure, by virtue of a vesting order made

under Section 44 of the Land Acquisition Act. Learned Senior State

Counsel also submits, as the learned President’s Counsel for the 2nd

Defendant did, that Janatha Estates Development Board falls into category

of an ‘objector’ in terms of Section 243 and had rightfully made a claim

in respect of the “State land”.

Defending the orders made by the High Court of Civil Appeal as

well the District Court, learned Counsel for the Plaintiffs contended that

the petition tendered to Court in March 2015, by which the 2nd Defendant

sought to restrain the auction of the seized land by the Fiscal, sought no

S.C.Appeal N0.76/2016

11

relief in its prayer to the effect that the subject matter be declared as

property belong to the State.

He contended that in terms of Section 44 of the Land Acquisition

Act, when a land is vested in a person or a body of persons, other than a

local body (as in the case of the 2nd Defendant), the right title and interest

in that property passes to that person or a body of persons. Thus, in terms

of Section 22 of the said Act, the conveyance, by which the acquiring

officer made in favour of the 2nd Defendant, is a disposition which passes

title of the land sought to be seized to Janatha Estates Development Board .

Perusal of the order of the High Court of Civil Appeal indicates

that it had considered three specific contentions that were placed before

that Court by the 2nd Defendant, which could be identified as follows:

a. Sections 241 to 245 of the Civil Procedure Code refer to two

types of persons (claimants and objectors) and two types of

applications (claims and objections),

b. A judgment debtor (although cannot be a claimant) can be an

objector, and

c. the District Court was under a mandatory duty to investigate

the claim or objections and particularly under a duty to satisfy

itself of the position that the land under seizure is not a State

land but belonging to the 2nd Defendant as at the date of the

seizure.

In proceeding to consider these contentions, the High Court of

Civil Appeal commenced its process of reasoning on the observations

S.C.Appeal N0.76/2016

12

made by Bonser CJ, in the judgment of Karuppan Chetty v Anthonayake

Hamine (supra) and by GPS De Silva CJ in Ghouse v Mercantile Credit

Limited (supra). The High Court of Civil Appeal then stated “ … there are

two categories of persons named in the relevant sections as ‘claimants’ and

‘objectors’ and also to ‘claims’ and ‘objections’”, and then proceeded to hold

“what is material is the scope of the inquiry but not whether the judgment debtor

could have been an objector, which question hence is not determined in this

order.” The High Court of Civil Appeal, however, considered the scope

of the investigation that could be undertaken by a District Court, in terms

of Section 241, and for that purpose, relied on the judgment of Karuppan

Chetty v Anthonayake Hamine (supra) and acted on the statement made

to the scope of the inquiry as it is stated that “ … the scope of the inquiry

seems to be essentially limited to what the Supreme Court said …”.

It is evident from the above factual narrative, what lies at the core

of the complaint of the 2nd Defendant is the refusal of the District Court

to consider the fact that the title to the property under seizure, lies in the

State. The High Court of Civil Appeal erred in affirming that refusal.

Hence the submission of the learned President’s Counsel that the District

Court was duty bound in terms of Sections 241-243 of the Civil Procedure

Code to conduct a “full and proper” investigations or inquiry, in order to

“fully” satisfy itself that the land sought to be seized was not in fact a

State land.

In my view, before this Court ventures into examine the validity of

the contentions presented on the scope of “full and proper” inquiry in

Section 241, it is imperative that it considers the nature of proceedings

that had taken place before the original Court as the first step. This is

because of the very nature of the application of the 2nd Defendant, as well

as the nature of the objections raised by the Plaintiffs, which undoubtedly

S.C.Appeal N0.76/2016

13

had an impact in the impugned orders. It would also appraise this Court

as to the manner in which the Courts below had set out to deal with the

dispute presented for determination.

It is already noted that, after property was seized by the Fiscal, the

2nd Defendant made an application to the District Court under Section

839 and not under Section 241, although the learned President’s Counsel

contended that the Court should have undertaken a “full and proper”

inquiry into its claim under Section 241.

The 2nd Defendant, in the said application claimed that it became

aware of the seizure, only upon the arrival of a surveyor to the property

under seizure, in order to carry out a survey of the land. It also avers that

the land under seizure was only in the possession of the 2nd Defendant at

the time of seizure, and that too upon a vesting order issued by the

Government Agent bearing reference No. F1/191.

It was further alleged by the 2nd Defendant, that it had no prior

notice of the seizure of the said land and, therefore moved Court, upon

the “exceptional grounds” that were pleaded therein, it invokes the

“revisionary” jurisdiction of that Court. The 2nd Defendant prayed inter

alia for issuance of notice on the Plaintiffs, name the Attorney General as

a party to the proceedings, release the property under seizure, and a stay

of further proceedings until a final determination.

The Plaintiffs have promptly resisted the said application by the

2nd Defendant to have the seized property released by filing a Statement

of Objections dated 08.04.2015, wherein it was pleaded in relation to the

said land that they totally reject the claim that the title of the land lies in

the Republic, as the vesting order was made under Section 44 of the Land

Acquisition Act confers title to the 2nd Defendant. They also relied on the

S.C.Appeal N0.76/2016

14

lease agreement No. 6952, entered by the 2nd Defendant with “Kandy Tyre

Pvt Ltd”, wherein a part of the land so vested was leased out to that

private enterprise. It was further asserted since the seizure of the land on

12.10.2014 by the Fiscal, no action was taken by the 2nd Defendant and

therefore the Plaintiffs moved Court to dismiss the application for

release from seizure.

After the 2nd Defendant’s application under Section 839 was filed,

the District Court made order on 01.04.2015 to serve summons on the

Attorney General and fixed the inquiry on 29.04.2015. This order was

made in view of the claim of the 2nd Defendant that the land under

seizure is not owned by it but by the Republic. On 16.04.2015, the

scheduled auction of the seized property was suspended by an order of

Court, pending the said inquiry.

When the matter was taken up for inquiry on 29.04.2015, it was

revealed that the summons was not served on the Attorney General.

Consequently, the inquiry was put off until 26.05.2015. Journal Entry No.

144 of 26.05.2015, indicates that the Fiscal had, by then, reported to Court

that the Attorney General was served with summons, notifying him of

the pending inquiry on 20.05.2015. Notwithstanding the service of

summons, there was no representation for the Attorney General at the

inquiry, which commenced on 20.05.2015. The proceedings of that day

indicate that during inquiry, the 2nd Defendant opted not to adduce any

evidence before Court, as mandated by Section 243, whereas the 1st

Plaintiff had adduced oral and documentary evidence on her behalf,

resisting the application. She tendered a mortgage bond (R2) by which

the 2nd Defendant had mortgaged the property under seizure to Bank of

Ceylon and, in addition, relied on the agreement of lease, which was

already tendered before Court along with her Statement of Objections.

S.C.Appeal N0.76/2016

15

After conclusion of the inquiry, Court indicated that the order would be

delivered on 24.07.2015.

On 20.07.2015, another application under Section 839 was made by

a private Counsel on behalf of the Attorney General, seeking to intervene

into the proceedings as an intervenient petitioner. The Court, by its order

dated 20.07.2015, rejected the said application, as the proceedings

relating to the inquiry had already been concluded.

Thereupon, the District Court, with its order dated 24.07.2015,

found that a claimant or objector, who seeks release of a seized property

must adduce evidence to show that at the date of the seizure he had some

interest in, or was possessed of the property seized in terms of Section

243. Since no evidence was adduced before that Court by the 2nd

Defendant or by the Attorney General to show that the State had some

interest in the property seized, it proceeded to dismiss the judgment

debtor’s application. After the application for intervention was dismissed

by Court there was no action taken either by the 2nd Defendant or the

Attorney General, to challenge that order.

It is evident from the above, despite the invocation of the

inherent powers by the 2nd Defendant by placing reliance on Section 839

in seeking to secure release of a seized property, the District Court had

considered the said application as a claim, or an objection, made in

respect of a property seized in execution of a writ under Section 241 and

had applied the provisions of Section 243 in dealing with same.

Provisions of Section 243 made it incumbent upon a claimant or an

objector, during an investigation conducted under Section 241, to adduce

evidence of his interest in relation to the property already seized. Since

the District Court had correctly proceeded to investigate the 2nd

Defendant’s claim of State’s title by making a reference to Section 243, at

S.C.Appeal N0.76/2016

16

the conclusion of that investigation, it could only make an order either

allowing or disallowing that claim, in terms of Section 244 or 245.

The said order of dismissal was righty made by the District Court.

In Isohamine v Munasinghe (1928) 29 NLR 277, it was held by

Garvin J, with Dalton and Lyall Grant JJ agreeing, (at p.281);

“[A]t a sitting of the Court for the purpose of investigating a claim duly

appointed and of which notice has been given the Court is entitled to proceed

judicially to determine the matter of the claim upon a consideration of the

evidence where evidence is adduced, and in the absence of evidence when the

claimant adduces none, and the order so made is, in my view of these Sections,

an order made upon investigation.”

Before considering the reasons given by the appellate Court for

affirming the said order of dismissal made by the District Court, it is

important to consider the contention presented by the 2nd Defendant at

this stage as to the scope of an investigation under Section 241.

Section 241 of the Civil Procedure Code is the first of eleven

individual Sections that are grouped in for the purpose of laying down

the procedure that govern “ Claims to Property Seized”. In the event of any

claim being preferred to, or an objection offered against the seizure or

sale of any immovable property by the Fiscal, in the execution of a decree

or any order passed before the decree, provisions of Section 241 are

triggered into action. Once a claim being made or any objection offered

against the seizure or sale of any immovable property, a statutory duty

is imposed on that Fiscal to report same to the Court, which passed the

said decree or order. After such claim or objection is reported, such a

Court “ … shall thereupon proceed in a summary manner to investigate such

S.C.Appeal N0.76/2016

17

a claim or objection with the like power as regards the examination of the

claimant or objector, and in all other respects, as if he were a party to the action.”

Despite imposing a duty on District Court to investigate such a

claim or objection, Section 241 does not specifically lay down any

parameters, within which such an investigation should be conducted. It

is observed that the wording used in Section 241 merely states that the

District Court should proceed “ … in a summary manner to investigate such

a claim or objection with the like power as regards the examination of the

claimant or objector, and in all other respects, as if he were a party to the action.”

Learned President’s Counsel, in order to be in line with his

contention presented to this Court, inserted two additional words in

describing the nature of an investigation conducted under Section 241 to

read it as a “full and proper” investigation into the claim of State land.

With these submissions in mind, I shall now proceed to examine

the statutory provisions that are found in Sections 241 to 245 of Civil

Procedure Code, which deals with the procedure applicable to “ Claims

to Property Seized”, as they might offer an indication as to the scope of

such an investigation.

Marginal notes of Sections 241 to 245 do provide an indication as

to the arrangement of these statutory provisions. Section 241 relates to

the claims made to the Fiscal to be reported to Court and be investigated

by that Court. Section 242 requires such claims to be made at the earliest

opportunity to Court while Section 243 states that it is for the claimant to

adduce evidence. Importantly, Sections 244 deal with when the Court

should exercise its discretion to release such property from seizure while

Section 245 deals with instances when a Court should disallow such a

claim or objection. The decision of Court must be preceded by an

S.C.Appeal N0.76/2016

18

undertaking of summary investigation into a claim or objection, in order

to satisfy itself whether such a claim or objection fits into any one or more

of the instances specified in Sections 243 and 244.

The most striking feature that could be identified in both these

Sections is that, although they deal with many different situations in

which a Court could make an order either allowing or disallowing the

release of a seized property, the repetitive reference to the word

“possession”.

It is also evident that the two Sections deal with the nexus between

the judgment debtor and the claimant or objector, who was in

“possession” of the property at the time of its seizure. Significantly, none

of the two Sections made any reference to the “title” of such property in

any of them, other than making a reference only to “an interest”.

Thus, it seems to me that if an objector or a claimant were to be

successful in obtaining an order releasing from seizure, such a person

must adduce evidence before Court in support that his objection or claim

of his interest by satisfying that Court of the existence of one or more

instances that are identified and listed out in Section 244. If the Court is

satisfied that the objector or claimant was in possession of the property,

at the time of its seizure, as the judgment debtor’s own property or of

some other person, who possessed same in trust or as a tenant of that

judgment debtor, it shall disallow that objection or claim.

The statutory provisions that contained in Sections 241 to 245

remained without a significant change being made to them since the

enactment of the Civil Procedure Code, except for the period during

which Administration of Justice Law No. 44 of 1973 was in operation.

Thus, pronouncements that were made by superior Courts on these

S.C.Appeal N0.76/2016

19

Sections since then, indeed provide very persuasive guidance as to the

general statutory scheme, in dealing with properties under seizure, even

if they could be distinguished from the factual positions from the matter

under consideration.

In making the impugned order, the High Court of Civil Appeal

had guided itself by adopting the reasoning of the judgment in Karuppan

Chetty v Anthonnayake Hamine (supra), where Bonser CJ made several

pronouncements regarding the application of Section 241. The

reproduced section of the judgment of Bonser CJ states (at p. 303) as

follows:

“[T]hen, when the parties are before the Court on the day of the

inquiry, the procedure should be very simple. It must be

remembered that the only question is whether the claimant was in

possession at the time of the seizure, and not whether the claimant

is the owner of the land. If it is found that he is in possession, the

Court makes an order to the Fiscal to release the property, but that

order determines nothing as to the rights of the parties. It may be

that the claimant is in possession of the property, but yet the true

owner of the property is the execution-debtor, and the property is

therefore executable under the writ. But that question cannot be

determined in the claim inquiry. The Code provides that that

question shall be determined in a separate action brought under

section 247. If the object and scope of the inquiry had been strictly

kept in view, the proceedings in this and other cases would have

been conducted more summarily than they appear to have

been.”(emphasis original)

The appellate Court, after reproducing the said statement,

concluded that “ … the scope of the inquiry seems to be essentially limited to

S.C.Appeal N0.76/2016

20

what the Supreme Court said in the aforesaid paragraph”. However, the

learned President’s Counsel contended that, unlike the instant appeal,

the question that arose before Bonser CJ for determination was the

quantum of costs which were payable by an unsuccessful claimant in an

application under Sections 241 and 242. He further contended that the

words employed by Bonser CJ therefore could not be logically and fairly

be taken to mean that in no circumstances the judgment debtor is entitled

to fall within the class of persons referred to as the ‘objector’ in Sections

214-243 and that in no circumstances the judgment debtor entitled to take

part in an investigation conducted under Sections 214-243.

The challenge of the 2nd Defendant to the validity of the judgment

of the High Court of Civil Appeal therefore is primarily premised on that

Court’s act of placing reliance on the observation made by Bonser CJ in

Karuppan Chetty v Anthonnayake Hamine (supra) in relation to

investigations conducted under Section 241 that “ … the only question is

whether the claimant was in possession at the time of the seizure, and not

whether the claimant is the owner of the land.”

It is already noted that the statutory provisions contained in

Section 241, does not contain any indication as the scope of the

investigation. This is because the words “ in the event of any claim being

preferred to, or objection offered against the seizure or sale” to the Fiscal “ he

shall, as soon as the same is preferred or offered, report the same to the Court”,

is indicative of the stage at which such an objection or claim could be

made. Obviously, in order to execute the writ, the Fiscal must personally

enter the property and the person who is in possession of the same at that

point of time, could make a claim or an objection.

The Court of Appeal, in its judgment of David Kannangara v

Central Finance Ltd., (2004) 2 Sri L.R. 311, considered the question

S.C.Appeal N0.76/2016

21

whether a claimant or objector must state his claim or objection to the

Fiscal, to invoke the provisions of Section 241. Amaratunge J stated (at

p.313) that “[I]t is true that in terms of Section 241, the fiscal has to report the

claim to the Court and an investigation into the claim is to be held thereafter.

This is the usual way of commencing an investigation under section 241.

However, the terms of Section 241 do not prohibit the making of a claim straight

to the Court which ordered the seizing of the property, …”.

If there is a claim or objection made to Fiscal at the time of seizure,

such a claim or objection should promptly be reported to Court by him

and should be investigated under Section 241. A claimant or an objector

could directly make his application to Court seeking release from seizure.

However, in terms of Section 242, such a claim or objection must be made

at the earliest opportunity and if it appears to that Court that the making

of the claim or objection was designedly and unnecessarily delayed with

a view to obstruct the ends of justice, it needed not inquire into such a

claim or objection.

The observation of Bonser CJ that “ … the only question is whether the

claimant was in possession at the time of the seizure, and not whether the

claimant is the owner of the land” finds confirmation when one examines

the same in the light of the provisions contained in Sections 244 and 245.

Section 244, whilst conferring a discretion on the District Court to

release the property seized, states that if it is satisfied that at the time of

its seizure the property was not

a. in the possession of the judgment-debtor, or of some

person in trust for him, or

b. in the occupancy of a tenant or other person paying

rent to him, or

S.C.Appeal N0.76/2016

22

c. on his own account or not as his own property, but

on account of or in trust for some other person,

although at such time the judgment-debtor was in

the possession of the property under seizure,

d. in the possession partly on his own account and

partly on account of some other person.

Similarly, the provisions of Section 245 states that if the Court is

satisfied that the property was, at the time it was seized,

a. in the possession of the judgment-debtor as his own

property, and not on account of any other person or

b. was in the possession of some other person, in trust for

the judgment debtor, or

c. in the occupancy of a tenant or other person paying rent

to such judgment debtor,

it could make order disallowing such a claim or objection as the

District Court did in this particular instance.

It is evident from the wording of the two Sections that the

operative criterion in the exercise of the discretion conferred in the Court

is the status of the person who is in possession of that property and his

relationship of his possession to the judgment debtor. If his possession

could be traced back to the judgment debtor, a claim or objection should

be disallowed, except for very limited situations as specified in the

Section 244, with a view to secure a third-party interest.

What is important in relation to the scope of investigation in terms

of Section 241 is that the Court should investigate in summary manner to

decide the question whether a claimant or objector had satisfied the

Court that his claim or objection falls within any one or more of the

S.C.Appeal N0.76/2016

23

situations envisaged in either Section 244 or Section 245, enabling it to

make order either allowing or disallowing the release of the property

under seizure.

This is due to the fact that the Civil Procedure Code had

specifically provided for a person, who had an interest over the property

under seizure but was unsuccessful in satisfying the Court that his claim

or objection falls within any one or more of the several instances that

were specified in Section 244, could seek redress under Section 247.

Section 247 provide for a party against whom an order under Section 244,

245 or 246 is passed, to institute an action within the specified time period

of fourteen days “… to establish the right which he claims to the property in

dispute, …” .

In Abraham Singho v Haramanis Appu (1933) 34 NLR 328, it was

held (at p. 329) that in “ … an action under Section 247, the only issue that

can be decided in such an action is whether the claimant is the owner of the

property in dispute if he is the plaintiff or whether the property is to be declared

liable to be sold in execution of the decree in his favour if the plaintiff is the

judgment-creditor ” Thus, in my view, the scope of the investigation under

Section 241, is limited to situations that are set out in Sections 244 and

245, where the specific instances in which a Court should allow or

disallow a claim or objection presented before it under Section 241 were

statutorily laid down.

There appears to be a sound and a pragmatic reason behind the

imposition of such limitations on the scope of an investigation under

Section 241, by provisions contained in Section 244 and 245, in restricting

same only to a summary investigation, and that too to decide as to the

nature of possession of the claimant or objector had at the time of the

S.C.Appeal N0.76/2016

24

land under seizure. In Isohamine v Munasinghe (supra), the Court

observed (at p.280) :

“ The procedure to be followed in the event of any claim being

preferred to property seized in execution is contained in sections

241 to 247 of the Code. Generally speaking, under the Civil

Procedure Code proceedings in Court must either conform to the

rules of regular procedure or of summary procedure. But the

procedure in the case of claims is of a special character - it is neither

‘regular procedure’ nor ‘summary procedure’. The Court is

required to investigate the claims ‘in a summary manner’. The

intention is manifest that a claim should be dealt with

expeditiously so that the execution of the writ should not be

delayed or defeated; and to this end the Court is expressly

empowered to refuse to investigate a claim which appears to have

been designedly and unnecessarily delayed with a view to obstruct

parties.”

The recognition of the necessity to conduct an investigation under

Section 241 in a summary manner was a deliberate act on the part of the

Legislature so that the execution of the writ obtained by the successful

plaintiff in his favour should not otherwise unnecessarily be delayed or

defeated. Therefore, I am in respectful agreement with the observation of

Bonser CJ that in an investigation under Section 241, “ … the only question

is whether the claimant was in possession at the time of the seizure, and not

whether the claimant is the owner of the land.”

In view of these factors, the conclusion reached by the High Court

of Civil Appeal, as to the scope of the investigation under Section 241, by

placing reliance on the judgement of Karuppan Chetty v Anthonnayake

S.C.Appeal N0.76/2016

25

Hamine (supra) is a correct one , as it is in line with the scheme set out by

the relevant Sections of the Civil Procedure Code.

Thus, if the material placed before Court during an investigation

under Section 241, satisfies that Court of the fact that the property at the

time of seizure was “in possession of the judgment-debtor as his own property,

and not on account of any other person”, in terms of Section 245, it was

incumbent upon that Court to disallow such a claim.

There is no doubt that the property under dispute was in the

possession of the 2nd Defendant at the time of its seizure. During the

investigation conducted under Section 241, the 2nd Defendant did not

adduce any evidence. However, the Plaintiffs tendered evidence during

that inquiry to establish that the 2nd Defendant had mortgaged the seized

property to Bank of Ceylon, that too, in addition to the lease agreement

which was tendered along with their Statement of Objections.

The description of the property that was seized by the Fiscal was

described by the 2nd Defendant in its application under Section 839 to be

a land consisting of “ Lot Nos. 1 to 9 as depicted in the Plan No. 2477 by

licenced surveyor D.D.C. Heendeniya dated 10.12.2004 and authenticated by

the Surveyor General” which are in total extent of 2 Acres 2 Roods 12.25

Perches (which was also depicted in Plan No. 4517 by licence surveyor

U. Abeysuriya dated 26.07.1997, with identical description of boundaries

and the extent).

The 1st Plaintiff tendered an Indenture of Lease No. 6952 (V1),

executed by G. Arthanayaka, Notary Public, on 31.03.2006, during the said

investigation. With the execution of the said lease agreement, the 2nd

Defendant had leased out a parcel of land carved out from the contiguous

land consisting of “ Lot Nos. 1 to 9 as depicted in the Plan No. 2477 by licenced

S.C.Appeal N0.76/2016

26

surveyor D.D.C. Heendeniya dated 10.12.2004” in an extent of 24.31 perches

by way of a subdivision, in favour of Kandy Tyre House (Pvt) Ltd.

In that lease agreement, the 2nd Defendant Janatha Estates

Development Board claimed it is the “ lawful owner and is seized and possessed

of all that allotment of land marked Lot No. 4 in Plan No. 7641 dated

21.06.2005” which is a part of the “ … contiguous allotments of land depicted

in Plan No. 4517 by licence surveyor U. Abeysuriya”.

In addition, the 1st Plaintiff tendered a mortgage bond No. 1605

(V2), through which the 2nd Defendant had pledged “Lot Nos. 1 to 9 as

depicted in the Plan No. 2477 by licenced surveyor D.D.C. Heendeniya dated

10.12.2004” as security for a primary mortgage “ free from all encumbrances

“ and also to “ … cede, assign, setover and assure unto the Bank by way of a

primary mortgage free from seizure, charge, lien or any other encumbrances

…”.

The 2nd Defendant, sought to counter that evidence only through a

document tendered along with its written submissions (“X”), which was

tendered to Court only after the investigation was concluded. The said

document, bearing the date 23.06.2015, indicates that the Colombo

Divisional Secretary had issued a vesting order in favour of the 2nd

Defendant under Section 44 of the Land Acquisition Act. In that

document, the official further “observes” that the Republic had retained

the “absolute” ownership of the land, now seized by the Fiscal. The

Plaintiffs had no opportunity to challenge that document and its

contents. This document could not be considered as an item of

“evidence” that had been “adduced” during investigations.

If the position presented by the 2nd Defendant, as reflected in

document “X” is correct, in order to succeed in its application for release

S.C.Appeal N0.76/2016

27

from seizure, the 2nd Defendant or any other party should have satisfied

the District Court in terms of Section 244, that the land under seizure in

its possession was “ on account or in trust” for the State or “ partly on its

own account and partly on the account” of the State. In view of the material

presented before the District Court, it was clearly indicated that the 2nd

Defendant was in possession of the property at the time of its seizure by

the Fiscal, and that it was “in possession of the judgment-debtor as his own

property, and not on account of any other person”, the District Court was

required under Section 245 to make order disallowing the 2nd Defendants

claim as it rightly did.

The High Court of Civil Appeal, in dealing with another

contention advanced by the 2nd Defendant before that Court, namely,

whether the District Court was under a mandatory duty to investigate

the position of the Attorney General to satisfy that the property in

question is not a State land, but a land belong to the 2nd Defendant as at

the date of seizure, proceeded to hold that “ … even if any claim of the State

was considered by the District Court, there was a likelihood of the District Court

coming to the finding that the property in question belongs to the [2nd]

Defendant and not to the State”. I am in agreement with this conclusion for

the reasons stated in the preceding paragraphs.

In the absence of any evidence that had been adduced before the

District Court to satisfy it that the claim or objection of the 2nd Defendant

qualifies to be taken in as any one or more of the criterion, as set out in

Section 244, the decision to disallow its claim or objection, was rightly

affirmed by the High Court of Civil Appeal. This conclusion is supported

by the pronouncement of Garvin J in Isohamine v Munasinghe (supra - at

p.281), “ … when the claimant who was bound by law to adduce evidence was

not present in person and had not arranged for evidence to be adduced in support

S.C.Appeal N0.76/2016

28

of his claim, the Court was, I think, entitled in the absence of such evidence to

make an order disallowing the claim. For the reasons already stated, that order

is in my opinion conclusive when the claimant did not within the period

prescribed in Section 14 institute an action to establish the right which he

claimed to the property.”

The other contention advanced by learned President’s Counsel for

the 2nd Defendant that that the words employed by Bonser CJ could not

be logically and fairly be taken to mean that in no circumstances the

judgment debtor is entitled to fall within the class of persons referred to

as the ‘objector’ in Sections 214-243 and that in no circumstances the

judgment debtor entitled to take part in an investigation conducted

under Sections 241 to 243.

This contention need not be considered by this Court as the High

Court of Civil Appeal had specifically held in this regard that “… it does

not arise for decision in the present case too, particularly due to the reason given

in the preceding passages of this order.” The High Court of Civil Appeal was

correct in making the said determination as the 2nd Defendant did not

move Court to get its property released from seizure under Section 241.

Thus, the 2nd Defendant did not present itself before the District

Court either as an objector or a claimant in terms of Section 241, but

instead invoked inherent jurisdiction of Court under Section 839, seeking

the release of its property. The 2nd Defendant opted to rely on Section 839,

when a specific Section of the Civil Procedure that sets out a specific

procedure in which such an application could be made.

The judgment of Karonisa V Singho 31 NLR 410, is relevant in this

context. It was an instance where appeal was preferred from an order of

the Commissioner of Requests, who vacated an earlier order of his Court,

S.C.Appeal N0.76/2016

29

whereby the claim of a claimant under section 241 of the Civil Procedure

Code had been dismissed for the reason of his absence on the date of

inquiry. The claimant made his claim to the Fiscal and had no direct

dealing with Court. It was later discovered that the claimant had not been

noticed by Court informing him of the date of inquiry. The Claimant

moved Court to re-open the investigation under Section 241, which the

Court decided to grant under its inherent power. Dalton J held (at p.411)

that the Court has no inherent power to vacate an order it had made

dismissing a claim under Section 241, on account of the absence of the

claimant on the day fixed for inquiry and the Claimant should have

moved in revision to an appellate Court.

In the instant appeal however, the competency of the 2nd

Defendant to have the property released from seizure never arose before

the District Court for determination. This is the reason why the High

Court of Civil Appeal stated in its order, after making reference to the

question whether a judgment debtor could be an objector in terms of

Section 241, that “ … it does not arise for decision in the present case …”. The

appellate Court made reference to the judgment of Ghouse v Mercantile

Credit Limited (supra) only in respect of the exemption granted to a

judgment debtor in terms of Section 218(n) to highlight that “ … even that

is not within the scope of the inquiry under Section 241, but it should come

within the purview of Sections 343 and 344 of the Code.”

At the concluding stage of this judgment, I turn to consider the

contention of the Added Respondent, who claimed that the property

under seizure is State land. The Added Respondent sought to establish

that claim through documents tendered along with his application

marked as “Y1” and “Y2” in this Court. The Added Respondent’s

application is clearly an attempt to re-open the investigation conducted

S.C.Appeal N0.76/2016

30

by the District Court under Section 241, and that too for the first time

before this Court. The Added Respondent did not participate in the

appellate proceedings before the High Court of Civil Appeal, nor did he

appeal against the refusal of his intervention in the District Court.

I am not convinced at all that he could re-agitate the question of

title to the property under seizure by making an attempt to re-open the

said investigation, conducted and concluded by the District Court

against the 2nd Defendant, for two reasons.

First, in respect of the Added Respondent, the investigation under

Section 241 proceeded ex parte as summons was duly served. Wood Renton

J, in Muttu Menika v Appuhamy (1911) 14 NLR 329, held that a person

whose claim was dismissed for default of appearance should not move

to re-open the claim inquiry (by explaining the default) on the ground

that the order was made ex parte.

In a preceding paragraph I have referred to the judgment of

Karonisa V Singho ( supra), where it was held that a Court has no

inherent power to vacate an order dismissing a claim under Section 241,

on account of the absence of the claimant on the day fixed for inquiry. A

similar reasoning was adopted in a more recent judgment of Marikka v

Vanik Incorporation Ltd., and Others (2006) 1 Sri L.R. 281.

In the instant appeal, the Added Respondent did not make any

attempt to explain his absence on the date of inquiry before the District

Court, instead moved this Court to consider the material tendered along

with his application to intervene into these proceedings, seeking a

declaration of his title to the land under seizure. As already noted, this is

clearly an attempt to re-open the inquiry that had been concluded by the

original Court, and therefore the contention of the Added Respondent

S.C.Appeal N0.76/2016

31

could not be entertained by this Court, when he had failed to resort to

legal remedies that were available to him.

Secondly, Section 247 confers finality to the orders made under

Sections 244, 245 and 246. Such an order could be interfered with only if

the unsuccessful party to have the property under seizure released, but

thereafter proceeded to establish his right, by instituting an action and

that too within 14 days from such an order.

Bonser CJ, in Ramalingam v Ragunatha Kurukkal Sambantar

(1895) said (at p.200) that “… an order made under section 244 is not an

appealable order, but that the remedy is under section 247.” In Muttu Menika

v Appuhamy (1911) 14 NLR 329, Wood Renton J expressed the view (at

p.330) that “[I]t seems to me that the object of the group of sections concerned

with claims to property seized is to secure a summary inquiry into such claims,

and to provide that the result of that inquiry shall be decisive as to the rights of

parties, subject always to the remedy indicated in section 247”. More

specifically, in Isohamine v Munasinghe (supra), Garvin J stated (at p.

280), “[I]f at the sitting of the Court or, to use the, language of section 243, " on

such investigation " the claimant fails to adduce evidence, the Court can but

disallow the claim since the claimant having failed to establish that he had an

interest in or was possessed of the property it may surely be inferred that the

judgment-debtor and not the claimant is in possession. This is a conclusion at

which the Court arrives ‘upon such investigation’. There is ample authority for

the proposition that an order disallowing a claim in such circumstances is one to

which the conclusive character given by section 247 attaches”.

The 2nd Defendant failed to adduce any evidence of its claim

during the investigation that the land under seizure is State land. On the

contrary, the 1st Plaintiff adduced evidence that the 2nd Defendant held

the title to the property under seizure. With the dismissal of that claim,

S.C.Appeal N0.76/2016

32

either the 2nd Defendant or the Attorney General did not take steps to

“establish his right” over the land under seizure by instituting action in

terms of Section 247.

In this regard, I am fortified in my view with the opinion of Wood

Renton J, in Muttu Menika v Appuhamy (supra, at p. 330), “ … where the

Legislature has enacted a particular remedy for a grievance in terms which show

that it intended that remedy to be the only one open to an aggrieved party, redress

cannot be sought by any other form of proceedings. I need not quote the language

of Section 247, with which we are all familiar. But it seems to me that the last

clause in that Section strongly corroborates the view that I take of the point now

under consideration. It is these terms: ‘ Subject to the result of such action, if

any, the order shall be conclusive.’ There can be no doubt but that an ex

parte order is an order within the meaning of this group of sections, and I think,

therefore, that in terms of section 247 it is conclusive, unless the party

aggrieved by it brings the action for which that section provides.”

In view of the reasoning contained in the preceding paragraphs, I

proceed to answer the Questions of Law on which this appeal was argued

before this Court as follows:

The questions of law that were suggested by the 2nd Defendant and

accepted by Court

a. Did the High Court of Civil Appeal incorrectly, and not

properly considered whether the District Court was duty

bound in terms of Sections 241-243 of the Civil Procedure Code

to conduct a full and proper investigations or inquiry, in order

to fully satisfy itself that the land sought to be seized was not in

fact State land, in its order dated 09.10.2015 ? Yes, only if such a

S.C.Appeal N0.76/2016

33

claim is supported by evidence adduced during investigation

under Section 241.

b. Is the said order incorrect in its understanding of Sections

241,242 and 243 of the Civil Procedure Code ? No.

e. Did not the High Court of Civil Appeal fully and properly

consider the effect of the findings in its said order that in terms

of Section 243 of the Civil Procedure Code, the District Court

could not hear the Hon. Attorney General unless he was

represented on the day fixed for the inquiry into the Appellant’s

application ? Yes, it did.

f. Did the High Court of Civil Appeal fail to consider whether the

District Court failed to appreciate that in the facts and

circumstances of the case before it, the overriding

considerations for that Court was to satisfy itself that the land

sought to be sold/auctioned was not a State land ? No.

Consequential questions of law that were suggested by the Plaintiff and

accepted by Court

b. It is admitted that the State made an application to intervene in

this action in the District Court of Colombo over the subject

matter of this case, that application was refused by that Court

on 20.07.2015, the State failed to appeal against the said order,

if so, is the said order Res Judicata against the State ? Yes, only

in relation to its intervention.

Consequential questions of law that were suggested by the Added

Respondent and accepted by Court

S.C.Appeal N0.76/2016

34

c. Is the absolute title of the subject land remains in the State ? In

the absence of any evidence adduced before the District Court,

this question does not arise for consideration.

d. If so, as per admission that subject land is a State land, can the

subject to be auctioned and be seized in view of the notice

marked as “X1” ? Does not arise for consideration in view of

the answer to the other Question of Law.

In view of the said answers to the Questions of Law framed by this

Court, I proceed to dismiss the appeal of the 2nd Defendant. The

judgments of the District Court as well as of the High Court of Civil

Appeal are accordingly affirmed. The Plaintiffs are entitled to costs of this

appeal.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

VIJITH K. MALALGODA, PC., J. I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

KUMUDINI WICKREMASINGHE, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT