1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA In the matter of an appeal S.C. Appeal No. 92A/2008 S.C. (H.C) CALA 68/2008 NCP/HCCA/ARP/43/2007F Pandigamage Podinona No.44, Kandy Road, Medawachchiya Plaintiff D. C. Anuradhapura Case No.14383/L -Vs- M. H. M. Suweyal, No.40, New Siyana Hotel, Jaffna Road, Medawachchiya Defendant And Between M. H. M. Suweyal No.40, New Siyana Hotel, Jaffna Road, Medawachchiya. Defendant/Appellant -Vs. Pandigamage Podinona No.44, Kandy Road, Medawachchiya Plaintiff/Respondent

And Now Between

2

M. H. M. Suweyal No.40, New Siyana Hotel, Jaffna Road, Medawachchiya. Presently at No.22/1, Bulugahatenna, Akurana Defendant/Appellant/ Appellant -Vs- Pandigamage Podinona (deceased) No.44, Kandy Road, Medawachchiya. Plaintiff/Respondent/ Respondent 1A. Hettiaarachchige Sriyani 1B. Hettiarachchiige Wasantha Kumara Hettiarachchi 1C. Hettiarachchige Chalton

Jayaweera 1D. Hettiarachchige Nandaniemala All of No.44, Kandy Road, Medawachchiya. Substituted Plaintiff/ Respondent/Respondents BEFORE: B.P.ALUWIHARE, P.C, J UPALY ABEYRATHNE, J & ANIL GOONARATNE, J COUNSEL: W. Dayaratne, P.C, with Ms. R. Jayawardena for the Defendant-Appellant-Appellant. Ananda Kasturiarachchi for the substituted Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondents.

3

ARGUED ON: 14.02.2017. DECIDED ON: 05.07.2017 ALUWIHARE, P.C., J, This appeal had arisen from an order of the High Court of Civil Appeals

(hereinafter referred to as HCCA) of North Central Province.

Facts germane to the issue are as follows:

The Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as The Plaintiff)

filed a rei-vindicatio action in the District Court against the Defendant-

Appellant-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Defendant). At the conclusion

of the trial the learned District Judge by his judgment dated 10th December, 2001

held with the Plaintiff.

Aggrieved by the said judgment the Defendant preferred an appeal to the HCCA.

The Defendant having deposited required fees had secured a copy of the brief.

Sometime thereafter, Registrar of the HCCA, North Central Province had

dispatched notices to the parties informing them that the matter was due to be

called on 30th April, 2008. According to the Defendant he had shifted from his

original address at 40, New Siyane Hotel, Jaffna Road, Medawachchiya to an

address in Akurana. The Defendant asserts that when he received the notice he

got his registered Attorney to peruse the record and he was informed that the

matter had come up on 30th April, 2008, and the appeal had been dismissed on

that day. Subsequently the Defendant had made an application, to have the order

of dismissing the appeal, set aside and to have the appeal relisted.

4

The HCCA had, by its order dated 10th June, 2008, dismissed the application for

relisting on the ground that the Defendant had failed to exercise due diligence in

prosecuting the appeal.

The Defendant is now canvassing the legality of the order of the HCCA referred

to above.

Leave was granted on 11th November, 2008 on the following question of law:

(Referred to in paragraph 18 (e) of the Petition of the Defendant dated 21st June,

2008)

“ Did the High Court fail to consider that no appeal can be dismissed on a calling

date on the ground of default of appearance of the parties or their respective

Attorney-at-Law, as the High Court has the power to dispose the appeals only

on its merits”

Proceedings before the HCCA on 30th April 2008 reveal that the order of

dismissal states that, `although the Defendant-Appellant had been noticed to

attend court, the party is neither present nor represented. The appeal is

dismissed for the said reason´.

Upon perusal of the order made by the HCCA, on the relisting application, it is

evident that the court had gone into the reasons adduced by the Defendant for

his non-appearance. The court having considered the reasons so adduced had

held that the Defendant had failed to satisfy the court that there were sufficient

reasons or grounds to have the order of dismissal vacated and to have the appeal

relisted.

I do not wish, however, to consider the sufficiency or otherwise of the reasons

adduced as the issue before us is simply whether a court can dismiss an appeal

5

on a date fixed for calling of the matter without considering the merits of the

case.

At the hearing of the appeal the learned President’s Counsel for the Defendant-

Appellant relied on the decision in the case of Jinadasa Vs. Sam Silva reported in

1994 1 SLR page 231.

The learned President’s Counsel for the appellant submitted that the HCCA was in

error dismissing the appeal on the basis that the court could not have dismissed

the application on a day the matter was only to be called and secondly falling

into further error in dismissing the appeal without considering the merits.

The attention of this court was drawn to Section 769 (1) of the Civil Procedure

Code which reads as follows:

769 (1) When the appeal comes on for hearing, the Appellant shall be heard in

support of the Appeal. The Court shall then, if it does not at once dismiss

the appeal or affirms the decree appealed from, hear the Respondent

against the appeal, and in such case the Appellant shall be entitled to

reply.

(2) If the appellant does not appear either in person or by an Attorney-at-

Law to support his appeal, the court shall consider the appeal and make

such order thereon as it thinks fit. (emphasis added)

Provided that, on sufficient cause shown, it shall be lawful for the court

of Appeal to reinstate upon such terms as the court shall think fit any

appeal that has been dismissed under this subsection.

6

The subsection (2) of Section 769 of the Civil Procedure Code castes a mandatory

duty on the court to consider the appeal before making any order thereon, in

instances where the Appellant does not appear.

It is clear, that in the instant case, the order of dismissal was wrong as the

learned Judges had not complied with a mandatory provision of Section 769 of

the Civil Procedure Code and learned judges of the HCCA had merely dismissed

the appeal due to the absence of the Appellant, without considering the appeal.

It was the contention of the learned counsel for the Respondent that the powers

of the Appellate Court are not fettered by any legal principle to dismiss an appeal

on a date the matter is only fixed for it to be either mentioned or called. I do not

see any conflict of this argument with the position taken up on behalf of the

appellant. The learned counsel for the appellant did not challenge the powers of

the court to dismiss an appeal, but complains of non-compliance with Section

769 (2) of the Civil Procedure Code as referred to earlier.

It was also contended on behalf of the Respondent that, the Petitioner had failed

to act diligently and therefore the Appellant is not entitled to the relief sought.

In the instant case the appellant had lodged the appeal on time, and had paid fees

for the preparation of the briefs and the appellant had collected the briefs. These

steps taken by the appellant amply demonstrate that the appellant had been

diligent in prosecuting the appeal and the only blemish had been the non-

appearance on 30th April, 2008, the date for notice returnable, which the

appellant had explained when the matter was supported for relisting.

I wish, however, to refer to the view formed by their Lordships in deciding the

case of Jinadasa Vs. Sam Silva et el 1994 (1) SLR 232.

Their Lordships held that the court cannot prevent miscarriage of justice except

within the framework of the law: it cannot order reinstatement on compassionate

7

grounds. Inasmuch as it is a serious thing to deny a party to his right of hearing,

a court may, in evaluating the established facts, be more inclined to generosity

rather than being severe, rigorous and unsparing.

The judges, as much as, are required to dispose cases, must also be alive to the

fact that litigants come before them to vindicate their rights.

As such, if this court is called upon to dismiss the appeal without going into

merits, such an order must be made only upon considering all facts relevant to

the issue of the maintainability of the appeal. This was a supplication for relief or

redress which the Petitioner had made, as a matter of right, in terms of section

754 of the Civil Procedure Code, read with Article 138 of the Constitution,

seeking to have errors in fact or law corrected, which the petitioner alleges that

were committed by the District Court.

As such the HCCA was obliged in terms of Section 769 (2) of the Civil Procedure

Code to consider the matter before dismissing the appeal.

As referred to earlier, it was strenuously argued on behalf of the Respondent that

“there is no legal principle to state that an appellate court has no power to

dismiss an Appeal, on the very first day”. No doubt the court has wide powers of

disposal; such powers, however, must be exercised without transgression of the

law and legal principles.

Chief Justice Beaumont in the case of Shamdasani and others v Central Bank of

India AIR1938 Bombay stated, as to the exercise of the discretion by the court:

“ The court ought to have considered that, it is after all, a very

serious matter to dismiss a man’s suit or summons, or whatever it

8

may be, without hearing it, and that course ought not to be adopted

unless the court is really satisfied that justice so requires”.

Having considered the facts and circumstances relevant to this case, I

hold that the High Court of Civil Appeals was in error when it

dismissed the appeal of the Defendant-Appellant without fully

complying with Section 769 of the Civil Procedure Code and I answer

the question of law on which leave was granted in the affirmative.

Accordingly, the order made by the High Court of Civil Appeals on the

10th June 2008, dismissing the Appeal is hereby set aside. The learned

judges of the High Court of Civil Appeals are directed to relist this

matter and dispose the same in compliance with Section 759 of the Civil

Procedure Act.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Justice Upaly Abyrathne

I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Justice Anil Gooneratne

I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

9