IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal under and in terms of Section 5C(1) of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No: 19 of 1990 as amended by the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) (Amendment) Act No: 54 of 2006. SC Appeal No. 157/2017 SC/HCCA/LA No. 515/2016 Provincial High Court Case No.

NCP/HCCA/ANP/1051/2015(F) DC Polonnaruwa Case No. 11714/L/2007

Marimuttu Shanmugam, No. 3/9, 28th Mile Post, Mahasenpura, Polonnaruwa. PLAINTIFF - Vs - D.M. Gunapala, No. 537, Wadichchale Road, Polonnaruwa. DEFENDANT And between Marimuttu Shanmugam, No. 3/9, 28th Mile Post, Mahasenpura, Polonnaruwa. PLAINTIFF APPELLANT

- vs - D.M. Gunapala, No. 537, Wadichchale Road, Polonnaruwa.

2

DEFENDANT RESPONDENT And now between Marimuttu Shanmugam (Deceased), No. 3/9, 28th Mile Post, Mahasenpura, Polonnaruwa. PLAINTIFF APPELLANT APPELLANT Marimuttu Selvanayagam, No. 3/9, 28th Mile Post, Mahasenpura, Polonnaruwa. SUBSTITUTED PLAINTIFF APPELLANT APPELLANT

- vs - D.M. Gunapala, No. 537, Wadichchale Road, Polonnaruwa. DEFENDANT RESPONDENT RESPONDENT Before: Vijith K. Malalgoda, PC, J Janak De Silva, J Arjuna Obeyesekere, J Counsel: Bhagya Herath with Sajeevi Jayasinghe for the Substituted Plaintiff Appellant Appellant Sanjeewa Dassanayake with Dilini Premasiri and Nilum Devapura for the Defendant Respondent Respondent Argued on: 2nd November 2021 Written Tendered by the Substituted Plaintiff Appellant Appellant on 31st July Submissions: 2020 and 19th November 2021

Tendered by the Defendant Respondent Respondent on 26th October 2021 Decided on: 6th August 2024

3

Obeyesekere, J

This is the sixth and hopefully the final episode of a litigation that commenced in 2007.

The Plaintiff Appellant Appellant [the Plaintiff] filed action in the District Court of

Polonnaruwa on 2nd February 2007 against the Defendant Respondent Respondent

[the Defendant] seeking a declaration of title in respect of the land referred to in

paragraph (a) of the schedule to the plaint, and to evict the Defendant from a part of the

said land referred to in paragraph (b) of the schedule to the plaint. It is admitted by the

parties that the action of the Plaintiff was a rei vindicatio action. The Defendant having

filed answer, the parties entered terms of settlement before the District Court on 30th

October 2008. However, on 16th June 2011 the Defendant moved the Provincial High

Court of the North Central Province holden at Anuradhapura [the High Court] by way of a

revision application complaining that there were discrepancies in the survey plan that was

prepared pursuant to the said settlement and seeking to set aside the said terms of

settlement or in the alternative to direct that a fresh survey be carried out. The High Court

did not set aside the terms of settlement but instead directed that a fresh survey be

carried out. Pursuant to the Defendant seeking the leave of this Court against the said

judgment of the High Court, the parties agreed for the terms of settlement to be set aside

and for the matter to be sent back to the District Court for further trial.

The Plaintiff thereafter filed an amended plaint, replied to by an amended answer with a

claim for damages for improvements, and a replication. Pursuant to the admissions and

issues being raised, the Plaintiff led the evidence of 7 witnesses while the Defendant led

the evidence of 3 witnesses. Although the District Court held by its judgment dated 27th

May 2015 that the Plaintiff has established his title to the impugned land and that the

Defendant was in possession of such land, the District Court held further that the

Defendant can continue to be in possession of the said land until the Defendant obtains

a valuation regarding the improvements made by him and the sum so determined by the

valuer is paid to the Defendant.

4

Aggrieved, the Plaintiff filed an appeal before the High Court. The Defendant however

chose not to prefer an appeal probably for the reason that the District Court judgment

enabled him to continue to be in possession of the said land without any hindrance. By

its judgment delivered on 13th September 2019, the High Court took the view that while

the Plaintiff had failed to establish his title to the land referred to in paragraph (b) of the

schedule to the plaint, the Defendant has established his entitlement to the impugned

land and on that basis set aside the judgment of the District Court in its entirety.

Dissatisfied with the said judgment of the High Court, the Plaintiff sought and obtained

leave to appeal from this Court on 9th August 2017 on four questions of law. While I shall

advert to the said questions of law later in this judgment, it would suffice to state at the

outset that the primary issue that needs to be determined in this appeal is whether the

Plaintiff has discharged the burden cast on a plaintiff in a rei vindicatio action and if so,

whether the Defendant has established a better title than the Plaintiff.

The Rei Vindicatio action

In Mihindukulasuriya Sudath Harrison Pinto and Others v Weerappulige Piyaseeli

Fernando and Others [SC Appeal No. 57/2016; SC minutes of 11th September 2023],

Samayawardhena, J having carried out an extensive examination of the law relating to a

rei vindicatio action, stated that, In order to succeed in a rei vindicatio action, first and

foremost, the plaintiff shall prove his ownership to the property. If he fails to prove it, his

action shall fail. This principle is based on the Latin maxim onus probandi incumbit ei qui

agit, which means, the burden of proof lies with the person who brings the action.

In arriving at the above conclusion, Samayawardhena, J has cited with approval three

judgments of this Court. The first is the judgment in De Silva v Goonetilleke [32 NLR 217]

where Chief Justice Macdonell had stated [at page 219] that, There is abundant authority

that a party claiming a declaration of title must have title himself: To bring the action rei

vindicatio plaintiff must have ownership actually vested in him. (1 Nathan p. 362, s. 593.)

....The authorities unite in holding that plaintiff must show title to the corpus in dispute

and that if he cannot, the action will not lie.

5

The second is the judgment in Pathirana v Jayasundera [58 NLR 169] where, Gratiaen J.

declared [at page 172] that, In a rei vindicatio action proper the owner of immovable

property is entitled, on proof of his title, to a decree in his favour for the recovery of the

property and for the ejectment of the person in wrongful occupation. The plaintiffs

ownership of the thing is of the very essence of the action. Maasdorps Institutes (7th Ed.)

Vol. 2, 96.

The third is the judgment delivered by G.P.S. De Silva, J (as he then was) in Mansil v

Devaya [(1985) 2 Sri LR 46] where he stated [at page 51] that, In a rei vindicatio action,

on the other hand, ownership is of the essence of the action; the action is founded on

ownership.

Samayawardhena, J has also referred to the judgment in the South African case of De Vos

v Adams and Others [(2016) ZAWCHC 202] where Davis, J had stated as follows:

Turning specifically to the rei vindicatio it is clear that there are three requirements

which the owner must prove on a balance of probabilities, in order to succeed with

the particular action. Firstly, the applicant must show his or her ownership in the

property. In the case of immovable property it is sufficient as a result to show the

title in the land is registered in his or her name. Secondly, the property must exist, be

clearly identifiable and must not have been destroyed or consumed. Thirdly, the

defendant must be in possession or detention of the property at the time that the

action is instituted.

Burden of proof in a rei vindicatio action

In Mihindukulasuriya [supra], this Court referred to with approval the following

paragraph in Willes Principles of South African Law [9th Edition (2007); at page 539]:

To succeed with the rei vindicatio, the owner must prove on a balance of

probabilities, first, his or her ownership in the property. If a movable is sought to be

recovered, the owner must rebut the presumption that the possessor of the movable

is the owner thereof. In the case of immovables, it is sufficient as a rule to show

6

that title in the land is registered in his or her name. Secondly, the property must

exist, be clearly identifiable and must not have been destroyed or consumed.

Money, in the form of coins and banknotes, is not easily identifiable and thus not

easily vindicable. Thirdly, the defendant must be in possession or detention of the

thing at the moment the action is instituted. The rationale is to ensure that the

defendant is in a position to comply with an order for restoration. [emphasis added]

Referring to the obligation of a plaintiff in a rei vindicatio action to establish the title to

the land, Chief Justice Dep stated in Preethi Anura v William Silva (SC Appeal No.

116/2014; SC Minutes of 5th June 2017), that the, Plaintiff need not establish the title

with mathematical precision nor to prove the case beyond reasonable doubt as in a

criminal case. The plaintiffs task is to establish the case on a balance of probability.

In Theivandran v Ramanathan Chettiar [(1986)] 2 Sri LR 219; at page 222], Chief Justice

Sharvananda stated as follows:

In a vindicatory action the claimant need merely prove two facts; namely, that he

is the owner of the thing and that the thing to which he is entitled to possession by

virtue of his ownership is in the possession of the defendant. Basing his claim on his

ownership, which entitles him to possession, he may sue for the ejectment of any

person in possession of it without his consent. Hence when the legal title to the

premises is admitted or proved to be in the plaintiff, the burden of proof is on the

defendant to show that he is in lawful possession. [emphasis added]

A similar view was expressed in Mihindukulasuriya [supra] where it was held that, When

the paper title to the property is admitted or proved to be in the plaintiff, the burden shifts

to the defendant to prove on what right he is in possession of the property.

In Wasantha v Premaratne (SC Appeal No. 176/2014; SC Minutes of 17th May 2021),

Samayawardhena, J held that, Notwithstanding that in a rei vindicatio action the burden

is on the plaintiff to prove title to the land no matter how fragile the case of the defendant

is, the Court is not debarred from taking into consideration the evidence of the defendant

in deciding whether or not the plaintiff has proved his title. Not only is the Court not

7

debarred from doing so, it is in fact the duty of the Court to give due regard to the

defendants case, for otherwise there is no purpose in a rei vindicatio action in allowing

the defendant to lead evidence when all he seeks is for the dismissal of the plaintiffs

action.

Chief Justice G.P.S. de Silva referring to the criterion to be adopted in a rei vindicatio

action in respect of the burden of proof stated in Banda v Soyza [(1998) 1 Sri LR 255; at

259] that, In a case such as this, the true question that a court has to consider on the

question of title is, who has the superior title? The answer has to be reached upon a

consideration of the totality of the evidence led in the case.

The above position has been summarised in Mihindukulasuriya [supra] in the following manner:

Whilst emphasising that (a) the initial burden in a rei vindicatio action is on the

plaintiff to prove ownership of the property in suit and (b) the standard of proof in a

rei vindicatio action is proof on a balance of probabilities, if the plaintiff in such an

action has sufficient title or superior title or better title than that of the

defendant, the plaintiff shall succeed. No rule of thumb can be laid down in what

circumstances the Court shall hold that the plaintiff has discharged his burden.

Whether or not the plaintiff proved his title shall be decided upon a consideration of

the totality of the evidence led in the case.

This being the legal position, the District Court was satisfied that the Plaintiff had

established on a balance of probability the identity of the impugned land, his title to the

said land and that the Defendant was in possession of such land. The High Court however

took the view that, (a) the Plaintiff has not established title in respect of the area of land

that the Defendant was in possession, and (b) the Defendant is in possession of the said

land in terms of a permit issued to him under the Land Development Ordinance. I shall

therefore consider the evidence presented by the parties before the District Court, the

findings of the learned District Judge and the findings of the High Court in answering the

questions of law and in arriving at a decision in this case.

8

The case of the Plaintiff

The State had issued permit No. 23/241 dated 8th April 1954 in terms of the Land

Development Ordinance to Kanawadipulle Marimuttu, the father of the Plaintiff, in

respect of a land situated in Polonnaruwa in extent of 4A 2R. Even though a copy thereof

has been tendered in evidence and referred to in the judgment of the District Court, the

said permit is not available in the case record. It is however admitted that even though

the extent of the said land has been specified in the permit, the boundaries of the land

have not been stipulated in the permit by reference to a survey plan, due to the reason

that a survey plan was not available at that time. It is in evidence that the said land

occupied by Marimuttu and the surrounding village was surveyed in July 1970 and that

Plan No. w. P. ms. fmd. 18 [P6] was prepared pursuant thereto. According to the Final

Tenement List attached thereto [P7] the land occupied by Marimuttu in terms of the said

permit has been identified as Lot No. 19 in P6.

On 14th June 1986, the State had issued Marimuttu a grant [P1] in terms of the Land

Development Ordinance in respect of Lot No. 19 in P6. The extent of Lot No. 19 is 5A 2R

8P. This Lot No. 19 is the land referred to in paragraph (a) of the schedule to the plaint

and in respect of which a declaration of title has been sought. While it is by P1 that the

land given to Marimuttu was identified for the first time by reference to a survey plan, it

would be seen that the extent of the land referred to in the grant had increased by

approximately 1 acre of land over and above the extent of the land given under the

permit. The Land Officer attributed this discrepancy to a survey plan not being in place at

the time the permit was issued to Marimuttu. I shall refer later in this judgment to the

evidence relating to this discrepancy in extent as this was the primary ground relied upon

by the High Court to set aside the judgment of the District Court .

Pursuant to the death of Marimuttu, his eldest son Marimuttu Shanmugam, the Plaintiff

in this case had been recognised as the grantee of the said land by letter dated 11th August

2003 issued by the Divisional Secretary, Thamankaduwa [P2]. The name of the Plaintiff

has accordingly been registered in the Land Folio [P3] as the grantee of the said land.

Thus, on the face of it, the Plaintiff is entitled in law to the land referred to in paragraph

9

(a) of the schedule to the plaint by virtue of the said grant P1 and is entitled to bring this

action.

The Plaintiff states that due to the situation that prevailed in the area from 1983, his

father and he had not been in occupation of the said land at all times, only for the

Defendant and two others to encroach upon the said land and occupy parts of the land

given by P1 during their absence. The evidence bears out that the Plaintiff had brought

this to the attention of the officers attached to the office of the relevant Divisional

Secretary in the late 1980s. Having returned to the said land at the end of the hostilities,

the Plaintiff instituted three cases in the District Court against the said persons, including

this case against the Defendant seeking a declaration of title in respect of Lot No. 19 in P6

and to eject the Defendant from the land referred to in paragraph (b) of the schedule to

the plaint in extent of 3R 8P, which the Plaintiff claimed formed part of the land referred

to in P1 and was in the possession of the Defendant.

The case of the Defendant

The Defendant is the son of D. M. Thegis Appu. The Defendant states that the State had

issued his father permit No. 354/272 dated 1st April 1965 [V1] in respect of a land situated

in Polonnaruwa in extent of 1 acre. Similar to the permit issued to Marimuttu, V1 too does

not contain any reference to a survey plan. V1 however refers to three of the boundaries

of the land referred to therein. Upon the death of Thegis, the name of the Defendant had

been registered as the permit holder [V2]. The position of the Defendant was twofold.

The first and foremost was that the land that he and his family are in occupation is the

land referred to in the permit V1 and therefore he has good title to such land possessed

by him. The second was that he had neither encroached upon nor was he in possession

of any part of the land referred to in P1. In other words, it was the position of the

Defendant that the land referred to in paragraph (b) of the schedule to the plaint is the

subject matter of the permit issued to his father and later to him and importantly does

not form part of the land given to the Plaintiff by P1. The Defendant had stated further

that he has developed the land that he is in possession of and constructed houses

thereon, and that he is entitled for compensation in the event the District Court holds

that he is in possession of the land referred to in P1.

10

Terms of Settlement

On 30th October 2008, the parties entered into a settlement, the terms of which inter alia

are as follows:

(a) For a commission to be issued on the Surveyor General to survey the land occupied

by the Defendant and determine if such land forms part of the land referred to in

the grant P1;

(b) In the event it is determined by the said survey that the land that the Defendant is

in possession of forms part of the land given to the Plaintiff by P1, the Defendant

would vacate such land;

(c) The Plaintiff would hand over any land to which the Defendant is entitled to in terms

of the permit V1 in the event the Plaintiff is in possession of such land;

(d) Parties shall equally bear the cost of such survey.

Survey No. PO/SS/Court/2010/048

Pursuant to the said commission, Government Surveyor H.M. Ranaweera Bandara at the

Surveyor Generals Department had carried out a survey of the land in dispute. In his

report [P5] annexed to the survey plan that was prepared by him [P4] he had stated that

the Plaintiff, the Defendant and the other two persons who are said to have also

encroached onto the land referred to P1 were present when he visited the said land on

5th April 2010, and that the boundaries of the lands possessed by each of them had been

shown by them.

Ranaweera Bandara states that he thereafter carried out a survey of Lot No. 19 of P6 and

divided the said Lot No. 19 into 8 sub-lots numbered from A to H, as reflected in the survey

plan P4. Lot E in extent of 4A 1R 19.09P was the land occupied by the Plaintiff. It must be

noted that in terms of extent, Lot E is almost identical to the extent of land that was given

to Marimuttu by a permit way back in 1954. Ranaweera Bandara has stated that the

11

Defendant was in occupation of two contiguous lots, namely Lot G in extent of 29.5P being

a paddy field and Lot H in extent of 3R 0.94P which was a high land, with the two lots

separated by a bund [kshr]. Together with the extent of the other Lots A-D and F, the total

extent of the land was 5A 2R 8P, which is the extent of Lot No. 19 and setout in P1. Thus,

the Court commissioned surveyor found that the land that was possessed by the

Defendant was within the land area that had been granted to the Plaintiff in terms of P1.

The evidence of Ranaweera Bandara in this regard is as follows:

ta n,m;%fha 04 udhsus ,l=Kq lsrsula keye tfia lsrSug wjYH;djhla ;snqfKa keye' oSukd m;%fha iusmqraK uekqus lghq;= lr,d tys N=la;s jsosk whf.a udhsus igyka lsrSus l<d' vS' tus' .=Kmd, keue;a;d n,m;%hla bosrsm;a l<d' wod< udhsus jsia;rh ms<sn|j meyeos,s keye' ud jsiska uksk ,o bvu ;=< meusKs<slref.a osukd m;%h ksYaps; jYfhkau meyeos,sju y|qkd .kak mqjka jqKd' ta meusKs<slref.a oSukd m;%hg wh;a msUqr me'04w hkafka r;= mdgska ioyka fjkjd' oSukd m;%hg wh;a nsus fldgi 11714 kvqfjs vS 'tus' .=Kmd, keue;a;d N=la;s jsosk nj;a Tyq jsiska ksji bos lr,d ;sfhkjd' th l=vd ia:dkhla revs 3 hs mrapia 9'4 la iy l+Tqre bvus jYfhka mrapia 25 la iy revs 30'44 m%udkhla nj;a 11714 kvqfjs bx.%sis wlaIr G iy H orK fldgi jYfhka meyeos,sj olajd ;sfnkjd' th N=la;s

jsoskafka vS' tus' .=Kmd, keue;a;dh' tfy;a tu G iy H fldgia wdjrKh fjkjdo lshd meyeos,sju m%ldY l< fkdyelsh' wOsldrs m%Odk m;%fha bvu iy n,m;%fha bvu talu;slj

meyeos,s keye' ta wkqj RPqj fyda n,m;%h osula isoqlr keye' Thus, it was clear from P4 and P5 that Lots G and H occupied by the Defendant formed

part of Lot No. 19 in respect of which the Plaintiff had been issued the grant P1. Once this

report was received, the Plaintiff, acting in terms of the aforementioned terms of

settlement had sought to execute a writ to eject the Defendant from the said Lots G and

H. This was resisted by the Defendant and culminated in the terms of settlement being

set aside by this Court with the consent of the parties.

Amended pleadings and the trial

Pursuant to the Order made by this Court on 24th October 2013 directing that the trial be

proceeded with, the Plaintiff filed an amended plaint on 18th June 2014. By this time, the

Plaintiff had the benefit of the survey plan P4 and the survey report P5. Thus, while

reiterating the matters in the plaint that the Defendant was occupying a land that had

12

been given to him by the State on the grant P1, paragraph (b) of the schedule to the plaint

specifically identified by reference to P4 the land that was admittedly in the possession

of the Defendant.

In his amended answer, the Defendant stated as follows:

fuu js;a;slre N=la;s js|sk bvus fldgia iy f.dvke.s,s tls flduidrsiajrhdf.a wxl

PO/SS/Court/2010/048 ork msUqfra f,dgs wxl G iy H f,i y|qkdf.k we;s nj;a js;a;slre

tls foam<j, N+la;sfha isgsk njg tls flduidrsiajrhd meyeos,sj jdra;d lr we;s nj;ah'

js;a;slre .re wOslrKfha flduidrsiajrhd jk hq' tus' ta' nS' w,yfldaka uskskafodare jrhdf.a

wxl PO/SS/Court/2010/048 orK msUqfra f,dgs wxl G iy H f,i y|qkdf.k we;s foam<g whs;sjdislus lshkq ,nkafka bvus iY%sl lsrSfus wd{d mkf;a m%;smdok m%ldrj js;a;slreg iy Tyqf.a mshdg 1965 os ,nd fok ,o wxl 354$272 ork n,m;%h m%ldrj nj;a' An admission was also marked that the land which is the subject matter of this appeal is

Lots G and H of P4 and that the Defendant was in possession of such land [fuu kvqjg

jsIh.; bvu jkafka PO/SS/Court/2010/048 orK msTqfra f,dgs wxl G iy H orK fldgia nj;a

tlS fldgia js;a;slre nqla;s js|sk nj;a ms<s.kS'].

The submission of Ms. Bhagya Herath, the learned Counsel for the Plaintiff that the land

in question i.e., Lots G and H in P4 is State land and forms part of the land referred to

in the grant P1, and that the Defendant is in possession of the said land, is amply borne

out by P4 and P5, as well as the following evidence of Ranaweera Bandara:

ud jsiska uksk ,o bvu ;=< mEusKs,slref.a oSukd m;%h ksYaps; jYfhkau meyeos,sju y|qkd.kak mqjka jqkd' ta meusKs,slref.a oSukd m;%hg wh;a msUqr me'04 w hkafka r;+ mdgska i|yka fjkjd' kvqfjs bx.%sis wlaIr G iy H orK fldgi jYfhka meyeos,sj olajd ;sfnkjd'

th N=la;s jsoskafka vS 'tus' .=Kmd, keue;a;dh.

Thus, it was the position of the learned Counsel for the Plaintiff that with the entire land

referred to in P4 coming within the extent of land referred to in P1, the Plaintiff had

successfully discharged the obligation cast on a plaintiff in a rei vindicatio action, they

being identifying the land in dispute, establishing title thereto and that the defendant was

in possession of such land. While I am in agreement with Ms. Herath that there is no

13

dispute with regard to the identity of the land in dispute and that the Defendant is in

possession of such land, the only outstanding issue in this appeal is whether Lots G and H

formed part of the grant issued to the Plaintiff or the permit issued to the Defendant. This

would determine title to the land.

The judgment of the District Court and the High Court

The learned District Judge has first, and I must say correctly identified the two questions

that he had to decide in the following manner:

1' js;a;slre nqla;s jsosk bvu meusKs,slref.a oSukdm;%fha bvug whs;s fldgila jkafkao@ 2' tu bvus fldgi js;a;slreg ,ndos we;s n,m;%fha bvus fldgi jkafkao The learned District Judge has thereafter examined the documents P1 P7 tendered by

the Plaintiff and the evidence led on his behalf and concluded that, tnejska me'01 isg me'07 - ^w& olajd f,aLk mrsYs,kh lsrSfusoS wOslrKhg ;yjqre jk m%Odk;u lreK jkafka mE'01 orK osukd m;%fha i|yka jsIh jia;=jg js;a;slre N+la;s jsosk fuu kvqfjs yn.; bvus fldgio wh;a

jk njhs'

The learned District Judge has finally considered whether the said Lots G and H form part

of the land granted to the Defendant by the permit V1 and whether the Defendant has a

better title to Lots G and H than the Plaintiff. It is only thereafter that the learned District

Judge has concluded, for reasons to which I shall advert to later, that title to the said lots

G and H are with the Plaintiff and that the said lots do not form part of the land given to

the Defendant by V1.

At the hearing before the High Court, the Defendant challenged the judgment on the

following principal grounds:

(a) The District Court failed to consider that the Plaintiff had no right to have a grant

issued in his name for a land which is in extent over and above the extent stated in

the permit;

(b) The learned District Judge erred when he accepted the validity of the grant issued

to the Plaintiff with regard to the subject matter of the case;

14

(c) The District Court had no jurisdiction to hear and determine this matter in view of

the provisions of Section 23 of the Interpretation Ordinance.

By its judgment delivered on 13th September 2016, the High Court set aside the judgment

of the District Court on the following grounds:

(a) Considering the evidence of the witnesses, it is clear that the Defendant has been in

possession of the impugned Lots G and H for a considerable period of time on the

permit issued to him;

(b) The permit issued to the Defendant is valid in law and the State has acknowledged

the validity of the permit V1 by registering the name of the Defendant as the permit

holder after the issuance of the grant;

(c) In terms of the Land Development Ordinance, a permit is issued in the first instance

and a grant is issued only thereafter. In this case, the Plaintiffs father had been

issued a permit in respect of 4A 2R and in view of the considerable discrepancy with

the extent of the land referred to in the grant, it is clear that the grant for an extent

of 5A 2R 8P has been issued by mistake. Therefore, the Plaintiff has failed to

establish title for a land over and above an extent of 4A 2R;

(d) The Defendant has established that lots G and H is the land referred to in V1 and the

Defendant therefore has a right to occupy such land;

(e) As contended by the Defendant, the District Court had no jurisdiction to resolve the

dispute in this case.

Questions of law

It is in the above circumstances that leave to appeal was granted in respect of the

following questions of law:

15

1) Did the High Court err in law when it held that Section 23 of the Interpretation

Ordinance operates as a bar in making a pronouncement in this instance?

2) Did the High Court err in law when it held that the District Court has no jurisdiction

to hear and determine the issue under consideration in view of Article 35 of the

Constitution?

3) Did the High Court err in law by failing to appreciate that the District Court had held

that the Defendant had failed to discharge his evidentiary burden to prove his

right/entitlement to hold the subject land by virtue of any rights arising via the

alleged permit issued to him vide V1?

4) Did the High Court err in law by failing to appreciate that the District Court erred

when it held that the Defendant is entitled to claim compensation for the alleged

improvements without an iota of evidence to justify such finding?

I must state that what is being impugned in this appeal is not the decision of the President

to issue Marimuttu a grant in respect of Lot No. 19 which includes lots G and H. Instead,

the dispute between the parties finally comes down to whether the State has issued the

grant P1 and the permit V1 in respect of one and the same land. The applicability of

Section 23 of the Interpretation Ordinance and Article 35, and whether such provisions

fetter the power of Court to grant any relief would arise for consideration only where a

finding is reached that the State has issued the grant P1 and the permit V1 in respect of

the same land.

The findings of the District Court

The District Court, having arrived at a preliminary finding that the Plaintiff has established

his title to lots G and H, considered the following grounds in arriving at its conclusion that

the Defendant is not entitled to lots G and H by virtue of the permit V1:

(1) The Defendants own evidence;

(2) The sequence of events;

16

(3) Discrepancy in the extent of land between the permit and grant;

(4) Discrepancies in the boundaries between V1 on the one hand, and P4 & P6 on the

other.

The Defendants evidence

The first ground relied upon by the District Court as to why in its view the Defendant is

not entitled to lots G and H by virtue of V1 was the evidence of the Defendant himself.

While under cross examination, the Defendant admitted that the land he is in possession

of comes within the grant P1, as borne out by the following questions and answers:

m%( ta uekqfus tps iy Ps fldgia ;uhs ;uqka N=la;s jsoskjd lsh,d bosrsm;a lr ;sfnkafka@ W( tfyuhs' m%( tal ;uqka ms<s.kakjd@ W( tfyuhs' m%( t;fldg ;uqkag ms<s.kak fjkjd ;uqka bkafka meusKs,slreg wh;a oSukd m;%.; bvfus lsh,d@ W( Tjs' m%( ta wkqj lsisoq wjia:djl js'01 n,m;%.; bvu uek,d y|qkd .kak lghq;= lf,a keye@ W( keye' m%( ;uqka mosxps fj,d bkak bvu l=Uqre bvula yegshg Ikauq.usg os,d ;sfnkjd lsh,d okakjdo@ [Shanmugam is the Plaintiff] W( tfyuhs' While I shall discuss separately the discrepancies between the boundaries of the land

given to the Plaintiff when compared with the boundaries of Lots G and H, the Defendant

in cross examination stated further as follows:

m%( ;uqka mosxps fj,d bkafka tps iy Ps lshk fldgia j,@ W( tfyuhs' m%( ta fldgiaj, fome;a;lg we,la mdrla fmkak,d keye lsh,d uu fhdaPkd lrkjd@ W( msUqre wkqj fmkak,d keye' m%( ta wkqj ;uqkaf.a js'01 n,m;%h fus me' 04 ^w& msUqfra tps iy Ps ioyd wod, n,m;%h fkfuhs lsh,d uu fhdaPkd lrkjd@ W( tal uu okafk keye'

17

Thus, the Defendant himself was not certain if Lots G and H formed part of the land given

to him under the permit V1, nor did the Defendant move for a commission to have the

boundaries of V1 superimposed on P6, even though that was one of the grounds on which

the Defendant sought to set aside the terms of settlement way back in 2011.

I must also observe that while in his evidence-in-chief Ranaweera Bandara stated that me' 01 orK osukd m;%hg wod< bvuhs" js 01 f,aLkhg wod< bvuhs tlu bvula o lsh,d ug yrshg lshkak neye lsh,d uu lsjsjd' fus bvusj, is;shus wxl fjkia' js' 01 n,m;%j, ;sfnk udhsus lsisjla me' 01 n,m;%fha i|yka jkafka keye, during cross examination, in response to the

question js 01 orK Wmf,aLkhg wod< bvu Tn jsiska uekqus lrk ,o bvu ;=, msysgs bvulao

keoao lshkak Tng ksYaps;j lshkak mqjkao@, his reply was fkdyelshs. It is on the above evidence that the District Court concluded as follows:

js;a;slreg n,m;%hla ksl=;a lr ;snqKo" tls n,m;%fha i|yka bvu Tyq jsiska Nqla;s jsosk nj lshd isgsho" tu n,m;%h u; wod, bvus fldgi Tyqg ysusjsh hq;= njg W;a;rfha yd fiiq iEu wjia:djlu i|yka lr ;snqKo meusKs,a, Tyqf.ka yria m%Yak wik wjia:dfjsoS Tyq meyeos,sj ms<sf.k we;s lreK kus fuu wdrjq,a .; bvus fldgi me'01 m%odk m;%fhka meusKs,slreg neyer

lr we;s bvug wh;ajk njhs'

Sequence of events

The second ground relied upon by the District Court is that the claim of the Defendant is

not supported by the sequence of events. I have already stated that Marimuttu was issued

a permit in 1954 for a land in extent of 4A 2R, that the Defendants father was issued the

permit V1 for a land in extent of 1A in 1965 and that the survey plan P6 depicting Lot No.

19 as having an extent of 5A 2R 8P was prepared in 1970. The Defendant is asking Court

to accept that with the entire land being 5A 2R 8P, and with Marimuttu being in

possession of 4A 2R out of this larger land, the balance 1A is what was given by V1 to the

Defendants father in 1965.

If the claim of the Defendant is to be accepted, soon after V1 was issued in 1965, the

predecessors of the Plaintiff and the Defendant must have been in possession of two

separate but adjoining lands, given the situation of lots G and H in P4. However, the

ground reality is that the boundaries of the permit V1 do not refer in any manner to any

18

of the boundaries of P1, although according to P4, at least two boundaries of lots G and

H were adjacent to lot E in P4. The discrepancies in the boundaries are a matter that I will

discuss later in detail.

There is another reason why the claim of the Defendant that he and his father have been

in exclusive possession of the land now identified as Lots G and H since 1965 cannot be

accepted. The Final Village Plan P6 was prepared in July 1970. The evidence of A. P. G.

Gamage, the Land Development Officer, Divisional Secretarys Office, Thamankaduwa

was that, (a) P6 was prepared for the purpose of issuing the grant, (b) the lots in P6 were

demarcated on the basis of the possession that was enjoyed by those on the ground, (c)

the extent of land enjoyed by Marimuttu at the time the grant was issued was 5A 2R 8P,

and (d) this extent is reflected in Lot No. 19. The relevant evidence is re-produced below: m%( osukdm;%h fok wjia:dfjs os kej; ueksula l, njg lreKq wkdjrKh fjkjo@ W( tfyuhs' m%' oSukdm;%h ksl=;a lsrsfus os Bg wdod<j lrk ,o ueksus wkqj bvfus m%udKh fldmuKo@ W( wlalr 05 hs" rEvs 02 hs" mrapia 08hs'

oSukdm;%hla ksl=;a lsrSug fmr osukdm;%Odrshdg wjir m;%hla ksl=;a lsrsu w;HdjYHhs' me'01 orK osukdm;%h ksl=;a lsrsug fmr jsOsu;a mrsos fla'udrsuq;a;= yg me'07 orK wjir m;%h ksl=;a lr,d ;snqKd' fus bvu i|yd fla'udrsuq;a;= yg whs;sjdislus mj;skafka 1954.04.08 jk osk isg' me'01 orK oSukdm;%h ksl=;a lsrsfus oS th ksl=;a lr,d ;sfnkafka fus bvu uek y|qkd .eksfuka miqjhs' tys msTqre wxl w'P'ms'fmd 18 f,i;a" len,s wxl 19 f,i;a i|yka fjkjd' fuys m%udKh jYfhka wlalr 05 hs" rEvs 02 hs" mrapia 08 la jYfhka i|yka fjkjd'

G L Manoj, a Technical Officer at the Surveyor Generals Department, referring to P7 [the

tenement list attached to P6] had stated as follows:

m%' me'7 lshk f,aLkh ilia lr.kak mdol lr .kafka uq,a f,aLkfha oskh 1970.07.21? W' tfiah' m%' ta jkjsg tu bvus fldgfia nqla;sfha isgsfha ljqo lsh,d f,aLk wdYs%;j Tng lshkak mqjkao@ W' f,aLkfha i|yka wdldrhg fla'udrsuq;a;= kue;af;la i|yd oSukd m;%hla ilia lr ;sfnkjd' m%' ta wjia:dj jkjsg bvfus nqla;sfha isgsfha ljqo lsh,d f,aLk wkqj lshkak mqjkao@ W' oSukd m;%hla ,nd oSfusoS osia;%sla uskskafodre ldrahd,fha ldrah Ndrh jkafka tu bvfus fjfik

mqoa.,hdg oSukd m;%hla ksl=;a lsrsu i|yd wod, mqoa.,hdf.a ku f;dr;=re ,nd .kakjd'

me'7 f,aLkh m%ldrj f,dgs wxl 19 orK fldgfia ysgshd lsh,d i|yka jkafka udrsuq;a;= kue;af;la

19

Thus, it is on the basis of Marimuttus possession on the ground that the said land came

to be demarcated as Lot No. 19 having an extent of 5A 2R 8P. The allocation of extra land

is not a mistake on the part of any officer. This is also the explanation for the increase of

the extent of land in P1 over and above what was given initially by the permit to

Marimuttu. The fact that Marimuttu was in possession in 1970 of the entire land of 5A 2R

8P rebuts the position of the Defendant that the land referred to in lots G and H is the

land given to his father in 1965 and which land the Defendants claim they have enjoyed

since then. Furthermore, if the Defendant and/or his father were in possession of the

impugned land [i.e. what has now been identified as lots G and H], P6 would have

reflected their presence. Not only was the impugned land [lots G and H] not demarcated

as a separate lot, P7 which is the Tenement List attached to P6 has no reference at all to

the Defendants father.

The District Court therefore arrived at the conclusion that a grant is issued to the person

in possession of the land in terms of the permit and the fact that a grant was issued to

Marimuttu means that he was the person in possession of the said 5A 2R 8P at the time

the said land was surveyed in 1970, with the result that the land referred to in V1 is not

lots G and H.

The discrepancy in extent between the permit issued in 1954 and the grant P1

This brings me to the third ground and the primary argument of Mr. Sanjeeva

Dassanayake, the learned Counsel for the Defendant, that being the discrepancy in the

extent of the land between the permit initially issued to Marimuttu and the subsequent

grant V1. There is no dispute that the difference in extent of land between the permit and

the grant issued to Marimuttu is almost 1A or an increase of 23% over and above the

extent specified in the permit issued to Marimuttu. The learned Counsel for the

Defendant submitted that as a permit is a precursor to a grant, a permit and grant forms

part of one process, and therefore the land that the Plaintiff is entitled to in terms of the

grant must be limited to the extent given in the permit. It was his position that even

though it has been admitted before the District Court that Lots G and H are situated within

Lot No. 19 in P6 and forms part of the land given to the Plaintiff in terms of P1, the Plaintiff

20

cannot claim title to the extent of land [that being lots G and H] which is over and above

what was given in terms of a permit in 1954. This was the principle reason relied upon by

the High Court in arriving at its conclusion that the Plaintiff does not have title in respect

of the said 1A of land.

In terms of the Land Development Ordinance, a permit is granted in the first instance on

condition that the permit holder develop the land and it is only after the conditions of the

permit are satisfied that a grant is issued for that land. For that reason, the permit and

the grant are part of one process, and as held in Agosinno vs Divisional Secretary,

Thamankaduwa and Others [SC Appeal No. 30/2004; SC Minutes of 23rd March 2005]

where any issues arise relating to succession, a nomination made under the permit would

continue to be valid even after a grant has been issued. However, I am unable to accept

the argument that the extent of land in a permit and a grant must be identical. I have

already referred to the fact that the land given in terms of the permit to Marimuttu was

not issued in terms of a survey plan but the grant has been issued in terms of survey plan

P6 prepared in 1970 on the basis of possession with the boundaries specifically identified

and demarcated.

W A Thilak Shantha, Colonisation Officer who was called by the Defendant stated as

follows:

uf.a w;aoelsus wkqj idudkHfhka osukd m;%hla ksl=;a lrkak fmr n,m;%hla ksl=;a lsrsu wksjdraHfhka isoqjsh hq;=hs' n,m;%hla mokus lrf.k ;uhs osukd m;%hla ksl=;a lrkafka' n,m;%hla ksl=;a lrk wjia:dfjsos ta bvus lgsgsfha mosxps mqoa.,hd ljqo lshd fidhd n,kjd' huslsis ;eke;af;la md%fhda.slj bvus lene,a,la nqla;s jsoskafka ke;sj n,m;%hla ksl=;a jsu isoqfjkafka keye' uf.a m,mqreoao wkqj mosxpshla fyda nqla;shla ke;sj n,m;%hla ksl=;a lrkafka keye' osukd m;%h ksl=;a lsrsu ioyd n,m;%hla m%odkh lr ;sfhk bvu uekqus lghq;= isoqlr,d ;ud osukd m;%hla ksl=;a lrkafka' bvus ljsfjsrshlska bvula neyer lsrsug lghq;= lrkafka lgsgs levSfus ie<eiaula ilia lr,d bvfus udhsus we;=,;a lr,d n,m;%hla ,nd fokjd' n,m;%hla ksl=;a lrkak fmr Pkmo bvu fnodfok wjia:dfjsos ta jf.a l%shdj,shla o isoqjs ;snsh hq;=hs' osukd m;%hla ksl=;a lrkafka n,m;%hla mokus lrf.k' hus fyhlska n,m;%hla ;sfhk bvus fldgil m%udKfha fjkila fjkak mq,qjka' n,m;%fha ;sfhk m%udKhg jvd wvqfjkak;a mq,qjka jevsfjkak;a mq,qjka wvqjSu;a 10% l m%udKhla jevsjsu;a

10% m%udKhla' t;fldg fjkiajSfus mrdih 10% la muK ;ud lshd isgskafka' uf.a rdPldrs lafIa;h ;=, bvus j, 10% m%udKh blaujd .sh wjia:d uu oel,d ;sfhkjd ta jf.au

10% m%udKh g wvq wjia:d;a oel,d ;sfhkjd' tfia fjkak fya;=j n,m;%,dNska bvus

21

ixjraOkh l,dg miqj .,a oud uekSus isoqlrkjd' ta wjia:dfjs nqla;s jsosk m%udKh lgsgslrejka jsiska fmkajd fokjd' ta wjia:dfjsos ;ud uskskafodare uy;=ka 10% jevsmqr fmkajd fok m%udKhg ie,eiafuka we;=,;a lrkjd' oSukd m;%hla fokak ;ud uekqula uekqula isoq lrkafka'

The High Court has not considered the above evidence before it ruled out the possibility

of there being a difference in extent between the permit and the grant issued to

Marimuttu. Nor has the High Court considered the fact that Marimuttu was given a grant

for 5A 2R 8P since he was in possession of the said land, and that Marimuttu is entitled to

the entirety of the land referred to in P1.

Discrepancies in the boundaries

The fourth ground relied upon by the District Court are the discrepancies in the

boundaries of the land possessed by the Defendant. If the position of the Defendant that

the 1 acre of land given to him under V1 is the land now identified as Lots G and H is to

be accepted, then, with Lots G and H being adjoining lands to the 4A 2R land given on the

permit to Marimuttu, the said lands must share at least one common boundary.

According to P1, the land given to the Plaintiff is Lot No. 19 of P6. In terms of the tenement

list P7, the said land is bounded as follows:

North Lot 21 of P6, with Lot No. 21 described as a new clearing reservation for

drainage channel;

East Lot No. 38 of P6 being a paddy field allotted to P.M. Ran Banda and Lot No. 39

described as a forest with ruins with an extent of 1A 3R 18P of forest and the

balance 1R 5P being ruins;

South Lot 15 of P6 [roadway]

West Lot 20 of P6, with Lot No. 20 being a paddy field allotted to D. P. Pasuntha.

P6 does not show any drainage channels or canals running through Lot No. 19, thus

shutting the door to the possibility of any land situated within Lot No. 19 having a canal

as a boundary.

22

According to P4 prepared in 2010, lots G and H are contiguous lots but separated by a

bund [kshr]. Once combined, these two lots (a) are triangular in shape, (b) are situated

on the south eastern boundary of Lot No. 19, and (c) have the following boundaries:

North Lot No. 19 of P6

East Lot No. 39 of P6

South Lot No. 15 being the roadway

West Lot No. 19 of P6

The permit V1 issued in 1965 to the Defendant however contains the following

boundaries:

North Canal and road

East land occupied illegally by Ran Banda

South Canal and road

West boundary not mentioned

Thus, it would be seen that:

(a) The land given to the Defendants father by V1 in 1965 had a canal and a road to the

North whereas lots G and H which are situated within Lot No. 19 and on the south

eastern boundary of Lot No. 19, does not have a canal and a road to its north nor a

canal to the south. Instead the northern boundary of Lots G and H is the land given

to Marimuttu;

(b) Even though Lot No. 38 of P6 had been allotted to Ran Banda, and the eastern

boundary of V1 is also a land occupied illegally by Ran Banda, the eastern boundary

of lots G and H is not lot No. 38 but instead is lot No. 39 of P6;

(c) The land given to the Defendants father by V1 had a roadway and a canal on the

south whereas for lots G and H, it is only a road;

(d) At least two boundaries of the land given to the Defendants father by V1 are canals,

whereas none of the boundaries of Lots G and H are canals or waterways;

23

(e) Even though by the time V1 was issued in 1965, Marimuttu had already been issued

a permit, V1 does not refer to a border possessed by Marimuttu on a permit.

With the boundaries being entirely different, the only conclusion that can be arrived at is

that Lots G and H which are currently occupied by the Defendant is not the land referred

to in V1. It is on the above basis that the learned District Judge arrived at the following

conclusions:

tfia jqj;a tu n,m;%fha i|yka jsIh jia;=j l=uk ia:dkhl msysgsfhao hkak iusnkaOfhka ksYaps;;djhla iy meyeos,s lsrSula wOslrKh bosrsfha fkdue;' bosrsm;a lr we;s n,m;%ho msUqre wxlhla" f,dgs wxlhla ksjerosj i|ykaj fkdue;' nsus m%udKh muKla ksYaps;j i|ykafjs' tfukau udhsus w;rska udhsus 3 la muKla i|ykaj we;s w;r tls udhsuso meusKs,slre Nqla;s jsosk bvfus udhsus iu .e,mSula fyda ieiosula fuu kvqjg wod,j le|jd we;s uekqus jdra;dj wkqj ;yjqre

fkdfjs'

ta wkqj udkl jrhd fj; js;a;slre bosrsm;a lr we;s js'1 n,m;%fha i|yka bvu f,i tu bvu

y|qkd.eksula isoqlr fkdue;'

tu idlaIs i,ld ne,Sfusos js;a;slre bosrsm;a lr we;s jS'1 n,m;%fha bvu me'1 n,m;%fha bvu ;=, wka;ra.; jk njg wOslrKhg wkqus;shlg t<eTsh fkdyelsh' tfukau tls n,m;%fha i|yka bvu ksis mrsos yoqkd .eksug yelshdjla tu.ska Wod js fkdue;' tfia jqj;a bijs .; bvus me'1 oSukd

m;%fha Wmf,aLk.; bvus jk njg m%udKj;a idlaIs bosrsm;a js we;s nj meyeos,s fjS' Although the District Court has referred to these discrepancies, the High Court has failed

to consider the discrepancies in the boundaries.

Taking into consideration the evidence that is available before me, I am in agreement with

the findings of the learned District Judge that the Plaintiff has discharged the burden cast

on him to establish on a balance of probability that lots G and H have been given to the

Plaintiff by grant P1, that the Defendant is in possession of the said lots, and that the

Defendant has not been able to establish that he has a better title than the Plaintiff to

Lots G and H. The High Court however has failed to consider any of the above matters

even though it has concluded that considering the evidence of the witnesses, it is quite

clear that the defendant possesses lots G and H on the permit issued to him in terms of

the Land Development Ordinance. In the above circumstances, I am of the view that the

24

third question of law must be answered in the affirmative. Accordingly, the necessity to

consider the first two questions of law does not arise.

Is the Defendant entitled for compensation for improvements

In his answer, the Defendant moved for compensation in a sum of Rs. 2 million for

improvements effected by him in the event of the District Court holding that the land

occupied by the Defendant is part of the land given to the Plaintiff. This amount was

increased to Rs. 6 million in the amended answer, even though it was admitted that no

improvements had taken place after the institution of action. While the evidence

disclosed that the Defendant has constructed two houses on the said land and developed

the said land, the Defendant has failed to lead any independent evidence of the value of

such houses. That is a burden that the Defendant was required to discharge, which

admittedly the Defendant has failed to do. The learned District Judge has held that the

Defendant is entitled to be compensated for such improvements but since there is no

valuation, had concluded that until the Defendant establishes such value, the Defendant

can continue to possess the said land. I am of the view that the failure of the Defendant

to prove his claim should not inure to his benefit, and for that reason, I regret I am unable

to agree with the conclusion of the learned District Judge that the Defendant can continue

to possess the land until the value of the improvements effected is established by the

Defendant. The finding of the learned District Judge that the Defendant is entitled to

possess the impugned land until such land is valued by a Government Surveyor and until

such payment is made by the Plaintiff is therefore set aside.

Conclusion

In the above circumstances, I answer the 3rd question of law in the affirmative. The

necessity to answer the 1st and 2nd questions of law therefore does not arise. With regard

to the 4th question of law, I am of the view that although the Defendant may be entitled

to claim compensation for improvements, the Defendant has failed to establish the value

of such improvements.

25

The judgment of the High Court is accordingly set aside and the judgment of the District

Court is affirmed, subject to the aforementioned variation. I make no order for costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT Vijith K. Malalgoda, PC, J I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT Janak De Silva, J I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT