IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

1. Centre for Policy Alternatives,

No. 6/5, Layards Road,

Colombo 05.

2. Dr. Paikiasoothy Saravanamuttu,

No. 3, Ascot Avenue,

Colombo 05.

Petitioners in SC/FR/91/2021

Sithara Shreen Abdul Saroor,

No. 202, W.A. Silva Mawatha,

Colombo 06.

Petitioner in SC/FR/106/2021

Ambika Satkunanathan,

No. 27, Rudra Mawatha,

Colombo 06.

Petitioner in SC/FR/107/2021

SC/FR/91/2021

SC/FR/106/2021

SC/FR/107/2021

Vs.

1. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

2

SC/FR/91/2021

2. Major General (retd) G.D.H. Kamal

Gunaratne,

Secretary, Ministry of Defence,

No. 15/5, Baladaksha Mawatha,

Colombo 03.

3. C.D. Wickramaratne,

Inspector General of Police,

Police Headquarters, Colombo 1.

4. Major General Dharshana

Hettiarachchi,

Commissioner General of

Rehabilitation,

Bureau of Commissioner General

of Rehabilitation,

No. 462/2, Kaduwela Road,

Ganahena, Battaramulla.

Respondents

1. Dr. Malkanthi Hettiarachchi,

7A, De Soyza Mawatha,

Mt. Lavania.

2. Al Haj Abdul Jawad Alim

Ualiyallah Trust & Maulavee

K.R.M. Sahlan Rabbane,

B.J.M. Road, Kattankudy 05.

Intervenient-Respondents

Before: Buwaneka Aluwihare, P.C., J.

Murdu N.B. Fernando P.C., J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

3

SC/FR/91/2021

Counsel: Viran Corea with Luwie Ganeshathasan, Khyati

Wikramanayake and Thilini Vidanagamage for the

Petitioners in SC/FR/91/2021.

Suren Fernando with Khyati Wikramanayake for the

Petitioners in SC/FR/106/2021.

Pulasthi Hewamanna with Harini Jayawardhana, Fadhila

Fairoze and Githmi Wijenarayana for the Petitioners in

SC/FR/107/2021.

Nerin Pulle, P.C., Additional Solicitor General, with Dr.

Avanti Perera, Deputy Solicitor General for the

Respondents.

Suren Gnanaraj with Rashmi Dias Goonewardena for the

1st Intervenient-Respondent.

Shehan De Silva with Naveen Maha Arachchige for the 2nd

Intervenient-Respondent.

Argued on: 21.03.2022, 13.05.2022, 18.05.2023, 05.06.2023,

28.06.2023

Written Submissions:

By the Petitioners in SC/FR/91/2021 on 09.08.2022 and

03.08.2023

By the Petitioners in SC/FR/106/2021 on 15.03.2022 and

26.07.2023

By the Petitioners in SC/FR/107/2021 on 15.03.2022 and

31.07.2023

By the Respondents on 19.07.2023

By the 2nd Intervenient-Respondent on 14.03.2022 and

15.08.2023

4

SC/FR/91/2021

By the 1st Intervenient-Respondent on 15.03.2022 and

23.10.2023

Decided on: 13.11.2023

Samayawardhena, J.

Introduction

The petitioners filed these fundamental rights applications

(SC/FR/91/2021, SC/FR/106/2021 and SC/FR/107/2021) in their

own right and in the public interest on the basis that several fundamental

rights guaranteed under Chapter 3 of the Constitution are violated by the

Prevention of Terrorism (De-radicalization from holding violent extremist

religious ideology) Regulations No. 1 of 2021 published in the

Extraordinary Gazette No. 2218/68 dated 12.03.2021.

All three applications were supported together and the Court granted

leave to proceed to the petitioners on the alleged violation of Articles 10,

12(1) and 13 of the Constitution. The Court also made an interim order

suspending the operation of the said Regulations until the final

determination of these applications.

Two petitioners were allowed to intervene. They are opposing the

applications of the petitioners.

Arguments were taken up together and parties agreed to abide by a single

judgment.

As stated in the Gazette, these Regulations were made by the President

under section 27 of the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions)

Act No. 48 of 1979 read with paragraph (b) of Article 4 of the Constitution.

5

SC/FR/91/2021

The learned Additional Solicitor General appearing for the respondents

submitted to Court that the primary purpose of promulgating these

Regulations was the de-radicalization and rehabilitation of the misguided

youth who either surrendered or were arrested following the horrific

Easter Sunday attacks on 21.04.2019, driven by a violent extremist

religious ideology.

While these fundamental rights applications were pending, the Bureau of

Rehabilitation Bill was placed on the Order Paper of Parliament on

23.09.2022. This Bill was subsequently challenged in this Court for its

constitutionality. On 04.10.2022, in SC/SD/54-61/2022, this Court

ruled that the Bill as a whole was inconsistent with Article 12(1) of the

Constitution and suggested ways to address the inconsistencies.

Following this determination, the Bureau of Rehabilitation Act No. 2 of

2023 was enacted.

As section 3 of the Bureau of Rehabilitation Act states The objective of

the Bureau shall be to rehabilitate drug dependent persons or any other

person as may be identified by law as a person who requires rehabilitation

and which may include treatment and adoption of various therapies in

order to ensure effective reintegration and reconciliation, through

developing socio-economic standards. This Act contains extensive

provisions related to rehabilitation. I find that several Regulations overlap

or conflict with the provisions of the Bureau of Rehabilitation Act because

the Bureau of Rehabilitation Act was non-existent when these impugned

Regulations were promulgated. If these impugned Regulations had been

promulgated after the determination of the Bureau of Rehabilitation Bill

and the enactment of the Bureau of Rehabilitation Act, it would have

saved more judicial time.

6

SC/FR/91/2021

The learned Additional Solicitor General submits that the Act provides

for the rehabilitation framework, while these Regulations provide for the

procedure for sending individuals for rehabilitation.

All parties unequivocally endorse the idea of rehabilitation and

acknowledge that restorative justice is better than retributive justice.

Retributive justice is based on the punishment of offenders whereas

restorative justice is based on repairing harm and reconciling parties.

Nevertheless, the petitioners assert that the impugned Regulations will

not achieve this goal. They contend that the rehabilitation contemplated

in the impugned Regulations is tantamount to pre-trial punishment.

Locus standi

The learned Additional Solicitor General raised a preliminary objection

regarding the locus standi of the petitioners to file these applications. He

reiterates this objection in his post-argument written submissions as

well. His argument is that although the petitioners state that they invoke

the fundamental rights jurisdiction in public interest, they have failed to

present at least a single affidavit of an arrestee or surrendee who has

expressed a view that he or she does not wish to take part in the process

of rehabilitation in lieu of prosecution as envisaged by the impugned

Regulations. I do not think that the Court should adopt such a strict

attitude in the invocation and exercise of the fundamental rights

jurisdiction.

All the petitioners (except the 1st petitioner in SC/FR/91/2021 which is

a company) are citizens of Sri Lanka.

In SC/FR/91/2021 there are two petitioners. The 1st petitioner is a

company incorporated under the Laws in Sri Lanka whose one of the

primary objectives is to contribute to public accountability in governance

through the strengthening of awareness in society of all aspects of public

7

SC/FR/91/2021

and policy implementation. The 2nd petitioner is the executive director of

the 1st petitioner company.

The petitioner in SC/FR/106/2021 is reportedly a human rights activist

working as a member of the Mannar Womens Development Federation

and Womens Action Network that work with women directly affected by

armed conflict in Sri Lanka.

The petitioner in SC/FR/107/2021 was a member of the Human Rights

Commission in Sri Lanka and is involved in rehabilitation processes in

different capacities.

The literal reading of Article 126(2) of the Constitution indicates that the

fundamental rights jurisdiction of this Court can be invoked by a person

whose rights have been infringed or are about to be infringed by executive

or administrative action. However, the contextual reading of the

Constitution as a cohesive whole and the jurisprudential dimension

reveal that the invocation of fundamental rights jurisdiction is not

circumscribed by rigid boundaries or limited by isolated provisions.

Instead, it is intended to be a flexible and dynamic instrument for

safeguarding the rights and liberties of the People.

The Preamble of the Constitution itself recognises the fundamental

human rights, amongst others, as an intangible heritage that guarantees

the dignity and well-being of the people of Sri Lanka.

According to Article 3 of the Constitution, sovereignty is in the People and

sovereignty includes the fundamental rights. Article 4(d) states that the

fundamental rights shall be respected, secured and advanced by all the

organs of government and shall not be abridged, restricted or denied,

except in the manner and to the extent provided for in the Constitution.

8

SC/FR/91/2021

According to Article 17, every person shall be entitled to apply to the

Supreme Court, as provided by Article 126, in respect of the infringement

or imminent infringement by executive or administrative action, of a

fundamental right to which such person is entitled under the provisions

of Chapter 3 of the Constitution.

In accordance with Article 27(2)(a), the State is committed to establishing

a democratic socialist society with one of its objectives being the full

realization of the fundamental rights and freedoms of all persons.

Article 28(a) states that the exercise and enjoyment of rights and

freedoms are inseparable from the performance of duties and obligations

and accordingly it is the duty of every person in Sri Lanka to uphold and

defend the Constitution and the law.

The contours of fundamental rights jurisdiction have expanded over the

years, and public interest litigation in response to violations and

imminent violations of fundamental rights is no longer a new

phenomenon in the global arena.

In the seminal case of Bulankulama and Others v. Secretary of Ministry of

Industrial Development and Others [2000] 3 Sri LR 243 at 258, Justice

Amerasinghe observed:

[T]he Supreme Court has sole and exclusive jurisdiction to hear and

determine any question relating to the infringement or imminent

infringement by executive or administrative action of any

fundamental right The Court is neither assuming a role as

trustee nor usurping the powers of any other organ of Government.

It is discharging a duty which has in the clearest terms been

entrusted to this Court, and this Court alone, by Article 126(1) of the

Constitution.

9

SC/FR/91/2021

Learned counsel for the 5th and 7th respondents submitted that,

being an alleged public interest litigation matter, it should not be

entertained under provisions of the Constitution and should be

rejected. I must confess surprise, for the question of public interest

litigation really involves questions of standing and not whether

there is a certain kind of recognized cause of action. The Court is

concerned in the instant case with the complaints of individual

petitioners. On the question of standing, in my view, the petitioners,

as individual citizens, have a Constitutional right given by Article 17

read with Articles 12 and 14 and Article 126 to be before this Court.

They are not disqualified because it so happens that their rights are

linked to the collective rights of the citizenry of Sri Lanka rights

they share with the people of Sri Lanka. Moreover, in the

circumstances of the instant case, such collective rights provide the

context in which the alleged infringement or imminent infringement

of the petitioners fundamental rights ought to be considered. It is in

that connection that the confident expectation (trust) that the

Executive will act in accordance with the law and accountably, in

the best interests of the people of Sri Lanka, including the petitioners,

and future generations of Sri Lankans, becomes relevant.

In Sugathapala Mendis and Another v. Chandrika Kumaratunga and

Others [2008] 2 Sri LR 339 at 356, Justice Thillakawardane endorsed this

view in the following manner:

With respect to the submission of standing, or locus standi, we

concur with the opinion of the learned Judge in Bulankulama

(supra), namely that petitioner in such public interest litigation have

a constitutional right, given by Article 17, read with Articles 12 and

126, to bring forward their claims. Petitioners to such litigation

cannot be disqualified on the basis that their rights happen to be

10

SC/FR/91/2021

ones that extend to the collective citizenry of Sri Lanka. The very

notion that the organs of government are expected to act in

accordance with the best interests of the People of Sri Lanka,

necessitates a determination that any one of the People of Sri Lanka

may seek redress in instances where a violation is believed to have

occurred. To hold otherwise would deprive the citizenry from seeking

accountability of the institutions to which it has conferred great

power and to allow injustice to be left unchecked solely because of

technical shortcomings. This position is consistent with several

instances where this Court has held standing to be adequate.

The petitioners in the instant applications have the locus standi to file

these applications.

I will now consider the impugned Regulations separately to determine

whether they violate Articles 10, 12(1), and 13 of the Constitution, as

alleged by the petitioners.

The purpose of the Regulations

Regulation 1 provides the title of the Regulations. It captures the purpose

of the Regulations and sets the tone for the rest.

These Regulations may be cited as the Prevention of Terrorism (De-

radicalization from holding violent extremist religious ideology)

Regulations No. 01 of 2021.

Article 10 of the Constitution reads as follows:

Every person is entitled to freedom of thought, conscience and

religion, including the freedom to have or to adopt a religion or belief

of his choice.

11

SC/FR/91/2021

Article 10 is a non-derogable and an entrenched provision. No restrictions

can be placed on this Article. To amend Article 10, Article 83 requires a

2/3 majority in Parliament and approval through a referendum.

The freedom of thought, as enshrined in our fundamental rights, stands

out as a cornerstone of democracy. The freedom of thought ensures that

a persons mind remains beyond scrutiny. To infringe upon the freedom

of thought is to undermine the very essence of a democratic society, for

it is within the realm of individual thought that the roots of self-

expression, personal liberty, human dignity and the flourishing of all

other fundamental rights are nurtured.

The definition of extremist religious ideology presents inherent

difficulties as religious beliefs may vary widely among individuals, with

one persons religious ideology potentially appearing extreme to another.

In the absence of clarity, there is a risk of arbitrary decisions being made

where certain attitudes, behaviors, attire etc. can also be deemed as signs

of extremist religious ideologies.

According to Article 10, the State cannot prevent a person from thinking

or believing in some religious ideology on the basis that such thinking or

belief is irrational or extreme. As I have already stated, Article 10 sets an

absolute bar against such infringements. Nevertheless, if such person

manifests his thinking or belief, freedom of thought can be restricted as

permitted by Article 15 of the Constitution.

Whilst Article 10 guarantees freedom of thought to every person, Article

14(1)(a) guarantees freedom of expression of his thinking to every citizen.

Article 14(1)(a) states Every citizen is entitled to the freedom of speech

and expression including publication. In Fernando v. The Sri Lanka

Broadcasting Corporation [1996] 1 Sri LR 157 at 179, Justice Mark

Fernando stated that Article 10 denies government the power to control

12

SC/FR/91/2021

mens minds, while Article 14(1)(a) excludes the power to curb their

tongues.

Unlike freedom of thought, the freedom of speech and expression is not

absolute. The full enjoyment of freedom of speech and expression is

circumscribed by Article 15(2):

The exercise and operation of the fundamental right declared and

recognized by Article 14(1)(a) shall be subject to such restrictions as

may be prescribed by law in the interests of racial and religious

harmony or in relation to parliamentary privilege, contempt of court,

defamation or incitement to an offence.

According to Article 170, law means any Act of Parliament and any law

enacted by any legislature at any time prior to the commencement of the

Constitution and includes an Order in Council. This means the freedom

of speech and expression can be limited by an Act of Parliament.

The manifestation of ones religion or belief is a fundamental right. Article

14(e) states:

Every citizen is entitled to the freedom, either by himself or in

association with others, and either in public or in private, to manifest

his religion or belief in worship, observance, practice and teaching.

Freedom to manifest ones religion or belief is also subject to restrictions.

Article 15(7) imposes restrictions on the manifestation of religion or belief.

The exercise and operation of all the fundamental rights declared

and recognized by Articles 12, 13(1), 13(2) and 14 shall be subject

to such restrictions as may be prescribed by law in the interests of

national security, public order and the protection of public health or

morality, or for the purpose of securing due recognition and respect

for the rights and freedoms of others, or of meeting the just

13

SC/FR/91/2021

requirements of the general welfare of a democratic society. For the

purposes of this paragraph law includes regulations made under

the law for the time being relating to public security.

For the purpose of Article 15(7), law includes not only Acts of parliament

but also regulations made under the law for the time being relating to

public security.

While Article 10 is theoretically absolute and untouchable, practically, it

may not be so. It seems that learned counsel for the petitioners accept

this.

Learned counsel for the petitioner in SC/FR/106/2021 says The role of

the State, to be exercised in terms of the Constitution and the law, is limited

to stepping in, in the event that imminent harm is to be caused to another.

Even in the event that a person is prone to violence, the powers given to

the State to prevent such harm do not extend to the power to brainwash,

or to change the thoughts, conscience or religion of a person.

Learned counsel in SC/FR/91/2021 states the petitioners are not

against the notion of de-radicalization and rehabilitation of persons holding

violent extremist views. To the contrary, the petitioners strongly believe

that rehabilitation is an essential pre-requisite of any progressive criminal

justice system and when done properly and with due regard to the rights

of persons, is the most appropriate way to deal with many persons who

have violent extremist views.

In Premalal Perera v. Weerasuriya [1985] 2 Sri LR 177 at 192 Justice

Ranasinghe (as His Lordship then was) stated that a religious belief need

not be logical, acceptable, consistent or comprehensible in order to be

protected that unless where the claim is so bizarre, so clearly non-religious

in motivation, it is not within the judicial function and judicial competence

to inquire whether the person seeking protection has correctly perceived

14

SC/FR/91/2021

the commands of his particular faith. That means, if the religious belief

is so bizarre, so clearly non-religious in motivation, the protection under

Article 10 is not available.

But the question is how to draw the line between a religious belief need

not be logical, acceptable, consistent or comprehensible in order to be

protected and the claim is so bizarre, so clearly non-religious in

motivation? What is the yardstick to decide that the religious belief is so

bizarre, so clearly non-religious in motivation? People cannot be

prosecuted, nay persecuted, for merely holding religious ideology which

the State thinks to be violent and extremist.

All seem to be in agreement that when there is an imminent threat in

pursuit of violent extremist religious ideology, the State can step in to

prevent the harm for the greater benefit of all others. However, prevention

of harm cannot be the pretext for arbitrary use of power to curb the rights

of the People.

Although no issue of a legal nature arises from the title of a statute, the

unqualified concept contained in the title of the impugned Regulations is

inconsistent with Article 10 of the Constitution. This has been

exacerbated by the fact that no definition has been provided for the term

violent extremist religious ideology in the Regulations.

I must also note that in the Sinhala version of these Regulations, the

word violent is not included in the title of the Regulations.

The objective of the Regulations

Regulation 2 deals with the objectives of the Regulations. However, a

contextual reading of these objectives reveals that there is no nexus

between the theme of the Regulations as manifested in the title and the

15

SC/FR/91/2021

objectives of the Regulations. Regulation 2 is inherently illogical and

irrational. It reads thus:

The objective of these regulations shall be to ensure, that any person

who surrenders or is taken into custody on suspicion of being a

person who by words either spoken or intended to be read or by

signs or by visible representations or otherwise, causes or intends

to cause commission of acts of violence or religious, racial or

communal disharmony or feelings of ill will or hostility between

different communities or racial or religious groups after the coming

into operation of these regulations is dealt with in accordance with

the provisions of the Act, and that persons who have surrendered or

have been taken into custody in terms of any emergency regulation

which was in force at any time prior to coming into operation of these

regulations, continue in terms of these regulations, to enjoy the same

care and protection which they were previously enjoying.

According to Regulation 2, the objective of these Regulations is not de-

radicalization and rehabilitation of individuals holding violent extremist

religious ideology. Regulation 2 does not expressly state such an

objective.

Regulation 2 outlines two-fold objectives:

The first objective is to ensure that any person who surrenders or is taken

into custody on suspicion of being a person who by words either spoken or

intended to be read or by signs or by visible representations or otherwise,

causes or intends to cause commission of acts of violence or religious, racial

or communal disharmony or feelings of ill will or hostility between different

communities or racial or religious groups after the coming into operation of

these regulations is dealt with in accordance with the provisions of the Act

(and not in accordance with the provisions of the impugned Regulations).

16

SC/FR/91/2021

According to Regulation 9, Act means the Prevention of Terrorism

(Temporary Provisions) Act No. 48 of 1979.

I find it hard to understand this objective. Let me explain.

According to section 2(1)(h) of the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary

Provisions) Act, a person who by words either spoken or intended to be

read or by signs or by visible representations or otherwise causes or

intends to cause commission of acts of violence or religious, racial or

communal disharmony or feelings of ill-will or hostility between different

communities or racial or religious groups shall be guilty of an offence

under that Act. These are the very same words used in Regulation 2

quoted above. The Act also includes provisions for individuals who are

arrested on suspicion of engaging in the aforementioned acts. In this

backdrop, it appears incongruous when Regulation 2 says after the

coming into operation of the Regulations such persons are dealt with in

accordance with the provisions of the Act. The Act does not provide for

rehabilitation.

The second objective is that persons who have surrendered or have been

taken into custody in terms of any emergency regulation which was in force

at any time prior to coming into operation of these regulations, continue in

terms of these regulations, to enjoy the same care and protection which

they were previously enjoying. If the care and protection provided to

those individuals remain the same even after these Regulations, I fail to

see any significance in this objective.

Alternative interpretations of these objectives may be possible but this

shows the inherent vagueness, ambiguity, and obscurity in Regulation 2.

If the stated objective of the Regulations is not clear, how can their impact

and applicability be properly assessed or understood? The existence of

such real uncertainties within legal provisions may give rise to subjective

17

SC/FR/91/2021

interpretation and arbitrary enforcement of the law, which may

undermine the rule of law and legal predictability. This violates Article

12(1) of the Constitution which states All persons are equal before the

law and are entitled to the equal protection of the law.

Who can be referred to rehabilitation?

Who can be referred to rehabilitation is set out in Regulations 3 and 5.

Regulation 3 reads as follows:

Any person who, in connection with any offence under the provisions

of,

(a) the Act, or the Prevention of Terrorism (Proscription of Extremist

Organizations) Regulations No. 1 of 2019 published in the Gazette

Extraordinary No. 2123/3 of May 13, 2019, surrenders or has

surrendered to, or is taken or has been taken into custody by; or

(b) the Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers)

Regulation, No. 1 of 2019 published in the Gazette Extraordinary No.

2120/5 of April 22, 2019, has surrendered to or has been taken into

custody by,

any police officer, or any member of the armed forces, or to any

public officer or any other person or body of persons authorized by

the President by Order, may be referred to a rehabilitation

programme in terms of the provisions of these regulations.

Regulation 3 delineates three distinct categories of individuals who may

be directed to rehabilitation. They are:

A person who is in connection with any offence under the provisions of:

18

SC/FR/91/2021

(1) the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act No. 48 of

1979

(2) the Prevention of Terrorism (Proscription of Extremist

Organizations) Regulations No. 1 of 2019

(3) the Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers) Regulations

No. 1 of 2019

The term connected with any offence has not been defined in the

impugned Regulations. Such a broad term permits the inclusion of

virtually anyone under its scope, based on the subjective criteria of those

authorised to arrest individuals under the impugned Regulations.

The Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers) Regulations No. 1

of 2019, which were made under section 5 of the Public Security

Ordinance No. 25 of 1947 as amended, have since lapsed. Consequently,

persons cannot now be taken into custody under the aforesaid third

category.

The Prevention of Terrorism (Proscription of Extremist Organizations)

Regulations No. 1 of 2019 were made under section 27 of the Prevention

of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act No. 48 of 1979.

People can still be taken into custody under the first and second

categories because the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions)

Act No. 48 of 1979 and the Regulations made thereunder are still in force.

Who can arrest individuals?

According to Regulation 3 of the impugned Regulations, persons in

connection with any offence under the provisions of the Prevention of

Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act No. 48 of 1979 and the Prevention

of Terrorism (Proscription of Extremist Organizations) Regulations No. 1

of 2019 can be taken into custody by

19

SC/FR/91/2021

(1) any police officer,

(2) any member of the armed forces,

(3) any public officer,

(4) any other person or

(5) body of persons authorized by the President by Order.

There is no provision in the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary

Provisions) Act No. 48 of 1979 and the Prevention of Terrorism

(Proscription of Extremist Organizations) Regulations No. 1 of 2019 which

confers the President or the Minister to exercise such power.

The words used in Regulation 3(a) are Any person whosurrenders or

has surrendered to, or is taken or has been taken into custody thereby

covering not only past acts but also future acts. The plain reading of

Regulation 3 confirms that this is applicable to the Prevention of

Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act No. 48 of 1979, the Prevention of

Terrorism (Proscription of Extremist Organizations) Regulations No. 1 of

2019 and the Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers)

Regulations No. 1 of 2019. Regulation 3, when read in conjunction with

Regulation 9, confers a sui generis power of arrest.

The argument of the learned Additional Solicitor General that Regulation

3 does not in any way confer power on any authority to arrest a person

under these Regulations, but makes reference to persons whose surrender

or custody is in terms of other laws/Regulations is unacceptable.

Similarly, the argument of learned counsel for the intervenient

respondents that Prevention of Terrorism (De-radicalization from holding

violent extremist religious ideology) Regulations No. 01 of 2021) does not

envisage nor empower the arrest or taking into custody of persons

thereunder and only applies to those who are arrested or taken into

custody under the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act No.

20

SC/FR/91/2021

48 of 1979 as amended, Prevention of Terrorism (Proscription of Extremist

Organizations) Regulations No. 1 of 2019 and the Emergency

(Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers) Regulation No. 1 of 2019 and refers

to categories of persons entitled to arrest thereunder is also unacceptable.

Prevention of Terrorism (Proscription of Extremist Organizations)

Regulations No. 1 of 2019 do not provide for arrest. Hence, before the

impugned Regulations were made, arrest had to be done under the

Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act No. 48 of 1979.

The Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act No. 48 of 1979

identifies categories of persons who can arrest individuals. According to

this Act, far from any person, even any police officer cannot arrest

individuals under the said Act. In terms of section 6(1) of the Act, any

police officer not below the rank of Superintendent or any other police

officer not below the rank of Sub-Inspector authorized in writing by him in

that behalf may, without a warrant and with or without assistance and

notwithstanding anything in any other law to the contrary arrest any

person.

Can Regulations override the principal Act?

Regulations made under the principal Act cannot override the principal

Act unless it is expressly provided. The Regulations are expected to be

consistent with and subordinate to the enabling Act. What cannot be

done through an amendment to the principal Act cannot be done through

Regulations made under the same Act. The principal Act passed by the

legislature cannot be changed by the executive by Regulations.

According to section 17(1)(c) of the Interpretation Ordinance No. 21 of

1901 as amended, where any enactment confers power on any authority

to make rules, no rule shall be inconsistent with the provisions of any

21

SC/FR/91/2021

enactment. Section 17(2) enacts that In this section the expression

rules includes rules and regulations, regulations, and by-laws.

Section 27(1) of the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act

No. 48 of 1979, which invests the Minister with his rule-making power

enacts The Minister may make regulations under this Act for the purpose

of carrying out or giving effect to the principles and provisions of this Act.

This does not permit the Minister to unilaterally extend or modify the

enabling Act passed by Parliament. Such actions would constitute an

encroachment on legislative power by the executive, which is contrary to

the fundamental principles of democratic governance.

According to section 28 of the of the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary

Provisions) Act No. 48 of 1979, The provisions of this Act shall have effect

notwithstanding anything contained in any other written law and

accordingly in the event of any conflict or inconsistency between the

provisions of this Act and such other written law, the provisions of this Act

shall prevail. Article 170 of the Constitution includes Regulations into

the definition of written law. This itself indicates that Regulations made

under the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act cannot take

precedence over the Act.

In the case of The Attorney General of Ceylon v. W.M. Fernando, Honorary

Secretary, Galle Gymkhana Club (1977) 79(1) NLR 39 at 42-43, Justice

Sharvananda (as His Lordship then was) stated:

A clear distinction has to be drawn between an Act of Parliament

and subordinate legislation, even though the latter is contained in a

resolution passed by the House of Representatives, a limb of the

Legislature. A Court has no jurisdiction to declare invalid an Act of

Parliament, but has jurisdiction to declare subordinate legislation to

be invalid if it is satisfied that in making the subordinate legislation,

22

SC/FR/91/2021

the rule-making authority has acted outside the legislative powers

conferred on it by the Act of Parliament under which such legislation

is purported to be made. () The doctrine that subordinate

legislation is invalid if it is ultra vires, is based on the principle that

a subordinate agency has no power to legislate other than such as

may have expressly been conferred by the supreme Legislature.

Subordinate legislation is fundamentally of a derivatory nature and

must be exercised within the periphery of the power conferred by the

enabling Act. If a subordinate law-making authority goes outside the

powers conferred on it by the enabling statute, such legislation will

ipso facto be ultra vires.

In Ram Banda v. The River Valleys Development Board (1968) 71 NLR 25,

the Minister, purporting to act under the rule-making powers conferred

on him by certain sections of the Industrial Disputes Act, made

Regulation 16 of the Industrial Disputes Regulations, 1958. Regulation

16 provided that every application under paragraph (a) or (b) of section

31B(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act in respect of any workman shall be

made within three months of the date of termination of the services of that

workman. The appellant workmans application was rejected by the

Labour Tribunal on the ground that the date of dismissal was more than

three months anterior to the application. On appeal, the Supreme Court

held:

Regulation 16 is ultra vires the rule-making powers conferred on the

Minister by sections 31A(2), 39(1)(a), 39(1)(b), 39(1)(ff) and 39(1)(h)

of the Industrial Disputes Act inasmuch as it in effect takes away

from the workman, on the expiry of the stated period of three months,

the right given to him by the legislature to apply to a Labour Tribunal

for relief, and to that extent nullifies or repeals the principal

enactment.

23

SC/FR/91/2021

Section 39(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act provides that every

Regulation made by the Minister should be placed before Parliament for

approval and that on such approval and publication in the Gazette, it

shall be as valid and effectual as though it were herein enacted. Justice

Weeramantry took the view that such approval does not confer validity

on a Regulation which is outside the scope of the enabling powers. His

Lordship stated at page 38:

The mere passage of such regulation through Parliament does not

give it the imprimatur in such a way as to remove it, through the

operation of section 39(2), from the purview of the courts. The duty

of interpreting the regulation and the parent Act in order to see

whether the former falls within the scope allowed by the latter

devolves on the courts alone.

Against such a background, to view section 39(2) as a clock of

validity which may be thrown around rules which in fact are ultra

vires would be to erode rather than protect the supreme authority of

Parliament. Regulations clearly outside the scope of the enabling

powers and passing unnoticed in the heat and pressure of

parliamentary business may then survive unquestioned and

unquestionable; and functionaries manifestly exceeding their

powers would thereby be able to arrogate to themselves a de facto

legislative authority which de jure belongs to parliament alone.

For the foregoing reasons I cannot subscribe to the view that the

mere passage of a regulation through Parliament gives it the

imprimatur of the legislature in such a way as to remove it from the

purview of the courts through the operation of section 39(2).

The duty of interpreting the regulation and the parent Act in order to

see whether the former falls within the scope allowed by the latter

24

SC/FR/91/2021

devolves on the courts alone. It is a principle that has often been

asserted, and bears reassertion, that just as the making of the laws

is exclusively the province and function of Parliament, so is their

interpretation the province and function exclusively of the courts. In

the total and exclusive commitment of this function to the care of the

courts, tradition, law and reason all combine; nor is any organ of the

State so-well equipped in fact or so amply authorised by law to

discharge this function. It is self-evident that Parliament is not nor

ever can be the authority for the interpretation of the laws which it

enacts.

In the view stated above, the courts as the sole interpreters of the

law are committed to the duty, despite section 39(2), to consider

whether a regulation travels beyond the powers conferred on its

maker. Any other view of the law seems fraught with danger to the

subject for it would free the acts of creatures of the legislature from

the checks and scrutinies which alone are effective in ensuring that

the delegated authority while operating to the uttermost limits of its

powers does not travel beyond.

I thus reach the conclusion that it is within the competence of this

court to subject such regulations to the ultra vires test despite section

39(2) and for the reasons earlier set out, I hold the rule in question

to be ultra vires.

In River Valleys Development Board v. Sheriff (1971) 74 NLR 505 the

majority did not agree with the above judgment. However, River Valleys

Development Board v. Sheriff was overruled in The Ceylon Workers

Congress v. The Superintendent, Beragala Estate (1973) 76 NLR 1, which

held that Ram Banda v. The River Valleys Development Board had been

correctly decided. The dicta of Justice Weeramantry in Ram Banda v. The

River Valleys Development Board was followed by a series of subsequent

25

SC/FR/91/2021

decisions. Those decisions include Wickremasekera v. Ganegoda (1973)

76 NLR 452, Rahuman v. Trustees of the Mohideen Jumma Mosque [2004]

2 Sri LR 250 and Rathnakumara and Others v. The Postgraduate Institute

of Medicine (SC/APPEAL/16/2014, SC Minutes of 30.03.2016).

In the instant case, only the making of the Regulations and their

publication in the Gazette in terms of section 27(1) and (2) of the

Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act No. 48 of 1979 have

taken place, and not the approval by Parliament.

Regulation 3 is ultra vires the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary

Provisions) Act No. 48 of 1979. It also constitutes an affront to Article

12(1) of the Constitution.

This also violates Article 13(1) of the Constitution which states No person

shall be arrested except according to procedure established by law. Any

person arrested shall be informed of the reason for his arrest.

Who determines rehabilitation under regulation 3?

Regulation 3 provides for the arrest. Then the next question is who

decides to send such persons having some connection with any offence

under the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act No. 48 of

1979 or the Prevention of Terrorism (Proscription of Extremist

Organizations) Regulations No. 1 of 2019 or the Emergency

(Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers) Regulations No.1 of 2019 to

rehabilitation. The impugned Regulations do not provide for it. It is

important to bear in mind that this category of persons is different from

those who fall into the category described in Regulation 5. Regulation 3

is clearly vague.

According to Regulation 3, such arrestees may be referred to a

rehabilitation programme in terms of the provisions of these regulations,

26

SC/FR/91/2021

not in terms of the provisions of the Bureau of Rehabilitation Act No. 2 of

2023, which became law after these Regulations. This leads to a further

confusion whether there are two regimes governing rehabilitation.

Article 13(5) declares Every person shall be presumed innocent until he is

proved guilty.

Regulation 3 violates Articles 12(1), 13(1) and 13(5) of the Constitution.

Reintegration Centres

Regulation 4 provides for setting up of Reintegration Centres:

The Secretary to the Ministry of the Minister shall, from time to time

approve Centres to be known as Reintegration Centres (hereinafter

referred to as the Centre) for the purpose of rehabilitating the

surrendees and detainees. Upon such approval the Commissioner

General of Rehabilitation shall by order published in the Gazette

specify the category and the place of the Centres approved by the

Secretary.

According to Regulation 9, Minister means the Minister of Defence.

This Regulation is in direct contradiction to the framework established

by the Bureau of Rehabilitation Act No. 2 of 2023.

In brief, under the Bureau of Rehabilitation Act, there are no

Reintegration Centres but Rehabilitation Centers established by the

Minister in charge of the subject of rehabilitation, not by the Minister of

Defence or Secretary to the Ministry of Defence or Commissioner General

of Rehabilitation. The administration, management and control of the

affairs of the Bureau of Rehabilitation is vested in the Governing Council.

27

SC/FR/91/2021

After the enactment of the Bureau of Rehabilitation Act, impugned

Regulation 4 is no longer valid or sustainable. Regulation 4 cannot be

given effect to over the provisions of the Bureau of Rehabilitation Act. The

overlap between the provisions of the Bureau of Rehabilitation Act and

Regulation 4 leads to ambiguity.

Regulation 4 violates Article 12(1).

Detention orders

Regulation 5 has four sub sections: 5(1) and 5(2) are standalone sections.

They deal with distinct matters. 5(3) and 5(4) together deal with a

separate matter.

Several questions arise out of this Regulation.

Regulation 5(1) reads as follows:

Any person other than a police officer to whom a person surrenders

or who takes a person into custody in terms of regulation 3 shall

hand over such surrendee or person taken into custody, to the Officer

in Charge of the nearest police station within twenty four hours of

such surrender or taking into custody.

There is no ambiguity that Regulation 5(1) refers to first two categories of

Regulation 3 mentioned above because this Regulation does not refer to

past acts. It says any person other than a police officer to whom a person

surrenders or who takes a person into custody shall hand over such

person to the officer in charge of the nearest police station within twenty

four hours. As I mentioned previously, individuals cannot be arrested in

such a manner by any person other than a police officer. Regulation

5(1) violates Articles 12(1) and 13(1).

Regulation 5(2) reads as follows:

28

SC/FR/91/2021

Notwithstanding the provisions of regulation 3, where there is

reasonable cause to suspect that a surrendee or detainee has

committed an offence specified in regulation 3, the Officer in Charge

of the police station in which such surrendee or detainee is held in

custody shall submit a report to the Minister for consideration

whether such surrendee or detainee shall be detained in terms of

section 9 of the Act, for the purpose of conducting an investigation.

This Regulation clears the doubt that a reference to rehabilitation in

terms of Regulation 3 is done where there is not even a reasonable cause

to suspect that the arrestee has committed an offence specified in

Regulation 3. Reference to rehabilitation under Regulation 3 is not

voluntary. This shows the illegality of rehabilitation under Regulation 3.

According to Regulation 5(2), where there is reasonable cause to suspect

that a detainee has committed an offence specified in Regulation 3, the

officer in charge of the police station shall submit a report to the Minister

of Defence for consideration whether such person shall be detained in

terms of section 9 of the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions)

Act for further investigation. This goes to show that the procedure in the

impugned Regulations is sui generis. Otherwise, there is no reason to

reiterate this within this Regulation.

Role of the Attorney General

Regulation 5(3) reads as follows:

Where in the course of such investigation it is disclosed that such

surrendee or detainee has committed an offence specified in

regulation 3 the matter shall be referred to the Attorney-General for

appropriate action in terms of the law.

29

SC/FR/91/2021

According to this Regulation, during the course of an investigation (prior

to its conclusion), if the police decide that the detainee has committed an

offence specified in Regulation 3, the matter shall be referred to the

Attorney General. It is important to note that this decision is made

unilaterally by the police.

Regulation 5(4) states:

Where the Attorney-General is of the opinion that according to the

nature of the offence committed a surrendee or detainee shall be

rehabilitated at a Centre in lieu of instituting criminal proceedings

against him, such surrendee or detainee shall be produced before a

Magistrate with the written approval of the Attorney-General. The

Magistrate may make order, having taking into consideration

whether such surrendee or detainee has committed any other

offence other than offences specified in regulation 3, referring him

for rehabilitation for a period not exceeding one year at a Centre.

This marks the second occasion where a unilateral decision is taken

against the detainee that he committed the offence. The Attorney General

can unilaterally decide that the detainee shall be rehabilitated at a Centre

in lieu of instituting criminal proceedings. With the written approval of

the Attorney General, the detainee is then produced before a Magistrate.

Under the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act, the

Magistrate has no authority to release individuals on bail without the

sanction of the Attorney General. In practical terms, with the written

approval of the Attorney General for rehabilitation, the Magistrate has to

make a perfunctory order for rehabilitation. That is the reality. This the

Magistrate does, without a charge sheet, without trial, without conviction

and without passing a sentence. The sentence for committing an

unknown and undisclosed offence is rehabilitation. Notably, there is no

30

SC/FR/91/2021

provision for a hearing to be given to the detainee before sending him for

rehabilitation. The detainee can even be produced to the Magistrate at

his residence with the written approval of the Attorney General for

rehabilitation to get the formal order.

A careful reading of Regulation 5(4) confirms that the only matter the

Magistrate can take into account is whether the detainee has committed

any offence other than those specified in Regulation 3. If I may repeat,

what it says is The Magistrate may make order, having taking into

consideration whether such surrendee or detainee has committed any

other offence other than offences specified in regulation 3, referring him for

rehabilitation for a period not exceeding one year at a Centre. It does not

say that the Magistrate may, having taken into consideration inter alia

whether such surrendee or detainee has committed any offence other

than the offences specified in regulation 3, refer such person to a Centre

for rehabilitation for a period not exceeding one year. Here an individual

is sent for rehabilitation without his informed consent. It remains unclear

whether the alleged commission of other offences is considered in favor

of rehabilitation or against it. The absence of proper judicial oversight

throughout this entire process renders it inherently arbitrary.

Article 13(3) enacts that Any person charged with an offence shall be

entitled to be heard, in person or by an attorney-at-law, at a fair trial by a

competent court. Article 13(3) does not fall under any of the restrictions

recognised under Article 15. This Article is interrelated with Article 13(5),

which upholds the presumption of innocence until proven guilty as a

fundamental right. Article 13(3) cannot be rendered nugatory by denying

a trial, as these Regulations do. The principle of fairness is not limited to

the trial proper. It begins before the trial and continues after the trial in

the event of a conviction.

31

SC/FR/91/2021

Regulation 5 violates the fundamental rights guaranteed under Article

12(1) and 13(5).

The argument that all these decisions are reviewable and therefore no

prejudice is caused to the rehabilitant is unacceptable. Litigation is time-

consuming and costly. It is the duty of the State to take all precautionary

steps to safeguard the fundamental rights of the subjects.

Revocation of the rehabilitation order

Regulation 6 deals with the subject of revocation of the rehabilitation

order.

6(1) Where any surrendee or detainee who is referred to for

rehabilitation by an order of a Magistrate under sub regulation (4) of

regulation 5 acts in a manner that is disruptive to the rehabilitation

programme or detrimental to the interests of the other surrendees or

detainees who are under rehabilitation at the Centre, the

Commissioner-General of Rehabilitation shall inform in that regard

in writing to the Officer in Charge of the police station who applied

to the Magistrate for rehabilitation of such surrendee or detainee.

(2) Upon receipt of information from the Commissioner-General of

Rehabilitation under sub regulation (1) of this regulation, the Officer

in Charge of the police station who applied to the Magistrate for

rehabilitation of such surrendee or detainee shall apply to the

Magistrate to revoke the order for rehabilitation and refer the matter

to the Attorney-General to consider whether such person shall be

indicted in lieu of rehabilitation.

The term disruptive can be interpreted in many ways; for instance,

complaints against the condition of the Center can be considered as

disruptive. According to this Regulation, the revocation of a rehabilitation

32

SC/FR/91/2021

order is effected without any inquiry or hearing being afforded to the

rehabilitant. Absence of due process infringes upon the principles of

natural justice and fairness, thereby constituting a violation of Article

12(1).

It seems to me that this is a matter that should be addressed through the

Bureau of Rehabilitation Act and not by way of Regulations made under

the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act.

Section 26 of the Bureau of Rehabilitation Act provides for obstructions

of the rehabilitation programme.

Any person who unlawfully obstructs or attempts to unlawfully

obstruct any person employed in any Centre for Rehabilitation in the

performance of his lawful duties under this Act, commits an offence

under this Act and shall be liable on conviction after summary trial

by a Magistrate to a fine not exceeding fifty thousand rupees or to

imprisonment of either description for a period not exceeding six

months or to both such fine and imprisonment.

As previously mentioned, this is a consequence of these Regulations

having been promulgated before the Bureau of Rehabilitation Act came

into existence.

Extension of rehabilitation period

Regulation 7 deals with the extension of the rehabilitation period.

7(1) At the end of the period of rehabilitation specified in respect of

a surrendee or detainee in the order made by the Magistrate under

sub Regulation (4) of regulation 5, the Commissioner-General of

Rehabilitation shall, having regard to the nature and progress of the

rehabilitation of such surrendee or detainee, consider whether it is

appropriate for the surrendee or detainee to be released or be subject

33

SC/FR/91/2021

to a further the period of rehabilitation, shall forthwith submit his

recommendation to the Secretary to the Ministry of the Minister. The

Secretary shall forthwith forward such report to the Minister.

(2) The Minister may, after perusal of the report submitted to him

under sub regulation (1) of this regulation,

(a) order the release of such surrendee or detainee; or

(b) extend the period of rehabilitation for a period of six months at a

time, so however that the aggregate period of such extensions shall

not exceed a further twelve months. Each such extension shall be

made on the recommendation of the Commissioner-General of

Rehabilitation.

(3) The surrendee or detainee shall, at the end of the extended period

of rehabilitation, be released.

This Regulation is ultra vires in several respects.

After obtaining an order for rehabilitation from a Magistrate for a

maximum period of one year and after the completion of that one-year of

rehabilitation, it is not within the purview of a Regulation to grant the

Minister of Defence the authority to unilaterally extend the rehabilitation

period for an additional year without the intervention of the Magistrate.

This amounts to a usurpation of judicial power by the executive in

violation of Article 3 read with Article 4(c) of the Constitution.

This is also done unilaterally without giving a hearing to the detainee.

This Regulation also violates Articles 12(1), 13(2) and 13(4).

Extension of the period of rehabilitation also seems to be a matter to be

dealt with through the Bureau of Rehabilitation Act and not by way of

34

SC/FR/91/2021

Regulations made under the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary

Provisions) Act.

According to the impugned Regulations, the Minister acts according to

the recommendations of the Commissioner General of Rehabilitation.

However, under the Bureau of Rehabilitation Act, the Commissioner

General of Rehabilitation is the Chief Administrative Officer and the

substantive decisions are taken by the Council which consists of eminent

professionals in the relevant fields including rehabilitation and social

integration.

The rehabilitation programme

Regulation 8 addresses the content of the program, the progress of the

individuals undergoing rehabilitation, and some aspect of their welfare.

8(1) The Commissioner-General of Rehabilitation shall provide a

surrendee or detainee with psycho social assistance and vocational

and other training during the period of his rehabilitation to ensure

that such person is integrated back to the community and to the

society.

(2) The Commissioner-General of Rehabilitation shall every three

months from the date of handing over a surrendee or detainee for

rehabilitation, forward to the Secretary to the Ministry of the

Minister, a report on the nature and the progress of the rehabilitation

programme carried out in respect of such person. The Secretary shall

submit such report to the Minister.

(3) A surrendee or a detainee referred for rehabilitation to a Centre

may with the permission of the officer in charge of the Centre be

entitled to meet his parents, relations or guardian as the case may

be, once in every two weeks.

35

SC/FR/91/2021

These provisions are completely redundant. I reiterate that these issues

must be addressed through the Bureau of Rehabilitation Act, not through

the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act. It seems that

these issues have already been addressed in the Bureau of Rehabilitation

Act.

Lawful restriction of fundamental rights

Notwithstanding that the fundamental rights have been given the utmost

recognition in our Constitution making it part of sovereignty which is

inalienable, as I have already stated, Article 15 recognises permissible

restrictions to fundamental rights. However, proportionality is inherent

in Article 15. The restriction must be rational and commensurate with

the objective to be achieved.

I must state at the outset that the learned Additional Solicitor General

did not take up the position that the restrictions are within the

constitutionally permissible limits. The State took up an unusual

position that no restrictions were placed by the impugned Regulations.

For the purpose of the present applications, the relevant Articles are

Articles 10, 12(1) and 13 because the Court granted leave to proceed only

on alleged violations of these Articles.

I have already dealt with Article 10, which cannot be subject to any such

restrictions.

Article 15(1) stipulates that the fundamental rights guaranteed by

Articles 13(5) and 13(6) shall be subject only to such restrictions as may

be prescribed by law in the interests of national security.

According to Article 15(7), the fundamental rights recognised by Articles

12, 13(1) and 13(2) shall be subject to such restrictions as may be

prescribed by law in the interests of national security, public order and

36

SC/FR/91/2021

the protection of public health or morality, or for the purpose of securing

due recognition and respect for the rights and freedoms of others, or of

meeting the just requirements of the general welfare of a democratic

society.

Article 170 defines law to encompass any Act of Parliament, laws

enacted by any legislature before the commencement of the Constitution,

and also includes an Order in Council.

Both 15(1) and 15(7) state that for the purposes of those two paragraphs,

law includes regulations made under the law for the time being relating

to public security.

Learned counsel for the petitioners especially relying on Thavaneethan v.

Attorney General [2003] 1 Sri LR 74 argue that regulations made under

the law for the time being relating to public security means Regulations

made under the law for the time being relating to the Public Security

Ordinance and therefore the restrictions placed on the fundamental

rights by the Regulations made under the Prevention of Terrorism

(Temporary Provisions) Act are against the Constitution and the rule of

law.

The learned Additional Solicitor General, for reasons best known to him,

avoided addressing this argument by asserting that the impugned

Regulations do not restrict any fundamental rights of the petitioner or any

other persons. As such, the respondents do not seek to engage in the

redundant exercise of relying on the applicability of Article 15(7) of the

Constitution and thereby attempt to interpret the said Regulations as law

within the meaning of that provision. It is rather naive to submit that the

impugned regulations do not restrict any fundamental rights when they

obviously do.

37

SC/FR/91/2021

Nonetheless, as the Court did not have the full benefit of the argument of

the State on that important point of law (namely, whether the term the

law for the time being relating to public security should be construed as

the law for the time being relating to Public Security Ordinance) and

also in view of the conclusion I have already reached, there is no necessity

to make a ruling on this point in the instant application. This matter can

be fully considered in a suitable future case.

Learned counsel for the petitioners further argue that, as the impugned

Regulations have been promulgated not by the Minister of Defence but

by the President, as evident from the Gazette, they should be deemed null

and void. In terms of section 27 of the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary

Provisions) Act, it is the Minister of Defence, not the President, who can

make Regulations under the Act. Although the impugned Regulations

have been signed by the President, it seems that, at the relevant time, the

President had been functioning as the Defence Minister as well. In light

of the conclusion I have already arrived at on the merits of this

application, there is no need to make a ruling on this important point as

well.

Conclusion

The Prevention of Terrorism (De-radicalization from holding violent

extremist religious ideology) Regulations No. 1 of 2021 are in violation of

the fundamental rights of the petitioners guaranteed under Articles 10,

12(1) and 13 of the Constitution. It is not practically possible for this

Court to suggest amendments to rectify the Regulations to align with all

fundamental rights due to their inherent flaws. The Court also makes the

declaration that the impugned Regulations are null and void. The State

shall pay a sum of Rs. 25,000 to each petitioner as costs of the

application.

38

SC/FR/91/2021

Judge of the Supreme Court

Buwaneka Aluwihare, P.C., J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Murdu N.B. Fernando P.C., J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court