IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

In the matter of an application under and in terms of Article 126 of the Constitution read with Article 17 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Wijewickrama Manamperig Leelawathi Udahawatta, Ulahitiyawa, Middeniya. Petitioner S.C.(FR) Application No. 85/2015

Vs. 1. Priyantha Kulathunga, Police Sergeant (54471), Sooriyawewa Police Station, Sooriyawewa. 2. Chaminda Prabath, Police Constable (35079), Sooriyawewa Police Station, Sooriyawewa. 3. J. Chandana, Police Constable (38261), Sooriyawewa Police Station, Sooriyawewa. 4. Sunil Shantha, Police Constable (40720), Sooriyawewa Police Station, Sooriyawewa. 5. K.A.Sampath Peiris, Police Constable (39716), Sooriyawewa Police Station,

S.C. (FR) No. 85/2015

2

Sooriyawewa. 6. Sisira Padma Kumara, Police Constable (61985), Sooriyawewa Police Station, Sooriyawewa. 7. N.K.Illangakoon Inspector General of Police, Police Headquarters, Colombo 01. 8. Hon. Attorney General, Attorney Generals Department, Hulftsdorp Street, Colombo 12.

Respondents ********

BEFORE : L.T.B. DEHIDENIYA, J. A.L. SHIRAN GOONERATNE, J. ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J. COUNSEL : Lakshan Dias with Maneesha Kumarasinghe for the Petitioner. Anuja Premaratne P.C. with Naushalya Rajapaksha for the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 6th Respondents. Dushantha Kularatne with Roshan Pathirana instructed by Iranga Wijegunawardena for the 4th and 5th Respondents. Ms. Induni Punchihewa SC for the Hon. Attorney General.

ARGUED ON : 09th August, 2021 DECIDED ON : 12th January, 2023

S.C. (FR) No. 85/2015

3

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

The Petitioner, one Wijewickrama Manamperige Leelawathi of

Middeniya, invoked the jurisdiction conferred on this Court under

Articles 17 and 126 of the Constitution by her petition dated 13.03.2015,

and sought a declaration that the fundamental rights guaranteed to her

son Liyana Arachchige Samantha, under Articles 11, 12(1), 13(3),13(4) and

13(5), had been violated by the executive or administrative actions of

the 1st to 6th Respondents on the allegation that he had died whilst being

held under Police custody, after he was severely beaten with pipes,

poles and sticks at the time of his arrest. It was averred by the

Petitioner in her petition that 35-year old Liyana Arachchige Samantha is

the third of her six children. He was living with one Kadukannage

Sriyalatha at the time of his death and earned his living as a mason. He

was known to his fellow villagers as Pallam Sudu Putha or Pallam Sudu

Aiya.

When this application was supported on 09.01.2017, this Court

granted Leave to Proceed for alleged infringement of Articles 11, 12(1)

and 13(4) of the Constitution.

In describing the chain of events that culminated with the death

of her son, the Petitioner stated that her son was arrested by two Police

officers on 19.02.2015 between 4.00 5.00 p.m. while returning home on

his motorcycle. Two Policemen had stopped Samantha near the 2nd

sluice gate of the 4th bund of Viharagala Tank and questioned him about

a hidden stock of illicit liquor. Thereupon, the Policemen removed his

shirt and tied his hands with it. They had then questioned Samantha and

demanded to reveal where he had kept his stock of illicit liquor

concealed. The questioning by the two Policemen had turned violent,

S.C. (FR) No. 85/2015

4

when they repeatedly assaulted Samantha with a hose pipe, which

continued even after he had fallen on the ground. Samantha was initially

crying out loud calling for help but started screaming murder as the

assault had continued with heightened intensity. Upon hearing his

screams, some of his fellow villagers have come near the place and saw

the attack on Samantha. He was thereafter taken to his house, that had

been lay abandoned after his wife deserted him few years back, and

there too the assault continued. He was initially beaten with a black

hose pipe by the two Policemen and when joined by another four, who

were in uniform and had arrived there in two motorcycles, poles and

sticks were also used. The reinforcements had arrived after one of the

two Policemen gave a call to someone asking to come. One of the

Policemen had emerged from the nearby abandoned house with a bottle

in his hand and poured its contents into a 10 litre can, which the officers

had brought along with them. Thereafter, the group of Policemen had

left the scene, carrying Samantha with them, in one of their motorcycles.

The 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 6th Respondents have collectively filed their

objections resisting the application of the Petitioner, whereas the 4th and

5th Respondents have filed their objections individually. Despite being

represented by their respective Counsel, the 1st to 6th Respondents were

unanimous in adopting their stance that the deceased Liyana Arachchige

Samantha did not die in Police custody and his death had occurred

whilst in the custody of Prison officers, who kept him under their

detention, until he fulfilled his bail conditions. They also specifically

deny having assaulted Samantha and assert that he did not disclose of

any assault by 1st to 6th Respondents, either to the medical staff or to the

Magistrate, who visited him at Hambantota Hospital.

S.C. (FR) No. 85/2015

5

According to the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 6th Respondents, they left their

station at 8.30 a.m. on 19.02.2015, as they were to conduct preventive

measures under the Excise Ordinance. Whilst on duty, the 2nd

Respondent received information that a person possessing a quantity of

illicit liquor was travelling near Viharagala junction. The officers decided

to make a detection and have positioned themselves near Viharagala

tank, awaiting the arrival of that person. Then they saw one person,

matching with the description given by the informant, walking along

the bund carrying a can. When they approached him, he started to run,

leaving behind his can. After giving a chase, he was apprehended and

the officers have identified him as Samantha alias Pallan Sudda, who by

then had several prosecutions for illegally possessing illicit liquor.

According to the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 6th Respondents, Samantha had

sustained injuries due to a fall, after fleeing from them. They recovered

8250 ml of suspected illicit liquor from the possession of Samantha.

None of the officers involved with the arrest did assault him. He was

then produced at the Station at 6.48 p.m. along with the productions

and his personal belongings, which included some cash and a hand

phone.

In replying to the allegation of assault, the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 6th

Respondents state that Samantha had sustained abrasions on the back of

his body after being tripped over the protruding Margosa roots, while

running away from them. They further state that, in the following

morning it was found that Samantha had suffered injuries to his

eyebrow, nostrils and cheek after a fall from a cement bench, whilst

being kept in the cell of Sooriyawewa Police, subsequent to his arrest.

The 1st to 6th Respondents tendered their notes of investigation along

with their individual affidavits, in support of their respective positions.

S.C. (FR) No. 85/2015

6

The 4th Respondent takes up a preliminary objection in his

objections as to the standing of the Petitioner to invoke jurisdiction of

this Court and further claims that it was the 2nd and 6th Respondents,

who made the arrest and he had merely gone to the place of arrest,

having assumed duties just four days before. He makes an allegation

that Samantha had been brutally assaulted by Prison guards, after he

made a failed attempt to escape from their custody. The 4th Respondent

challenges the accuracy of the out entry made by the 1st Respondent on

19.02.2015 at 8.30 a.m., which indicated that he (the 4th Respondent) too

had left the station with other Respondents and thereby contradicting

his claim that he went there only after the arrest was made.

The preliminary objection on the standing of the Petitioner was

also taken up by the 5th Respondent. He too claims that Samantha was

taken to the Station by the 1st Respondent in his motorcycle and despite

the arrest was made by the 3rd Respondent, the 1st Respondent had

made notes claiming responsibility to the arrest. The 5th Respondent

also takes up the position that he had merely visited the place of arrest

and Samantha had no visible injuries when the latter was handed over to

the reservist. The 5th Respondent also alleged that it was the Prison

guards, who have assaulted Samantha after his failed attempt to escape

and as a result his condition has got worsen. He further suspects foul

play, in stating that Samantha had died after he was administered an

injection by the medical staff at Hambantota Hospital.

At the hearing, the 4th and 5th Respondents did not pursue their

preliminary objection, perhaps in view of the pronouncement made by

this Court in rejecting a similar objection, in the Judgment of Lama

Hewage Lal (Deceased), Rani Fernando (Wife of deceased Lal) and

S.C. (FR) No. 85/2015

7

Others v Officer in Charge - Minor offences, Seeduwa Police Station

and Others (2005) 1 Sri L.R. 40, by observing thus;

It is therefore settled law that the lawful heirs and/or dependants of a

person who is deceased as a result of an act of torture should be entitled

to a declaration of the violation and compensation.

In this instant, the Petitioner is the mother of the deceased person

and for that reason she is also one of the lawful heirs of her deceased

son. Therefore, she has the necessary standing to invoke jurisdiction of

this Court for violation of the fundamental rights of her son.

Now I proceed to consider the merits of her application.

It is the 1st to 6th Respondents contention that the Petitioner had

failed to establish her allegation of violation of fundamental rights that

had been made against them to the required degree of proof, being a

high degree of certainty. The Respondents further contended that when

the several discrepancies in the version of events, as narrated by the

witnesses of the Petitioner, are considered along with the reason

attributed by the deceased himself as to the cause of the injuries he had

suffered to his face, the Petitioner has failed to prove that the

fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 11, 12(1) and 13(4) of the

Constitution had been infringed by them.

In Malinda Channa Pieris vs. AG. and Others 1994 1 Sri LR 1 it was

stated that unless the petitioner had adduced sufficient evidence to

satisfy the Court, he will fail to obtain a declaration of infringement of

his fundamental rights. This has been the accepted norm in

International Courts as in Fillkastre vs. Bolivia (HRC. 5.11.1991 - UN

Committee on Human rights) the U.N. Committee on Human Rights had

S.C. (FR) No. 85/2015

8

held that there was no violation because the allegations had not been

substantiated or corroborated.

A series of decided cases Thadchanamoorthi v Attorney-General

(1980) FRD 129, Goonewardene v Perera (1983) 1 Sri LR 305,

Kapugeekiyana v Hettiarachchi (1984) 2 Sri LR 153, Channa Peiris &

Others v Attorney-General (ibid) had clearly laid down the principle

that the civil standard of persuasion would apply and a high degree of

certainty would be required 'before the balance of probability might be said

to tilt in favour of a petitioner' who has been attempting to discharge his

burden in proving that his fundamental rights guaranteed in terms of

Article 11 had been violated by the respondents, whereas the

Judgments of Velumurugu v Attorney-General (1981) 1 Sri L.R. 406,

Jeganathan v Attorney-General (1982) 1 Sri LR 294, Sasanasiritissa

Thero and Others v P.A. de Silva, Chief Inspector CID and Others

(1989) 2 Sri L.R. 356, and Erandaka and Another v Hawlea, Officer in

Charge Hakmana and Others (2004) 1 Sri L.R. 268, speaks of strict

proof of such allegations, in view of the seriousness of the

consequences it would carry.

Clearly the Petitioner did not witness the alleged assault on her

son but, in order to substantiate her allegation, she had relied on the

contents of the sworn statements made by witnesses Kudakella Gamage

Kusumawathie, Ratnayakage Niroshan, Ratnayakage Nandasena and

Kadukannage Sriyalatha, tendered to Court along with her petition.

Perusal of these sworn statements of the persons who claims to have

witnessed the assault on the deceased Samantha reveal that none of

them had individually identified any of the 1st to 6th Respondents, but

they merely claim to have seen the assault on the deceased, which was

S.C. (FR) No. 85/2015

9

initially started by two Police officers, who had their Police helmets on.

The assault on Samantha had continued even after the joining of four

other officers, who arrived at the scene subsequently. They were

instructed to do so by the two officers, who were already there. Of the

several witnesses, Kusumawahie had seen two persons assaulting

another, who looked like Samantha with what appeared to her as a piece

of black hose pipe. The person who was being assaulted pleaded with

the two, not to assault him and screamed not to kill him. She then asked

one of her neighbours, Niroshan to verify the identity of the victim, as

she could not properly see him due to the distance. Niroshan had

confirmed that it was Samantha who was being assaulted. This witness

saw Samantha had no clothes on his upper body and his hands were tied

in front with a shirt. He further described the manner of the assault on

Samantha, comparing it with an instance of assaulting an animal.

Kusumawathie left the place as she did not wish to witness the brutality

of the assault. Nandasena, another witness, who happens to ride past

the place, had seen Samantha lying on the ground bare bodied and his

hands tied with a shirt. He also noted that one of the two Police officers,

who was standing there, had phoned someone claiming that they made

an arrest and asking the other person to come over.

In their objections, the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 6th Respondents admit the

fact that they made the arrest and claim that there were altogether

seven officers. The 4th Respondent, having denied the Petitioners claim

that four officers joined the other two, had not provided information as

to the circumstances under which the arrest was made. This is

understandable as the 4th Respondent admits that he had accompanied

the 1st Respondent and he merely went to the place of arrest with the

1st Respondent and that too only after the arrest was made by the 2nd

S.C. (FR) No. 85/2015

10

and 6th Respondents. The 5th Respondent also admits that he too had

merely went to the place of arrest, but only after the 3rd Respondent

had made the arrest. Thus, all of the 1st to 6th Respondents admit that

they were present at the place where the deceased person was arrested,

although the 4th and 5th Respondents claimed they have joined only

after the arrest was made. In the circumstances, the identities of the

officers who were involved with the circumstances relating to the arrest

of the deceased, as alleged by the Petitioner through her witnesses, are

established through their own admissions.

Since the Petitioners primary allegation, that her sons right to

freedom from torture, as guaranteed by Article 11 of the Constitution

had been violated by the 1st to 6th Respondents, was specifically denied

by these Respondents, I must then examine the available material, in

order to determine whether she had established that particular

allegation to the required degree of proof. In view of the description of

the account on the attack, as contained in the sworn statements of the

witnesses, Samantha was severely beaten with pipes, sticks and clubs by

the officers who arrested him. In allegations of violation of the

fundamental right to freedom from torture, ordinarily this Court would

consider whether such allegations are supported by medical evidence.

One such witnesses, relied upon by the Petitioner in this regard

was Sriyalatha. Witness Kadukannage Sriyalatha was left destitute when

her husband decided to leave her with three children and she was

living with Samantha at the time of his arrest, since his wife too had

deserted him by then, also leaving their three children to him.

On 19.02.2015, at about 5.00 p.m., upon hearing Samantha was

pleading with someone not to kill him, she too had rushed in to

S.C. (FR) No. 85/2015

11

investigate. She then saw Samantha, lying on the ground with his hands

tied and being beaten by six Police officers. She also saw them dragging

him into an abandoned house and continuing with their assault using

sticks and clubs. The officers were questioning Samantha as to the place

where he kept his stock of illicit liquor hidden. After some time, one of

the officers came out of the house and poured contents of a white bottle

into a plastic can. Thereafter, the Police party left the scene, taking

Samantha along with them. She was handed over the motorcycle, which

belonged to Samantha along with its ignition key.

After the death of Samantha on 22.02.2015, Sriyalatha made a

statement to Police as to what she had learnt from Samantha during her

visit to see him on 20.02.2015 at Hambantota Hospital, where she had

quoted him making an accusation against the Police officers that he was

severely beaten with clubs (ug fydZogu fmd,q j,ska .eyqjd). It is very

relevant to note that she made this statement at 3.00 p.m., on 23.02.2015

and the autopsy on the body of Samantha was performed by Consultant

JMO on the same day at 5.00.p.m. But she made her statements two

hours before the commencement of the autopsy and had stated what

she learnt from Samantha. Sriyalatha had no way of knowing the expert

opinion of the Consultant JMO before making her statement to Police

that Samanthas death was due to multiple deep contusions following

assault with heavy cylindrical weapon like wooden clubs. Clearly, she

had accurately narrated what she was told by Samantha on 23.02.2015,

before she made the sworn statement on 11.03.2015, in support of the

petition of the Petitioner.

The Petitioner, in order to substantiate her allegation of torture,

has relied on the post-mortem report of the Consultant JMO of

Hambantota Hospital. The post-mortem examination on the body of

S.C. (FR) No. 85/2015

12

Samantha was conducted by Dr. A.S. Seneviratne on 23.02.2015, who

confirms that the cause of death was due to multiple deep contusions

over the head, back of the body and limbs. There were altogether 32

ante mortem injuries on the body. Of these injuries, injury No. 2 was

found to be a contusion measuring 3X2 cm on the right eyebrow and

injury No. 1 refers to a black eye due to haematoma. There was a

laceration on the right lip while multiple contusions were observed on

his tongue. These were the four injuries observed on his head by the

consultant JMO.

Injury Nos. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 18 were categorised as

contusions, located on the anterior and posterior aspects of the length of

his right arm whereas injury Nos. 16 and 17, termed as two contusions

were also located on the posterior aspect of the left shoulder. There

were five contusions (injury Nos. 19, 20, 21, 22 and 23) located on the

back of the chest. Examination of the genitals had revealed two abraded

contusions on both sides of the scrotum, referred to as injury Nos. 13

and 14, while injury No. 15 referred to a contusion on right foot and

injury No. 26 was also a contusion deep into the underlying muscle,

located on the back of the left upper thigh.

In addition to above, there were three contusions located on the

buttocks (injury Nos. 23, 24 and 25) whereas contusions referred to as

injury Nos. 26, 27, and 28, were seen on the back of the left thigh. Injury

Nos. 29, 30, 31 and 32 were also contusions but located on the back of

the right thigh. The Consultant JMO had also noted the contusions

referred to as injury Nos. 27, 28, 29, 30, 31 and 32 were deep and

extending into the underlying muscles, as in the case of injury No. 26.

S.C. (FR) No. 85/2015

13

Thus, the witnesses of the Petitioner have supported each others

version of what they saw on the assault on the deceased and

corroborated by the findings of the autopsy. The witnesses were

consistent with the number of officers who participated with the

assault, the stages at which others have joined the initial two, the

intensity of the assault, what they have used in the attack, the duration

of assault and how Samantha cried out.

In view of the specific denial of any assault by the 1st to 6th

Respondents, and particularly in view of the allegation of the 4th and 5th

Respondents that the deceased had suffered injuries at the hands of the

Prison officers, this Court must then examine the available material to

conclude whether this is a probable proposition, as to the manner in

which the deceased had suffered his injuries.

It is stated in the notes of investigation, in relation to the arrest of

Samantha, indicated that he had suffered abrasions over back of his

lumber region. These injuries were caused when he had tripped himself

over protruding Margosa tree roots, whilst running away from the

officers (1R3). However, when Samantha was handed over to the

reservist PC 81754 Saman, there were no such external injuries noted by

that officer. On the following morning, the reservist had seen Samantha

lying on the cell floor, and upon inquiry, it was revealed that he had

fallen off from the bench and had suffered injuries to his right eyebrow

and was bleeding. The Officer-in-Charge was notified immediately of

this development and Samantha was thereafter rushed to Sooriyawewa

hospital, where he was initially admitted, before being transferred out

to Hambantota Hospital, later in the same day.

S.C. (FR) No. 85/2015

14

Considering the relative probabilities of suffering abrasions over

the lumber region of a person who falls being tripped over roots, while

running away in order to escape from his captors, it is significant to

note from the Health 1135A form, that Samantha did not have a single

injury to justify such a proposition. There were no injuries seen on the

knees of his legs or to his hands in the form of abrasions, which could

reasonably be expected find in the limbs after such a fall, whilst running

away from his pursuers. The contradictory positions of the notes of the

1st Respondent with that of the reservist further weakens the reliability

of such a claim. After the death of Samantha, SI Pannadasa of

Sooriyawewa Police had visited the place of arrest and was shown by a

brother of Samantha. He had not observed any Margosa trees in the

vicinity but saw only a Kumbuk tree. There was no indication of any

protruding roots of that particular tree. He also noted that the house of

the witness Kusumawathie is the closest to the place of arrest.

In the circumstances, the position of 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 6th

Respondents that Samantha had suffered injuries to his back after falling

down, becomes a proposition on which one could not place any

reliance, primarily due to its inherent improbabilities. The other

instance in which the 1st to 6th Respondents claim that Samantha had

sustained injuries was his fall from the bench in the following morning.

The 1st to 6th Respondents relied on the inconsistent history given by

Samantha as to the cause of those injuries. According to them, Samantha

had claimed that he fell from a push bicycle at the time of his admission

to Sooriyawewa Hospital and thereafter changed that position to indicate

that he had a fall from the cement bench, on which he slept during the

night. This factor must be probed further into by this Court.

S.C. (FR) No. 85/2015

15

It is correct that the BHT of Samantha (1R1) indicates that the

admitting medical officer of Sooriyawewa Hospital, had recorded therein

patient was stating that he got injured after falling from a push bicycle on

19.02.2015. It is also evident that the word motorbike was cut off from

the text and instead, the words push bicycle were inserted. Samantha

was admitted to hospital by one Susantha of Sooriyawewa Police Station.

The BHT indicates that the admission was made at 8.00 a.m. on

20.02.2015, and at that time the admitting medical officer had noted

haematoma around right eye and blood clots in his nostrils.

On the same day, the Officer-in-Charge of Sooriyawewa Police

Station, reported facts to Magistrates Court of Hambantota under BR

177/15 (1R2) and requested the Magistrate to examine a suspect, who

had suffered injuries due to a fall in the cell. The Magistrate had

thereafter visited the Hospital at 4.30 p.m. on the same day and when

questioned as to how he had sustained the injury, Samantha had replied

kskao .shd jegs,do okafka kE. This enquiry was made by the Magistrate, in

the presence of the Police officer who described to the Judicial officer as

to the nature of the accusation Samantha was arrested on. The

Magistrate had thereafter decided to enlarge him on bail.

Then why did Samantha complain to the admitting medical officer

of Sooriyawewa hospital at 8.00 a.m., that he fell off from his push bicycle

and it was due to that fall his right eye was injured? If he actually fell

off from the push bicycle, as he said to the medical officer, then why did

he changed that story and replaced it with an obviously a facile version

by stating kskao .shd jegs,do okafka kE to the Magistrate? These different

and inconsistent versions as to the explanation of the injury on the right

eye were highlighted by the 1st to 6th Respondents, in order to convince

S.C. (FR) No. 85/2015

16

this Court that the reliability of the Petitioners claim is at least

questionable and therefore should not be acted upon.

The said answer by Samantha to the Magistrate would indeed run

contrary to the claim of the Petitioner, which alleged that Samantha had

suffered injuries due to the beating by the 1st to 6th Respondents. But

there is an explanation to the said conduct of Samantha. When his

partner did pay a visit to him at Hambantota Hospital on the same day

and that too in the afternoon, she was told that he was severely beaten

by the Police officers. He had described the manner in which they

assaulted him by relating that they had severely beaten him, after

asking him to kneel and then to lie down on the bund. Sriyalatha had

then clarified from him as to the reason for not making that complaint

to the medical staff or to the Magistrate. The reply she received was

that he did not wish to antagonise them by making complaints against

them. This is a reasonable explanation, coming from a person, who had

been placed in a set of circumstances as Samantha was. This is not his

very first encounter with the Police. He already had several

prosecutions pending for committing similar type of offences. Clearly,

Samantha, in view of his social standing and background, would have

considered the probable consequences he might have to endure after

making a formal complaint of the beating he received in the hands of

the 1st to 6th Respondents of to a person in authority and decided

against it.

In this regard, it is relevant to refer to a quotation contained in the

dissenting Judgment of Sharvananda J (as he then was) in Velumurugu v

Attorney-General & Another (1981) 1 Sri L.R. 406, where his Lordship

had reproduced a passage from the Judgment of Greek Case, as reported

in the Journal of Universal Human Rights, on the difficulties faced by

S.C. (FR) No. 85/2015

17

litigants alleging that public officers had inflicted or instigated acts of

torture, which included the following observation, and is very relevant

to the issue at hand.

" a victim or witness able to corroborate his story might hesitate

to describe-or reveal all that has happened to him for fear of

reprisals. upon himself or his family.

The above quoted observation is only a part of a long quotation,

which included several other similar considerations, that had been

reproduced in its entirety in the Judgment of Channa Peiris & Others v

Attorney-General (supra).

After his admission to Sooriyawewa Hospital and until his custody

was transferred to Prison officers, Samantha was under the watchful eye

of Police officers. This was more evident from the proceedings in which

the examination of Samantha by the Magistrate at Hambantota hospital

are recorded. The Police officer had informed the Judicial officer of the

circumstances under which Samantha was arrested and had sustained

an injury. Thereafter, the Magistrate had questioned Samantha, in the

presence of that Police officer, who repeated the version that had

already been reported to Court. If Samantha were to reveal the manner

in which he actually suffered that injury at that point of time, that

would have had the effect of directly contradicting the version of

events, as narrated by the Police. In such circumstances, it is reasonable

to expect that Samantha would have not wanted to invite more trouble

by making such serious accusation against the arresting officers,

regarding the severe beating he had received at their hands.

S.C. (FR) No. 85/2015

18

The Courts, in assessing the reliability of such claims are mindful

of such limitations faced by the victims, who are reluctant to make a

very descriptive and truthful disclosure of what they have actually

experienced during their arrest and detention. It is not uncommon, that

persons who made such accusations were severely dealt with by the

concerned officers, once his custody is returned back to them by the

Magistrates, as revealed in the case of Somawardena v Superintendent

of Prisons and Others (SC Application 494/93 (Spl) decided on

22.03.1995). The observations of Atukorale J in Amal Sudath Silva v

Kodituwakku, Inspector of Police & Others (1987) 2 Sri L.R. 119, aptly

describe the approach this Court had adopted in such circumstances, on

the assessment of the reliability of claims of torture to a medical officer

or to a Judge, as revealed in the instant application;

It seems to me to be preposterous for any medical officer before whom a

suspect is produced for a medical examination in the custody of a police

officer to expect him to tell the officer in the very presence of that police

officer that he bears injuries caused to him as a result of a police assault.

This seems particularly so when the suspect is produced at the instance

of the police themselves and not upon an order of Court.

The evasive nature of the answer given by Samantha to the

Magistrate, in reply to the latters query as to how he was injured, by

stating kskao .shd jegs,do okafka kE, and thereby pleading total ignorance

as to the cause of his injuries, is indicative of this unfortunate reality.

Coming back to the issue of how the deceased Samantha had

suffered 32 ante mortem injuries, the Petitioner asserts that the 1st to 6th

Respondents have repeatedly beaten him with pipes, clubs and sticks.

She also alleged that during this severe physical assault, Samantha was

S.C. (FR) No. 85/2015

19

lying on the ground with his hand tied from his shirt to the front of his

body. He was crying out loud, not to kill him. Injury Nos. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10

were on his anterior aspect of his right arm and only injury Nos. 11 and

12 were seen on dorsal aspect of his left hand and near root of the left

thumb. This pattern of injuries indicates that one hand had suffered

more injuries than the other and that too on the outer aspect. Except for

six of his injuries, all other injuries were located on the back of his body

and the injuries that were noted on the back of the thigs had extended

deep into underlying muscles, indicating the degree of force used to

inflict them.

It had already been referred to the fact that the Consultant JMO

was of the opinion that the contusions and abrasions on the body of

Samantha were compatible with blunt force trauma following assault

with heavy cylindrical weapon like wooden clubs. Thus, the available

medical evidence is not only consistent with the Petitioners allegation

of repeated assaults with pipes, clubs and sticks, but also corroborates

that assertion. The death of Samantha was due to multiple contusions to

head, back of the body and limbs. The claim of the 4th and 5th

Respondents, that these injuries were caused to the deceased by the

Prison guards after his unsuccessful escape attempt, too was effectively

negated by the medical evidence as the Consultant JMO had opined

that the injuries, he had seen on the body of the deceased were in the

process of healing and therefore were 3 to 4 days old. The arrest of

Samantha had taken place in the evening of 19.02.2015 after 4.00. p.m.

and his death had occurred around 5.00 p.m. on 23.02. 2015, just short of

less than one hour to complete the four-day duration. The witnesses

who had seen the escape attempt say it had happened on 21.02.2015,

soon after midnight but no injuries were observed by the Consultant

S.C. (FR) No. 85/2015

20

JMO, matching with this claim. Therefore, I reject the 1st to 6th

Respondents contention that the injuries that resulted in the death of

Samantha were caused to him while under the custody of the Prison

officers and their denial of any responsibility owing to that reason.

It is not clear as to the reason to unleash such a sustained severe

assault on Samantha at the time of his arrest. There is no material to

suggest that he resisted the arrest, and if he had resisted the arrest,

obviously the 1st to 6th Respondents would have sought to justify the

minimum force used to make the arrest. The Petitioners contention was

that Samantha was tortured by the 1st to 6th Respondents to extract

information as to a stock of illicit liquor. Similarly, there is no material

even to suggest that Samantha was assaulted during the time he was

detained in the cell of Sooriyawewa Police. When he called Sriyalatha

after he was put into a cell, he did not claim there too he was assaulted.

In view of the consultant JMOs opinion, it is more probable that the

black eye was a result of a deep contusion underlying beneath the

injury No. 2 and it is not due to the fall from the bench or due to the

failed attempt to escape, as per the explanation offered by the 1st to 6th

Respondents.

The allegation of the Petitioner that her son had died due to an

act of assault by the arresting officers was presented to a person in

authority at the first available opportunity. Samantha had died on

22.02.2105 and during the inquest proceedings conducted on the same

day, the Petitioner had made the identical accusation to the Magistrate

and when questioned on what material she makes such an accusation,

she had replied that there are witnesses who saw the assault on her son

and they will be produced.

S.C. (FR) No. 85/2015

21

In view of the above, it is my considered opinion that the

Petitioner, by adducing credible and reliable eyewitness account as well

as medical evidence, had sufficiently discharged her burden of proof on

her complaint that her sons fundamental right to freedom from torture

had been violated by executive and administrative actions of 1st to 6th

Respondents, and thereby established her allegation against them.

The fact that Samantha was in possession of a significant quantity

of illicit liquor (assuming the notes reflect the actual reason for the

arrest) and having several prosecutions pending for similar offences, in

any way would not justify the conduct of the 1st to 6th Respondents.

Despite the fact that almost twenty-eight years ago to the date of arrest

of Samantha, this Court had very forcefully stated in the Judgment of

Amal Sudath Silva vs. Kodituwakku (1987) 2 Sri LR 119, that Nothing

shocks the conscience of a man so much as the cowardly act of a delinquent

police officer who subjects a helpless suspect in his charge to depraved and

barbarous methods of treatment ... Such action on the part of the police will

only breed contempt for the law and will tend to make the public lose

confidence in the ability of the police to maintain law and order. The petitioner

may be a hard-core criminal whose tribe deserve no sympathy. But if

constitutional guarantees are to have any meaning or value in our democratic

set up, it is essential that he be riot denied the protection guaranteed by our

Constitution. It is evident from complaints such as the instant

application, that there are officers, who continue to employ barbarous

methods of treatment on the suspects they happen to take charge and

pay scant regard to the repeated and consistent emphasis by this Court

on them to act within the Law.

S.C. (FR) No. 85/2015

22

The complaint of the Petitioner that the 1st to 6th Respondents

have violated the fundamental right guaranteed to her son under

Article 13(4) needed to be examined next.

Article 13 (4) of the Constitution reads as follows: -

"No person shall be punished with death or imprisonment

except by order of a competent Court, made in accordance

with procedure established by law, and shall not be further

held in custody, detained or deprived of personal liberty

except upon and in terms of the order of such judge made in

accordance with procedure established by law."

In Lama Hewage Lal (Deceased), Rani Fernando (Wife of the Deceased)

& Others v Officer in Charge Minor Offences, Police Station,

Seeduwa & Others (2005) 1 Sri L.R. 40, this Court has held thus: -

A careful reading of Article 13 (4) of the Constitution clearly

reveals that no person should be punished with death or

imprisonment except by an order of a competent Court.

Accordingly, if there is no order from such a Court no person

should be punished with death and unless and otherwise such an

order is made by a competent Court, any person has a right to live.

Considering the contents of Article 13 (4) of the Constitution,

Fernando, J. in Kotabadu Durage Sriyani Silva v Chanaka

Iddamalgoda, Officer-in-Charge, Police Station Payagala

(2003) 1 Sri L.R. 14, stated that, "expressed positively, that

provision means that a person has a right to live, unless a Court

orders otherwise".

S.C. (FR) No. 85/2015

23

It is clear from the PMR that Samanthas death had a causal nexus

to the injuries caused to him by the 1st to 6th Respondents, during the

formers arrest. Despite the fact that the death of Samantha had occurred

during the period he was detained by the Prison officers, the cause of

death is attributable to the injuries suffered during the arrest. Clearly

the right to life of Samantha had been violated by the 1st to 6th

Respondents by their collective actions, and thus the claim of

infringement of the fundamental right guaranteed to Samantha under

Article 13(4) by them too is established by the Petitioner.

Therefore, I hold that the 1st to 6th Respondents have violated

fundamental rights of the deceased Liyana Archchige Samantha,

guaranteed to him under Articles 11 and 13(4) of the Constitution and is

entitled to such a declaration along with compensation awarded to his

next of kin.

Learned State Counsel who represented the 8th Respondent,

informs this Court that an inquiry under Establishment Code (reference

No. S/DIG/SP/E/60/2015 was conducted by the Police Department

against the 1st to 6th Respondents. After the said inquiry, promotions of

the 2nd Respondent were deferred for a period of three years and the 1st,

3rd, 4th 6th Respondents were severely warned. The 5th Respondent was

discharged after the said inquiry. She further informed Court that after

conclusion of the non- summary inquiry, the 8th Respondent had taken

a decision to forward an indictment against the 1st, 2nd 3rd and 6th

Respondents under Section 296 of the Penal Code, in addition to

charges under Section 2 of the Convention Against Torture and Other

Cruel, Inhumane or Degrading Treatment or Punishment Act No. 22 of

1994. The 4th and 5th Respondents were discharged from the said

S.C. (FR) No. 85/2015

24

criminal prosecution, owing to the reason there was no admissible

evidence revealed against them during the non-summary inquiry.

The attack on Samantha took place during a time duration of little

over an hour. Despite the attack commenced by two officers, the other

four had joined well before the party had returned to Station with

Samantha. The material available before this Court does not provide a

reasonable basis to apportion the individual responsibility in the

infringement of Samanthas right to freedom from torture. Having

considered all the attendant circumstances, I order each of the 1st to 6th

Respondents to pay a sum of Rs. 100,000.00 as compensation from their

personal funds. Since the 1st to 6th Respondents have infringed the

fundamental rights of Samantha by torturing him, whilst acting in the

colour of lawful authority of making an arrest under the provisions of

the Excise Ordinance, I order the State to pay Rs. 300,000.00 as

compensation.

The 1st to 6th and the 7th Respondent to deposit these amounts in

the Registry of this Court within a period of three months from this

Judgment. This award of compensation should not be a bar for any

other Court from awarding compensation to the dependents of the

deceased Samantha.

It is evident from the petition of the Petitioner that her sons three

children were left in the lurch, without the care and protection of both

their parents.

In the circumstances, the registered Attorney of the Petitioner is

directed to tender the birth certificates of the three children of the

deceased Samantha forthwith to the Registry of this Court. The Registrar

S.C. (FR) No. 85/2015

25

of this Court thereupon will take steps to deposit Rs. 300,000.00 each, in

the names of the three children in the Sooriyawewa branch of the

National Savings Bank. The three of them are entitled to the principal

sum deposited in their names, upon reaching 18 years of age.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

L.T.B. DEHIDENIYA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

A.L. SHIRAN GOONERATNE, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT