IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Lakshani Madusha Sammuarachchi,

“Suramya”, Welimanna, Aranayake.

Petitioner

SC APPEAL NO: SC/APPEAL/220/2017

SC LA NO: SC/HCCA/LA/343/16

HCCA KEGALLE NO: SP/HCCA/KEG/117/2012

DC MAWANALLA NO: 24/T

Vs.

Surangi Deepika Jayawardhena,

“Suramya”, Welimanna, Aranayake.

Respondent

AND BETWEEN

1. Nirmala Shiranthani Siriwardhena,

2/55, Welimanna, Aranayake.

2. Krishan Lakshman Siriwardhena,

“Suramya”, Welimanna, Aranayake.

Intervenient Petitioners

Vs.

1. Lakshani Madusha Sammuarachchi

Petitioner-Respondent

2. Surangi Deepika Jayawardhena

Respondent-Respondent

Both of,

“Suramya”, Welimanna, Aranayake.

2

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

AND BETWEEN

1. Nirmala Shiranthani Siriwardhena,

2/55, Welimanna, Aranayake.

2. Krishan Lakshman Siriwardhena,

“Suramya”, Welimanna, Aranayake.

Intervenient Petitioner-Petitioners

Vs.

1. Lakshani Madusha Sammuarachchi

Petitioner-Respondent-Respondent

2. Surangi Deepika Jayawardhena

Respondent-Respondent-Respondent

Both of,

“Suramya”, Welimanna, Aranayake.

AND NOW BETWEEN

Lakshani Madusha Sammuarachchi,

“Suramya”, Welimanna, Aranayake.

Petitioner-Respondent-Respondent-

Appellant

Vs.

1. Nirmala Shiranthani Siriwardhena,

2/55, Welimanna, Aranayake.

2. Krishan Lakshman Siriwardhena

Intervenient Petitioner-Petitioner-

Respondents

3. Surangi Deepika Jayawardhena

Respondent-Respondent-Respondent-

Respondent

Both of, “Suramya”, Welimanna,

Aranayake.

3

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

Before: P. Padman Surasena, J.

Yasantha Kodagoda, P.C., J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Asthika Devendra with Milinda Sarathchandra for the

Petitioner-Respondent-Respondent-Appellant.

Ravindra Anawaratne with D.L.W. Somadasa for the 1st

Intervenient Petitioner-Petitioner-Respondent.

Pubudu De Silva for the 2nd Intervenient Petitioner-

Petitioner-Respondent.

Argued on: 07.06.2022

Written submissions:

by the Petitioner-Respondent-Respondent-Appellant on

23.01.2018 and 07.07.2022.

by the 1st Intervenient Petitioner-Petitioner-Respondent on

04.07.2022.

by the 2nd Intervenient Petitioner-Petitioner-Respondent on

09.04.2018 and 06.07.2022.

Decided on: 17.11.2022

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The original petitioner filed this application in the District Court of

Mawanella on 17.09.2010 making her mother the respondent, seeking to

admit the last will tendered with the petition to probate and to issue the

probate in her name for the administration of the estate of the deceased.

The deceased was the uncle of the original petitioner and by this last will

he bequeathed all his property to the original petitioner subject to the life

interest of the original petitioner’s mother, who is the elder sister of the

4

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

deceased. Newspaper publications were properly done in terms of section

529 of the Civil Procedure Code and nobody came forward to object to the

original petitioner’s application. The court made order on 06.05.2011

issuing the probate to the original petitioner and follow up orders were

made accordingly.

Pending termination of the proceedings, nearly one year after the issuance

of the probate, the two intervenient petitioners who are the siblings of the

deceased and the original respondent made an application to the District

Court under section 839 of the Civil Procedure Code seeking to recall the

probate and to issue the same in the name of the 1st intervenient petitioner

on the basis that: the purported last will is a fraudulent document; they

had no knowledge of the testamentary proceedings; and the intestate

estate of the deceased should devolve on the two intervenient petitioners

and the original respondent in equal shares because they are the natural

heirs of the deceased. The District Court made order dated 08.06.2012

rejecting this application. On appeal, the High Court of Civil Appeal by

judgment dated 02.06.2016 set aside the order of the District Court and

allowed the appeal. Hence this appeal by the original petitioner.

Maasdorp’s Institutes of South African Law at page 146 states “A will is a

declaration made by any person during his lifetime as to what he wishes

should become of his property after his death”. In terms of section 21 of the

Judicature Act No. 2 of 1978 testamentary jurisdiction is vested in the

District Court. The Wills Ordinance No. 21 of 1844 lays down the

substantive law regarding last wills. The Civil Procedure Code lays down

the procedure to be adopted in testamentary proceedings. I must state at

the outset that the testamentary procedure contained in the Civil

Procedure Code is complex and complicated. This procedure has

undergone a series of amendments over a considerable period of time and

it will continue to change. If I may trace the recent history, the procedure

5

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

was substantially changed by the Civil Procedure Code (Amendment) Law

No. 20 of 1977. Thereafter, the entire chapter 38 under the heading

‘Testamentary Actions’ was repealed and replaced with a new chapter by

the Civil Procedure Code (Amendment) Act No. 14 of 1993. After Act No.

14 of 1993, chapter 38 was further amended by Act Nos. 38 of 1998, 34

of 2000, 20 of 2002, 4 of 2005 and 11 of 2010. There are substantial

differences including the content and numbering of sections between the

old procedure and the new procedure and therefore cases decided under

the old procedure may not be relevant although they are cited and followed

without fully appreciating the differences between the two. For instance,

sections 536 and 537 governed the recall of probate under the old

procedure whereas under the new procedure it is sections 537 and 538

that govern the same. Hence in referring to or citing previous decisions,

care must be taken not to go by section numbers alone. A case in point

might be Shanthi Goonetilake v. Mangalika [2006] 3 Sri LR 331 where the

Court of Appeal seems to have relied on the judgments decided under the

old procedure to deal with an application filed under the new procedure.

In the first place, the sections relevant to testamentary procedure cannot

be found in one place in the Civil Procedure Code. They are in several

places: chapter 38 under the heading ‘Testamentary Actions’ with sections

516-554A is in one place whereas chapter 54 under the heading ‘Of Aiding,

Supervising, and Controlling Executors and Administrators’ with sections

712-722 and chapter 55 under the heading ‘Of the Accounting and

Settlement of the Estate’ with sections 723-744 are in a completely

different place. Chapter 38A under the heading ‘Insolvent Testamentary

Estates’ with sections 554F-554T, chapter 38B under the heading ‘Foreign

Probates’ with sections 554U-555BB and chapter 38C under the heading

‘General and Transitional Provisions in Testamentary Matters’ with sections

554CC-554DD were introduced by the Civil Procedure Code (Amendment)

Law No. 20 of 1977.

6

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

Furthermore, the law on testamentary procedure itself has been

influenced by different legal systems. L.J.M. Cooray in An Introduction to

the Legal System of Sri Lanka states at pages 26-27 “The offices of executor

and administrator are copied from English law and the rules governing

executors and administrators are to be found in the Civil Procedure Code,

1977, and have been influenced by English law. But they are given effect

to in a Roman-Dutch atmosphere because Roman-Dutch rules generally

apply regarding heirs and testate succession.” As pointed out by Bertram

C.J. in De Zoysa v. De Zoysa (1924) 26 NLR 472 at 476, Wijeyewardene J.

in De Silva v. Jayakody (1941) 42 NLR 226 at 229-230 and Sirimane J. in

Pathmanathan v. Thuraisingham (1970) 74 NLR 196 at 199-200, our

testamentary law relating to chapters 54 and 55 has been taken almost

verbatim from the Code of Civil Procedure of the State of New York.

All these factors have contributed to create inter alia redundancies,

obscurities, inconsistencies, overlaps etc. within the stipulated procedure.

For these reasons, in the course of this judgment I will endeavour to throw

some light (albeit not comprehensively) on some practical aspects of

general importance in the testamentary procedure.

In terms of section 517 of the Civil Procedure Code, when a person dies

leaving a last will, the person appointed therein as executor can apply to

the District Court in terms of section 524 to have the will proved and the

probate issued to him; or any other interested person can apply to have

the will proved and letters of administration issued with the will annexed.

517(1). When any person shall die leaving a will under or by virtue of

which any property in Sri Lanka is in any way affected, any person

appointed executor therein may apply to the District Court of the

district within which he resides, or within which the testator resided

at the time of his death, or within which any land belonging to the

testator’s estate is situate, within the time limit and in the manner

7

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

specified in section 524, to have the will proved and to have probate

thereof granted to him; any person interested, either by virtue of the

will or otherwise, in having the property of the testator administered,

may also apply to such court to have the will proved and to obtain

grant to himself of administration of the estate with copy of the will

annexed.

(2) If any person who would be entitled to administration is absent

from Sri Lanka a grant of letters of administration with or without the

will annexed, as the case may require, may be made to the duly

constituted attorney of such person.

As the law stands today, how the application for probate shall be made is

stated in section 524 of the Civil Procedure Code. Accordingly, the

application shall be made by petition and affidavit (but not by way of

summary procedure) and the petition shall set out inter alia the matters

stated in section 524(1)(a)-(d). They are: the fact of the making of the will,

the detail and situation of the deceased’s property, the heirs of the

deceased to the best of the petitioner’s knowledge, the grounds upon

which the petitioner is entitled to have the will proved, and the character

in which the petitioner makes the claim.

524(1). Every application to the District Court to have the will of a

deceased person proved shall be made within a period of three

months from the date of finding of the will, and shall be made by way

of petition and affidavit and such petition shall set out in numbered

paragraphs-

(a) the fact of the making of the will;

(b) the details and situation of the deceased’s property;

(bb) the heirs of the deceased to the best of the petitioner’s

knowledge;

8

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

(c) the grounds upon which the petitioner is entitled to have the will

proved; and

(d) the character in which the petitioner claims (whether as creditor,

executor, administrator, residuary legatee, legatee heir or

devisee).

(2) If the will is not already deposited in the District Court in which

the application is made, it must either be appended to the petition, or

must be brought into court and identified by affidavit, with the will as

an exhibit thereto, or by parol testimony at the time the application is

made.

(3) Every person making or intending to make, an application to a

District Court under this section to have the will of a deceased person

proved, which will is deposited in another District Court, is entitled to

procure the latter for the purpose of such application. Also the

application must be supported by sufficient evidence either in the

shape of affidavits of facts, with the will as an exhibit thereto, or of

oral testimony, proving that the will was duly executed according to

law, and establishing the character of the petitioner according to his

claim.

(4) The petitioner shall tender with the petition proof of payment of

charges to cover the cost of publication of the notice under section

529.

One of the main issues relating to the mode of application is whether

compliance with all the provisions of section 524(1)(a)-(d) is mandatory or

directory. If it is mandatory, for instance, failure to mention one property

of the deceased or one heir of the deceased would render the entire

proceedings void ab initio. The section requires the heirs of the deceased

to be stated in the petition “to the best of the petitioner’s knowledge”. The

9

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

language itself gives the indication that it is not mandatory. If the

petitioner is a stranger to the family and has no personal knowledge of the

heirs of the deceased, for instance, he will not be able to list out the names

of the heirs of the deceased. Hence as was held in Biyanwila v.

Amarasekere (1965) 67 NLR 488 and Pieris v. Wijeratne [2000] 2 Sri LR

145, the provisions of section 524(1)(a)-(d) are directory and not

mandatory. However, willful suppression of material particulars will not

be tolerated by court. It is in this context that Sirimane J. in the Biyanwila

case stated at page 494 “I am of the view that the provisions of this section

[524] are only directory, and that a failure to strictly comply with those

provisions, does not render the proceedings void ab initio. They are,

however, voidable, and in an appropriate case a party may ask the court

for relief under section 839 of the Civil Procedure Code.” Referring to the

failure to name heirs as parties to the application for probate, in the

Supreme Court case of Actalina Fonseka v. Dharshani Fonseka [1989] 2

Sri LR 95 at 99, Kulatunga J. stated “However, such failure is a relevant

fact in determining whether probate had been obtained by fraud.”

Let me now consider the application made by the intervenient petitioners

seeking to recall the probate. The intervenient petitioners made this

application under section 839 of the Civil Procedure Code.

839. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to limit or otherwise

affect the inherent power of the court to make such orders as may be

necessary for the ends of justice or to prevent abuse of the process of

the court.

It is not possible for the legislature to anticipate and make provision to

cover all possible contingencies. If there is no specific provision, it lies

within the inherent power of the District Court in terms of section 839 of

the Civil Procedure Code to make such orders as may be necessary for the

ends of justice or to prevent the abuse of the process of court.

10

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

Nevertheless, express provisions cannot be made nugatory by the inherent

power of the court. Inherent jurisdiction can be invoked if and only if there

is no provision in the law (Kamala v. Andris (1939) 41 NLR 71, Leechman

& Company Ltd v. Rangalla Consolidated Ltd [1981] 2 Sri LR 373,

Seneviratne v Abeykoon [1986] 2 Sri LR 1, Abeygunasekera v. Wijesekara

[2002] 2 Sri LR 269, Ravi Karunanayake v. Wimal Weerawansa [2006] 3

Sri LR 16).

Specific provisions are found in sections 537 and 538 to deal with

recalling, revoking or cancelling probate, letters of administration or

certificate of heirship. Section 537 deals with the grounds upon which

probate can be recalled, and section 538 stipulates that such application

shall be made by way of summary procedure. The intervenient petitioners

neither filed an application for recalling the probate under section 537 nor

followed summary procedure as required by section 538. As learned

counsel for the original petitioner points out, it is obvious that the

application of the intervenient petitioners in the District Court was

procedurally flawed and the District Court ought to have dismissed it in

limine. However the court did not do so. Nor did counsel for the original

petitioner object to the intervenient petitioners’ application in the District

Court on that basis. The original petitioner objected to it on the basis that

the intervenient petitioners did not make the application within the time

stipulated in the newspaper publication made under section 529 of the

Civil Procedure Code.

Unlike in a situation where there is patent or total want of jurisdiction,

when the court has plenary jurisdiction to deal with a matter and the

question is on invoking such jurisdiction in the right manner, a party

cannot keep silent and take up an objection as to procedure when the final

order is made against him. Any objection as to latent or contingent want

of jurisdiction shall be taken at the first available opportunity (section 39

11

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

of the Judicature Act No. 32 of 1978; Navaratnasingham v. Arumugam

[1980] 2 Sri LR 1 at 5-6). It is only if want of jurisdiction is patent that the

matter can be raised at any time, even for the first time on appeal, in which

event the whole proceedings including the judgment becomes a nullity ab

initio due to coram non judice (Beatrice Perera v. The Commissioner of

National Housing (1974) 77 NLR 361 at 366-370, Abeywickrama v.

Pathirana [1986] 1 Sri LR 120).

In Dabare v. Appuhamy [1980] 2 Sri LR 54 the defendant sought to dismiss

the plaintiff’s action on res judicata but the objection was overruled. On

appeal by the defendant, the plaintiff submitted that the dismissal of his

former action was invalid as the court had followed the wrong procedure,

in that, instead of summary procedure, regular procedure had been

followed. At that time, the plaintiff had not objected to the wrong

procedure being followed. Rejecting that argument and allowing the

appeal, the court stated that notwithstanding that the wrong procedure

had been followed, the order of dismissal made by the court was valid

since the court had jurisdiction to hear and determine the action and the

plaintiff did not take objection to the wrong procedure being followed at

that time. Wrong procedure can be validated by acquiescence, waiver or

inaction on the part of the parties.

I might also mention that when the court has plenary jurisdiction, it

cannot dismiss an application merely because the caption in the

application refers to a wrong section. If the Judge thinks that the applicant

has come under a wrong section but the court has jurisdiction to make a

suitable order had the application been made under the correct section,

the Judge shall not dismiss the application in limine on that ground alone,

unless such reference to the wrong section in the caption has caused

prejudice to the opposite party in meeting the applicant’s case in the

proper context.

12

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

Bindra on the Interpretation of Statutes (1975) 6th Ed. at page 153 states:

“It is a well-settled principle of interpretation that as long as an authority

has Power to do a thing, it does not matter if it purports to do it by reference

to a wrong Provision of law.” In Peiris v. The Commissioner of Inland

Revenue (1963) 65 NLR 457 Sansoni J. (later C.J.) stated at 458: “It is well-

settled that an exercise of a power will be referable to a jurisdiction which

confers validity upon it and not to a jurisdiction under which it will be

nugatory. This principle has been applied even to cases where a Statute

which confers no power has been quoted as authority for a particular act,

and there was in force another Statute which conferred that power.” This

principle was recognised in Solicitor-General v. Perera (1914) 17 NLR 413

at 416, Peiris v. The Commissioner of Inland Revenue (1963) 65 NLR 457 at

458, Jayawardane v. Ran Aweera [2004] 3 Sri LR 37 at 41 and

Kumaranatunga v. Samarasinghe [1983] 2 Sri LR 63 at 73-74.

In the case of Jayasekera v. Lakmini [2010] 1 Sri LR 41 at 51 the Supreme

Court pointed out that even if the attention of the court has not been

drawn to the relevant statutory provision through which relief could be

granted, “it is undoubtedly incumbent upon the Court to utilize the statutory

provisions and grant the relief embodied therein if it appears to Court that

it is just and fair to do so.” In Wilson v. Kusumawathi [2015] BLR 49 also

the Supreme Court took the same view.

In the instant case the District Court while recognising that the

intervenient petitioners could not come under section 839 nevertheless

considered the intervenient petitioners’ application under section 537 but

held that there were no sufficient grounds to recall the probate.

The High Court of Civil Appeal set aside the order of the District Court on

two main grounds: (a) failure on the part of the original petitioner to name

the intervenient petitioners as respondents to the main application as

necessary parties; and (b) failure on the part of the District Judge to come

13

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

to a definite finding that the last will was proved before issuance of the

probate.

There is no dispute that the names of the intervenient petitioners are

included in the body of the petition of the original petitioner. The High

Court of Civil Appeal in several places of the impugned judgment

emphasises that the intervenient petitioners are the natural heirs of the

deceased in the event the testator died intestate and therefore naming

them only in the body of the petition is insufficient and they ought to have

been named as necessary parties (respondents) to the application. The

High Court of Civil Appeal further states that non-compliance with section

524(5) makes the application of the original petitioner bad in law because

if no such affidavit as required by that section was tendered, the

intervenient petitioners should have been named as respondents.

Section 524(5) which stated “If the petitioner has no reason to suppose that

his application will be opposed by any person, he shall file with his petition

an affidavit to that effect and may omit to name any person in his petition

as respondent” was repealed, and section 524(1)(bb) which requires the

petitioner to name in the body of the petition “the heirs of the deceased to

the best of the petitioner’s knowledge” was introduced by the Civil

Procedure Code (Amendment) Act No. 38 of 1998.

Whether we agree or not, as the law stands today (which was the law

applicable at the time the original petitioner filed the application), in the

case of proving a last will, the law does not require the petitioner (a) to

name the heirs of the deceased as respondents to the application or (b) to

file an affidavit with the petition to say that he has no reason to suppose

that his application will be opposed by any person (thereby omitting to

name any person in his petition as a respondent).

14

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

I must also add that less than three weeks after the filing of the application

by the original petitioner in the District Court, section 524(4) was further

amended by the Civil Procedure Code (Amendment) Act No. 11 of 2010

whereby the requirement of tendering with the petition “the consent in

writing of such respondents as consent to his application” under section

524(4)(b) was also removed.

The intention of the legislature is clear by looking at section 528 of the

Civil Procedure Code, which sets out what an application for letters of

administration or certificate of heirship (in the case of death without a last

will) should constitute. Whilst section 528(1)(c) requires the petitioner to

set out in the body of the petition “the heirs of the deceased to the best of

the petitioner’s knowledge”, section 528(2) states that the petitioner “shall

name the next of kin of the deceased as respondents. If the petitioner has

no reason to suppose that his application will be opposed by any person,

he shall file with his petition an affidavit to that effect.” Section 528(3)(b)

further states that “The petitioner shall tender with the petition the consent

in writing of such respondents as consent to his application.” Section 528(3)

was further amended by the Civil Procedure Code (Amendment) Act No.

11 of 2010 with the introduction of section 528(3)(c) which requires the

petitioner to tender with the petition “notices on the respondents who have

not consented to the application, requiring them to file objections if any, to

the application on or before the date specified in the notice under section

529. Such notice shall be sent by the probate officer by registered post.”

Let me reproduce section 528 as it stands today for convenience:

528(1). Every application to the District Court for grant of letters of

administration or for the issue of certificates of heirship shall be made

within three months from the date of death, and shall be made by

way of petition and affidavit, and such petition shall set out in

numbered paragraphs-

15

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

(a) the fact of the absence of the will;

(b) the death of the deceased;

(c) the heirs of the deceased to the best of the petitioner’s

knowledge;

(d) the details and the situation of the deceased’s property;

(e) the particulars of the liabilities of the estate;

(f) the particulars of the creditors of the estate;

(g) the character in which the petitioner claims and the facts

which justify his doing so;

(h) the share of the estate which each heir is entitled to receive, if

agreed to by the heirs.

(2) The application shall be supported by sufficient evidence to afford

prima facie proof of the material averments in the petition, and shall

name the next of kin of the deceased as respondents. If the petitioner

has no reason to suppose that his application will be opposed by any

person, he shall file with his petition an affidavit to that effect.

(3) The petitioner shall tender with the petition-

(a) proof of payment of charges to cover the cost of publication of

the notice under section 529;

(b) the consent in writing of such respondents as consent to his

application;

(c) notices on the respondents who have not consented to the

application, requiring them to file objections if any, to the

application on or before the date specified in the notice under

section 529. Such notice shall be sent by the probate officer

by registered post.

This shows that the legislature did not intend to include the requirement

of the naming of heirs or next of kin of the deceased as respondents in an

16

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

application filed before the District Court to have the last will of the

deceased proved.

Hence the finding of the High Court of Civil Appeal that the failure to name

the intervenient petitioners as respondents to the application as necessary

parties is fatal does not represent the correct position of the law.

Nonetheless I must add that although naming heirs as respondents is not

mandatory, it is all the more salutary for any petitioner to name the heirs

or at least potential contesting heirs of the deceased as respondents for

transparency and to bring early finality to the case. In my view, if there is

a statutory requirement that the heirs of the deceased to the best of the

petitioner’s knowledge be made respondents and notice be served on them

where there is no written consent to the petitioner’s application, prolonged

litigation in the case of testacy can be minimised. It may be recalled that

in Biyanwila case (supra), Sirimane J. at page 494 whist stating that

failure to strictly comply with section 524 does not render the proceedings

void ab initio, further remarked that “They are, however, voidable, and in

an appropriate case a party may ask the court for relief under section 839

of the Civil Procedure Code”; and in Actalina Fonseka’s case (supra) at page

99, Kulatunga J. stated “However, such failure is a relevant fact in

determining whether probate had been obtained by fraud.”

When the District Court refused the application of the intervenient

petitioners for recalling the probate on the basis that there were

insufficient grounds to allow the application, the High Court of Civil

Appeal posed the question whether there were sufficient grounds for the

District Court to issue the probate in favour of the petitioner in the first

place. The High Court of Civil Appeal concluded that the issuance of

probate becomes relevant if and only if the District Court comes to the

definite finding that the will has been proved, but in this case the District

17

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

Judge has not done so before the issuance of the probate to the original

petitioner. There is force in this finding.

A testamentary action is similar to a partition action. The District Judge

hearing a testamentary action has a special duty to give effect to the

intention of the testator in the case of testacy and make a proper

distribution of property in the case of intestacy. In the full bench decision

of the Supreme Court in Adoris v. Perera (1914) 17 NLR 212 at 214,

Lascelles C.J. remarked “A judgment granting probate of a will is a

judgment in rem, and is binding on the world.” Further as stated by

Chitrasiri J. in Sadhana Dharmabandu v. Mallika Homes Ltd [2009] 1 Sri

LR 151 at 157 “The purpose of testamentary actions is to ascertain the wish

of a deceased person who cannot be called to court. Therefore, a duty is

cast upon Court to ascertain the intention of a deceased person irrespective

of adverse interests that may arise from other individuals.” The absence of

objections upon newspaper publications in terms of section 529 does not

absolve the District Judge from this special duty.

For instance, in terms of section 516, when any person shall die leaving a

will in Sri Lanka, the person in whose custody it shall have been deposited,

or who shall find such will after the testator’s death, shall produce the

same to the District Court of the district in which such depository or finder

resides, or to the District Court of the district in which the testator shall

have died, as soon as reasonably possible after the testator’s death. In

terms of section 517, as I stated earlier, the person appointed executor of

the last will or any interested party can make an application to the District

Court under section 524 to have the will proved and probate granted to

him or to have letters of administration issued to him with the will

annexed. In terms of sections 518 and 519 of the Civil Procedure Code,

when a will is deposited in court and no application has been made by any

person to prove the will and the probate issued, it is the duty of the court

18

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

to take appropriate steps to appoint a person to administer the estate of

the deceased or, if there is no fit and proper person to be so appointed, to

appoint the public trustee as the administrator.

The High Court of Civil Appeal without referring to any section in the Civil

Procedure Code on burden of proof or standard of proof of a will states “In

this action the petitioner-respondent has sought probate on the basis of a

purported last will of the deceased executed in the presence of five

witnesses. I am of the view such a document can be accepted as a valid

last will if proved before a court of law and not otherwise.” The High Court

of Civil Appeal seems to have taken the view that leading oral evidence to

prove a last will is mandatory in each and every case. I do not think so. It

is true that as a general rule the onus is on the propounder of the will to

prove affirmatively that the will is the act and deed of the free and capable

testator by removing all suspicious circumstances, if any, attached to the

will. However I hasten to add that it is not the duty of the court to see that

a testator makes a just distribution of his property. As long as it is

affirmatively proved that the testator executed the will intending it to be

his last will, the court cannot refuse to make a declaration that the will is

proved on the ground that the distribution of the property in the will is

prima facie unjustifiable and therefore the will is shrouded in suspicious

circumstances (Peries v. Perera (1947) 48 NLR 560).

In terms of section 531(1), if no objections are received within the

stipulated time after the newspaper publications, the court shall make

order declaring the will proved if the court is satisfied that the evidence

adduced is sufficient to afford prima facie proof as to the due making of

the will and the character of the petitioner. What is necessary is prima

facie proof and not strict proof by leading oral evidence.

531(1). If no objections are received in relation to any application

received under section 524 and 528 in response to a notice published

19

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

under section 529, on or before the date specified in such notice in

respect of such application, the court shall-

(a) in the case of an application under section 524, if the court is

satisfied that the evidence adduced is sufficient to afford prima

facie proof as to the due making of the will and the character of

the petitioner, it shall made order declaring the will to be proved

and if the applicant claims-

(i) as the executor or one of the executors of the will and asks

that probate thereof be granted to him the order shall

declare that he is executor, and shall direct the grant of

probate to him accordingly, subject to the conditions

hereinafter prescribed; or

(ii) in any other character than that of executor, and asks that

the administration of the deceased’s property be granted to

him, then the order shall include a grant to the applicant of

a power to administer the deceased’s property according to

the will with a copy of the will annexed; or

(b) in the case of an application under section 528-

(i) make order for the grant of letters of administration to the

petitioner subject to the conditions hereinafter prescribed; or

(ii) make order for the issue of a certificate of heirship in form

No. 87A in the First Schedule, to each of the heirs mentioned

in the application, stating also the share of the estate which

each heir is entitled to receive, if agreed to by the heirs;

(c) in the case of an application under section 528 for the issue of

certificates of heirship, make order for the grant of letters of

administration, instead, to some person entitled to take out

administration, subject to the conditions hereafter prescribed, if in

the opinion of court it is necessary to appoint some person to

administer the estate.

20

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

(2) The certificates of heirship issued under subsection (1)(b)(ii) above

shall be sufficient proof of the true heirs of the deceased referred to

therein, and may be produced for the purpose of claiming any share

in respect of any right, title or interest, accruing upon intestacy.

(3) For the purpose of making an order under subsection (1), the

Probate Officer shall submit all papers, relevant to the application in

question, to the District Judge in Chambers on the day following the

date specified in the notice published under section 529, in respect of

such application and the court shall forthwith make an appropriate

order.

Although section 531(3) enacts that “For the purpose of making an order

under subsection (1), the Probate Officer shall submit all papers, relevant to

the application in question, to the District Judge in Chambers on the day

following the date specified in the notice published under section 529, in

respect of such application and the court shall forthwith make an

appropriate order”, the District Judge is not expected to make a

mechanical order that the will is proved. Section 531(3) requires the

Probate Officer to submit papers to the District Judge for the latter to

make an “appropriate order”.

Section 531(1)(a) states that “if the court is satisfied that the evidence

adduced is sufficient to afford prima facie proof as to the due making of the

will”, the court shall declare that the will is proved.

What is meant by “the due making of the will”? The constituent elements

of the due execution of a will are set out in section 4 of the Prevention of

Frauds Ordinance No. 7 of 1840.

4. No will, testament, or codicil containing any devise of land or other

immovable property, or any bequest of movable property, or for any

other purpose whatsoever, shall be valid unless it shall be in writing

21

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

and executed in manner hereinafter mentioned ; (that is to say) it shall

be signed at the foot or end thereof by the testator, or by some other

person in his presence and by his direction, and such signature shall

be made or acknowledged by the testator in the presence of a licensed

notary public and two or more witnesses, who shall be present at the

same time and duly attest such execution, or if no notary shall be

present, then such signature shall be made or acknowledged by the

testator in presence of five or more witnesses present at the same

time, and such witnesses shall subscribe the will in the presence of

the testator, but no form of attestation shall be necessary.

In the instant case, the District Court has not considered at all the

requirements of section 531(1)(a) and has merely made a perfunctory order

to issue the probate to the original petitioner upon realising that no

objections had been filed consequent to the newspaper publications – vide

Journal Entry No. 4 dated 06.05.2011.

What is meant by prima facie proof? In Velupillai v. Sidembram (1929) 31

NLR 97 at 99 Drieberg J. stated:

“Prima facie proof” in effect means nothing more than sufficient

proof—proof which should be accepted if there is nothing established

to the contrary; but it must be what the law recognizes as proof, that

is to say, it must be something which a prudent man in the

circumstances of the particular case ought to act upon—s. 3, Evidence

Ordinance.

Section 3 of the Evidence Ordinance in describing what is meant by

‘proved’ states “A fact is said to be proved when, after considering the

matters before it, the court either believes it to exist or considers its existence

so probable that a prudent man might, under the circumstances of the

22

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

particular case, to act upon the supposition that it exists.” (vide also

Wickremasuriya v. Dedoleena [1996] 2 Sri LR 95 at 101-102)

The learned District Judge did not exercise his judicial mind to consider

whether the original petitioner had prima facie proved the due making of

the will before he decided to issue the probate to the original petitioner.

What the learned District Judge has recorded in the Journal Entry is that

“proof of publication is tendered; no objections; probate is issued in favour

of the petitioner”.

I agree with the High Court of Civil Appeal that there was no definite

finding that the will had been proved before the order was made to issue

the probate, which is a sine qua non and a prerequisite to the issuance of

the probate. Given the consequences which follow from that finding, it is

not a curable procedural defect but non-compliance with a mandatory

provision of the law. The order shall reflect due consideration of the

evidence adduced by the petitioner.

It is similar but not identical to an ex parte judgment entered under

section 85(1) of the Civil Procedure Code where the plaintiff is required to

place evidence before the court in support of his claim by affidavit or oral

testimony to the satisfaction of the court. Section 531 requires adducing

sufficient evidence to afford prima facie proof of the due execution of the

will, while section 85 requires placing evidence by affidavit or oral

testimony to satisfy the court. Both under sections 85(1) and 531 of the

Civil Procedure Code, the court cannot make a mechanical order without

going into the merits of the application merely because the application is

ex parte and there is no contesting party before court. In the instant case

the District Judge did not make a mechanical order; he did not make any

order at all in respect of proof of the will.

23

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

The last will in question is not a notarially attested document. It has been

executed before five witnesses. In the application filed before the District

Court seeking to recall the probate, the intervenient petitioners specifically

aver fraud in the execution of the last will and state inter alia that the last

will which is not an act and deed of the deceased has been prepared in the

handwriting of the petitioner herself who is the sole beneficiary of it

(subject to the life interest of the beneficiary’s mother), and the deceased

has placed his signature on a stamp issued about five years before the

execution of the last will. The fact that the last will was prepared by the

beneficiary in her own handwriting has not been controverted up to now.

The District Court in the impugned order has not touched upon this vital

matter which excites the suspicion of the court.

In Pieris v. Wilbert (1956) 59 NLR 245, an application for probate of a will

was resisted on the ground that the testator was not in a fit state of mind

at the time the will was executed. The petitioner was nominated in the will

as executor and also as the sole heir of all the estate of the deceased. It

was not disputed that the petitioner took an active part in getting the will

executed. Against this backdrop, the Supreme Court at page 247 relied on

the following passage from the judgment of Baron Parke in the Privy

Council case of Barry v. Butlin [1838] 2 Moo. P.C. 480 at 482-483:

The rules of law according to which cases of this nature are to be

decided do not admit of any dispute so far as they are necessary to

the determination of the present appeal and they have been

acquiesced in on both sides. These rules are two: The first that the

onus probandi lies in every case upon the party propounding a will

and he must satisfy the conscience of the Court that the instrument

so propounded is the last will of a free and capable testator. The

second is that if a party writes or prepares a will under which he

takes a benefit, that is a circumstance that ought generally to excite

24

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

the suspicion of the Court, and call upon it to be vigilant and jealous

in examining the evidence in support of the instrument, in favour of

which it ought not to pronounce unless the suspicion is removed, and

it is judicially satisfied that the paper propounded does express the

true will of the deceased.

The same point, i.e. if a party writes or prepares a will under which he

takes a benefit the court ought not to pronounce in favour of it unless the

suspicion created by that act is removed, was highlighted in a number of

cases including The Alim Will Case (1919) 20 NLR 481, Arulampikai v.

Thambu (1944) 45 NLR 457, Sithamparanathan v. Mathuranayagam (1970)

73 NLR 53, Ratnayake v. Chandratillake [1987] 2 Sri LR 299.

The District Court mainly focused on the failure on the part of the

intervenient respondents to file objections within the stipulated time

mentioned in the newspaper publications. The explanation of the

intervenient respondents is that the original petitioner, original

respondent and 2nd intervenient petitioner are living at the same address

but the original petitioner and her mother (the sister of the intervenient

petitioners) concealed from them the existence of the last will and the

testamentary case filed in court despite their names being disclosed in the

body of the petition, and they came to know about the case only after they

mistakenly received a postcard (as all are living at the same address) sent

by the Attorney-at-Law of the original petitioner to the original respondent

asking the latter to meet with the Attorney-at-Law for the testamentary

case. The postcard had been tendered with the petition of the intervenient

petitioners. This explanation is acceptable.

In Actalina Fonseka’s case (supra) at pages 99-100, Kulatunga J.

remarked:

25

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

Learned Counsel also submitted that notice of Order Nisi was

advertised in the Newspaper as required by Section 532. That may

be adequate in law. However, for determining whether probate was

obtained by fraud it would be relevant to know whether having

regard to the circumstances of the plaintiffs, such notice afforded to

them an adequate opportunity of being aware of the case and

whether the Defendants-Appellants kept the Plaintiff-Respondents

out of the case being aware of the fact that the Plaintiff-Respondents

were not likely to have read the Newspaper and become aware of the

testamentary case.

On the allegations contained in the plaint the Court has to determine

upon evidence whether the Plaintiff-Respondents were deliberately

kept in the dark about the existence of the testamentary action to

make it appear to the Court that there was no opposition to the grant

of probate, whether the will is a forgery and whether probate had

been obtained by fraud.

It is undeniable that the most appropriate time to object to the last will or

grant of probate or letters of administration is within a date not earlier

than sixty days and not later than sixty-seven days from the date of the

first newspaper publication. The relevant section is section 529 of the Civil

Procedure Code.

529(1). Every application to a District Court under section 524 or 528

shall be received by the Probate Officer of the District Court, and shall

be registered in a separate register to be maintained for that purpose

by the Probate Officer who shall thereafter cause the required

publications to be made in terms of subsection (2).

(2) The Probate Officer of a District Court shall, on any day of the week

commencing on the third Sunday of every month cause a notice in

26

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

form No. 84 in the First Schedule to be published in a prescribed local

newspaper in Sinhala, Tamil and English, relating to-

(i) every application under section 524 or 528 received by that

District Court in the preceding one month; and

(ii) every application under section 524 or 528 received by that

District Court and incorporated for the first time in the notice

published in respect of such District Court in the previous month,

so however that the information in respect of every application under

section 524 or 528 received by every District Court is published on

two separate occasions in two consecutive months.

(3) The notice published under subsection (2), shall call upon persons

having objections to the making of an order declaring any will proved,

or the grant of probate or of letters of administration with or without

the will annexed, or the issue of certificates of heirship to any person

specified in the application made under section 524 or 528, to submit

their written objections, if any, supported by affidavit, before such

date as is specified in the notice, being a date not earlier than sixty

days and not later than sixty seven days from the date of the first

publication referred to in subsection (2).

(4) Copies of such objections if any, shall be forwarded by the person

making the same to the person making the application under section

524 or 528, as the case may be, and shall also be served on the other

parties named in such objections.

However this is not the only occasion an objection could be raised against

a declaration that the will is proved or against the grant of probate or

letters of administration.

27

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

The following dicta contained in the Court of Appeal judgment in Shanthi

Goonetilake v. Mangalika [2006] 3 Sri LR 331 at 334 and made use of to

dismiss applications in limine that “The first publication in terms of section

529(2) was done on 23.04.2003. Objections to the granting of letters of

administration could be entertained in terms of section 529(3) of the Civil

Procedure Code only if such objections are submitted not earlier than 60

days and not later than sixty seven days from the date of the first

publication referred to in section 529(2). However, the petitioner has not filed

any objections to the order made by Court to grant letters of administration

to the respondent as prescribed in section 529(2). When a period of time is

specified by law before the expiration of which any act has to be done by a

party in a Court of law, that Court has no jurisdiction to permit that act to

be done after the expiration of that time within which it had to be done

(Ceylon Breweries v. Fernando [2001] 1 Sri LR 270). Therefore when the

petitioner has not made an application to recall the letters of administration

within the period prescribed in section 529(3) of the Civil Procedure Code,

the petitioner’s application cannot be entertained” does not, with respect,

represent the correct position of the law. The law has provided for various

opportunities to intervene, object and make applications for recall of

probate or letters of administration etc. beyond the period stipulated in

the newspaper publications. In point of fact, a person cannot make an

application to recall the probate or letters of administration within the

period prescribed in section 529(3) since at that time the court has not

issued probate or letters of administration.

According to section 536, any person interested in the will or the

deceased’s property can intervene by filing in the same court a caveat

before the final hearing of the petition.

536. At any time after the notice published under section 529 and

before the final hearing of the petition, it shall be competent to any

28

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

person interested in the will or in the deceased person’s property or

estate, though not a person specified in the petition, to intervene, by

filling in the same court a caveat as set out in form No. 93 in the First

Schedule against the allowing of the petitioner’s claim or a notice of

opposition thereto, and the court may permit such person to file

objections, if any, and may adjourn the final hearing of the petition.

In terms of section 537, probate, letters of administration or a certificate

of heirship can be recalled, revoked or cancelled upon the court being

satisfied that (a) the certificate should not have been issued or that the

will ought not to have been held proved, (b) that the grant of probate or

letters of administration ought not to have been made, or (c) that events

have occurred which render administration impracticable or useless.

537. In any case where a certificate of heirship has issued, or probate

of a deceased person’s will or administration of a deceased person’s

property has been granted it shall be competent to the District Court

to cancel the said certificate, or recall the said probate or grant of

administration, and to revoke the grant thereof, upon being satisfied

that the certificate should not have been issued or that the will ought

not to have been held proved, or that the grant of probate or of

administration ought not to have been made; and it shall also be

competent to the District Court to recall the probate or grant of

administration, at any time upon being satisfied that events have

occurred which render the administration hereunder impracticable or

useless.

There is no time limit for an application under section 537 to be made but

if the applicant says he was unaware of the newspaper publication calling

for objections, such an application shall be made at the earliest possible

opportunity of such applicant becoming aware of the case. The test is

objective, not subjective.

29

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

In Biyanwila v. Amarasekere (supra), the appellant became aware of the

fact that the respondent, her mother, had obtained the probate as

executor of the last will in 1952 but about 9 years later in 1961 she came

to court challenging the last will as a forgery. Whilst dismissing the appeal,

Sirimane J. observed inter alia at 494:

In this case however one cannot disregard the long delay on the part

of the appellant which places the respondent at an obvious

disadvantage. An order revoking probate after the lapse of such a

length of time, may even place the rights of third parties in jeopardy.

Williams on Executors and Administrators says at page 81 of the 14th

edition “Where a party who is…entitled to call in the probate and put

the Executor to proof of the Will chooses to let a long time elapse before

he takes this step he is not entitled to any indulgence at the hands of

the Court.”

Prior to the Civil Procedure Code (Amendment) Act No. 14 of 1993 by

which the whole chapter 38 under the title ‘Testamentary Actions’ was

repealed and replaced with a new chapter, the testamentary procedure

had inter alia the following conspicuous features:

(a) application for probate or letters of administration shall be made by

way of summary procedure – sections 524(1), 530(1)

(b) if the court is prima facie satisfied with the application, order nisi

shall be issued in the first instance – sections 526, 531

(c) such order nisi will be served on the respondents and such other

persons as the court shall think fit – sections 526, 531

(d) order nisi shall be published in newspapers – section 532

(e) if the petitioner has no reason to suppose that his application will

be opposed by any person, he can file with his petition an affidavit

to that effect and omit to name any person in his petition as

respondent – section 525(1)

30

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

(f) in the case of an application for probate, if no respondent is named

in the petition, the court may in its discretion make the order

absolute in the first instance – section 529(1)

Except for (e) above, all these features were removed by the Civil Procedure

(Amendment) Act No. 14 of 1993, and (e) was removed by the Civil

Procedure (Amendment) Act No. 38 of 1998.

Under the repealed procedure, as held by the Full Bench of the Supreme

Court in Adoris v. Perera (supra) “When an issue of probate has followed

upon an order nisi (and not upon an order absolute in the first instance), the

summary procedure for the recall of probate provided in section 537 does

not apply, and all parties are concluded by the issue of probate. But where

there is fraud in connection with the obtaining of probate even upon an order

nisi, an independent action might be brought to set aside the probate.”

When fraud is alleged in obtaining probate on a (purported) last will,

whether under the old procedure or new procedure, institution of a

separate action to unravel the fraud and cancel the probate is permissible.

The same will apply in the case of letters of administration. This does not

mean that the question of fraud cannot be adjudicated on in the

testamentary proceedings itself; everything depends on unique facts of

each case.

In Actalina Fonseka’s case (supra) the Supreme Court allowed a separate

action to be maintained seeking a declaration that the last will was a

forgery and probate had been obtained by fraud. At page 102, Kulatunga

J. stated:

An allegation that a will was forged intentionally to mislead the Court

to granting probate for the administration of an estate which has in

fact devolved on intestate heirs and that probate has been obtained

by persons who forged such will without disclosing the heirs has to

31

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

be viewed differently from an allegation that probate has been

obtained by mere perjury. If it were otherwise it is not clear why our

Courts have held that the proper procedure to impeach probate

obtained on a forged will is by separate action - Tissera v. Gunatilleke

Hamine 13 NLR 261; Adoris v. Perera 17 NLR 212; Biyanwila v.

Amarasekera 67 NLR 488.

Fraud cannot be suppressed by technicalities. Bertram C.J. in

Suppramaniam v. Erampakurukal (1922) 23 NLR 417 at 435 citing Black

on Judgments Vol 1, Section 292-293 states “Fraud is not a thing that can

stand even when robed in a judgment”. In Sirisena v. Kobbekaduwa,

Minister of Agriculture and Lands (1974) 80 NLR 1, Justice Vythialingam

at page 66 and Justice Weeraratne at page 140 quoted with approval the

following dicta of Lord Denning in Lazarus Estates Ltd v. Bearely (1956) 1

All ER 341 at 345:

No Judgment of a Court or order of a Minister can be allowed to stand

if it has been obtained by fraud. Fraud unravels everything. The Court

is careful not to find fraud unless it is specially pleaded and proved.

But once it is proved it vitiates judgments, contracts, and all

transactions whatsoever.

In Pieris v. Wijeratne [2000] 2 Sri LR 145 at 152, Jayawickrama J. held

“although according to section 536 of the Civil Procedure Code an

application to recall the probate could be made only where an order absolute

in the first instance has been made, in an appropriate case, depending on

the circumstances, a court has jurisdiction to act under section 839 of the

Civil Procedure Code and make an order as may be necessary for the ends

of justice or to prevent abuse of the process of the Court.”

The instant action was filed under the new procedure. As the law stands

today, when applications are filed seeking probate or letters of

32

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

administration, the adoption of summary procedure, issuance of order nisi

etc. are inapplicable (except in instances where an application for recalling

probate or letters of administration is subsequently made under section

538). The parties have to follow neither the summary procedure (as

contemplated in chapter 24 of the Civil Procedure Code) nor strictly the

regular procedure (by way of plaint and answer) but rather a special

procedure in that the application is made by way of petition and affidavit.

The court makes substantive orders in the nature of order absolute in the

first instance, not order nisi.

Interventions in testamentary actions are sought not only to challenge last

wills and issuance of probate or letters of administration. Such

applications are made by various persons interested in the estate for

various purposes by adopting various procedures. It is not my intention

to list out all such instances but I will highlight a few for better

understanding of the nature and complexity of such applications.

For instance, under section 718(1) “A creditor or any person interested in

the estate, may present to the court in the action in which grant of probate

or administration issued, proof by affidavit that an executor or administrator

has failed to file in court the inventory and valuation, and account (or

sufficient inventory and valuation, or sufficient accounts) required by law

within the time prescribed therefor.” It may be noted that this kind of

application can be made by “a creditor or any person interested in the

estate” by presenting “proof by affidavit” (not necessarily petition and

affidavit). The correction of the inventory and accounts can be challenged

in terms of section 718 (De Zoysa v. De Zoysa (1924) 26 NLR 472).

Section 720 provides another example: “In either of the following cases a

petition, entitled as of the action in which grant of probate or administration

issued, may be presented to the court which issued the same, praying for a

decree directing an executor or administrator to pay the petitioner’s claim,

33

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

and that he be cited to show cause why such decree should not be made (a)

by a creditor, for the payment of a debt, or of its just proportional part, at

any time after twelve months have expired since grant of probate or

administration; (b) by a person entitled to a legacy, or any other pecuniary

provision under a will, or a distributive share, for the payment or

satisfaction thereof, or of its just proportional part, at any time after twelve

months have expired since such grant.” It may be noted that this kind of

application can be made by “a creditor” or “by a person entitled to a legacy,

or any other pecuniary provision under a will, or a distributive share” by

presenting “a petition” (not necessarily a petition and affidavit).

Most intervention applications are in relation to claims on properties listed

and unlisted in the inventory. Such movable and immovable property

claims are not directly relevant to the main inquiry and are made from the

time the action is instituted until the termination of the proceedings.

These claims can be made inter alia by the parties to the case, heirs, third

parties who have purchased rights from the heirs, persons claiming

prescriptive rights, or any person interested in the estate.

The original petitioner shall set out in the original petition the details and

the situation of the deceased’s property as a requirement under sections

524(1)(b) and 528(1)(d), but this is not the inventory. The inventory is filed

under section 539(1) after the court makes order on entitlement to probate

or letters of administration and after the taking of the prescribed oath by

the executor or administrator but before the issuance of probate or letters

of administration.

539(1). In every case where an order has been made, by a District

Court declaring any person entitled to have probate of a deceased

person’s will, or administration of a deceased person’s property

granted to him it shall be the duty of the said person, executor or

administrator, in whose favour such order is made, to take within

34

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

fifteen days of the making of such order, the oath of an executor or

administrator as set out in form No. 92 in the First Schedule, and

thereafter to file in court within a period of one month from the date

of taking of the oath, an inventory of the deceased person’s property

and effects, with a valuation of the same as set out in form No. 92 in

the First Schedule and the court shall forthwith grant probate or

letters of administration, as the case may be.

Any application seeking inclusion or exclusion of properties before the

inventory is filed under section 539 is premature. Such applications shall

not be an impediment to decide the main application (i.e. proof of the last

will if any and the finding of in whose favour probate or letters of

administration should be issued).

In Harold Fernando v. Fonseka [1998] 3 Sri LR 301 the Court of Appeal

citing Fernando v. Fernando (1914) 18 NLR 24, Kathirikamasegara

Mudaliyar (1900) 5 NLR 29 and Kantaiyar v. Ramoe (1904) 8 NLR 207

rightly held that the grant of probate or letters of administration is a

distinct preliminary step in testamentary proceedings independent of

claims to the estate by the heirs, and the question of entertaining claims

to the estate on the ground that the claimant is an heir could form the

basis of an inquiry at a subsequent stage of the proceedings.

What happens if the testator includes properties in the last will which do

not belong to him and what happens if the executor disposes of such

properties by way of executor conveyances? According to section 2 of the

Wills Ordinance No. 21 of 1844 “It shall be lawful for every person

competent to make a will to devise, bequeath, and dispose of by will all the

property within Sri Lanka which at the time of his death shall belong to him,

or to which he shall be then entitled, of whatsoever nature or description

the same may be, movable or immovable,…” Inclusion in the last will of

properties that the testator is not the owner, does not give any rights to

35

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

the purported beneficiaries. Anybody can include others’ properties in his

last will and bequeath them to his next of kin as he pleases, but that does

not mean that after the death of the testator the beneficiaries can stake a

claim on such properties on the strength of the last will.

In Roslin Nona v. Herat (1960) 65 CLW 55 it was held that even if the

executor or administrator sells such properties with the authority of the

court, the buyer does not get title to such properties. In Rosalin Nona’s

case, the administratrix of the estate of a deceased intestate applied to the

District Court for authority to sell certain immovable properties that

allegedly belonged to the deceased. Two parties intervened in the

testamentary case objecting to the sale on the basis that they had

conclusive title to two of the lands by partition decrees. These objections

were dismissed by the District Court. On appeal, the Supreme Court

upheld that order. H.N.G. Fernando J. (later C.J.) with the agreement of

T.S. Fernando J. whilst dismissing the appeal stated:

The usual restriction contained in a grant of letters, which prohibits

the sale of immovable property by an administrator without the

authority of the Court, is a measure designed for the protection of the

estate and the heirs, and not for the protection of other interests. The

grant of leave to sell is merely a release of the Administrator from the

restriction imposed in the letters, and is neither an adjudication upon

the title, if any, of the intestate or the Administrator, nor anything

equivalent to an order for a sale in execution enforceable with the aid

of the process of the court.

The common law does not prevent a person from executing a transfer

of property which may, in fact, belong or turn out to belong to another,

although, of course, the transferee in such a case acquires no title as

against the true owner. A transferee from an Administrator cannot

claim to be in any better position on the score that the transfer was

36

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

executed with the leave of the Court. If, therefore, an administrator

claims any property as being the property of estate or as being liable

to be sold in order to repay the debts of the estate or the expenses of

administration, the court does not in the testamentary proceedings

have jurisdiction to determine disputes as to title between the

administrator and third parties. The Appellants had no right to call

upon the court to adjudicate upon their claims of unencumbered title

to the two lands in question. The action, if any, which they should

take at this stage to protect their interests is not a matter upon which

they can be advised by this court.

Conversely, failure to include in the inventory a property that actually

belonged to the deceased does not deprive the heirs of making a claim to

that property on succession (Fernando v. Dabarera (1971) 77 NLR 127).

The question whether a disputed proprietary claim can be decided

summarily (e.g. section 718) or later in the same proceedings by way of a

judicial settlement (e.g. section 736) or whether a separate action needs

to be filed on that claim is a vexed question. Such disputed proprietary

claims are one of the main reasons for the delay in concluding

testamentary actions in the District Court. The answer to this question

depends on the nature and scope of the particular claim and the stage at

which it is made. The decision needs to be taken on the unique facts and

circumstances of each individual application. Broadly speaking, if the

claim is by a party to the case or by an heir of the estate and the claim is

not a complicated one, it can be decided in the testamentary case itself.

But if it is by a third party and the claim is a complicated one with distinct

causes of action which require raising issues and leading evidence of

several witnesses, it is prudent that it be decided in a separate action. It

is not practically possible to hear a case within a case.

37

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

However, in certain instances, deciding the issue in the case itself is

mandatory. Section 736(2) provides for one such instance and enacts

“Where a contest arises between the accounting party and any of the other

parties respecting any property alleged to belong to the estate, but to which

the accounting party lays claim, or respecting a debt alleged to be due by

the accounting party to the testator or intestate, or by the testator or

intestate to the accounting party, the contest must be tried and determined

in the same special proceeding and in the same manner as any issue arising

on a civil trial.” In Suppammal v. Govinda Chetty (1943) 44 NLR 193 at 195

it was observed “These words are clear and peremptory. They require that,

if at the stage of a judicial settlement, a question such as arose here, arises

between an accounting party, that is to say, between an executor or

administrator, and any of the other parties, that is to say, other parties to

the testamentary suit, such as the widow in this case, that question must

be determined “in the same special proceeding”, that is to say in the

proceeding for the judicial settlement.” The reference to “the other parties”

in section 736(2) was construed as the other parties to the action, not third

parties.

In the matter of the last will and testament of Don Cornelis Dias (1986) 2

NLR 252 it was held that in the case of a petition under section 712 to

discover property withheld from an executor, if the respondent in terms of

section 714(3) puts in an affidavit claiming to be the owner of such

property, the only thing for the court to do is to dismiss the petition

remitting the parties to the machinery of an ordinary action for the

determination of their rights.

Conversely, when an application is made by a creditor under section 720

seeking a decree directing the executor or administrator to pay such claim,

if the executor or administrator files an affidavit setting forth facts which

38

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

show to the satisfaction of the court that the validity of the claim is

doubtful, then the court can dismiss the application.

In De Silva v. Gomes (1928) 30 NLR 249 it was held “An administrator, who

is not prepared to admit the claim of a creditor, is not entitled to place upon

the court the responsibility of a decision on the matter. In such a case it is

left to the creditor to establish his claim by regular proceedings against the

estate.”

In De Silva v. Jayakody (1941) 42 NLR 226 it was held “Where a petition is

presented to court by a creditor under section 720 of the Civil Procedure

Code praying for a decree directing an executor or administrator to pay the

creditor’s claim and the respondent denies the validity and legality of the

claim, the court is debarred from acting under the section and compelling

payment of the disputed claim. In such a case the petition should be

dismissed without prejudice to the creditor’s right to bring a separate

action.”

In Suppammal v. Govinda Chetty (supra) it was held “Where an application

was made by an heir of an estate for a direction to the administrator to have

the inventory filed by him amended so as to include certain sums of money

which the administrator claimed as his own the application fell within the

scope of section 718 of the Civil Procedure Code. Where a question such as

the above arises between the accounting party (i.e., the executor or

administrator) and any of the other parties to the testamentary case, that

question may be determined in the proceeding for judicial settlement and

not by separate action. It would be within the discretion of the Court to direct

amendment under section 718 or to refer a party to the procedure of section

736, viz., judicial settlement, according to the nature and scope of the

particular application and the stage at which it is made.” This was quoted

with approval in Jayantha de Soysa v. Naomal de Soysa [1997] 3 Sri LR

65.

39

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

Filing the final account is a significant step in bringing the proceedings to

termination.

In terms of section 551 every executor and administrator shall file in the

District Court, on or before the expiration of twelve months from the date

upon which probate or grant of administration is issued or within such

further time as the court may allow, a true and final account of his

executorship or administration verified on oath or affirmation. The form of

the final account is found in Form No. 118A in the First Schedule to the

Civil Procedure Code. It may be noted that distribution of the property is

part of the final account.

In terms of section 724A, if the executor or administrator has failed to file

the final account in court, any person interested in the estate can make

an application to court in that regard and the court shall take appropriate

steps. Further, while in terms of section 724B the court can discharge the

executor or administrator if he files the final account together with other

documents to establish that the entire estate has been duly administered

and distributed, if objections arise the court shall direct a judicial

settlement of the account in terms of section 724B(7).

Judicial settlement of such account plays a vital role in the termination of

testamentary proceedings. Sections 725 and 726 provide how the

procedure in relation to judicial settlement of such account can be

invoked. Section 729 allows an executor or administrator to move for a

judicial settlement of the account as well.

725. In any of the following cases, and either upon the application of

a party mentioned in the next section or of its own motion, the court

may from time to time compel a judicial settlement of the account of

an executor or administrator:-

40

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

(a) where one year has expired since grant to him of probate or

administration;

(b) where such grant has been revoked, or for any other reason his

powers have ceased;

(c) where he has sold or otherwise disposed of any immovable

property of the testator, or devisable interest therein, or the rents,

profits, or proceeds thereof, pursuant to a power in the will, where

one year has elapsed since the grant of probate to him.

726(1). The application for a judicial settlement in the last section

mentioned shall be by petition, entitled as of the action in which grant

of probate or administration issued, and may be presented by a

creditor, or by any person interested in the estate or fund, including

a child born after the making of a will; or by any person in behalf of

an infant so interested; or by a surety in the official bond of the person

required to account, or the legal representative of such surety.

(2) Upon the presentation thereof, citation shall issue accordingly; but

in a case specified in paragraph (a) of the last preceding section the

court may, if the petition is presented within less than eighteen

months after the issue of probate or administration, entertain or

refuse to entertain it in its discretion.

However all the complicated proprietary issues in relation to the case

cannot be settled and decided by a judicial settlement of the account

alone.

In Holsinger v. Nicholas (1918) 20 NLR 417 it was held “The object of a

judicial settlement is that all matters that may arise in the course of the

administration of the estate between the accounting party and the

beneficiary should be dealt with promptly and in an expeditious manner, so

41

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

that the whole question might be finally wound up in those proceedings. If

the Judge thinks that the matter is of such complication and importance that

it can only be inquired into by a regular action, he might suspend the

settlement until that matter is determined by a regular action, or conclude

the settlement subject to the determination of that matter.”

This judgment was referred to in Zain v. Sheriff (1937) 40 NLR 310 when

the court decided “Proceedings for a judicial settlement are not appropriate

for the purpose of deciding a question which could not be finally determined

without other persons who are not parties to the testamentary suit.”

In Pathmanathan v. Thuraisingham (1970) 74 NLR 196 it was held

“Disputed claims cannot be adjudicated upon in an inquiry relating to the

judicial settlement of the accounts of executors and administrators under

Chapters 54 and 55 of the Civil Procedure Code. In such proceedings,

therefore, a legatee cannot claim as a creditor that a certain sum of money

is due to him from the estate of the testator, if the claim is disputed by the

executor. Such a disputed claim can only be made by way of a separate

action.” This was reiterated in Imbulmure v. The Public Trustee [2012] 2 Sri

LR 413.

This court granted leave to appeal to the original petitioner on the following

questions of law as formulated by the petitioner at paragraph 18(b), (c),

(d), (e), (g) and (h) of her petition. They are reproduced below with the

answers:

Q. Did the High Court err in law by coming to the conclusion that the

appellant has failed to comply with section 524(5) of the Civil

Procedure Code when it has been repealed by the Civil Procedure

Code (Amendment) Act No. 38 of 1998?

A. Yes.

42

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

Q. Did the High Court err in law by failing to consider that the

petitioner-respondents should establish a prima facie case before the

learned District Judge under section 537 read with 538 since

summary procedure should be adopted in determining an application

thereunder and/or that the petitioner-respondent has failed to

establish a prima facie case before the District Court?

A. The original petitioner has not objected to the procedure before the

District Court and therefore it cannot be canvassed before the

Supreme Court. The intervenient petitioners have established a prima

facie case before the District Court.

Q. Did the High Court fail to consider and/or conclude and/or give

reasons as to whether the High Court was satisfied with the

application of the petitioner-respondents before the District Court?

A. Reasons have been given. If the reasons are inadequate, this court

has justified the conclusion of the learned High Court Judges with

reasons.

Q. Did the High Court err in law by allowing intervention and filing

objections even after considering the same under section 537 which

only permits the court to recall the probate?

A. No. Recalling probate does not end the matter; the court shall take

follow up steps.

Q. Did the High Court err in law by concluding that the petitioner-

respondents are necessary parties to the appellant’s application

although the appellant has complied with section 524?

A. Yes. But on that ground alone the Judgment of the High Court of

Civil Appeal cannot be set aside.

43

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

Q. Did the High Court err in law by allowing the petitioner-

respondents’ application on the basis that probate has been issued

instead of letters of administration whereas it was not a ground urged

by the petitioner-respondents in their application before the District

Court?

A. No. A question of law can be raised for the first time on appeal. On

the facts of this case, as the petitioner was not named as the executor

of the will, what the District Court ought to have issued was not

probate but letters of administration with the will annexed. However

that matter does not go to the root of the case. In my view, that matter

has been highlighted by the High Court of Civil Appeal to emphasise

that the District Court did not consider the merits of the petitioner’s

application before issuing the probate to the original petitioner. This

is understood by the following part of the judgment: “In the instant

action the learned District Judge has merely issued a probate without

considering the facts presented before him. Therefore, I am of the view

that the issuing of the probate has no validity in law. If the learned

District Judge took care to look at the provisions as to testamentary

procedure and if he was of the view that the will has been proved, it

was letters of administration with the will annexed and not a probate

that should have been issued.” I accept that the finding of the High

Court of Civil Appeal that “the procedure adopted by the learned

District Judge to issue probate in itself would amount to a serious

miscarriage of justice” is a misdirection in law.

At the time of granting leave, this court had allowed the intervenient

petitioners to reserve the right to raise any questions of law before the

appeal was taken up for hearing. Accordingly learned counsel for the 2nd

intervenient petitioner has raised several questions of law in the written

submissions filed prior to the argument and the same were reiterated at

44

SC/APPEAL/220/2017

the time of the argument. Learned counsel for the original petitioner has

addressed those questions of law in his post-argument written

submissions. In summary, these are the questions of law raised by the

original petitioners:

(i) Has the learned District Judge failed to comply with section

531(1)(a) when making the order dated 06.05.2011?

(ii) Has the learned District Judge failed to follow section 524 when

making the order dated 06.05.2011?

I answer (i) above in the affirmative and (ii) in the negative. By (ii) above,

what the intervenient petitioners submit is that naming them as

respondents in the testamentary proceedings is a legal requirement under

section 524. I am unable to agree with it.

I affirm the finding and the conclusion of the High Court of Civil Appeal

that the order of the District Court dated 08.06.2012 shall be set aside on

the failure of the learned District Judge to satisfy himself that the will was

duly made as required by section 531(1)(a) of the Civil Procedure Code

before the issuance of probate to the original petitioner, which goes to the

root of the case, and dismiss the appeal with costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

P. Padman Surasena, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Yasantha Kodagoda, P.C., J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court