SC Appeal 204/2015 JUDGMENT Page 1 of 10

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal under

and in terms of Section 9(a) of the

High Court of the Provinces

(Special Provisions) Act No.19 of

1990 of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

Officer-in Charge,

Police Station,

Sewanagala.

COMPLAINANT

Vs.

Mohamed Irupan Impar,

No.30, Randola,

Balangoda.

2nd SUSPECT

AND BETWEEN

Mohamed Irupan Impar,

No.30, Randola,

Balangoda.

2nd SUSPECT-APPELLANT

Vs.

01. Officer-in Charge,

SC APPEAL NO.204/2015 High Court Embilipitiya No.APL/02/2015. MC Embilipitiya No. 94991/13.

SC Appeal 204/2015 JUDGMENT Page 2 of 10

Police Station,

Sewanagala.

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

02. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

Mohamed Irupan Impar,

No.30, Randola,

Balangoda.

2ND SUSPECT-APPELLANT-

APPELLANT

Vs.

01. Officer-in Charge,

Police Station,

Sewanagala.

COMPLAINANT-

RESPONDENT- RESPONDENT

02. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT

SC Appeal 204/2015 JUDGMENT Page 3 of 10

BEFORE : PRIYANTHA JAYAWARDENA, PC, J.

L.T.B. DEHIDENIYA, J. and

S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

COUNSEL : Lakshan Dias with Shafnas Shanteen and Dayani Panditharatne

for the 2nd Defendant- Appellant.

Chrisanga Fernando, SC for the Respondents.

ARGUED ON : 12th June 2019.

DECIDED ON : 29th January 2020.

S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

Background

The Second Suspect - Appellant Mohomed Irupan Impar (hereinafter

sometimes referred to as Appellant) was originally charged under Section 368 (a) of

the Penal Code by the Magistrate of Embilipitiya on the 1st of December 2012, for

theft of five cows and a buffalo. The Appellant pleaded guilty. The Magistrate

accepted the plea of the Appellant and sentenced him to 6 months rigorous

imprisonment and imposed a fine of Rs 1500, in default one-month simple

imprisonment. Being aggrieved with the said sentence, the Appellant preferred an

appeal to the Provincial High Court of Sabaragamuwa and submitted that the

sentence is excessive and, that he should be given a non – custodial sentence. After

the matter was argued, the Learned High Court judge after giving reasons dismissed

the appeal.

The Appellant being dissatisfied with the said order submitted an appeal to

the Supreme Court. The matter was taken up for argument and both counsel made

their submissions. The issue of law to be considered is, has the Magistrate erred in

SC Appeal 204/2015 JUDGMENT Page 4 of 10

not providing a suspended sentence to the Appellant despite him pleading guilty to

the charge.

Considering all material before us, facts reveal that the Appellant was seen at

around 2.00 am in the wee hours of the day, stealing cows. He was identified by the

owner of the cows at an identification parade. When the matter was taken up for trial

the Appellant had pleaded guilty.

I carefully considered the plea of guilty in light of the available evidence

before the court. Appellant had not challenged his plea of guilt; hence we have no

reason to interfere with the conviction.

Since the Appellant had pleaded guilty, he had no right under Section 14(b)(i)

of the Judicature Act other than the right he had available to him to appeal against

the sentence. Further, considering the sentence in light of Section 368 of the Penal

Code, I find that there is no illegality or impropriety.

Issue of Bargaining of Sentence

The issue raised in this appeal was, with regard to the supposed confusion

that is said to have been created towards the Appellant. The counsel for the

Appellant submitted that the Appellant “thought” that when he said he will pay

compensation of Rs. 50, 000/-, he would be given a suspended sentence.

In criminal trials in countries such as the United States and other modern

Common law jurisdictions, the accused has three options as far as pleas are

concerned: A) guilty, B) not guilty or C) plea of nolo contendere. As held in a US case

State ex rel Clark v. Adams [111 S.E.2d 336 (1959)], the plea of "Nolo Contendere"

sometimes referred to also as "Plea of Nolvut" or "Nolle Contendere" means, in its

literal sense, "I do not wish to contend", and it does not origin in early English

Common Law. As per the practice (of US courts), a criminal case is disposed based on

a guilty plea bargained or nolo contendere plea.

SC Appeal 204/2015 JUDGMENT Page 5 of 10

In this context there arises a necessity to differentiate and distinguish between

a “plea of guilty” and “plea bargaining”. The Ahmadabad High Court in State of

Gujarat v Natwar Harchandji Thakor (2005 CriLJ 2957) (decided on 22 February

2005), brought out the distinction between “plea of guilty” and “plea bargaining”.

Accordingly, the courts said that both things should not have been treated, as the

same. There appears to be a mix up. Nobody can dispute that "plea bargaining" is

not permissible. However at the same time, it cannot be overlooked that raising of a

"plea of guilty" at the appropriate stage as provided for in the statutory procedure

for the accused and showing the special and adequate reasons for the discretionary

exercise of powers by the trial Court in awarding sentences cannot be admixed or

should not be treated the same.

Section 183 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act explains the procedure

upon which a plea of guilty is accepted by a Magistrate in a trial:

183(1) If the accused upon being asked if he has any cause to show why he

should not be convicted makes a statement which amounts to an

unqualified admission that he is guilty of the offence of which he is

accused, his statement shall be recorded as nearly as possible in the words

used by him; and the Magistrate shall record a verdict of guilty and pass

sentence upon him according to law and shall record such sentence:

Provided that the accused may with the leave of the Magistrate withdraw

his plea of guilt at any time before sentence is passed upon him, and in

that event the Magistrate shall proceed to trial as if a conviction has not

been entered.

Whether a "plea of guilty" amounts to "plea bargaining" is a matter of proof.

Every "plea of guilty" which is a part of the statutory process in a criminal trial, cannot

be said to be a "plea bargaining" ipso facto. It is a matter requiring evaluation of the

factual profile of each accused in criminal trial before reaching a specific conclusion

of it being only a "plea bargaining" and not a plea of guilty simpliciter. It must be

SC Appeal 204/2015 JUDGMENT Page 6 of 10

based upon facts and proof, not on fanciful surmises without the necessary factual

supporting profile for that.

In State of Uttar Pradesh v. Chandrika (2000 Cr.L.J 384) at 386, the Indian

Supreme Court held that it is settled law that on the basis of Plea Bargaining the

court cannot dispose of the criminal cases. Court held in this case that mere

acceptance or admission of guilt should not be reason for giving a lesser sentence.

The Accused cannot bargain for reduction of sentence merely because he pleaded

guilty. Hence, by considering the basic principles of administration of justice merits

alone should be considered for conviction and sentencing, even when the accused

confesses to guilt, for it is the constitutional obligation of the court to award

appropriate sentence.

In approaching the question of sentence, South African courts have taken into

rumination ‘the triad consisting of the crime, the offender and the interests of

society’. This was explained in [S v Rabie 1975 (4) SA 855 (A) at 862G-H] where

the courts found the “punishment should fit the criminal as well as the crime, be fair

to society, and be blended with a measure of mercy according to the circumstances.”

In Rabie’s case at 862A-B Holmes JA reiterated that “the main purposes of

punishment are deterrent, preventive, reformative and retributive.”

While it was perceived in S v Karg 1961 (1) SA 231 (A) at 236A, that the

“retributive aspect of punishment has tended to yield ground to the aspects of

prevention and correction…The punishment should not only reflect the shock and

indignation of interested persons and of the community at large and so serve as a just

retribution for the crime but should also deter others from similar conduct.”

What appears from these cases is that in other countries such as South Africa

retribution and deterrence are the proper purposes of punishment and they must be

accorded due weight in any sentence that is imposed. Given that both South Africa

and Sri Lanka follow the same systems of Roman Dutch Law with principles of English

Law and other private laws respective to each nation, even in Sri Lanka it could be

SC Appeal 204/2015 JUDGMENT Page 7 of 10

said that retribution and deterrence in its proper purposes of punishment could be

accorded due weight in any sentence that is imposed. In my view each of the

elements of punishment is not required to be accorded equal weight, but instead

proper weight must be accorded to each according to the circumstances. Serious

crimes will usually require that retribution and deterrence should come to the fore

and that the rehabilitation of the offender will consequently play a relatively smaller

role.

It should also be reiterated that the Appellant “thought” that when he said

he’ll pay compensation of Rs. 50, 000/- that he would be given a suspended

sentence. This could also be considered as some form of sentence bargaining on the

part of the accused.

Gunasekara J in Attorney General v Mendis [(1995) 1 Sri L.R 138] was of

the opinion that “once an accused is found guilty and convicted on his own plea, or

after trial, the Trial Judge has a difficult function to perform. That is to decide what

sentence is to be imposed on the accused who has been convicted. In doing so he has

to consider the point of view of the accused on the one hand and the interest of society

on the other. In doing so the Judge must necessarily consider the nature of the offence

committed, the manner in which it has been committed the machinations and the

manipulations resorted to by the accused to commit the offence, the effect of

committing such a crime insofar as the institution or organisation in respect of which it

has been committed, the persons who are affected by such crime, the ingenuity with

which it has been committed and the involvement of others in committing the crime.

The Trial Judge who has the sole discretion in imposing a sentence which is appropriate

having regard to the criteria set out above should in our view not to surrender this

sacred right and duty to any other person, be it counsel or accused or any other person.

Further he went on to state that whilst plea bargaining is permissible in our view,

sentence bargaining should not be encouraged at all and must be frowned upon”. It is

safe to say that this view still remains as a fundamental aspect of this court and

sentence bargaining is still something that is be frowned upon.

SC Appeal 204/2015 JUDGMENT Page 8 of 10

As discussed earlier, it is the duty of a Trial judge to consider all the

circumstances of the case. The triad of crime, offender and the interests of the

society should be taken into consideration when delivering a judgment which should

ensure it incorporates the purpose of a punishment namely deterrence and

retribution among other purposes.

One such aspect that is commonly considered by a Trial Judge is to grant

suspended sentence to offenders as envisaged in Section 303 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure. In awarding a suspended sentence the rationale of it should be

considered, which was explained by the Law Commission through a Memorandum to

the Minister of Justice on the 13th October 1970. Such purpose of suspended

sentences was explained as follows:

(1) that no offender should be confined in a prison unless there is no

alternative available for the protection of the community and the reform

of the individual;

(2) that imprisonment, with its obviously criminal associations, should

not bring a non-criminal offender within its ambit;

(3) that an offender is given the opportunity of responding to

incentives to good behaviour accompanied by the threat of drastic

penal action, should he persist in criminal conduct;

(4) that the offender is treated as an individual who, despite the nature

of the offence, is subjected to penal action related to his needs, his

character and the possibility of his reform.

(Emphasis added)

Further in the memorandum Professor C.H.S Jayewardene, Professor of

Criminology in the University of Ottawa expressed the following opinion: “the

suspended sentence with its connotation of punishment and pardon is supposed to

have integrative powers. The offender is shown that he has violated the tenets of

society and provoked its wrath, but is immediately forgiven and permitted to continue

SC Appeal 204/2015 JUDGMENT Page 9 of 10

to live in society with the hope that he would not indulge in that form of behaviour

again. To this is added the supportive argument that imprisonment has an isolating

and alienating effect on the family of the imprisoned offender because of the hardships

they are faced with during the imprisonment of one of the family members.”

(Paragraph 5 of the memorandum)

The aforementioned view expressed shows the change in how punishments

are to be meted out. In my view suspended sentencing could be considered as a

progressive method of sentencing as it aims to rehabilitate and restore an offender

whilst still having the option of incapacitating such an offender if they regress to

former ways.

In this case it should be noted that the appellant submitted the appeal to the

High Court and stated that the custodial sentence is unreasonable and unacceptable.

On the perusal of the judgement of the Magistrate and the records, we find,

according to the finger print record dated 8/9/2011, that the Appellant has a

previous conviction, namely, High Court of Hambantota in case no. 304/07 had

found him guilty under Section 140 and Section 300 of the Penal Code and

sentenced him for 6 months and 2 years respectively and the same was suspended

for a period of 10 years. The learned Magistrate in his judgement had considered

these facts and imposed the aforementioned sentence.

In the given circumstances the Appellant cannot expect the Learned

Magistrate to violate the provisions of the law to impose another suspended

sentence when he is already serving a suspended sentence pending against him as

this would be completely unacceptable. Such will pave the way for the offenders to

commit offences and get away with it by throwing money. Sentencing is a sacred

right vested with the judicial officer. The Magistrate exercised the same after

evaluating all the circumstances of the case. The accused can submit their concerns

by way of mitigatory circumstances to the court but it is unfair and unacceptable for

him to form a question of the sentence. In the present case where the Appellant has

SC Appeal 204/2015 JUDGMENT Page 10 of 10

a previous conviction he cannot expect the judge to ignore the same and to start

sentencing on a clean slate.

Considering all, I find that there is no merit in the appeal. Hence the appeal is

dismissed. Registrar is hereby directed to send the case record to the Magistrate of

Embilipitiya to implement the sentence.

Further the Registrar is also directed to forward the details of the second

conviction to the High Court Judge of Hambantota, together with this judgment to

activate the suspended sentences imposed against the appellant.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

PRIYANTHA JAYAWARDENA, PC, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

L.T.B. DEHIDENIYA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT