==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal under and in terms of Section 5C of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No.19 of 1990 as amended by High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) (Amendment) Act No. 54 of 2006 read together with Article 127 of the Constitution.

Galabada Kankanamge Jinadasa No.265/A, High Level Road, Colombo 5.

Plaintiff

Vs.

S.C. Appeal No. 77/2017

(SC/HCCA/LA No. 445/2016)

High Court Civil Appeal Case

No. WP/HCCA/COL 147/2015/LA

D.C. Colombo Case No.DLM/97/2015

Galabada Kankanamge Lekha Lasanthi No.2A, Balapokuna Road, Colombo 06

Defendant AND BETWEEN

Galabada Kankanamge Lekha Lasanthi No.2A, Balapokuna Road, Colombo 06

Defendant-Petitioner.

S.C. Appeal No.77/2017

2

Vs.

Galabada Kankanamge Jinadasa No.265/A, High Level Road, Colombo 5.

Plaintiff-Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

Galabada Kankanamge Jinadasa No.265/A, High Level Road, Colombo 5.

Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant

Vs.

Galabada Kankanamge Lekha Lasanthi No.2A, Balapokuna Road, Colombo 06 Defendant-Petitioner-Respondent.

BEFORE : ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J. K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J. MENAKA WIJESUNDERA, J. COUNSEL : Dr. Romesh de Silva PC, with Widura Ranawake and Shanaka Cooray instructed by Suraj Rajapakse for the Plaintiff-Respondent - Appellant. Dr. Sunil F.A. Cooray instructed by Nilanga Perera for the Defendant-Petitioner -Respondent ARGUED ON : 18th September, 2025. DECIDED ON : 07th May, 2026 ***********

S.C. Appeal No.77/2017

3

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

In this appeal, the Plaintiff seeks to set aside the judgment of the

Provincial High Court of Civil Appeal in appeal No.

WP/HCCA/COL/147/2015/LA pronounced on 28.07.2016, which

allowed the appeal made by the Defendant, in order to have an order

made by the District Court on 11.11.2015 in case No. DLM/97/2015, set

aside. In making the said order, the District Court granted relief in the

interim to the Plaintiff, preventing the Defendant from alienating,

transferring, encumbering, mortgaging, leasing or renting out the property

described in the schedule to the Plaint.

In instituting the instant action (Case No. DLM/75/2017) against the

Defendant by Plaint dated 19.06.2015 in the District Court of Colombo, the

Plaintiff declared therein that the Defendant is one of his two daughters to

whom he gifted the property under dispute by Deed of Gift No. 1821 and

executed on 27.01.2002, reserving his life interest. The Plaintiff claims that

due to multiple acts of gross ingratitude on the part of the Defendant, he

now seeks to annul the said Deed of Gift by way of a decree of Court. The

Plaintiff also alleged that the Defendant is taking steps to lease out or to

sell the said property as she had previously collected advance deposits and

lease rentals in respect of that property.

On 22.06.2015, the Plaintiff sought an enjoining order against the

Defendant, and was granted by the District Court. The Defendant tendered

her Statement of Objections on 06.07.2015, resisting the issuance of the

interim injunction. She stated in her Statement of Objections that in Case

No. DLM/88/2012, which she had filed before the same Court on

S.C. Appeal No.77/2017

4

24.05.2012, her father was named as the Defendant. In that action the

Defendant sought to annul the Deed of Declaration No. 2872, executed by

the Plaintiff, for the purpose of cancelling the Deed of Gift No. 1821,

executed in her favour. The Defendant also alleged that in that case (Case

No. DLM/88/2012) the Plaintiff sought the identical reliefs by way of his

amended answer, which the Court had rejected and therefore; without

setting aside that order by an appellate Court, he is now bound by that

order. She therefore seeks to have the enjoining order already dissolved by

Court.

After an inquiry, the District Court, by its order dated 11.11.2015 has

held that the Plaintiff had re-transferred the ownership of the disputed

property back to himself after cancelling the Deed of Gift No. 1821, by the

execution of Deed of Declaration No. 2872 on 30.03.2012, on the basis of

gross ingratitude on the part of the Defendant and therefore had

established a prima facie case, which made him entitled to the interim relief.

The original Court further ruled that the balance of convenience also

favoured the Plaintiff and, if no injunction is issued, he would suffer an

irreparable loss as that would allow the present Defendant to earn and

income by leasing or renting out the property.

The Defendant obtained leave to appeal against the said order from

the Provincial High Court of Civil Appeal. The appellate Court had

thereupon, allowed her appeal by setting aside the said order of the

District Court. The appellate Court held that the District Court erred when

it held that the Plaintiff is the owner of the property by solely acting on the

premise that the execution of Deed of Declaration revoking the gift

conferred title on him, but the instant action was instituted on the premise

S.C. Appeal No.77/2017

5

of gross ingratitude on the part of his daughter, thus seeking to have the

Deed of Gift void by a decree of Court. The appellate Court noted that

what the Plaintiff had presented a different case before the lower Court in

support of injunctive relief to the case he had pleaded in his Plaint.

The High Court also considered the line of reasoning adopted by the

District Court in arriving at the conclusion; that the balance of convenience

lies with the Plaintiff. The District Court acted on the Defendant’s

statement in her objections that she has no intention of alienating the

property or to lease it or to rent it out, and therefore concluded that she

would not suffer any inconvenience by the issuance of the injunction. The

appellate Court decided that it is also as an erroneous conclusion. The

third point that the appellate Court found on which the lower Court had

erred was its decision on the acceptance of the claim of irreparable damage

of the Plaintiff, if the property was leased or rented out.

With those pronouncements made by the Provincial High Court of

Civil Appeal, and determining to allow the appeal of the Defendant, the

Plaintiff sought leave to appeal from this Court against that judgment. On

04.04.2017, this Court decided to grant leave and allowed the Plaintiff to

appeal against the said judgment on the questions of law as set out in

paragraphs 14(ii) and 14(v) of the Petition dated 07.09.2016, along with the

interim reliefs that were sought in terms of paragraph (f) of the prayer of

the said Petition:

a. Whether the impugned Judgement is against the applicable legal

principles and/or fails to appreciate the applicable legal

principles?

S.C. Appeal No.77/2017

6

b. Whether the impugned Judgment is misconceived in law and

does not contain due and proper reasons in that totally fails to

appreciate that the underlying basis and/or rationale of the said

Judgment is the life interest of the Plaintiff in the relevant

property (which fact not challenged by the Defendant) ?

During the hearing of this appeal, learned President’s Counsel who

represented the Plaintiff, had strongly contended that; although the instant

action was instituted seeking to annul a Deed of Gift that had been

executed in favour of the Defendant, consequent to her committing several

acts that are referred to in the Plaint, which the Plaintiff alleged as acts of

gross ingratitude rendering that gift voidable, the fact that he nonetheless

retained his life interest over the disputed property and therefore the

rights of the donor placed in such a situation were not given due attention

by the appellate Court. He relied on the judgment of this Court in

Lamabadusuriya v Abeygunawardena (SC Appeal No. 169 of 2011 –

decided on 06.04.2018 by Prasanna Jayawardena J) in support of the appeal.

As the Defendant concedes the life interest, by which the Plaintiff is

entitled to use and enjoy the property until his death, it was the contention

of the learned President's Counsel that the original Court had rightly

issued the injunction as pleaded in order to preserve that right by ensuring

the status quo.

In addition, the learned President’s Counsel also contended that the

principle set out in the judgment of Seelawathie Mallawa v Millie

Keerthiratne (1982) 1 Sri L.R. 384, that a wrong doer not to benefit from his

own wrongdoing, is applicable to the instant action which further justifies

the issuance of the injunction.

S.C. Appeal No.77/2017

7

Learned Counsel for the Defendant on the other hand submitted

that it was the Defendant who constructed the building that stands on the

land gifted by her father. The development to the property under dispute

was carried out by the Defendant with the consent of her father and, as

such, she is entitled to remain in the possession of the land until she is

compensated for the improvements.

It is in this backdrop of factual and legal submissions presented

before this Court; I now turn to consider and determine the two questions

of law on which this appeal was argued.

The Deed of Gift No. 1821, was executed on 27.01.2002 in favour of

the Defendant. The Defendant obtained Development Permits from the

Municipal Council of Colombo on 27.04.2005 and on 06.12.2007 which

granted her permission to the proposed construction. Her plans for the

proposed building were approved by the said Council on 10.03.2006. The

Defendant claims that she spent around Rs. 15 million, which she obtained

as a loan from a bank, in order to construct a multi-storeyed building on

the land gifted by her father. She had also obtained the water, electricity

and telephone facilities to the property on her own. The Plaintiff denied

that the funds for the construction was obtained solely by the Defendant,

who did not engage in any income generating activity during that time,

and claimed that it was he who provided the required funding for the

construction of the said building.

The Plaintiff executed a Deed of Declaration on 30.03.2012, revoking

the gift he already made in favour of his daughter in 2002. It is the

Defendant’s position that the dispute with her father arose when she

requested a sum of Rs. 3 million from him. It was alleged that the Plaintiff

S.C. Appeal No.77/2017

8

agreed to provide that amount, on the condition that the Defendant would

renounce her rights to the estate of her deceased brother. The Defendant

did not agree with that condition and when she examined the relevant

folio of the Land Registry in order to apply for another loan, she realised

that a Deed of Declaration had been executed by her father, annulling the

said Deed of Gift.

During the ensuing period of over a period of ten years since the

execution of the Deed of Gift; and even after the execution of the Deed of

Declaration, the Defendant had leased out the building to different parties

from time to time. It was done on the basis that she had put up the

building by her own funds on the land gifted by her father, thereby

entitled to derive an income for herself. The Plaintiff apparently did not

contest any of these actions by his ungrateful daughter during this time.

It appears that; with the rift (that commenced with the refusal by the

Plaintiff to lend her Rs. 3 million and imposing a condition with which the

Defendant did not agree) between the two becoming widened as time

progressed, the health of the filial relationship between the Plaintiff father

and the Defendant daughter too had suffered incrementally and had

deteriorated significantly. Upon realizing that the Plaintiff had revoked the

Deed of Gift, the Defendant promptly instituted an action by Plaint dated

24.05.2012 in Case No. DLM/88/2012, seeking a declaration of title to the

property in dispute. She also sought to annul the said Deed of Declaration

No. 2872, executed by her father on 20.03.2012.

In his answer to the Plaint dated 24.08.2012 in Case No.

DLM/88/2012, the Plaintiff had stated that it was he who provided funds

to the Defendant to put up the building and denied the allegation made

S.C. Appeal No.77/2017

9

against him over imposing conditions over the estate of his deceased son.

The Plaintiff, admitted the execution of the Deed of Declaration and made

a counter allegation that she had maltreated him and cited several of such

instances that are attributed directly to the acts of the Defendant. In that

answer, he only sought for the dismissal of the Plaint.

After about seven months since filing his answer, the Plaintiff made

an application before the District Court to amend same by adding that the

Defendant, after the Deed of Gift was cancelled by him, had no right to

remain on the property and therefore ought to be treated as a trespasser.

The Plaintiff therefore prayed for a declaration of his title to the disputed

land and also of the eviction of the Defendant therefrom by a decree of

Court. The Defendant successfully objected to the reception of the said

amended Answer.

The Plaintiff thereupon moved the Provincial High Court of Civil

Appeal seeking leave to appeal against the said order of refusal made by

the District Court on 19.03.2014 in Case No. WP/HCCA/COL/LA 43 of

2014. An amended petition was filed on 21.07.2014 and the Defendant

objected to that amendment as well. The Plaintiff had thereupon moved to

withdraw the said leave to appeal application filed before the Provincial

High Court of Civil Appeal. The appellate Court dismissed the application

upon withdrawal on 16.10.2015.

It is in these circumstances the Plaintiff instituted the instant action

to annul the Deed of Gift by way of a decree of Court, pleading that relief

on the basis of gross ingratitude on the part of the Defendant. Their

litigating history referred to above in detail is clearly set out by the parties,

in their respective pleadings in the instant action.

S.C. Appeal No.77/2017

10

It need not to be re-iterated here that the instant appeal arises out of

an interlocutory order made by the District Court issuing an injunction,

well before even the instant case had matured to the stage that it could be

taken up for trial. The case instituted by the Defendant however had

progressed to the stage of trial.

It is evident from the pleadings that the execution of the Deed of Gift

and the Deed of Declaration, the fact that the Defendant is in possession of

the disputed land, and the existence of a building on that land are

undisputed facts, and are not contested by either party in these actions.

The validity of the Deed of Gift, after the execution of the Deed of

Declaration whether the Defendant was responsible for the alleged acts of

gross ingratitude towards the Plaintiff, whose funds were utilised to put

up that building on that land, whether the Plaintiff consented for that

construction, under what right the Defendant is in possession of the

disputed property, and even if she is guilty of gross ingratitude; whether

she is entitled to remain on that land until she is paid compensation for

improvements are perhaps some of the issues of fact and law, which must

be determined by the District Court after proceeding to trial on both these

cases. This Court has no intention of expressing any view on any of these

factual or legal issues. It is noted that the two cases that are pending before

the District Court, one for annulment of the Deed of Declaration and the

other for annulment of the Deed of Gift, would eventually determine the

legal entitlements of the respective parties.

However, as at the present moment, this Court concerns itself only

with the entitlement of the Plaintiff to the injunctive relief, which he

claimed against the Defendant. In this context, it must be noted that it is an

S.C. Appeal No.77/2017

11

undisputed fact that the Plaintiff had retained his life interest over the

disputed property, even after executing the Deed of Gift in favour of the

Defendant.

The judgment of Lamabadusuriya v Abeygunwardena (SC Appeal

No. 169 of 2011 – decided on 06.04.2018) relied on by the Plaintiff, clearly

identifies the nature of the bundle of rights held by a life interest holder

over a property, after same was gifted. After having referred to the

authoritative texts on Roman-Dutch Law, Prasanna Jayawardena J has made

the following pronouncement; “ … that a life interest holder, even though has

the power to exercise jus utendi and jus fruendi (Right to use and enjoy the

property) in full measure, subject to his right to deal with his life interest, he does

not have the power to exercise jus disponendi (Right to alienate the property) or

jus abutendi (Right to demolish or diminish the property) which remains with the

title holder, who has the dominium over the property but who could not exercise it

fully without the assent of the life interest holder.”

When viewed in the light of the said pronouncement on the nature

of the rights of a life interest holder; who had gifted a property, this Court

must accordingly consider the validity of the reasoning of the appellate

Court had adopted in holding that the initial requirement which must be

fulfilled by an applicant, who seeks an injunctive relief; namely a prima

facie case, had not been satisfied.

What exactly is meant by a prima facie case that must be established

by an applicant seeking injunctive relief had been considered by the

superior Courts in many of its judgments. The Plaintiff himself relied on

the judgments of Jinadasa v Weerasinghe (1929) 31 NLR 33, Dissanayake

v Agricultural and Industrial Credit Corporation and Others (1963) 64

S.C. Appeal No.77/2017

12

NLR 283 and Kariyawasam v Janaki and 2 Others BLR [2013] Vol. XX at p.

77 before the District Court in support of his application.

The term ‘prima facie case’, as defined by these judgments, speaks of

a situation where “… that there is a serious question to be tried at the hearing

and that on the facts before it there is a probability that the plaintiffs are entitled to

relief.” In Dissanayake v Agricultural and Industrial Credit Corporation

and Others (ibid) the Court said (at p. 285) that it must consider “… whether

the circumstances are such that the decree which may ultimately be entered in

favour of the party seeking the injunction would be nugatory or ineffective if the

injunction is not issued.”

In the impugned judgment, the appellate Court found that the

Plaintiff, having presented his Plaint on the basis that the Deed of Gift

executed in favour the Defendant should be nullified by a decree of Court

issued on the basis of gross ingratitude on her part, but in response to the

Statement of Objections filed by the Defendant resisting the extension of

the enjoining order already issued, presented his case in the following

manner (at page 4, paragraph 11 of the further written submissions

tendered to District Court on 17.11.2015);

“ … it is crystal clear that in terms of the law as it stands today, the

Plaintiff is entitled to a declaration of title, in that;

a. the Plaintiff was the owner of the land (admitted)

b. the Plaintiff donated the land to the Defendant (admitted)

c. the Plaintiff revoked the donation on the ground of

ingratitude.”

S.C. Appeal No.77/2017

13

In view of the position taken before the District Court by the

Plaintiff, the Defendant raised a pertinent question in her written

submissions, namely that if the Deed of Gift has already been properly

revoked, there is no necessity for the Plaintiff to nullify it once more, by

way of a declaration of Court.

However, in the instant matter, the Plaintiff had alleged (in

paragraph 13 of his Plaint), that “… the Defendant is guilty of gross

ingratitude” and after making references of several such instances therein,

goes on to claim that “ … a cause of action has accrued to the Plaintiff to sue

the Defendant for the revocation of Deed of Gift bearing number 1821 dated

27/1/2002 and attested by K.P. Jayawardena, Notary Public hereinbefore marked

as P2.”

In the prayer (a) to the Plaint in the instant action, the Plaintiff

prayed for a “ … Judgment and decree by which the Court be pleased to set aside

and/or declare null and void and/or voidable the said Deed of Gift bearing number

1821 dated 27/1/2002 and attested by K.P. Jayawardena, Notary Public

hereinbefore marked as P2 is of no force or effect in law.”

It is clear from the above, having pleaded a case based on gross

ingratitude and seeking to annul the said Deed of Gift, as his final relief,

the Plaintiff had pleaded in the interim, a case based on the basis that the

Deed of Gift that had been executed is no longer valid since it had already

been revoked by him with a Deed of Declaration. The Plaintiff did not

invite the District Court to consider the grant of the injunctive relief on the

case had had pleaded in the Plaint, but instead presented a different case,

and thereby seeking to establish a prima facie case, for the issuance of an

interim order. When the very basis of his action and the relief sought from

S.C. Appeal No.77/2017

14

Court based on that action, not been presented before Court in seeking

relief in the interim, it does not require a detailed consideration to reach a

conclusion that there is no serious question presented before Court to be

tried at the hearing, and that on the facts presented before it, there is a

probability that the plaintiff is entitled to relief.

The District Court, in granting injunctive relief to the Plaintiff had

acted on the case relied upon by him in the written submissions whereas

the Provincial High Court of Civil Appeal considered the case pleaded by

him in the Plaint and the case presented to satisfy the District Court that

there exists a prima facie case, in arriving at the conclusion that the lower

Court had erred. I am in agreement with the said conclusion reached by

the appellate Court.

The Explanation 2 of Section 150 of the Civil Procedure Code states

that “ … no party can be allowed to make at the trial a case materially different

from that which he has placed on record, and which his opponent is prepared to

meet.” Thus, with the case presented by the Plaintiff during the inquiry

stage to determine his entitlement to any relief in the interim and then

seeks to substantiate a case which is substantially different to the one he

had already pleaded in the Plaint and runs contrary to the one which the

Defendant was called upon to meet by filing her answer, there cannot be a

reasonable prospect for the Plaintiff to claim “ … that the decree which may

ultimately be entered in favour of the party seeking the injunction be nugatory or

ineffective if the injunction is not issued” (vide judgment of Dissanayake v

Agricultural and Industrial Credit Corporation and Others).

It is already referred earlier on that the Plaintiff’s submission that

since the Defendant concedes the life interest, that the original Court had

S.C. Appeal No.77/2017

15

rightly issued the injunction as pleaded in order to preserve that right by

ensuring the status quo. This part of the submissions of the Plaintiff brings

the question of the status quo into consideration of this Court.

The Plaintiff relied on the judgment of this Court in Kariyawasam v

Sujatha Janaki and “Others (supra) before the District Court to impress

upon that Court that “[T]he primary purpose of granting interim injunctions is

to preserve the status-quo of the subject matter in dispute until legal rights and

conflicting claims of the parties are adjudicated and decided upon.”

Turning to consider the actual status quo that existed when the

District Court issued the injunction must be examined before I proceed any

further on this aspect. The Defendant instituted her action in 2012 whereas

the Plaintiff instituted his action only on 19.06.2015. Similar to the prayer

of the Plaintiff in the instant action, the Defendant also prayed for

injunctive relief against the Plaintiff in her action. The District Court, by its

order dated 24.01.2013, granted the Defendant of the interim relief she had

prayed for by issuing an injunction on the Plaintiff preventing him from

alienating the property by selling, renting/leasing, mortgaging or

depriving the Defendant of her rights by any other means.

There is no challenge to the said order made against him on the part

of the Plaintiff, who thereafter only moved to amend his answer, that too

unsuccessfully. Thus, the Plaintiff could not have exercised some of his

rights he is entitled to under his life interest over the property, in terms of

the said order.

The property in dispute is essentially a commercial property.

Neither party ever resided in that building. Since the building was put up

S.C. Appeal No.77/2017

16

and made ready for occupation, it was the Defendant who rented/leased

out same repeatedly, which the Plaintiff now wants to prevent. The

Defendant cannot sell the property given to her under a life interest,

without the consent of her father. This being the status quo of the property,

considered in the light of the principles of equity, the Defendant, deriving

an income from the property could not be termed as an act of

impingement of the rights of the Plaintiff, when the exercise of which had

been prevented by an order of Court.

Since the Plaintiff is prevented by the Court in exercising some of his

rights, there cannot be an irreparable loss caused to him when his

daughter does that. The reliance placed on the ratio of the judgment in

Seelawathie Mallawa v Millie Keerthiratne (supra) by the Plaintiff would

not render him of any assistance as the principle enunciated in the said

pronouncement that a wrong doer obtaining the benefit of his own wrong

to the detriment of the other party has no relevance to the instant appeal.

In view of the reasoning contained in the preceding paragraphs of

this judgment, I proceed to answer the questions of law on which the

instant appeal was argued as follows;

c. Whether the impugned Judgement is against the applicable legal

principles and/or fails to appreciate the applicable legal

principles? No.

d. Whether the impugned Judgment is misconceived in law and

does not contain due and proper reasons in that totally fails to

appreciate that the underlying basis and/or rationale of the said

S.C. Appeal No.77/2017

17

Judgment is the life interest of the Plaintiff in the relevant

property (which fact not challenged by the Defendant) ? No.

Since the two questions of law were answered in the negative, the

judgment of the Provincial High Court pronounced on 28.07.2016 is hereby

affirmed. The appeal of the Plaintiff is accordingly dismissed.

I make no order as to costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J. I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT MENAKA WIJESUNDERA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT