1 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for Special Leave to Appeal in terms of Article 128 of the Constitution

P.N. Maharajah, No. 133/5, Nawala Road, Narahenpita, Colombo 05. Deceased-Petitioner 1. Nagan Maharajah Weerasingham, 2. Muniyandi Aswath Ammal 3. Nagam Maharajah Nirmala

All of, No. 133/5, Nawala Road, Narahenpita, Colombo 05.

4. Nagam Maharajah Thilagawathie 5. Nagam Maharajah Thilakaranee

Both of, No. 16/10, Liyanage Mawatha, Nawala Road, Rajagiriya. Substituted-Petitioners SC. Appeal No. 121/2010

SC (SPL) 286/2008 CA/Writ/1923/2006 Vs,

1. Hema Wijesekara,

The Commissioner of National Housing, National Housing Department, “Sethsiripaya”Battaramulla.

2. Perumal Muniyandi Sundarammal (Deceased),

No. 133/5, Nawala Road, Narahenpita, Colombo 05.

2

3. M.S. Jaldeen 4. H. Akurugoda 5. R.W.M.S.B. Rajapkse 6. N.T. Padmadasa

All members of the Board of Review under Ceiling on Housing Property Law No. 10G, Sri Vipulasena Mawatha, Colombo 10. Respondents 7. Sunil Kannangara

Director-Housing, National Housing Department, ‘Sethsiripaya’ Battaramulla. Added Respondent Now Between

1. Nagan Maharajah Weerasingham, 2. Muniyandi Aswath Ammal 3. Nagam Maharajah Nirmala

All of, No. 133/5, Nawala Road, Narahenpita, Colombo 05.

4. Nagam Maharajah Thilagawathie 5. Nagam Maharajah Thilakaranee

Both of, No. 16/10, Liyanage Mawatha, Nawala Road, Rajagiriya. Substituted-Petitioners-Petitioners

1. Hema Wijesekara,

The Commissioner of National Housing, National Housing Department, “Sethsiripaya” Battaramulla.

3

2. Perumal Muniyandi Sundarammal (Deceased),

No. 133/5, Nawala Road, Narahenpita, Colombo 05. 2A. Kasamuthu Singiah

No. 133/6, Nawala Road, Narahenpita, Colombo 05. 2B. Kasamuthu Sinniah

No. 133/5, Nawala Road, Narahenpita, Colombo 05.

3. M.S. Jaldeen 4. H. Akurugoda 5. R.W.M.S.B. Rajapkse 6. N.T. Padmadasa

All members of the Board of Review under Ceiling on Housing Property Law No. 10G, Sri Vipulasena Mawatha, Colombo 10. Respondents-Respondents 7. Sunil Kannangara

Director-Housing, National Housing Department, ‘Sethsiripaya” Battaramulla. 8. Raja Gunaratne

The Commissioner of National Housing, National Housing Department, “Sethsiripaya” Battaramulla

9. Dr. M. Karunadasa

The Commissioner of National Housing, National Housing Department, “Sethsiripaya” Battaramulla

4

10. S. Collure

The Commissioner of National Housing, National Housing Department, “Sethsiripaya” Battaramulla Added Respondents-Respondents

Before: Sisira J. De. Abrew J Priyantha Jayawardena PC J Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J

Counsel: S.N. Vijithsingh for Substituted Petitioners-Petitioners

Ms. Yuresha De. Silva SSC for the 10th Added Respondent-Respondent

A.C.F. Benazir for 2A and 2B Substituted Respondents-Respondents

Argued on 26.10.2017 Decided on 19.02.2018 Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J

The Substituted Petitioners Petitioners have filed the present special leave to appeal application

against the decision by the Court of Appeal in CA/Writ Application No. 1923/2005. When this

matter was supported, this court had granted special leave on the questions of law raised in sub-

paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) to paragraph 43 of the Petition which reads as follows;

43 (a) Whether the Court of Appeal err in law by holding that, at the time of deciding the

questions of preliminary objections the Commissioner of National Housing, (the said

decision was affirmed by the board of review) could determine the entire

application of the Petitioner by dealing with the merits of the application without

informing the Petitioner, that the Commissioner was going to decide the merits of

the application as well.

5 (b) Whether the Court of Appeal err in law by holding that the inquiry before the

commissioner could correctly proceeded under section 9 of the Ceiling on Housing

Property Law and whereas the Court of Appeal by previous judgment dated 21st May

2002 held that the previous owner had sold the houses within the permitted time, in

terms of section 10 of the Ceiling on Housing Property Law, (and there was no

application made by the contesting Respondent under section 9 of the ceiling on

housing property law?

(c) Did Court of Appeal err in law by not deciding that the inquiry should have

proceeded in terms of section 13 of the Ceiling on Housing Property Law as observed

by the Court of Appeal in previous judgment dated 21st May 2002 and hence

equities of the parties would be a relevant consideration, it had to be decided by

leading evidence in terms of section 13 of the said law.

As revealed before us, after instituting the said Writ application before the Court of Appeal, the

Petitioner P.N. Maharajah had died on 06.06.2007 and his heirs were substituted as petitioners to

the said application.

As further revealed before this court, the Deceased Petitioner and one K. Kasimuththu were

employed in a company by the name Ramsay Limited. At the time the Ceiling on Housing Property

Law came into operation the said Ramsay Limited was owned 44 tenements including the two

tenements occupied by P.N. Maharajah and K. Kasimuththu. The two tenements occupied by the

said P.N. Maharajah and K. Kasimuththu were bearing tenement numbers 94/5 and 94/6

respectively.

The present application is limited to the tenement bearing number 94/6 occupied by the said

K. Kasimuththu and later by his wife Muniyandi Sundarammal and there were series of cases,

including several inquiries under the Ceiling on Housing Property Law, a District Court action and

two Writ applications filed before the Court of Appeal with regard to the said property. By the

present application the Substituted Petitioners Petitioners were challenging the decision by the

Court of Appeal dated 15.09.2008.

Since the said decision by the Court of Appeal, referred to an inquiry under the Ceiling on Housing

Property Law, it is necessary to understand the background to the dispute between the two parties

with regard to the tenement referred to above.

6 As referred to above, the Deceased Petitioner and the present Substituted Petitioners Petitioners

(here-in-after referred to as Petitioners) lived in tenement No. 94/5 and there is no dispute with

regard to the said tenement. The Deceased Petitioner being the tenant of the said tenement,

purchased the said tenement from its previous owner at the time Ceiling on Housing Property Law

came into operation, since the said premises came within the provisions of the said law.

This fact is very much clear from the document produced marked 7R10A which is a letter by the

previous owner Ramsay Limited to the Commissioner of National Housing dated 11th January 1974

and as revealed this is a vital communication by the said previous owner with regard to the sale of

houses to its previous occupants.

The 1st paragraph of the said letter reads as follows;

“With reference to your letter No, CH/DB/1A/74 dated 7th January 1974, we write to inform

you that out of the 44 houses in question five houses already been sold to the tenants. Of

the balance, to the best of our knowledge and belief twelve of the tenants are citizen of

Ceylon and 27 tenants are non-citizens. In view of the fact that they are non-citizens they

could not purchase the houses”

From the above it is very much clear that, at the time the above letter was written on 11th January

1974, 5 houses had been sold to its tenants.

If the said position is correct, the balance houses would be vested with the Commissioner of

National Housing by the operation of Ceiling on Housing Property Law and the disposal of the said

property would have to be under the provisions of the said law. With regard to the 5 houses

referred to above it is further clear that those tenements had been sold to its rightful tenants and

not to any other person, including tenant of the other tenements.

However as revealed before the inquiry conducted by the Commissioner of National Housing, the

said Ramsay Limited had disposed tenement bearing No. 94/6 to the Deceased Petitioner on 11th

January 1974 by deed of transfer No. 545.

It was further revealed at the said inquiry that, when the said Ramsay Limited informed by letter

dated 11th January 1974 (on the same day as the deed of transfer had been executed) that they

have disposed 5 properties to its tenants, the Commissioner believed that the said 5 transfers are

7 to the rightful tenants and therefore vesting orders were cancelled in respect of those tenements

by letter dated 06.06.1977.

By letter dated 17.03.1998 the said Commissioner of National Housing had cancelled his previous

order and vested the tenement bearing No. 94/6 with the Commissioner of National Housing in

order to proceed under the provisions of the Ceiling on Housing Property Law.

The Petitioners predecessor in title had filed a Writ application before the Court of Appeal against

the said decision and the Court of Appeal allowing the said application, directed the Commissioner

of National Housing to hold a fresh inquiry in order to consider whether the transfer referred to

above by the said Ramsay Limited comes within the provisions of sections 9 and 10 of the Ceiling

on Housing Property Law.

The Petitioners predecessor in title who agreed to face a fresh inquiry by the said order of the

Court, had gone before the Commissioner of National Housing and raised a preliminary objection

for the maintainability of the said inquiry. The Commissioner of National Housing, who permitted

the parties to even file written submissions on the issues raised before him, finally disposed the

whole matter when he realized that the Petitioner’s predecessor in title is raising all these issues as

a delaying tactic.

The said decision of the Commissioner of National Housing was once again considered by the

Ceiling on Housing Property Board of Review and affirmed the said decision by its order dated

21.09.2005.

The Court of Appeal once again reviewed the decisions of both the Commissioner of National

Housing and the Ceiling on Housing Property Board of Review and affirm the said decision to vest

the tenement bearing No. 94/6 with the Commissioner of National Housing when Petitioners

Predecessor in title filed a Writ application before the Court of Appeal and by the present

application the Petitioners have challenged the said decision.

When deciding the said matter the Court of Appeal was mindful of the provisions of section 10 of

the Ceiling on Housing Property Law which reads as follows;

Section 10; Where, on the date of commencement of this law, any person owns any house in

excess of the permitted number of houses, such person may, if such person is an

individual, within a period of twelve months from such date, and if such person is a

8

body of persons, within a period of six months of the date on which the

determination under this law by the Commissioner or as the case may be, by the

Board of Review, of the maximum number of houses that may be owned by such

body, or where such body applies for, and is granted an extension of time by the

Commissioner within six months from the November 1, 1974, dispose of such house

with notice to the Commissioner unless the tenant of such house or any person

who may under section 36 of the Rent Act succeed to the tenancy of such house has

made application with simultaneous notice to the owner for the purchase of such

house (emphasis Added)

When going through the provisions of section 10 above, it is clear that, the above provision of the

Ceiling on Housing Property Law deals with a situation, where a third party could purchase a

property, that comes within the Ceiling on Housing Property Law, and such disposition can only

take place with notice to the Commissioner of National Housing. As discussed above, the body of

persons which belongs the tenement referred to above had transferred it to an outsider within the

meaning of the Ceiling on Housing Property Law, without following the said provision of the Ceiling

on Housing Property Law, pretending that it was sold to its rightful tenant.

Requirement under section 10 of the Ceiling on Housing Property Law was discussed in the case of

Wahab V. Jayah (1988) 1 Sri LR 78 by the Supreme Court as follows;

“The Ceiling on Housing Property Law No. 1 of 1973, came into operation on 13.1.73. Under

section 8 of the said law the Plaintiff made statutory declaration (P1 dated 4.4.73) which

included the premises in suit, as a house owned by the appellant in excess of the permitted

number of houses which the Plaintiff did not propose to retain. Section 10 of the said law

provides that any person who owns any house in excess of the permitted number may,

within a period of 12 months from the date of the commencement of the Law, dispose of

such house with notice to the Commissioner unless the tenant of such house had made an

application with simultaneous notice to the present owner for the purchase of that house.”

During the arguments before this court, as well as before the Court of Appeal, the Petitioners

alleged that rules of natural justice was not followed by the Commissioner of National Housing

when making the impugned order without granting an opportunity to present their full case before

the Commissioner.

9 However as observed earlier in this judgment, the Petitioners predecessor in title had raised an

unprecedented objection before the Commissioner of National Housing with regard to his

jurisdiction, when the Court of Appeal had directed him to hold an inquiry and even after raising

the said objection, the Commissioner had granted time for the parties to file written submissions

but, when he realized that it was only a delaying tactic he considered the entire matter on its merit

with the help of the detail submissions placed by both parties and made his order.

In the said circumstances, I see no merit in the present application. I therefore answer the

questions of law raised by the Petitioners in the negative and dismiss the application with costs.

Application dismissed with costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Sisira J. De. Abrew J

I Agree,

Judge of the Supreme Court

Priyantha Jayawardena PC

I Agree,

Judge of the Supreme Court