==== BLOCKS ==== 

SC / CHC / APPEAL / 19 / 2013 HC / Civil / 552 / 2009 / MR

In the matter of an appeal made in terms of

Section 5 (C) of the High Court of the Provinces

(Special Provisions) Act No.54 of 2006.

1. Sinnarajah Sivakumar,

2. Harijah (Wife of Sivakumar),

9749, SW 111th Terrace Miami,

Florida,

3313776,

United States of America.

Through their Power of Attorney

Nadaraja Thamilalagan,

“Malarvasa” Urumpirai North,

Urumpirai.

PLAINTIFFS

SC / APPEAL / 39 / 2022

SC / HCCA / LA / 65 / 2020

HCCA Jaffna / 182 / 2018

DC Jaffna: L / 240 / 2014

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

SC / APPEAL / 39 / 2022 1

-Vs-

Ponnuthurai Gurudev,

311, Navalar Road,

Jaffna.

DEFENDANT

AND THEN BETWEEN

Ponnuthurai Gurudev,

311, Navalar Road,

Jaffna.

DEFENDANT – APPELLANT

-Vs-

1. Sinnarajah Sivakumar,

2. Harijah (Wife of Sivakumar),

9749, SW 111th Terrace Miami,

Florida,

3313776,

SC / APPEAL / 39 / 2022 2

United States of America.

Through their Power of Attorney

Nadaraja Thamilalagan,

“Malarvasa” Urumpirai North,

Urumpirai.

PLAINTIFFS – RESPONDENTS

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Sinnarajah Sivakumar,

2. Harijah (Wife of Sivakumar),

9749, SW 111th Terrace Miami,

Florida,

3313776,

United States of America.

Through their Power of Attorney

Nadaraja Thamilalagan,

“Malarvasa” Urumpirai North,

SC / APPEAL / 39 / 2022 3

Urumpirai.

PLAINTIFFS – RESPONDENTS –

PETITIONERS

-Vs-

Ponnuthurai Gurudev,

311, Navalar Road,

Jaffna.

DEFENDANT – APPELLANT –

RESPONDENT

Before: A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J.

Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J. &

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J.

Counsel: Kuvera De Zoysa, PC, with N.M. Shaheid and Kevin Dias for the Plaintiffs –

Respondents – Petitioners.

K.V.S. Ganesharajan for the Defendant – Appellant – Respondent.

Argued on: 13.03.2024

Decided on: 23.03.2026

SC / APPEAL / 39 / 2022 4

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J.

1. The point that arises in this appeal is not altogether unfamiliar. It has recurred in

one form or the other in those classes of cases where a defect in the institution of an

action is pointed out as a vice that taints the whole proceedings that had taken place

in the court a quo. Such an argument that proceedings in the District Court became

null and void because of the absence of a power of attorney was advanced in this case

in the Civil Appellate High Court in Jaffna and the learned High Court judges have

dismissed the plaint an action filed by the Plaintiffs in this case solely on the basis

that the tender of the power of attorney took place long after the appeal brief had

been remitted to the High Court.

2. The case instituted by the Plaintiffs - Respondents - Appellants (the Plaintiffs) was

an action for declaration, wherein the Plaintiffs living in the USA had filed this action

for the ejectment of the Defendant from the property situated in Navalar Road, Jaffna

As the plaint filed in the District Court of Jaffna clearly indicates, the Plaintiffs - a

husband and wife who were living in Miami, Florida filed the action through their

attorney in the District Court of Jaffna against the sole Defendant whom they alleged

was an overholding lessee. There was also a claim for arrears of rentals and damages.

3. The special feature in this case is that the 1st Plaintiff - the husband himself traveled

down from the USA and testified in the case before the District Court. I find upon a

perusal of the proceedings in the District Court that the Defendant has admitted inter

alia;

a. He did not have title to the property – the subject matter of the

action.

b. He had undertaken that he would leave the property once he

constructed his own house.

c. He undertook to leave in 2 years.

SC / APPEAL / 39 / 2022 5

d. He never paid any money to the Plaintiffs.

4. This explains the basis of the action on the premise that the Defendant had become

an overholding lessee.

5. I must state at the very outset that though the plaint and the proxy filed in the case

quite clearly indicated that the Plaintiffs began their legal proceedings through their

power of attorney holder, hardly any objection was ever taken by the Defendant to

the absence of the power of attorney either at the commencement of the trial or in the

course of it.

6. Indeed, the power of attorney had not been filed along with the plaint and I need not

reiterate the long-held principle that the power of attorney could come on the record

later. I would draw attention to cases such as Udeshi v. Mather1 and Gricilda

Hewa v. Thomas Hewa2. The dicta of Atukorale, J. (with Sharvananda, C.J. and

L.H. De Alwis, J. concurring) is quite significant to recall;

“It is now settled law that the failure to file the powers or certified copies

thereof in court as stipulated in S.25 (b) is only an irregularity which can

be cured later by tendering them to court; Aitken Spence & Co. v.

Fernando3. In the instant case this omission has been cured by certified

copies being filed with the motion dated 22.8.1986”

7. In Aitken Spence & Co. v. Fernando (supra) – the case cited by Atukorale, J,

Bonser C.J., after consultation with Moncrieff, J. expressed the following view at p

37;

1 (1988) 1 Sri.L.R. 12 2 (1998) 3 Sri.L.R. 43 3 (1900) 4 N.L.R. 35

SC / APPEAL / 39 / 2022 6

“A power of attorney or a copy of it, might under Section 25 (b), be filed

at any stage of the case. It seems to me that in matters of this nature, the

important thing is that the person in fact had authority to act and not

whether the instrument of authorization was filed at the time of the

institution of the action.

8. From the observations of Bonser C.J., it is apparent that what a Court has to be

concerned with is whether there was an intention on the part of the principal to clothe

the agent with authority. Section 25 (b) of the Civil Procedure Code which runs in the

following tenor was interpreted by Bonser C.J. as not imposing a strict requirement

of filing the instrument of agency along with the plaint at the time of the institution

of the action;

“Persons holding general powers of attorney from parties not resident

within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the court within which limits

the appearance or application is made or act done, authorizing them to

make such appearances and applications, and do such acts on behalf of

such parties; which power, or a copy thereof certified by a registered

attorney or notary shall in each case be filed in the court”.4

9. It is this attenuation of the formalism of Section 25 (b) that gave rise to cases such as

Udeshi v. Mather (supra) and Gricilda Hewa v. Thomas Hewa (supra).

Amerasinghe, J. crystalized the relevant question that a Court has to pose in regard

to Section 25 (2) in Gricilda Hewa v. Thomas Hewa (supra);

“It seems to me that in matters of this nature, the important thing is that

the person in fact had authority to act and not whether the instrument of

authorization was filed at the time of the institution of the action'.

4 Section 25 (b) of the Civil Procedure Code

SC / APPEAL / 39 / 2022 7

The failure to file the power of attorney of or a certified copy thereof in

court, as stipulated in s. 25 (b) is only an irregularity”.

10. But the fact remains that the Defendant never gave his mind to the absence of the

power of attorney until he settled down to put forth his written submissions to the

learned District Judge. In practice written submissions are a norm in the original

Courts after the parties have closed their respective cases and it is in his written

submissions that the Defendant made a complaint that the power of attorney was

non est in the case.

11. It would appear that the learned District Judge of Jaffna did not pay his attention

to this complaint but proceeded to determine the rights of the parties on the merits.

He drew attention to the perennial dictum of U. De Z Gunawardana, J. in Ruberu

and Another v. Wijesooriya5 on declaration of title cases and it is worth quoting

the passages of the learned Judge in regard to the merit of the case of the Plaintiffs

which was based on a lease and an overholding lessee.

"Whether it is a licensee or lessee, the question of title is foreign to a suit

in ejectment against either. The licensee obtaining possession is deemed

to obtain it upon the terms that he will not dispute the title of the Plaintiff

without whose permission he would not have got it. The effect of Section

116 of the Evidence Ordinance is that if a licensee desires to challenge

the title under which he is in occupation he must first quit the land. The

fact that the licensee or the lessee obtained possession from the plaintiff

is perforce an admission of the fact that the title resides in the plaintiff.

12. The learned Judge of the Court of Appeal (as His Lordship then was) further held

that;

5 (1998) 1 Sri.L.R. 58

SC / APPEAL / 39 / 2022 8

"It is an inflexible rule of law that no lessee or licensee will never be

permitted either to question the title of the person who gave him the lease

or the license or the permission to occupy or possess the land or set up

want of title in that person".

13. As regards the scope of an action against an overholding lessee which characterized

the action of the Plaintiffs against the Defendant the pertinent citation of Gamini

Amarasekara, J. to Maasdorp’s Institutes (7th Ed.) Vol. 2, 96. in the case of H.W.

Amarasiri and Another v. W.M. Bandara Menika and Others6 is worthy of note;

“The scope of an action by a lessor against an overholding lessee for

restoration and ejectment, however, is different. Privity of contract

(whether it be by original agreement or by attornment) is the foundation

of the right to relief and issues as to title are irrelevant to the proceedings.

Indeed, a lessee who has entered into occupation is precluded from

disputing his lessor’s title until he has first restored the property in

fulfilment of his contractual obligation. “The lessee (conductor) cannot

plead the exceptio dominii, although he may be able easily to prove his

own ownership, but he must by all means first surrender his possession

and then litigate as to proprietorship…….” 7

“A decree for a declaration of title may, of course, be obtained by way of

additional relief either in a rei vindicatio action proper (which is in truth

an action in rem) or in a lessor’s action against his overholding tenant

(which is an action in personam). But in the former case, the declaration

is based on proof of ownership; in the latter, on proof of the contractual

relationship which forbids a denial that the lessor is the true owner.”

6 SC / APPEAL / 108 / 2022 7 Voet 19.2.32.

SC / APPEAL / 39 / 2022 9

14. The aforesaid principles of law seem to have inclined the learned District Judge of

Jaffna to decide the case in favour of the Plaintiffs and reject the case of the

Defendant. In fact, the learned District Judge ordered the ejectment of the Defendant

from the premises in Navalar Road, Jaffna. The import of the judgment of the Court

a quo is an unambiguous characterization of the Defendant as an overholding lessee.

15. In his appeal to the Civil Appellate High Court of Jaffna, the Defendant persisted in

his objection that there was no power of attorney on the record of the case. Much

argument before us turned on the fact of a special power of attorney having been

tendered to the District Court of Jaffna on 13 March 2019 by way of a motion, which

the learned counsel for the Defendant Mr. K.V.S. Ganesharajan pointed out was filed

long after the Defendant had preferred his appeal to the Civil Appellate High Court

of Jaffna on 4 September 2018. The judgement of the District Court had been

pronounced on 4 July 2018. The learned President's Counsel for the Plaintiffs brought

to the notice of this Court that the learned Civil Appellate High Court Judges had

themselves been put aut fait of the tendering of the special power of attorney but the

learned Judges of the Civil Appellate Court treated this as a fundamental vice that

vitiated the whole proceedings in the District Court.

16. The learned Civil Appellate Court Judges by their judgment dated 22 January 2020

concluded that there was a failure on the part of the Plaintiff to file the power of

attorney or a copy thereof in Court in compliance with Section 25 (b) of the Civil

Procedure Code and in their opinion such a failure was fatal to the maintenance of

the action.

17. The learned Judges of the Civil Appellate High Court thus allowed the appeal of the

Defendant and dismissed the action of the Plaintiffs.

18. It is from this judgement that the Plaintiffs invoked the appellate jurisdiction of this

Court and I would also set down the 3 questions of law that surfaced to the fore at

SC / APPEAL / 39 / 2022 10

the threshold stage of leave;

(a) Is the failure to comply with Section 25 (b) of the Civil Procedure Code

not a fatal irregularity?

(b) Was the irregularity, if any, cured by the subsequent tender of the power

of attorney to the District Court?

(c) Did the Learned Judges of the said Civil Appellate High Court misdirect

themselves in law in failing to appreciate that in matters of this nature

the important thing was whether the power of attorney Holder in fact had

the authority to institute action on behalf of the Plaintiffs - Respondents

- Appellants?

19. It has to be remembered that the case ran its full course in the District Court of Jaffna

and both parties sought to vindicate their positions by testifying in their favour. Even

though the Plaintiffs employed one Nadarajah Thamilalagan to institute this action

characterizing the said Nadarajah Thamilalagan as their attorney, the 1st Plaintiff

(the husband of the 2nd Plaintiff) himself testified and pleaded his case before the

District Court for the ejectment of the Defendant. It was long clear to the Defendant

as clear as sunlight that the case had been instituted through an agent. There was

no power of attorney which accompanied the plaint or followed thereafter but the

Defendant chose not to raise any objections to this defect which the Courts of this

country have long cited as a mere irregularity.

20. It is axiomatic that in cases of irregularity Defendants in cases do take objections at

the commencement or long before the commencement of a trial to an irregularity or

otherwise, and no trace of such an objection is visible upon a perusal of the

proceedings in this case - Section 17 of the Civil Procedure Code which enjoins a Judge

not to dismiss an action for misjoinder or non-joinder of parties.

SC / APPEAL / 39 / 2022 11

21. Pereira, J. in London and Lancashire Fire Insurance Com. v. P and O Com.8

stated the following as regards objections to misjoinder or non-joinder of parties;

“An objection of the grant of the misjoinder or non-joinder of

parties is not a defence to the Plaintiff’s case to be taken by way of

answer.”

22. As to an irregularity on misjoinder of cause of action Susil Perera v. Kelly and

Another9 held;

“Any objection to misjoinder of cause of action has to be taken

before the hearing”

23. These cases undoubtedly turned on misjoinder and non-joinder of parties that had to

be brought to the notice of Court as an irregularity even before the commencement of

the trial. But we have seen that in regard to the irregularity of the absence of a power

of attorney, these instruments could be brought onto the record of a case even after

the case has commenced, in terms of the long-held principles that have developed

around Section 25 of the Civil Procedure Code.

24. However, if a suit that was instituted by a power of attorney holder has been decided

after going into the merits, it goes without saying that the appellate Court would not

entertain an objection as to jurisdiction unless it has resulted in failure of justice.

This was a case where the 1st Plaintiff who had, along with his wife held out a special

power of attorney, however invalid it was, took the witness stand and was subjected

to cross examination by the Defendant. Not a single question was posed to him as to

the want of authority of the aforesaid Nadarajah Thamilalagan to institute an action

on their behalf.

8 18 N.L.R. 15 at p.21 9 2002 3 Sri.L.R. part 6 p.163

SC / APPEAL / 39 / 2022 12

25. There was no issue raised as to the want of authority of the said agent. Neither did

the 1st Plaintiff repudiate in the course of his evidence the said Nadarajah

Thamilalagan as his power of attorney holder. It has to be remembered that a power

of attorney signifies a contract or an agreement between a recognized agent and a

Plaintiff / Defendant in a case. If the authority of the agent is not in question, it would

be obnoxious to common sense to insist on a stringent compliance with Section 25 (b)

of the Civil Procedure Code so as to invalidate proceedings of a lower Court, when the

Plaintiff had ratified the agency by his subsequent conduct of acquiescence in all the

acts the said Nadarajah Thamilalagan took in this case.

26. In this context I do well to reflect on the case of Kumarihamy v Punchi Menika10

where Abrahams C.J. articulated these views as follows;

“I see no reason why the opinion expressed in Segu Mohamadu

v. Govinden Kangany11 should not apply. There Wood Renton

C.J., approved of the finding in Bisandas Valad Majuvian v.

Lakmichand Kisamchand12, which was to the effect that an

irregularity of this nature should not be permitted to vitiate the

proceedings unless such irregularity affected the merits of the case

or the jurisdiction of the Court”.13

27. There is also authority across Palk Strait that an objection that the institution of a

suit is not within the authority conferred by a power-of-attorney, should be taken at

the earliest possible opportunity and before issues are framed – see Municipal

Committee, Pathankot v. Roshanlal14 and that even when an objection is so taken

and sustained, the court should not reject the plaint but give an opportunity to the

10 38 N.L.R. p.385 11 12 Leader 61 12 6 Bombay High Court Reports 159 13 At 38 N.L.R. p.387 14 (1957) ILR Punj 1443

SC / APPEAL / 39 / 2022 13

parties to rectify the defect – see Radhakishen v. Wali Mohammed15. In a case,

the plaintiff, who was of age, presented a plaint by his mother acting as guardian and

describing him as a minor. The plaintiff was himself present at the presentation of

the plaint and the court, believing that he had acted in good faith held that the

defective presentation was an irregularity which did not affect the jurisdiction of the

court to accept the plaint – see Wali Mohammed v. Ishak Ali.16

28. I take the view that although a power of attorney must be strictly construed as giving

only such authority as it expressly or by necessary implication creates, this Court

cannot decline to recognize the authority that the 1st Plaintiff himself has impliedly

recognized what Nadarajah Thamilalagan had to do whatever was necessary or

ordinarily incidental to the effective execution of an express authority conferred on

him by a written document that got onto the record long after the appeal had been

preferred to the Civil Appellate High Court of Jaffna.

29. Therefore, the learned Civil Appellate High Court Judges grievously erred in

dismissing the plaint of the Plaintiffs solely on the ground that there was no written

authority that lay on the record. As the parties brought to the notice of this Court, it

appears that there was a belated tender of a document styled special power of

attorney and in the absence of any objection to the validity of the authority of the

agent in initiating this action, this Court cannot be driven to the conclusion that a

fundamental vice affected this case so as to invalidate the proceedings in the District

Court.

30. This brings me to the cardinal principle that has guided this Court in distinguishing

between an irregularity and illegality. The mere circumstance of there being an error,

defect or irregularity in any proceeding in a suit, is no ground for reversing or varying

a decree in appeal. But if it appears that the error, defect or irregularity affected the

15 AIR 1956 Hyd 133 16 AIR 1931 AL 527 (FB)

SC / APPEAL / 39 / 2022 14

merits of the case or jurisdiction of the court, it would be a ground for reversing or

varying the decree. Where an irregularity is one which affects the merits of a case or

the “jurisdiction of a court”, it is said to be a material irregularity. Where it does not,

it is usually spoken as a mere irregularity.

31. In the circumstances, the Defendant was not prejudicially affected in espousal of his

case before Court and he was not misled at all in his defence. Accordingly, I proceed

to answer the questions of law in favour of the Plaintiff – Respondent – Appellant

and allow his appeal.

32. Thus, the judgement of the learned Civil Appellate High Court Judges dated 22

January 2020 is set aside and the judgement of the learned District Judge dated 4

July 2018 is affirmed and restored.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J. Judge of the Supreme Court

I agree

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J. Judge of the Supreme Court

I agree