==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 15

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal under

Article 128(2) of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic

of Sri Lanka.

S.C. Appeal No: Rajakaruna Mudiyanselage

48/2024 Jayawardhena,

Mudungoda,

SC/SPL/LA No: Kiralogama.

193/2023 PETITIONER

CA Writ Application No. Vs.

CA(Writ) 293/19 1. Director General,

Mahaweli Authority,

No. 500,

T.B. Jaya Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

2. Resident Project Manager

(Land),

Resident of RPM (Land),

Thambuththegama.

3. Commissioner of Lands,

Land Commissioner’s

Department,

Colombo 07.

Page 2 of 15

4. Registrar of Lands,

Land Registry,

Anuradhapura.

5. Rajakaruna Mudiyanselage

Siriwardhana,

Mudungoda,

Kiralogama.

6. Rajakaruna Mudiyanselage

Dharmawardhana,

Mudungoda,

Kiralogama.

7. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

AND NOW BETWEEN

Rajakaruna Mudiyanselage

Jayawardhena,

Mudungoda,

Kiralogama.

PETITIONER-APPELLANT

Vs.

1. Director General,

Mahaweli Authority,

No. 500, T.B. Jaya Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

Page 3 of 15

2. Resident Project Manager

(Land),

Resident of RPM (Land),

Thambuththegama.

3. Commissioner of Lands,

Land Commissioner’s

Department,

Colombo 07.

4. Registrar of Lands,

Land Registry,

Anuradhapura.

5. Rajakaruna Mudiyanselage

Siriwardhana,

Mudungoda,

Kiralogama.

6. Rajakaruna Mudiyanselage

Dharmawardhana,

Mudungoda,

Kiralogama.

7. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS-RESPONDENTS

Before : Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

: Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

: Sampath K. B. Wijeratne, J.

Page 4 of 15

Counsel : Priyantha Alagiyawanna with Sauri Senanayake

instructed by Sachini Maheshika for the Petitioner-

Appellant.

: Vijithsingh instructed by Dinesh de Silva for the 5th

Respondent-Respondent.

: Chaya Sri Nammuni, DSG with Hashini Opatha,

SSC, for the 1st to 4th and 7th Respondent-

Respondents.

Argued on : 06-08-2025

Written Submissions : 09-09-2025 (By the Petitioner-Appellant)

: 16-05-2024 (By the Petitioner-Appellant)

: 10-09-2025 (By the 1st to 4th and 6th Respondent-

Respondents)

: 25-10-2024 (By the 1st to 4th and 7th Respondent-

Respondents)

: 17-09-2025 (By the 5th Respondent-Respondent)

: 19-09-2024 (By the 5th Respondent-Respondent)

Decided on : 21-11-2025

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

This is an appeal preferred by the petitioner-appellant (hereinafter referred to

as the appellant) on the basis of being aggrieved of the judgment pronounced

by the Court of Appeal on 31-05-2023, wherein the Writ Application preferred

by the appellant was dismissed.

This is a matter where the appellant sought a mandate in the nature of a Writ

of Certiorari to quash the nominations that had been made in the documents

Page 5 of 15

P-9, P-9A and P-9B marked and produced along with his petition, and also a

mandate in the nature of a Writ of Mandamus as prayed for in the petition.

The Court of Appeal from the impugned judgment refused to grant the said

reliefs and dismissed the Writ Application without costs for the reasons set

out in the said judgment.

When this appeal was considered for the granting of leave to appeal by this

Court on 14-03-2024, leave was granted by this Court on the following

questions of law.

1. Have Their Lordships of the Court of Appeal misdirected themselves

in law and/or in fact when they failed to consider that as per section

48A(2) of the Land Development Ordinance, irrespective of the fact

that the original allotee or the selected prospective permit holder had

died prior to the issuance of a permit, his spouse is only entitled to

life interests as provided by section 48A(2) of the Land Development

Ordinance, and the spouse has no right to make any nomination?

2. Have Their Lordships of the Court of Appeal misdirected themselves

in law and/or in fact when failing to identify that once a land is

reserved under a person’s name, even if the said person passes

away, the spouse is entitled only to life interest?

3. Whether Nandawathie had succeeded as a permit holder and not as

a life interest holder in 1980 upon the death of Punchirala, in terms

of Section 26 Rule 1 of the Sale of State Land (Special Provisions) Act

No. 43 of 1973?

4. Whether in terms of Section 19(2) of the Land Development

Ordinance, the permit could have been issued to Punchirala as he

had died in 1980?

5. In the circumstances, whether Nandawathie had become the original

permit holder in terms of the Land Development Ordinance

inasmuch as she could not have been issued with a permit in terms

of Act No. 43 of 1973?

Page 6 of 15

When this matter was taken up for argument, it was agreed by the parties

that this matter could be argued together with SC Appeal No. 49/2024, since

the facts and the circumstances and the law that should be considered are

similar. It was agreed that a single judgment can be pronounced, but the

questions of law that need determination in relation to both the matters

should be answered separately.

At the hearing of the appeal on 06-08-2025, this Court heard the submissions

of the learned Counsel, and also had the benefit of considering the pre-

argument as well as post-argument written submissions in relation to their

respective stands taken up before the Court.

Although the parties agreed to have a single judgment, it is my view that it

would be prudent to pronounce two separate judgments in view of the slight

variations as to the facts and the questions of law under which the two

appeals were argued, which would in my view provide better clarity.

The appellant has gone before the Court of Appeal on the basis of being the

eldest son of the deceased Rajakaruna Mudiyanselage Punchirala and the

claimed legal successor of the subject matter of the application under the

provisions of the Land Development Ordinance (LDO).

It has been his position that his father Punchirala developed three plots of

paddy land situated at Eppawala with the consent of the Mahaweli Authority

(referred to as Lot 492, 467 and 491), and therefore, the Mahaweli Authority

conveyed the said lands to Punchirala as per the land ledger and the State

Land permits issued in that regard. It was his position that the said three

lands were conveyed and allocated to his father in the year 1979 under the

provisions of LDO (the documents marked P-2 and P-2A filed together with

the petition before the Court of Appeal).

It has been his position that it is he who developed the said land Lots 492 and

491 with the consent of his father, and even after his father’s death on 29-10-

1980, it was he who cultivated and possessed the said lands.

Page 7 of 15

He has contended that his mother Nandawathie fell ill in the year 2008 and

two of his siblings named as the 5th and 6th respondents in the Court of Appeal

petition influenced his mother to demand that he should leave the lands he

was cultivating, which resulted in finding out that his mother had been issued

State Grants in terms of section 19(4) of the LDO in relation to the lands.

It has been his position that upon further inquiry, he came to know that in

the land permits issued to his father in relation to two of the lands out of the

earlier mentioned three lands, his father’s name has been struck off and his

mother’s name has been entered as the permit holder [(permit no.

407/D5/TO/46/03 alias 492 (irrigation) land ledger marked P-7 and P-7A)

and (permit no. 407/D5/TO/46/02 alias 491 (irrigation) land ledger marked

P-8 and P-8A)]. It has been his position that as a result, his mother has

obtained the land grants in relation to the said lands under her name and has

nominated the 5th and 6th respondents, which he termed as illegal

nominations.

Claiming that it is he who is entitled to succeed to the lands given to his father

under the permits as the eldest son of the family in terms of the LDO, he has

prayed for a mandate in the nature of a Writ of Certiorari to quash the

documents marked P-9, P-9A and P-9B. He has prayed for a mandate in the

nature of a Writ of Mandamus directing the 1st to 3rd respondents named in

the Court of Appeal petition that his name should be entered as the nominee

or successor of the lands mentioned in the land grants marked P-5 and P-6

as per the regulations in the LDO. He has also prayed for a Writ of Mandamus

directing the 4th respondent to delete the nominations registered in the land

registry as specified in P-9A and P-9B.

The Court of Appeal in the impugned judgment has determined that the

earlier mentioned Punchirala, the father of the appellant, has been selected

to alienate the State Lands mentioned in the petition in terms of the Sale of

State Lands (Special Provisions) Law, and since he has passed away before

any permit could be issued to him, the said permits had been issued to his

widow Nandawathie, and that was the reason for the deletion of Punchirala’s

name and substituting the name of Nandawathie in the said land permits.

Page 8 of 15

It has been the view of the Court of Appeal that accordingly, the State Grants

in terms of section 19(4) of the LDO have been properly granted to

Nandawathie, and it is she who has the right to nominate her successor.

It has been determined that there was no basis for the Court of Appeal to

issue Writs in the nature of Certiorari and Mandamus, while holding that the

appellant is not entitled to the reliefs sought.

At the hearing of this appeal, the learned Counsel for the appellant

strenuously argued that in terms of section 48A(2) of the LDO, irrespective of

the fact that the original allotee/selected prospective permit holder had died

prior to the issuance of permits or not, his spouse is only entitled to life

interests and the spouse has no right to make any nominations. It was his

contention that even if the grants were being issued in terms of section 19(4)

of the LDO, the positions still remain the same.

It was his position that in terms of section 2 of the LDO, the term ‘permit-

holder’ should mean any person to whom a permit has been issued and

includes a person who is in occupation in any land alienated to him on a

permit, although no permit has actually been issued to him. Therefore, it was

his position that Punchirala’s spouse Nandawathie to whom the grant has

been issued in terms of section 19(4) can only have life interest, where she

would not have the power to dispose or nominate a successor.

The learned Counsel heavily relied on the judgment of Obeyesekere, J.

pronounced in the case of Jayathilaka Vs. Divisional Secretary Kuruwita

and Others (2021) 2 SLR 430 and the judgment pronounced by the Supreme

Court on 09-11-2023 in SC Appeal 166/2017 where Samayawardhena, J.

has extensively discussed the legal effects of a permit and a grant issued in

terms of section 19(2) and 19(4) of the LDO.

The position taken up on behalf of the respondents was that since the original

allocation of the lands to Punchirala was made in terms of the Sale of State

Lands (Special Provisions) Law No. 43 of 1973, although the said Law has

later been repealed, the Law that should be considered as applicable in

Page 9 of 15

relation to the issuing of permit to Nandawathie instead of Punchirala should

be that and not the LDO.

It was the position of the learned Counsel that section 26 of the said Law is

the relevant provision under which the relevant authority has decided to

change the name of the allotee of the lands in question after the death of the

original allotee, and accordingly, permits issued in terms of section 19(2) and

the grants issued under section 19(4) have been issued in the name of

Nandawathie in terms of the LDO. It was submitted on behalf of the

respondents that since Nandawathie was the original permit holder, it is she

who has the right to nominate the successor in terms of the LDO and the

nominations are legal and valid before the law.

Having considered the above factual matrix and the legal arguments advanced

before the Court, it is my view that the central question that needs

consideration would be whether Nandawathie, the mother of the appellant, is

the person who was given the original permit or the permit has been given

only on the basis that she is the widow of the original allotee or permit holder,

and if not, whether she has any right to nominate a successor on her own

motion as she has done on this particular occasion.

It is clear that when the father of the appellant, namely Punchirala, was

selected for the sale of the State Lands mentioned in the petition, the said

selection was done on 21-09-1979 in terms of Sale of State Lands (Special

Provisions) Law of No. 43 of 1973 (P-2). It is undisputed that the said

Punchirala passed away on 20-10-1980, before being issued with a permit or

a grant in terms of the said Law.

The documents marked P-7A and P-8A, the relevant land ledgers establish

the fact that although initially the ledgers have been prepared on the basis

that Punchirala is the permit holder, before any permit could be issued, he

has passed away in the year 1980.

Although the Sale of State Lands (Special Provisions) Law was repealed on 05-

05-1981 by the Amendment Act No. 27 of 1981 of the LDO, there cannot be

any doubt that the applicable law at the time Punchirala passed away in

Page 10 of 15

relation to the allocation of the lands to him has been the Sale of State Lands

(Special Provisions) Law. It may be the very reason why the relevant authority

has decided to insert Nandawathie’s name in the land ledger having

considered the applicability of section 26 of the Law in relation to the

devolution of title in case of a death of a permit holder or holder of a grant

although there was no permit.

It appears that since the Sale of State Lands (Special Provisions) Law stands

repealed from the 05-05-1981, when the permits were finally issued on 12-

12-1984, it has been issued in terms of the LDO. Accordingly, the grants in

respect of the questioned lands have also been issued to the said Nandawathie

in terms of section 19(4) of the LDO (the documents marked P-5 and P-6). The

said grants have been issued on 29-08-2002 and 17-01-2002 respectively.

Therefore, it is my considered view that when the land permits in terms of

section 19(2) of the LDO were issued in the name of Nandawathie, the permits

have not been issued on the basis that she was the widow of the original

permit holder Punchirala, but on the basis that she is the person who should

get the permit since the original allotee Punchirala was never issued with a

permit in terms of either the Sale of State Lands (Special Provisions) Law or

LDO, due to the fact that he has passed away in the year 1980.

It is therefore clear that the said Nandawathie has been issued with the

corresponding grants in terms of section 19(4) of the LDO on the same basis.

Accordingly, I am of the view that the said Nandawathie had the legal right to

nominate her successors and to nominate the 5th and the 6th respondents as

shown in the documents marked P-9A and P-9B.

It needs to be noted that the case relied on by the appellant, namely the case

of Jayathilaka Vs. Divisional Secretary, Kuruwita and Others (supra), was

not a case where similar facts as in this case had been considered. In the said

case, the permit under the provisions of the LDO has been issued in the name

of one Rathran Hami and the said Rathran Hami had nominated Pahala

Gamaethiralalage Jayathilaka as his successor in the permit itself. Upon the

death of the said Rathran Hami, his spouse Gunarathne Manike has

Page 11 of 15

succeeded to the said land in terms of section 48A(1) of the LDO as amended

by Amendment Act No. 27 of 1981.

It has been an admitted fact that the only entitlement that the said

Gunarathne Manike had to the land was by virtue of being the surviving

spouse of the original permit holder. The said Gunarathne Manike has been

granted the permit to the land in terms of section 19(4) of the LDO and she

has in turn, based on the strength of the grant in her favour, has nominated

one of her other daughters as the successor to the said land.

The question before the Court was whether it is the nominee of the original

permit holder, namely Jayathilaka, or the nominee of the Gunarathne

Manike, who had a grant in her favour as the wife of the original permit holder

who should be considered as the successor of the land upon the death of the

said Gunarathne Manike.

It was under that context His Lordship of the Court of Appeal has considered

the provisions of section 48A(2) of the Ordinance in determining that such a

spouse shall be entitled to a grant of that land, but the said spouse would not

have the power to nominate a successor to that land. It was held that it would

be the successor nominated by the original permit holder who can succeed to

the land mentioned in the grant accordingly.

However, the facts of the matter before this Court are quite different, although

it may look somewhat similar.

As I have stated previously, the relevant document submitted to the Court of

Appeal clearly demonstrates the fact that the mother of the appellant, namely

Nandawathie, has not been given the grant on the basis of being the spouse

of the permit holder, but the said Nandawathie is the permit holder.

It is my view that there is no basis to argue that section 48A(1) or 48A(2)

should be the provision applicable when it comes to nominating a successor

to the two lands in question.

It is clear that Nandawathie being the permit holder on her own right, has

been granted the relevant permits in terms of section 19(4) of the LDO.

Page 12 of 15

The relevant section 19(4) of the Ordinance reads as follows,

19(4). A permit-holder shall be issued a grant in respect of the land

which he is in occupation

(a) Where he has paid all sums which he is required to pay

under subsection (2);

(b) Where he has complied with all the other conditions

specified in the Schedule to the permit; and

(c) Where he has been in occupation of, and fully developed,

to the satisfaction of the Government Agent

(i) Irrigated land, for a period of three years, or

(ii) High land for a period of one year:

Provided, however, that the Land Commissioner may issue a grant

before the expiry of the aforesaid period where the permit-holder

satisfies him that the failure to issue such grant before the expiry

of such period would adversely affect the development of such

land.

For the aforementioned reasons, I find that the learned Judges of the Court

of Appeal were correct when it refused to issue Writs in the nature of Certiorari

and Mandamus as sought by the appellant, though the Court has not

considered the relevant legal provisions and its applicability to the matter at

hand in detail.

However, it needs to be emphasized that granting of a Writ is a discretionary

remedy that would be afforded to a party only upon the discretion of the Court.

In such an instance, the conduct of a party who seeks such a Writ is also

immensely relevant.

It is well settled law that a Writ would not lie if the party is guilty of laches or

due to unnecessary delay and in similar circumstances.

Page 13 of 15

In the case of Biso Menika Vs. Cyril de Alwis and Others (1982) 1 SLR, it

was stated that;

Per Sharvananda, J., citing Lord Greene,

“A Writ of Certiorari is issued at the discretion of the Court. It cannot be

held to be a Writ of right or one issued as a matter of course. But exercise

of this discretion by Court is governed by certain well-accepted principles.

The Court is bound to issue a Writ at the instance of a party aggrieved

by the order of an inferior tribunal except in cases where he has

disentitled himself to the discretionary relief by reason of his own

conduct, like submitting to jurisdiction, laches, undue delay or waiver. As

Lord Greene M.R. in Rex Vs. Stafford Justices (1940) 2 K.B 33 at page 43

stated,

“Now, in my opinion, the Order, for the issue of Writ of Certiorari

is, except in cases where it goes of course, strictly in all cases a

matter of discretion, It is perfectly true to say that if no special

circumstance exists and if all that appears is a clear excess of

jurisdiction, then a person aggrieved by that is, entitled ex debito

justitiae to his Order. That merely means this, in my judgment, that

the Court in such circumstances will exercise its discretion by

granting the relief. In all discretionary remedies it is well known

and settled that in certain circumstances - I will not say in all of

them, but in a great many of them - the Court, although nominally

it has a discretion, if it is to act according to the ordinary principles

upon which judicial discretion is exercised, must exercise the

discretion in a particular way and if a Judge at a trial refuses to

do so then the Court of Appeal will set the matter right. But when

once it is established that in deciding whether or not a particular

remedy shall be granted the Court is entitled to inquire into the

conduct of the applicant, and circumstances of the case, in order to

ascertain whether it is proper or not proper to grant the remedy

sought, the case must in my judgment be one of discretion.”

Page 14 of 15

The proposition that the application for Writ must be sought as soon as

injury is caused is merely an application of the equitable doctrine that

delay defeats equity and the longer the injured person sleeps over his

rights without any reasonable excuse the chances of his success in a Writ

application dwindle and the Court may reject a Writ application on the

ground of unexplained delay.”

The appellant has filed his action before the Court of Appeal on the 12th day

of July 2019. The appellant being the eldest son of Punchirala and

Nandawathie and the claimed occupier of the two lands, it is hard to believe

what he has stated in his petition, that he came to know only in 2008 after

his mother fell ill that the said grants had been issued in favour of his mother

Nandawathie. In my view, given the facts of the matter, he should have known

that fact from the very outset.

Even if he came to know about the grants and the nominations made by his

mother in 2008 in favour of his other two siblings, the 5th and the 6th

respondents, he has come before the Court of Appeal seeking to quash the

said nominations by way of a Writ more than 10 years after the said finding,

as claimed in his petition.

Although he has attempted to justify the said delay by stating that he

complained to the relevant authorities in order to get the nominations

cancelled and get his name approved as the successor, which resulted in the

delay, I find no basis to agree.

The appellant has also averred that he has already initiated a District Court

action as well as an action before the High Court of Anuradhapura to assert

his rights, which means he has come before the Court of Appeal seeking a

discretionary remedy of a Writ while perusing alternative remedies that may

be available to him.

Page 15 of 15

For the aforementioned reasons, I answer the questions of law considered in

the following manner;

1. Considering the matter in terms of section 48A(2) of the LDO does

not arise as Nandawathie was the person to whom the permit has

been granted.

2. Punchirala has been named as the allotee of the land and had

passed away before he was issued with a permit, and the relevant

law applicable to the allotments at the time of his death was the Sale

of State Lands (Special Provisions) Law and the question of life

interest of the spouse would not arise.

3. Yes.

4. No.

5. Yes.

Based on the above answers to the questions of law, the appeal is dismissed

as I find no merit in the same.

The parties shall bear their own costs of the appeal.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Sampath K. B. Wijeratne, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court