1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

In the matter of an application for

Contempt of Court under and in terms

of Article 105(3) of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of

Sri Lanka.

SC Contempt 06/18 [SC RULE 03/19]

Ranjan Ramanayake

No. A5, Housing Scheme for Members

of Parliament, Madiwela,

Sri-Jayawardenapura-Kotte.

Respondent

Before: Buwaneka Aluwihare, PC. J

L.T.B Dehideniya, J

E.A.G.R Amarasekara, J

Counsel: Anura Maddegoda PC, with Ashan Fernando, Ms. Nadeesha Kannangara

and Saumya Wijesinghe instructed by Sandun Gamage for the

Respondent

Madhawa Tennekoon DSG, with Sahanya Naranpanawa SC for the

Hon. Attorney General

2

Inquiry on: 25.03.2022

Written submissions; 23.05.2022

Decided on: 07.06.2022

Aluwihare PC, J

Proceedings were initiated against the Respondent, Ranjan Ramanayake [hereinafter

referred to as the Respondent] in terms of Article 105(3) of the Constitution and a

Rule was issued in terms of the said Article, calling upon the Respondent to show

cause as to why he should not be punished for the offence of contempt of court.

The Rule was read out to the Respondent on 30th July 2019 to which the Respondent

pleaded not guilty.

When this matter was taken up for inquiry on 5-03-2022, the learned president’s

counsel for the Respondent intimated to the court that the Respondent wish to

withdraw the earlier plea of not guilty and that he wishes to plead guilty to the Rule.

The court questioned the Respondent in person and he affirmed that he wishes to

withdraw his earlier plea of not guilty and to plead guilty to the Rule. Questioned by

the court, the Respondent said that he took this decision on his own volition.

Accordingly, the plea of guilt was recorded and the court proceeded to convict the

Respondent for the offence of contempt of court.

It is alleged that the Respondent whilst taking part in a television programme titled

“Wada Pitiya” telecast over the channel “Derana”, made the following utterance in

reference to a case pending before the Supreme Court;

3

““ ඒ 3 (three) බෙන්ච් අධිකරණබෙන්ච වාරණ නිබෙෝගෙක් දාලා තිබෙනවා. දැන්ච

ආරංචිෙක් තිබෙනවා ඒක 5ට ෙනවා, 5ට ගිෙත් තුනක් බෙබෙට බදකක් එබෙට හින්චද

තීන්චුබේ බවනසක් බනාබේවි ෙ කිො........”

The respondent in making the said utterance had said that according to a source, the

matter would be referred to a bench of five judges and the decision would be a divided

one, three judges holding a particular view and the other two a different view, clearly

implying that the issues in the case had already been determined by the judges, even

before the case had been heard.

It was pointed out on behalf of the Respondent that the utterance was speculative,

based on the ‘information’ the Respondent had received [“ආරංචිෙක් තිබෙනවා”] and

not a view entertained by him.

Despite the statement, in essence, being one of speculation, still it clearly conveys the

message that the judges had made up their minds, even before the case had been

heard, as to what the determination of the court ought to be. Creating such an

impression in the minds of the public, would undoubtedly, have an adverse effect

on the credibility of the institution and more so on the trust the public reposes in the

administration of justice.

As such this court is of the view that this matter should be visited with utmost

seriousness, particularly considering the fact that the statement was made without

any basis whatsoever.

We observe that every citizen of this country has a duty to protect the integrity of the

system of administration of justice. Any erosion of public trust in the system can have

serious consequences for the well-being of society.

Pleading in mitigation it was submitted on behalf of the Respondent that in the course

of the television programme in question, the Respondent expressed that he has a

positive impression of the Supreme Court, particularly after the Chief Justice said in

his speech [at the ceremonial sitting to welcome him] that the people have a right to

4

criticise the judgements of the Supreme Court. It was the contention of the learned

President’s Counsel that the statement made by the Respondent relating to the

Supreme Court must be considered in its entirety to appreciate the context in which

it was made and that he did not intend to insult or to bring the Supreme Court into

disrepute.

The learned President’s Counsel invited court, in deciding the sentence to be imposed,

to consider the fact that the Respondent has made a tremendous contribution to the

film industry of this country and due to his acting skills, the Respondent had won

several coveted awards such as Sarasaviya, Slim Nielsen, Signis Salutation and Derana

Awards.

It was also pointed out that the Respondent is a vocal, social and a political activist

who has been the voice of the voiceless people and a leading campaigner against social

injustice. The learned President’s Counsel also invited the court to consider the fact

that, without proceeding to an inquiry, the Respondent expressed an unqualified plea

of guilt to the Rule and in his own word expressed remorse and regret over the words

he uttered in reference to the Supreme Court.

Thus, it was submitted, that the Court should show magnanimity, and the learned

Counsel cited the case of In Re Prashant Bhushan and another Contempt Petition (CRL)

No.1 of 2020 where the Supreme Court of India taking into account that the

utterances were made bona fide and the subsequent expression of regret, imposed a

nominal punishment by imposing a fine of Rs. 1/- on the contemnor.

In this matter, the Respondent, having pleaded guilty to the Rule [ offence of Contempt

of Court] , has expressed penitence, remorse and deep regret regarding the impugned

statement. We have also considered the other mitigatory factors urged before this

court on behalf of the Respondent.

Accordingly, we impose a sentence of 2 years imprisonment on the Respondent.

Acting, however, in terms of Section 303 of the Code of Criminal procedure Act No.

5

15 of 1979 [as amended] the sentence imposed on the Respondent is suspended for a

period of five years with effect from today.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

JUSTICE L.T.B. DEHIDENIYA

I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

JUSTICE E.A.G.R. AMARASEKARA

I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT