1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

S.C. Appeal 59/2014 SC/HCCA/LA No. 301/2011 NCP/HCCA/ARP No. 689/2009(F) D.C. Polonnaruwa Case No. 10/P/2007

Liyanage Indrani Manel Charlotte Watawala nee Perera Of No. 462/12, Main Street, Negombo. PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT-PETITIONER Vs. Ratnayake Mudiyanselage Jayatilleke Bandara of No. 135, Thopawewa, Polonnaruwa. DEFENDANT-APPELLANT-RESPONDENT Liyanage Anoma Kanthi Juliyana Bamunuwatte nee Perera Of No. 42/17, Dias Place, Panadura. DEFENDANT-RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT BEFORE: Priyasath Dep P.C., J. Anil Gooneratne J. & Prasanna S. Jayawardena P.C., J

2

COUNSEL: Dr. Sunil Cooray for the Plaintiff-Respondent-Petitioner Vijaya Niranjan Perera with Ms. Jeevani Perera For the Defendant-Appellant-Respondent ARGUED ON: 30.09.2016 DECIDED ON: 09.02.2017 GOONERATNE J. This was a partition action filed in the District Court of Polonnaruwa

on or about 18.07.1997. Plaintiff filed plaint against the 1st Defendant (Plaintiff’s

sister) 2nd and 3rd Defendants to partition a land described in the 3rd schedule to

the plaint. Plaintiff-Respondent-Petitioners aver that the 3rd schedule refer to a

divided portion of land from and out of the larger land called Dingirbanda–

Hitapu-Watta which divided portion was said to be 5 Acres in extent within the

boundaries given in the 3rd schedule. The larger land is described in the 1st

schedule to the plaint in extent of 27 Acres and 15 Perches was owned on a

crown grant.

The position of the Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant was that the

Plaintiff and 1st Defendant are sisters and they got title to the corpus to the land

from their father Bonnie Perera on two separate deeds. It is urged that only the

3

two of them were the co-owners of the larger land and that the 2nd Defendant

(son of 3rd Defendant) has no title whatsoever to the land in dispute but lived on

the land in dispute. The 3rd Defendant was the wife or mistress of Wilson Singho

who was the original lessee under Bonnie Perera. The learned District Judge held

with the Plaintiff-Respondent-Petitioner on the points of contest raised in the

action by the Plaintiff and the Defendant. As such the District Court Ordered the

partition of the land in dispute between the Plaintiff and the 1st Defendant.

Learned District Judge held against the 2nd and 3rd Defendants on their plea of

prescriptive title. The 2nd and 3rd Defendants being aggrieved by the Judgment

of the District Court appealed to the High Court. The High Court set aside the

Judgment of the learned District Judge and ordered trial De Novo.

The Defendant-Appellant-Respondent support the Judgment of the

learned High Court Judge. These Respondents reject the argument of the

Petitioner that 5 Acres in extent of the land in schedule 3 of the plaint remained

divided. It is an undivided portion of a larger land. Further they argue that mere

separation of a portion and long continued possession thereof would not confer

the possessor the benefit of prescriptive possession. It is further explained by

reference to paragraph 5 of the plaint that there were other intestate heirs and

co-owners. Those details not made known by the Petitioner. Defendant-

Appellant-Respondent refer to the testamentary case (T/18) of late Gabriel

4

Wijesinghe Jayawardena where 11 children were made parties. Plaintiff admits

this fact in evidence.

This court on 14.03.2014 granted Leave to Appeal on the following

substantial question of law.

(1) Did the High Court err by holding that the identity of the corpus has not

been proved for the reason that the extent of land sought to be

partitioned is only 5 Acres but the land depicted in the preliminary plan is

6 Acres 2 Roods and 35 Perches?

(2) In any event did the High Court err in setting aside the Judgement of the

District Court with respect to the question of the respective rights of

parties?

Learned counsel for the Plaintiff-Respondent-Petitioner in his oral

and written submissions argued that the High Court failed to consider whether

the corpus for partition has been sufficiently identified by means of boundaries

of the land, in terms of the decisions reported in 1989 (1) SLR 361 which followed

the decision reported in 43 CLW 82.

I would like to consider the case of Gabriel Perera Vs. Agnes Perera

43 CLW 82 held .. in a deed the partition of land conveyed is clearly described

and can precisely ascertained, a mere inconsistency as to the extent thereof

should be treated as a mere falsa demonstratio not affecting that which is

already sufficiently conveyed. This case is more on the question of interpretation

5

of the deed. In the appeal it was argued that the person who claims under the

deed, the deed marked P2, describes the boundaries of the land correctly.

Corpus confined to lot A & C. Party concerned who claim under deed P2 the

entire extent of lot A which is 1 Rood and 2 Perches or only 1 Rood and 5

Perches. Lot A was 1 Rood and 22 Perches and not 1 Rood and 5 Perches as

described in the deed P2. Rule envisaged was that a subsequent statement

inconsistent in extent should be treated as mere falsa demonstratio not

affecting that which is already sufficiently conveyed.

The above decision in 43 CLW. 82 was followed in Yapa Vs.

Dissanayake Sedera 1999 (1) SLR 361. It is a case where in a deed the partition

of land conveyed is clearly described and clearly ascertained a mere

inconsistency as to extent should be treated as a mere falsa a demonstratio not

affecting that which is sufficiently conveyed.

I do not think the above cases relied upon by the Plaintiff-

Respondent-Petitioner could be equated to the case in hand, and the decision

in the cases reported in 60 NLR 337, 61 NLR 352 and 1989 (2) SLR 105 could be

read subject to, and in harmony with the principle accepted in the decisions

reported in the above decided cases relied by the Petitioner.

The case in hand cannot be described in its extent as a mere

discrepancy in extent. Learned High Court Judge very correctly observes (Pg.9)

6

that the extent of land referred to in the preliminary plan and the land sought

to be partitioned in the schedule to the plaint differ in an extent of about 1 Acre

2 Roods and 35 Perches. Further the High Court Judge observes that the

boundaries in plan ‘X’ shows certain differences and the Plaintiff party did not

lead evidence to connect and explain such differences. I also wish to state that

the two decided cases relied upon by the Plaintiff party do not refer to any

provisions in the Partition Law. However the case reported in 1989 (2) SLR 105

Sopaya Silva and another Vs. Magilin Silva discuss in detail Sections 18(1) (a) (iii),

18(2), 19(2) of the Partition Law inclusive of discrepancy in extent of corpus with

the corpus described in plaint and commission. Further the above Magilin’s case

consider the duty of commissioner – lis pendens natural justice so on and so

forth. The case of Sopaya Silva and another Vs. Magilin Silva is a persuasive

Judgment which is very relevant to the case in hand and follows the decided

case of Brumpy Appuhamy Vs. Morias Appuhamy 60 NLR 337.

In this regard my views and that of the High Court which I concur

with, are fortified by the Judgment of Sansoni CJ. in Jayasuriya Vs. Ubaid 61 NLR

352 Held -

In a partition action there is a duty cast on the Judge to satisfy himself as to the identity of the land sought to be partitioned, and for this purpose it is always open to him to call for further evidence (in a regular manner) in order to make a proper investigation.

7

I also note and I am inclined to adopt the dicta in Sopaya Silva and

Another Vs. Magilin Silva S.N. Silva J.

Held –

(1) It was not open to the District Judge to dismiss the case on the point of wrong

registration of the lis pendens – a point on which there was no contest and no

argument was heard. It is a violation of natural justice.

(2) The lis pendens being registered in the folios where the deeds of the land described

in the plaint were registered was correctly registered.

(3) On receipt of the surveyor’s return which disclosed that a substantially larger land was

surveyed the District Judge should have decided on one of the following courses after

hearing the parties:

(i) To reissue the Commission with instructions to survey the land as described in

the plaint. The surveyor could have been examined as provided in section 18(2)

of the Partition Law to consider the feasibility of this course of action.

(ii) To permit the Plaintiffs to continue the action to partition the larger land as

depicted in the preliminary survey. This course of action involves the

amendment of the plaint and the taking of consequential steps including the

registration of a fresh lis pendens.

(iii) To permit any of the Defendants to seek a partition of the larger land as

depicted in the preliminary survey. This course of action involves an

amendment of the statement of claim of that defendant and the taking of such

other steps as may be necessary in terms of section 19(2) of the Partition Law.

(4) The surveyor under section 18(1) (a)(iii) of the Partition Law must in his report state

whether or not the land surveyed by him is substantially the same as the land sought

to be partitioned as described in the schedule to the plaint. Considering the finality

8

and conclusiveness that attach in terms of s 48(1) of the Partition Law to the decree

in a partition action, the Court should insist upon due compliance with this

requirement by the surveyor.

There is another matter that should be considered. In the manner

pleaded and submitted to this court the 1st schedule in the plaint is in extent of

27 Acres and 15 perches, was owned on a Crown Grant in favour of Gabriel

Wijesinghe Jayawardena in the year 1905. (P1) He died intestate in 1909 and his

heirs were widow Elsie Wijesinghe Jayawardena and children. One of whom was

Leopold Victor Stanley Jayawardena. Written submissions of Plaintiff-

Respondent-Appellant does not disclose the names of the other children and

the number of children. It is pleaded that the said Victor Stanley Jayawardena

thereafter separated from and out of the said larger land called “Dingiriband –

Hitapu-Watta” an extent of 13 Acres 2 Roods and 7 ½ perches which he

possessed and became owner of land and described in plan No. 278 of 1944. The

said extent is 13 Acres 2 Roods and 7 ½ perches is described in 2nd schedule.

Plaint avers that the said Stanley sold and transferred an extent of 5 Acres to

Liyanage Bonnie Perera. This is the way Plaintiff presents the case.

In the manner observed above there is something the original court

should seriously consider. 2nd and 3rd Defendant-Appellant-Respondent takes up

the position that the original owner Gabriel Wijesignhe Jayawardene had several

9

other children and the said Jayawardena’s intestate estate was administered in

D.C. Anuradhapura Case T/181 where all 11 children were named as

Respondents in the testamentary case. The document P3 (letters of

administration) was admitted by Plaintiff but as argued on behalf of 2nd and 3rd

Defendant-Appellant-Plaintiff has deliberately refrained from making all the

children parties. Original court should consider this position and decide its

necessity and relevancy.

In the above facts and circumstances, I have no hesitation to affirm

the Judgment of the learned High court Judge. The two questions of law are

answered as ‘No’ in the negative.

Identity of the corpus is always an important and a relevant matter

in a land case and more particularly in a partition suit. I also note the following

from the Judgment of the learned High Court Judge which I concur.

“........ fuu kvqfjs uq,sl msUqr iusnkaOfhka uskskafodarejrhd o

idlsIslrejl= jYfhka leojd kej; fuu kvqj uq, isg jsNd. lr ;Skaoqjla

,nd oSug ksfhda. Lsrsu jvd;a idOdrK yd hqla;s iy.; njhs. ta wkqj fuu

kvqj kej; uq, isg jsNd. lsrsug fmdf,dkakrej osid wOslrKh fj; fhduq

lsrSug ;SrKh lruq. fuu kvqj merKs kvqjla nejska kvqj jsNd. lr wjika

lsrSug mqraj;djhla ,ndosg hw;= njo lSrKh lruq ......”

It is always safe to follow the statutory provisions contemplated by

law. What is relevant and important had been suggested and the procedure to

10

be adopted are discussed in the case of Sopaya Silva Vs. Magilin Silva.

Judgment of the learned High Court Judge is affirmed. This appeal is dismissed

with costs.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Priyasath Dep P.C., J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Prasanna S. Jayawardena P.C., J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT