1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the maer of an appeal in terms of Secon 5C of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990, as amended.

Indian Overseas Bank having its Central Oce at No. 763 Anna Salai, Madras (Chennai), India and having a branch at No. 139, Main Street, Peah, Colombo 11.

PLAINTIFF

vs.

1. Saany Chandrasekera also known as Sappany Chandrasekera

2. Nalini Natasha Chandrasekera

Both of No. 66B/19, Sri Maha Vihara Road, Kalubowila, Dehiwala Carrying on business under the name, style and rm of Cambridge Traders at No. 22E, Quarry Road, Colombo 12.

DEFENDANTS

And between

SC Appeal No: 48/2021 SC HC (CA) LA No: 216/2020 HCCA Colombo Case No: WP/HCCA/COL/41/2019(LA) DC Colombo Case No: DDR/425/2017

2

1. Saany Chandrasekera also known as Sappany Chandrasekera

2. Nalini Natasha Chandrasekera

Both of No. 66B/19, Sri Maha Vihara Road, Kalubowila, Dehiwala Carrying on business under the name, style and rm of Cambridge Traders at No. 22E, Quarry Road, Colombo 12.

DEFENDANTS APPELLANTS

vs.

Indian Overseas Bank, having its Central Oce at No. 763 Anna Salai, Madras (Chennai), India and having a branch at No. 139, Main Street, Peah, Colombo 11.

PLAINTIFF RESPONDENT

And now between

1. Saany Chandrasekera also known as Sappany Chandrasekera

2. Nalini Natasha Chandrasekera

Both of No. 66B/19, Sri Maha Vihara Road, Kalubowila, Dehiwala Carrying on business under the name, style and rm of Cambridge Traders at No. 22E, Quarry Road, Colombo 12.

3

DEFENDANTS APPELLANTS APPELLANTS

vs.

Indian Overseas Bank, having its Central Oce at No. 763 Anna salai, Madras (Chennai), India and having a branch at No.139, Main Street, Peah, Colombo 11.

PLAINTIFF RESPONDENT RESPONDENT Before: Vijith K. Malalgoda, PC, J Yasantha Kodagoda, PC, J Arjuna Obeyesekere, J Counsel: Chathura A. Galhena with Dharani Weerasinghe and Chathuni Peiris for the Defendants Appellants Appellants Priyantha Alagiyawanna with Isuru Weerasooriya and Duminda Premaratne for the Plain Respondent Respondent Argued on: 16th January 2023 Wrien Tendered by the Defendants Appellants Appellants on 14th July 2021 Submissions: and 22nd February 2023 Tendered by the Plain Respondent Respondent on 22nd July 2021 and 17th February 2023 Decided on: 23rd January 2024

4

Obeyesekere, J

The Plain Respondent Respondent [the Plain] is a bank duly incorporated in the

Republic of India, with a branch oce in Sri Lanka. It is a licensed commercial bank within

the meaning of the Banking Act, No. 30 of 1988, as amended, and is a lending instuon

within the meaning of the Debt Recovery (Special Provisions) Act, No. 2 of 1990 [the

principal enactment], as amended by the Debt Recovery (Special Provisions) Amendment

Act, No. 4 of 1994 [the Amendment Act] [collecvely referred to as the Act].

The Defendants Appellants Appellants [the Defendants] who are carrying on business

under the name, style and rm of Cambridge Traders, were customers of the Plain,

and had maintained a current account with the Plain.

Granng of credit facilies to the Defendants

The Plain states that at the request of the Defendants, it issued the Defendants an oer

leer dated 2nd July 2012, in terms of which, the Defendants were oered a cash credit

facility of Rs. 75 million for a period of 12 months with an opon to renew the facility for

further periods of 12 months at a me, with interest to be calculated at the Primary

Lending Rate [PLR], plus a margin of 1.50% per annum, and subject to other terms and

condions set out in the said leer. In essence, what the Defendants had been oered

was a permanent overdra facility.

The said oer leer also provided that the credit facility shall be secured by the personal

guarantees of the Defendants and by the mortgage of an immovable property situated

in Colombo 12, belonging to the 1st Defendant. The Defendants had acknowledged the

said oer and thereby the terms and condions contained therein, by placing their

signature on the last page thereof. The asseron of the Plain that the said oer leer

contained the wrien agreement between the pares as contemplated by the Act has not

been disputed by the Defendants. Cered copies of the said agreement, personal

guarantees of the Defendants and the Mortgage Bond No. 8776 executed on 6th July 2012

to secure the said credit facility of Rs. 75 million and interest thereon had been annexed

to the plaint.

5

It is admied that:

(a) the Plain permied the Defendants to avail themselves of the said credit facility

of Rs. 75 million through their current account;

(b) the Defendants had maintained the said current account by deposing and

withdrawing monies;

(c) the credit facility had been renewed from me to me, with the last renewal for a

period of one year having taken place in September 2015.

It is important to note that the loan account was reconciled by the Plain on 30th

September 2013, 31st March 2014 and 31st March 2015, with the balance outstanding on

each occasion, which comprised of the capital sums of money withdrawn by the

Defendants and the interest payable on the capital outstanding, amounng to over Rs. 76

million. The said balances have been communicated in wring to the Defendants and the

accuracy thereof as well as the fact that the said sums of money are due and payable to

the Plain have been acknowledged in wring by the Defendants. Thus, the Defendants

are estopped from dispung the accuracy of the balance outstanding as at 31st March

2015 on the credit facility obtained by them.

Instuon of acon

The Plain states that even though the Defendants made payments aer the renewal of

the credit facility in September 2015, such payments were irregular. That the Defendants

had defaulted in the selement of the balance outstanding aer the said renewal is

reected in the Statement of Accounts annexed to the plaint. Aer a series of

correspondence between the pares during the period of August 2016 to June 2017

relang to the re-payment of the outstanding sums of money failed to yield any results,

the Plain had sent a leer of demand on 2nd September 2017 seeking the payment of:

(a) a sum of Rs. 83,883,674.99, which the Plain claims was the debit balance

outstanding as at 24th August 2017; and

6

(b) interest thereon at the rate of 16.48% per annum from 25th August 2017.

I must note that the Defendants failed to respond to the said leer of demand, and as

held in Disanayaka Mudiyanselage Chandrapala Meegahaarawa v Disanayaka

Mudiyanselage Samaraweera Meegahaarawa [SC Appeal No. 112/2018; SC Minutes of

21st May 2021], this is a circumstance which can be held against a defendant, although

such failure to respond to a business leer cannot by and of itself prove the case of a

plain.

It is in these factual circumstances that the Plain, acng in terms of Secon 3 of the Act

instuted acon against the Defendants by ling a plaint on 12th October 2017 in the

District Court of Colombo.

As provided for by the Act, the provisions of which I shall discuss in detail later in this

judgment, the District Court issued a decree nisi for the sum prayed for in the plaint. The

decree nisi having been served, the Defendants made an applicaon supported by an

adavit seeking leave to appear and show cause against the decree nisi being made

absolute. Accordingly, by its Order dated 21st February 2019, the District Court granted

the Defendants leave to appear and show cause in terms of Secon 6(2)(a), that is upon

the payment of the sum of money specied in the decree nisi, or alternavely in terms of

Secon 6(2)(b), that is upon the furnishing of security sucient to sasfy the said decree,

in the event of it being made absolute.

It is perhaps important to note at this stage that the Defendants did not move that the

property already mortgaged by them as security for the aforemenoned credit facility by

Mortgage Bond No. 8776, and which property had been valued at Rs. 75 million in 2012,

be accepted as security, nor had the District Court given its mind to such fact, even though

the District Court proceeded to act in terms of Secon 6(2)(b) of the Act. It is this failure

on the part of the District Court that the Defendants are complaining of in this appeal.

7

Invocaon of appellate jurisdicon

Aggrieved by the said Order of the District Court, the Defendants had led a peon in

the Provincial High Court of the Western Province holden in Colombo [the High Court]

seeking leave to appeal against the said Order. The High Court, while granng leave, had

stayed the Order of the District Court. Following a full argument, the said appeal had been

rejected and the Order of the District Court had been armed by the High Court by its

judgment delivered on 15th July 2020.

By a peon led on 18th August 2020, the Defendants sought leave to appeal against the

judgment of the High Court. On 22nd March 2021, this Court, having heard learned

Counsel, granted leave to appeal on the following queson of law:

Did the Civil Appellate High Court err in law by arming the District Court Order

dated 21st February 2019 by holding that the Defendants are required to deposit

security under Secon 6(2)(a) or 6(2)(b) of the Debt Recovery Act, as amended,

notwithstanding the fact that the Defendants have furnished a mortgage of a land in

order to obtain the monies that are referred to in the plaint led by the Plain in

the District Court?

The above queson of law brings into focus an important aspect of the Act, namely

whether a security oered at the me of obtaining a loan facility can be considered as a

security for the purposes of obtaining leave to appear in terms of Secon 6(2)(b). This

queson does not appear to have been considered by this Court previously.

Before proceeding further, I must state that the District Court had entered the decree

absolute on 31st August 2020, thus bringing the District Court proceedings to an end. The

Plain had thereaer executed the decree and accordingly, the property that is the

subject maer of Mortgage Bond No. 8776 has been seized in sasfacon of such decree.

8

Introducon of legislaon to expedite debt recovery

In order to give context to the provisions of the Act and the above queson of law, I shall

commence by going back in me to the late 1980s.

At that me, a bank licensed under the Banking Act, No. 30 of 1988 or a nance company

licensed under the Finance Companies Act, No. 78 of 1988, which had lent and advanced

monies to a customer and the repayment of which had been defaulted by the customer,

had several opons to choose from in order to recover the monies so lent and advanced,

depending inter alia on whether the credit facility had been secured or not. The rst and

perhaps the most frequently adopted method was to resort to the regular procedure set

out in the Civil Procedure Code and le a plaint followed by an answer and then proceed

to trial, with the burden of proof being with the plain bank or nance company. The

second opon that was available was where the credit facility had been secured by an

immovable property. In such an instance [and this being before the introducon of the

Recovery of Loans by Banks (Special Provisions) Act, No. 4 of 1990], if the lender was a

State bank, it was able to sell the immoveable property by way of parate execuon,

provided such power had been conferred by the incorporang statute of such bank. The

third was to resort to the provisions of the Mortgage Act which were available where a

loan had been secured by movable or immovable property. The fourth was to le acon

under summary procedure, as provided by Secon 703 of the Civil Procedure Code,

provided the criteria set out therein had been sased.

The view that prevailed at that me, which is borne out by the speech made by the then

Minister of Jusce during the second reading of the Debt Recovery (Special Provisions) Bill

[vide Hansard of 24th January 1990] was that where a credit facility was not secured, the

provisions of the Civil Procedure Code were inadequate for the speedy recovery of monies

lent and advanced by banks and nance companies, and that new laws must be

introduced to provide lenders with an expedious method of recovering their debts.

Reference was made to the recommendaons of the Commiee chaired by Jusce D.

Wimalaratne in support of this posion. It is in this background that the Government of

that me proposed the enactment of several new laws and consequenal amendments

to several exisng laws [fourteen altogether] as part of its debt recovery legislaon

9

package in order to improve the debt recovery environment in the country. One such

proposed law was the Debt Recovery (Special Provisions) Bill.

The Debt Recovery (Special Provisions) Bill

The said Bill had been referred to this Court by the President, in terms of Arcle 122(1)(b)

of the Constuon, for its special determinaon on whether the Bill or any provision

thereof is inconsistent with the Constuon. In its determinaon on The Debt Recovery

(Special Provisions) Bill [Decisions of the Supreme Court on Parliamentary Bills 1990, Vol.

VI, page 3 at page 5] this Court observed as follows:

It needs to be emphasised that legal provisions for the expedious recovery of debts

not before they fall due, but aer default by the borrowers by banking and

nancial instuons are not burdens or punive measures imposed on borrowers.

Expedious debt recovery is, in the long-term, benecial to borrowers in general for

at least two reasons. Firstly, expedious repayment or recovery of debts enhances

the ability of lending instuons to lend to other borrowers. Secondly, the Laws

delays in respect of debt recovery, howsoever and by whomsoever caused, tend to

make lending instuons much more cauous and slow in lending: by refusing some

applicaons, by requiring higher security from some borrowers, and by insisng on

more stringent terms as to interest from other borrowers. Expedious debt recovery

will thus tend to make credit available more readily and on easier terms, and will

maximise the ow of money into the economy. Undoubtedly, there is a legimate

naonal interest in expeding the recovery of debts by lending instuons engaged

in the business of providing credit, and thereby smulang the naonal economy

and naonal development. [emphasis added]

In Mahavidanage Simpson Kularatne v Peoples Bank [SC Appeal No. 04/2015; SC

Minutes of 15th September 2020], Murdu N. B. Fernando, PC, J, referring to the preamble

of the Act which states that it is an Act to provide for the regulaon of the procedure

relang to debt recovery by lending instuons, observed at page 5 that, This legislaon

was brought into operaon together with many other laws and amendments to exisng

laws in the early 1990s, for the manifestaon of the economic development of the country

10

and for the nancial stability and ecient working of the lending instuons and also for

the expedious recovery of debts due and owing to a lending instuon.

Thus, several provisions were introduced by the Act with a view to expeding the recovery

of monies lent and advanced by banks and nance companies. One of the most notable

provisions in the Act is that once the lending instuon has established to the sasfacon

of the District Court that the sums of money claimed in the plaint are due and owing to

it, the Court shall issue in the rst instance a decree nisi, and thereaer the burden of

proving that the said sums of money are not due, shis to the defendant, with the

defendant rst being required to obtain the leave of the Court in order to discharge this

burden. It would thus be seen that a defendant against whom acon has been led under

the Act is required to follow a two ered process the rst is to obtain leave of Court in

terms of the criteria laid down in the Act to defend the acon, and the second is, if leave

is granted, to thereaer sasfy Court that the monies claimed are not due from the

defendant and that accordingly, the decree nisi should be discharged.

Secon 2 the gateway to the Act

While Secon 2 is the gateway to the Act, sub-Secon (1) thereof reads as follows:

A lending instuon (hereinaer referred to as the instuon) may, subject to the

provisions of subsecon (2) recover debt due to it by an acon instuted in terms of

the procedure laid down by this Act, in the District Court within the local limits of

whose jurisdicon

(a) a party defendant resides; or

(b) the cause of action arises; or

(c) the contract sought to be enforced was made.

Jurisdicon in respect of any acon led under the Act has been vested with the District

Court. Even though the High Court of the Western Province established under the High

Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No. 10 of 1996 [the Commercial High

11

Court] has jurisdicon in respect of commercial transacons, Schedule 1 of the said Act

has specically excluded from the jurisdicon of such Court acons instuted under the

Act.

Being the gateway to the Act, Secon 2 sets out three requirements that must be fullled

in order to resort to the scheme of expedious recovery of loans provided for in the Act.

The rst requirement is that the sum alleged to be in default should not be less than Rs.

One hundred and y thousand.

Lending instuon

The second requirement is that acon should only be led by a lending instuon, which

term has been dened in Secon 30, as amended by the Amendment Act, to mean a

licensed commercial bank, a company registered under the Finance Companies Act No.

78 of 1988 to carry out nance business, the Naonal Savings Bank, the Naonal

Development Bank, the Development Finance Corporaon of Ceylon and includes a

liquidator appointed under the Companies Act to wind up any of the above instuons.

The only excepon to the requirement that the plain must be a lending instuon in

order to invoke the provisions of the Act is contained in Secon 25, in terms of which a

person who inter alia knowingly draws a cheque which is subsequently dishonoured by

the bank for want of funds is guilty of an oence under the Act, and proceedings can be

instuted against such person in the Magistrates Court by such person to whom the

cheque was issued. This posion was conrmed in Ocer in Charge, CID v Soris [(2006) 3

Sri LR 375], where the majority of this Court accepted the submission of the Aorney

General that:

(a) while Parts I to IV of the Act which set out the recovery procedure in respect of

monies lent and advanced by lending instuons applies only to a lending

instuon, Part V of the Act under which Secon 25 has been placed contains no

such limitaon;

12

(b) in terms of Secon 25(1)(a), criminal responsibility is cast on any person who

transacts business with any instuon or person irrespecve of such instuon or

person being a lending instuon; and

(c) if it was within the contemplaon of the Legislature that person should include

only those transacons or nancial business with a lending instuon, Secon

25(1)(a) would have made it clear in unambiguous terms that the person

contemplated in Secon 25(1)(a) is only a person who has transacons with a

lending instuon.

Recovery of a Debt

The third requirement in Secon 2 is that acon should be led only to recover a debt.

Pursuant to the Amendment Act, the denion of debt in Secon 30 reads as follows:

debt means a sum of money which is ascertained or capable of being ascertained

at the me of the instuon of the acon, and which is in default, whether the same

be secured or not, or owed by any person or persons, jointly or severally or as

principal borrower or guarantor or in any other capacity, and alleged by a lending

instuon to have arisen from a transacon in the course of banking, lending,

nancial or other allied business acvity of that instuon, but does not include a

sum of money owed under a promise or agreement which is not in wring;

[emphasis added]

Thus, the fact that the credit facility granted to the Defendant had been secured by the

mortgage of an immovable property is not an impediment to the Plain invoking the

provisions of the Act in order to recover the sums outstanding on the credit facility.

It must perhaps be menoned that the words, to have arisen from a transacon in the

course of banking, lending, nancial or other allied business acvity of that instuon

were agreed to be added during the hearing into the constuonality of the Bill before

this Court in order to address an argument that aording the privilege and advantage of

recovering debts unconnected with ordinary banking transacons and allied transacons

through the provisions of the Act would be violave of Arcle 12(1) of the Constuon.

13

The above denion of debt has made it mandatory that an acon, while sasfying the several other requirements set out therein, must be based on a promise or agreement which is in wring, even if the sum of money that is sought to be recovered is otherwise capable of being ascertained. In the determinaon of this Court in the Debt Recovery (Special Provisions) (Amendment) Bill of 2003 [Decisions of the Supreme Court on Parliamentary Bills 1999-2003, Vol. VII, page 435 at page 437], it was held that:

(ii) Secon 2(1) of the original Act empowers a lending instuon to have recourse to the special procedure to recover a debt due to such instuon. The term debt is dened in Secon 30 as amended by Act No. 9 of 1994. In terms of this denion a debt would include any sum of money which is due to a lending instuon arising from a transacon had in the course of its business. It is signicant that the denion has a clear reservaon that a debt does not include a sum of money owed under a promise or agreement which is not in wring. In view of the reservaon the special procedure could be resorted to only in instances where there is a wrien promise or agreement on the basis of which the sum due is claimed. This is broadly similar to the provision in the summary procedure on liquid claims. The amendment in clause 8 of the Bill, repeals the denion of the term debt in secon 30. The substuted denion excludes the words referred to above which limit its applicability to money owed under a promise or agreement which is in wring. The resulng posion is that the court would not have any wrien evidence of the commitment on the part of the debtor when it issues decree nisi in the rst instance. We are inclined to agree with the submission of the Peoners that the two amendments referred to above would extend the applicaon of the special procedure which is more stringent from the point of the debtor, to a wider category of persons and to any transacon had with the lending instuons, even in the absence of a wrien promise or agreement to pay. We are further of the view that there is no raonal basis to extend the provisions of the Act that is presently in force in the manner referred to in (i) and (ii) above.

14

Priyantha Jayawardena, PC, J in his dissenng judgment in Mahavidanage Simpson

Kularatne v Peoples Bank [supra; at page 19] held that, this court has consistently held

that acons instuted under the Debt Recovery Act to recover a debt must be based on a

promise or agreement in wring so that wrien evidence of the commitment on the part

of the debtor could be prima facie established before entering the decree nisi.

It is important to note that this denion of debt does not refer to by name the wrien

promise or agreement or the instrument under which the money is owed e.g., whether

it is a term loan agreement, a pledge loan agreement, an overdra agreement etc.

Therefore, the District Court must not be inuenced or guided by the name assigned to

the credit facility under which the monies have been granted to a customer.

In Kiran Atapau v Pan Asia Bank Limited [(2005) 2 Sri LR 276; at page 279], the Court of

Appeal, referring to an argument that the defendant has not obtained a loan but only an

overdra which does not come within the meaning of debt in Secon 30, and having

referred to the denion of debt, stated that, Therefore whether one calls the sum

borrowed an overdra or a loan, if it is capable of being ascertained it falls within the

meaning of debt under secon 30 of the Debt Recovery (Special Provisions) Act.

Accordingly, there is no merit in the submissions made by the learned President's Counsel

for the Defendant that the capital sum claimed by the plain does not fall within the

meaning of debt in terms of secon 30 of the Debt Recovery (Special Provisions) Act. It is

my further view that the term debt described in secon 30 includes overdras, if the

amount is capable of being ascertained or is ascertained at the me of instuon of the

acon.

Raja Fernando, J in Eassuwaran and Others v Bank of Ceylon [(2006) 1 Sri LR 365], while

rejecting an argument that the Act is not applicable to claims based on recovery on credit

facilities or on overdraft facilities and that Debt Recovery (Special Provisions) Act is

applicable only to fixed/term loans where the amount due is clearly ascertainable held

that the transactions which were referred to in the plaint fell well within the definition of

debt.

15

In Dharmaratna v Peoples Bank [(2003) 3 Sri LR 307], the Court of Appeal, having

referred to the definition of debt, rejected the argument of the defendant that the decree

absolute was void and/or a nullity for the reason that an overdraft is not a debt or a loan

and is therefore outside the purview of the Act.

At this juncture, there are two things that I wish to stress.

The rst is that it is not the nomenclature of the credit facility that maers, but inter alia

whether the sum is owed under a promise or agreement that is in wring and whether

the other requirements in Secon 2 and the denion of debt have been sased. Thus,

it is open to a lending instuon to resort to the Act in order to recover any monies owed

to it so long as that sum of money is (a) owed under a promise or agreement that is in

wring, (b) the said sum is ascertained or capable of being ascertained, and (c) sases

the other requirements in the said denion.

The second is the danger of insisng on using a parcular nomenclature in order to invoke

the provisions of the Act, especially with regard to overdras, for the reason that an

overdra can take many forms and therefore, a claricaon is perhaps appropriate at this

stage. In Peoples Bank v Jagoda Gamage Nishantha Pradeep Kumara [SC Appeal No.

234/2017; SC Minutes of 12th December 2022] this Court, having examined in detail the

nature of an overdra facility, has idened its dierent forms. Accordingly, a bank may

allow a customer who does not have sucient funds in his or her current account and

who does not have a pre-determined arrangement reected by way of a wrien

agreement with the bank, to overdraw his or her account by simply honouring a cheque

presented by such customer.

While in terms of Section 73 of the Bills of Exchange Ordinance, A cheque is a bill of

exchange drawn on a banker payable on demand, Section 3 of the Ordinance provides

that, A bill of exchange is an unconditional order in writing, addressed by one person to

another, signed by the person giving it, requiring the person to whom it is addressed to

pay on demand, or at a fixed or determinable future time, a sum certain in money to or to

the order of a specified person, or to bearer. [emphasis added]

16

A cheque issued by one person to another may amount to a promise in wring that the

sum reected in such cheque is owed by the former to the laer. In a customer-bank

relaonship however, even though a cheque presented by a customer and honoured by

the bank in spite of a lack of funds in the customers account is reecve of an oer and

acceptance and is undoubtedly an overdraft, such a cheque may not amount to a promise

or agreement in writing by the customer that he or she owes such sum of money to the

bank. Therefore, for the purposes of the Act, it appears that an action cannot be based

only on such cheque for the simple reason that it is not reflective of a written promise or

agreement made to the bank and is therefore outside the purview of the Act.

I am however mindful that in Mahavidanage Simpson Kularatne v Peoples Bank [supra],

the majority expressed the view that the presentaon with the plaint of two cheques by

which the account had been overdrawn was sucient compliance with the above

requirement of a wrien promise. A similar view was expressed in Eagle Breweries Ltd v

Peoples Bank [(2008) 2 Sri LR 199] where the Court of Appeal, whilst conceding that a

statement of accounts and the cheques by which the account had been overdrawn do not

come within the meaning of instrument or agreement, nonetheless held that a cheque

or a statement of accounts from a bank could also be considered to constute a document

containing a contract entered into between two pares and would therefore come within

the ambit of a document in terms of Secon 4(1) of the Act.

Secon 4(1) of the Act

The Plain, having sased the requirements in Secon 2, and as mandated by Secon

4(1) read together with Secon 4(4), led together with its plaint an adavit of its Chief

Manager to the eect that the sum claimed is lawfully due to the Plain from the

Defendants. A cered copy of the aforemenoned agreement on which the acon was

based and cered copies of other documents relied upon by the Plain had been

annexed to the plaint.

The Defendants had raised an objecon before the District Court that the originals of the

said agreement and other documents had not been annexed to the plaint. Although that

was not an issue by the me this appeal was led, such objecons connue to be taken

17

before the trial Court, probably for the reason that conicng views have been expressed

whether the wrien promise or agreement, reected by an instrument, agreement or

document, and upon which the acon is based whether it be the original or a copy

thereof must be annexed to the plaint. These objecons stulfy the objecves of the

Act. I would therefore like to consider the relevant provisions of the principal enactment

and the Amendment Act, with a view to clarifying this issue and prevent such objecons

being raised before the trial Court in the future.

Secon 4(1) of the principal enactment provided as follows:

The instuon suing shall on presenng the plaint le an adavit to the eect that

the sum claimed is justly due to the instuon from the defendant and shall in

addion produce to the court the instrument, agreement or document sued upon

or relied on by the instuon. [emphasis added]

Secon 4(5) went on to state that:

The instuon shall tender with the plaint

(a) the affidavit and instrument, agreement or document referred to in subsection

(1) of this section;

(b) draft decree nisi; and

(c) the requisite stamps for the decree nisi and service thereof.

The Amendment Act repealed Secon 4(5), and repealed and replaced Secon 4(1) with

the following:

The instuon suing shall on presenng the plaint, le with the plaint an adavit

to the eect that the sum claimed is lawfully due to the instuon from the

defendant, a dra decree nisi, the requisite stamps for the decree nisi and for service

thereof and shall in addion, le in court, such number of copies of the plaint,

18

adavit, instrument, agreement or document sued upon, or relied on by the

instuon, as is equal to the number of defendants in the acon. [emphasis added]

In Mahavidanage Simpson Kularatne v Peoples Bank [supra; at page 13] the majority

held that At the point of presenng the plaint what is material is for a court to be sased

upon the adavit and the instrument, agreement or document presented before it, that

the sum claimed is a debt lawfully due to the plain bank and the instrument,

agreement or document annexed to the plaint is in conformity with the threshold

provisions of secon 4(2) of the Act for a court to issue a decree nisi, an ex-parte order

against a defendant.

Although dissenng with the conclusion reached by the majority, Jayawardena, PC, J

stated at page 17 that, it is evident that in order to instute an acon under the Debt

Recovery Act, the debt owed to the lending instuon must be ascertainable or capable

of being ascertained, at the me of the instuon of the acon, from a promise or

agreement which is in wring. Thus, in order to ascertain the sum of money due to a

lending instuon from the defendant, prior to entering the decree nisi under secon 4(2)

of the said Act, the said instuon is required to produce the said wrien document in

court.

Jayawardena, PC, J cited the following reasons to support his nding that producing the

agreement with the plaint is mandatory:

[Secon 4(2)] casts a duty on the court to be sased that the instrument,

agreement or document produced in terms of secon 4(1) of the said Act is properly

stamped, not open to suspicion by reason of any alteraon or erasure or other

maer on the face of it and the acon is not barred by prescripon before entering

the decree nisi. [page 13]

The words court being sased, in secon 4(2) of the said Act, require an

independent judicial mind to examine not only the facts stated in the adavit but

also the instrument, agreement or document presented by the lending instuon

with the plaint in order to determine whether the aforemenoned requirements that

19

are spulated in secon 4(1) have been complied with and a prima facie case has

been established by the lending instuon against the defendant, before entering a

decree nisi in terms of the said Act. [page 13]

[I]n terms of secon 4(2) of the Debt Recovery Act, the decree nisi entered should

state a sum not exceeding the sum prayed for in the plaint together with interest up

to the date of payment and such costs as the court may allow. [page 13]

However, the Debt Recovery Act does not spulate the method by which a court could

ascertain the sum claimed as interest [page 13]

Hence, in order to calculate the agreed interest that is required to be included in the

decree nisi, the lending instuon should le the wrien instrument, agreement or

document along with the plaint. [page 14]

Thus, I am of the view that secon 4(2) of the Debt Recovery Act has imposed a duty

on the court to be sased that not only the principal sum but also the interest

claimed thereon are lawfully due to the lending instuon from the defendant before

entering the decree nisi based on the documents led with the plaint in terms of

secon 4(1) of the Debt Recovery Act. [page 14]

[I]t is evident that the procedural law has made it imperave to produce the

instrument, agreement or document upon which a plain sues to be led along with

the plaint when instung acon. [page 16]

Moreover, in terms of secon 8 of the Debt Recovery Act, the court is conferred with

the power to order the original of the instrument, agreement or other document,

copies of which were led with the plaint or on which the acon is founded, be made

available, for its perusal at the me the acon is being supported. Accordingly,

secon 8 facilitates the requirement of court being sased that the lending

instuon has complied with the requirements set out in secon 4(1) of the Act when

the acon is supported to obtain a decree nisi. [page 19]

20

The posion in this regard can therefore be summarised as follows:

(1) Secon 4(1) requires copies of the instrument, agreement or document sued upon

to be led in Court for the purpose of serving it on the defendants, and therefore

means that such copies must form part of the plaint. This is reected in Secon 50

of the Civil Procedure Code which provides that, If a plain sues upon a document

in his possession or power, he shall produce it in court when the plaint is presented,

and shall at the same me deliver the document or a copy thereof to be led with

the plaint.;

(2) Given the fact that a plain is entled ex parte to a decree nisi in the rst instance

and thereaer the burden of disproving that the sum menoned in the decree nisi

is owed is on the defendant, it is crical for the District Court to be sased in the

rst instance itself that there is in fact a promise or agreement in wring and that

the said promise or agreement is the basis of the acon before Court;

(3) In terms of Secon 4(2), at the me the decree nisi is issued ex parte, the Court must

be sased that the instrument, agreement or document has been properly

stamped and is not open to suspicion by reason of any alteraon or erasure on the

face of such document. The best way for the Court to be sased of this fact is for a

copy of the agreement to be annexed to the plaint. Secon 8 enables the Court to

call for the original of the agreement in order to clarify any doubts that the Court

may have with regard to the contents or authencity of the agreement;

(4) The requirement laid down in Secon 23, which is reproduced below, can only be

sased by the District Court if a copy of the agreement is presented to Court with

the plaint:

In an acon instuted under this Act the court shall, in the decree nisi, order

interest agreed upon between the pares up to the date of decree nisi, and

interest at the same rate on the aggregate sum of the decree nisi from the date of

decree nisi unl the date of payment in full. In the event of the pares not having

agreed upon the rate of interest, the court shall in the decree nisi order interest at

21

the market rate from the date of instuon of acon up to the date of decree nisi

and thereaer on the aggregate sum of the decree nisi from the date of decree

nisi unl the date of payment in full.;

(5) When the Court is called upon in terms of Secon 6 to consider the applicaon of

the defendant for leave to appear and defend the acon, the Court must have the

benet of the agreement in order for the Court to be alert to the terms and

condions subject to which the credit facility has been granted and to make a proper

determinaon on whether the defendant has made out a prima facie sustainable

case.

I am therefore of the view that:

(a) It is mandatory for a plain to produce with the plaint the instrument, agreement

or document on which the plain is suing and which contains the wrien promise

or agreement;

(b) It is not mandatory for a plain to produce the original of the said instrument,

agreement or document sued upon, and tendering a copy would suce;

(c) It is sucient for the original of the said instrument, agreement or document sued

upon to be available for producon, if called upon by the Court.

Secon 6 of the Act

If Secons 2 and 4 are at the core of a plains case, Secon 6 is at the core of a

defendants case, and is very much the focus of this appeal.

Secon 6(1) provides that, In an acon instuted under this Act the defendant shall not

appear or show cause against the decree nisi unless he obtains leave from the court to

appear and show cause., and is reecve of the two ered process that I referred to at

the outset. Thus, where a defendant wishes to appear and show cause as to why the

decree nisi should not be made absolute, it is imperave that he or she rst seek and

22

obtain the leave of the District Court to do so. The prerequisites to seeking and obtaining

leave are set out in Secon 6(2).

Secon 6(2) as it stood in the principal enactment reads as follows:

The court shall upon the applicaon of the defendant give leave to appear and show

cause against the decree nisi either,

(a) upon the defendant paying into court the sum mentioned in the decree nisi; or

(b) upon the defendant furnishing such security as to the court may appear

reasonable and sufficient for satisfying the sum mentioned in the decree nisi in

the event of it being made absolute; or

(c) upon affidavits satisfactory to the court that there is an issue or a question in

dispute which ought to be tried. The affidavit of the defendant shall deal

specifically with the plaintiffs claim and state clearly and concisely what the

defence is and what facts are relied on as supporting it.

Secon 6(2) was repealed and replaced by the Amendment Act, and presently reads as

follows:

The court shall upon the ling by the defendant of an applicaon for leave to appear

and show cause supported by adavit which shall deal specically with the plains

claim and state clearly and concisely what the defence to the claim is and what facts

are relied upon to support it, and aer giving the defendant an opportunity of being

heard, grant leave to appear and show cause against the decree nisi, either

[a] upon the defendant paying into court the sum menoned in the decree nisi; or

[b] upon the defendant furnishing such security as to the court may appear

reasonable and sucient for sasfying the sum menoned in the decree nisi in

the event of it being made absolute; or

23

[c] upon the court being sased on the contents of the adavit led, that they

disclose a defence, which is prima facie sustainable and on such terms as to

security, framing and recording of issues, or otherwise as the court thinks t.

[emphasis added]

The ve requirements of Secon 6(2)

A close examinaon of Secon 6(2) reveals that there are ve requirements that need to

be complied with by a defendant who wishes to seek and obtain the leave of Court to

appear and show cause.

The rst is to make a wrien applicaon seeking leave of Court to appear and show cause.

As observed by the Court of Appeal in Peoples Bank v Lanka Queen Intl Private Limited

[(1999) 1 Sri LR 233 at 239], in the absence of an applicaon to show cause in wring

as contemplated by secon 6(2) it is possible to say that there is no proper applicaon

supported by an adavit before court. If this interpretaon is not given the amendment

would become superuous. This posion was reiterated in Seylan Bank PLC v Farook

[(2021) 3 Sri LR 1 at page 10] where this Court took the view that, Moreover, a wrien

applicaon is necessary as the said Act does not permit the pares to lead oral evidence

and/or produce fresh documentary evidence in an inquiry held in respect of an applicaon

led under secon 6(2) of the said Act to obtain leave to appear and show cause against

the decree nisi entered by court.

It must perhaps be emphasised that the Act does not contain any provision to le answer,

either at the stage of seeking leave or aer leave has been granted.

The second is that such applicaon must be supported by an adavit. In Seylan Bank PLC

v Farook [supra; page 11] this Court cited with approval the following passage from

Peoples Bank v Lanka Queen Intl Private Limited [supra; at page 237] where the Court

of Appeal, referring to the Amendment Act, held as follows:

This new subsecon clears any doubt that would have prevailed earlier in respect of

the procedure a defendant has to follow in applying for leave to appear and show

24

cause. On an examinaon of the amendment introduced in subsecon 6(2) it is

abundantly clear that the word applicaon which appeared in the original secon

has been qualied with the following words: upon the ling of an applicaon for

leave to appear and show cause supported by adavit. This shows that

(a) it is mandatory for the defendant to le an applicaon for leave to appear and

show cause.

(b) such applicaon must be supported by an adavit which deals specically with

the plains claim and state clearly and concisely what the defence to the

claim is and what facts are relied upon to support it.

The third is that the application and affidavit must deal specifically with the plaintiffs

claim, as held in Seylan Bank PLC v Farook [supra; at page 12]. I must state that most

applications made to the District Court seeking leave to appear and show cause do not

deal with the plaintiffs case but instead contain a mere denial or a whole host of

objections classified as technical objections or objections that are unrelated to the

plaintiffs claim. While a mere denial shall not suffice vide Metal Packaging Limited and

Another v Sampath Bank PLC [(2008) 1 Sri LR 356] this Court and the Court of Appeal

have reiterated time and again that leave cannot be obtained by raising frivolous technical

objections.

The Court of Appeal in Ramanayake v Sampath Bank Ltd and Others [(1993) 1 Sri LR 145

at page 153] has held that,

The defendant has to deal with the plaintiffs claim on its merits; it is not competent

for the defendant to merely set out technical objections. It is also incumbent on the

defendant to reveal his defence, if he has any.

On the other hand, mere technical objections and evasive denials will not suffice.

If no plausible defence with a triable issue is set up, the judge can give the defendant

leave to appear and show cause against the decree nisi by placing him on terms

either under section 6(2)(a) or section 6(2)(b).

25

The purpose of section 6 of the Act (and also sections 704 and 706 of the (Civil

Procedure) Code) is to prevent frivolous or untenable defences being set up and to

avoid the lengthening of proceedings by dilatory tactics.

A similar view was expressed in Seylan Bank PLC v Farook [supra; at page 12] where it was

held that:

Hence, a bare denial of the several averments in the plaint and/or seng out

frivolous technical objecons in the applicaon, without stang a defence to the

plains claim and the facts relied upon in support of the defence, does not sasfy

the criteria set out in secon 6(2) of the said Act. A defendant should not be allowed

to delay the administraon of jusce and prevent the plain from obtaining an

early judgment by making such an applicaon, as it would defeat the object of the

said Act to ensure an expedious recovery of debts. However, a defendant who has

disclosed a defence to the plains claim, should not be deprived of his right to

appear and defend the claim of the plain.

The stage at which an objecon with regard to the procedure followed by a plain can

be considered by the Court was discussed in Seneviratne and Another v Lanka Orix

Leasing Company Ltd [(2006) 1 Sri LR 230 at page 236]. In that case, the Court of Appeal,

having referred to the following passage from Civil Procedure in Ceylon [1971; page 318]

by K. D. P. Wickremasinghe that, In an acon under the summary procedure on a liquid

claim the defendant cannot be heard or allowed to take any objecon, as to the regularity

of the procedure, without having rst obtained the leave of the Court to appear and

defend. A judge cannot dismiss a summary acon on a liquid claim on the merits of the

case before granng the defendant leave to defend, held that a defendant cannot take

objecons at the stage leave is sought as to the regularity of the procedure followed by a

plain without rst obtaining the leave of Court to appear and defend the acon.

The fourth is that the applicaon and adavit must state clearly and concisely what the

defence to the claim is and what facts are relied upon to support it. This would necessarily

26

require a defendant to explain if any payments have been made to reduce the debt owed

by such defendant and to produce proof in support of such posion.

The above four requirements are mandatory and are condions precedent that must be

sased by a defendant, (a) in order for the District Court to consider whether leave to

appear can be granted, and (b) irrespecve of whether leave is sought under paragraphs

(a), (b) or (c) of Secon 6(2). Failure to comply with these condions precedent shall result

in the District Court making the decree nisi absolute in terms of Secon 6(3).

The h and nal requirement is for the defendant to choose under which paragraph of

Secon 6(2) he or she is seeking the leave of Court to appear and defend. However, there

is nothing to prevent a defendant seeking leave, alternavely of course, under each of the

three paragraphs. Logically speaking, a defendant who has defaulted on the credit

facilies made available to him will generally not seek leave under paragraph (a) as this

would require him to deposit the sum menoned in the decree nisi. Similarly, an

applicaon for leave under paragraph (b) also would be a rare occurrence for the reason

that the security must appear to the Court to be reasonable and sucient to sasfy the

sum menoned in the decree nisi, should it be made absolute. This however was one such

case where an applicaon under paragraph (b) could have been made.

Thus, on most occasions, leave would be sought under paragraph (c) on the basis that the

applicaon of the defendant supported by an adavit discloses a prima facie sustainable

defence. I am therefore of the view that while it is desirable, it is not mandatory for a

defendant to express a choice with regard to the paragraph in terms of which he or she

seeks leave.

The role of the District Court

Provided a defendant has complied with the aforemenoned rst four requirements of

Secon 6(2), the next step shall be for the Court to consider if the defendants applicaon

to appear and show cause against the decree nisi should be allowed.

27

The task of the District Court is made easier where an applicaon is made only under

either paragraphs (a) or (b). As held by the Court of Appeal in Naonal Development Bank

v Chrys Tea (Pvt) Ltd and Another [(2000) 2 Sri LR 206 at 209], where leave is granted

under Secon 6(2)(a) or 6(2)(b), the Court has no discreon to order security which is

not sucient to sasfy the sum menoned in the decree nisi.

However, where an applicaon is made directly, or on the face of it, as in this appeal,

under paragraph (c), the District Court is required to consider the maers set out in the

applicaon and adavit and be sased that the contents thereof disclose a defence

which is prima facie sustainable. Three possible scenarios emerge at this stage.

The rst is that if the District Court is sased that the applicaon and adavit disclose a

prima facie sustainable defence, leave to appear can be granted, subject to such terms as

to security, framing and recording of issues, or otherwise as the Court thinks t. However,

where the defendant admits liability to a part of the sum menoned in the decree nisi,

the Court should not grant leave to appear and show cause against the decree nisi under

Secon 6(2)(c) without requiring the defendant to pay into Court the said sum so admied

as a minimum condion to appear and show cause against the decree nisi [vide Seylan

Bank PLC v Farook [supra; at page 16].

The second scenario is that if the District Court is not so sased, he or she may refuse

the applicaon and if leave has been sought in the alternave under paragraphs (a) or (b),

make an appropriate order in terms of such paragraphs. However, where leave has only

been sought under paragraph (c), does it mean that the District Court must act under

Secon 6(3) and proceed to make the decree nisi absolute? I think not.

It would perhaps be relevant to refer at this stage to the speech made by Mr. Harindranath

Dunuwille, Member of Parliament, when the Bill pertaining to the Amendment Act was

being discussed in Parliament [vide Hansard of 24th February 1994; column 1214] where

he stated that, I think it is fair to say that the law is not without mercy. Thankfully, the

law is interpreted and the courts are manned by human beings and not automated

machines which would not have a human face. Therefore, there is always an inherent right

28

that is available to the Judges to ensure that the ends of justice are met and that the

process of court is not abused. Therefore, Sir, I might mention finally that whatever the

laws that are enacted, however stringent they may appear, it is always tempered with

mercy at the hands of a reasonable Judge.

This brings me to the third scenario, which is linked to the queson of law that must be

answered in this appeal, and concerns the course of acon the District Court should adopt

where the Court is not sased that leave can be granted under paragraph (c), and where

the defendant has not, on his own volion, made an applicaon for leave under paragraph

(a) or in the alternave, paragraph (b).

The applicaon of these three scenarios was considered in Seylan Bank PLC v Farook

[supra; at page 14], where this Court, referring to Secon 6(2)I, held as follows:

Accordingly, the above secon has cast a duty on the court to be sased that the

defendant has disclosed a defence which is prima facie sustainable against the claim

made by the plain, prior to making an order under and in terms of the said secon.

It is pernent to note that the words prima facie has been qualied by the addion

of the adjecve sustainable. Thus, the court should not only be sased that the

defendant has a prima facie defence, but that the defence of the defendant is prima

facie sustainable. Accordingly, the court is required to consider whether the defence

disclosed by the defendant can be sustained at the conclusion of the trial.

If the court is not sased that the defendant has disclosed a prima facie sustainable

defence, it has no jurisdicon to make an order under secon 6(2)(c) of the said Act.

In such an instance, the court should make an order either under secons 6(2)(a)

or (b) of the said Act.

On the contrary, if the court is sased that the defendant has disclosed a prima facie

sustainable defence, leave to appear and show cause against the decree nisi should

be granted on the terms set out in secon 6(2)(c) of the said Act.

29

The terms of an order granng leave to appear and show cause against the decree

nisi are set out in secons 6(2)(a), (b) and (c) of the said Act. The use of the

conjuncon or between the said secons requires the court to make an appropriate

order either under secons 6(2)(a) or (b) or (c) of the said Act. [emphasis added]

I am therefore of the view that as in this appeal, even where the applicaon of the

defendant is silent with regard to the paragraph under which leave is sought or where it

is apparent that the defendant is seeking leave only under Secon 6(2)(c) and not under

Secon 6(2)(a) or (b), the District Court must consider leave, rst under paragraph (c) and

if not sased that leave can be granted under paragraph (c), then under paragraphs (a)

or (b).

Is the imposion of security, mandatory in all cases?

There is one aspect arising out of Secon 6(2)(c) that I must refer to. That is whether the

granng of leave should always be subject to the imposion of terms or condions or in

other words, whether a defendant who has made out a prima facie sustainable defence

is entled to uncondional leave or leave without terms. This issue has been considered

in several decisions, both of this Court as well as that of the Court of Appeal and is the

basis on which the Defendants sought leave to appear and defend. I shall consider these

judgments as there appears to be some ambiguity surrounding the issue of whether

uncondional leave could be granted under Secon 6(2)(c).

In Ramanayake v Sampath Bank Ltd and Others (supra; at page 152) the Court of Appeal

considered Secon 6(2)(c) of the principal enactment and expressed the view that, Leave

may be granted uncondionally under secon 6(2)(c) where the court is sased that the

defendants adavit raises an issue or queson which ought to be tried.. However, in

Mahavidanage Simpson Kularatne v Peoples Bank [supra; at page 19], the majority,

having considered that in terms of Secon 6(2)(c), leave can be granted on such terms,

as to security, framing and recording of issues, or otherwise as the court thinks t was of

the following view:

30

The Legislature in no uncertain terms has laid down the procedure to be followed

for a defendant to show cause against a decree nisi and I see no reason to deviate

from the said provisions or to disregard such provisions. The Act does not permit

uncondional leave to appear. Leave to appear is always subject to condions. The

least being furnishing security as the court thinks t. As discussed earlier the

intenon of the Legislature has to be fullled and the purpose of the Act should not

be brought to naught by a court relying on technical objecons to defeat the very

purpose of the Act.

In any event, as pointed out by De Silva, J. in the case of Peole's Bank vs. Lanka

Queen International (Pvt) Ltd., (supra) section 6(2) (as amended by Act, No.4 of

1994) does not permit unconditional leave to defend the claim; the minimum

requirement according to section 6(2) (c) is for the furnishing of security

determined by Court and the Court can exercise its discretion in determining the

amount of security to be furnished by the defendant if he discloses a sustainable

defence. [emphasis added]

Thus, according to the majority opinion in Kularatne, leave to appear and defend cannot

be given without condions, with tendering security being a mandatory condion. A

contrary view was however expressed in Seylan Bank PLC v Farook [supra; at page 18]

where it was held that the court is empowered to grant leave to appear and show

cause against the decree nisi, without ordering security, under section 6(2)(c) of the said

Act.

While the issue of whether unconditional leave can be granted does not appear to have

been directly addressed, the Court, having stated that, a plain reading of the phrase

or otherwise as the court thinks fit shows that a wide discretion is conferred on the court

to make an appropriate order under section 6(2)(c) of the said Act., held that it does not

agree with the view expressed in Peoples Bank v Lanka Queen Intl Private Ltd [supra]

that unconditional leave cannot be granted, for the following reasons:

31

when the literal rule of interpretation is applied to the phrases on such terms

as to security or otherwise as the court thinks fit, it is clear that the legislature

has intentionally used two different phrases to enable the court to make two

different types of orders. The use of the conjunction or empowers the court to

make either of the orders as is necessary to safeguard the interests of the plaintiff.

the phrase or otherwise as the court thinks fit should be interpreted to enable

the court to make an appropriate order as it thinks fit, including an order granting

leave to appear and show cause against the decree nisi without the defendant

furnishing any security. [pages 16-17]

The position, in my view, can be summarised as follows:

(1) The use of the words, on such terms applies to security, framing and recording of

issues, or otherwise as the court thinks fit and therefore terms or conditions must

be imposed when granting leave;

(2) The words, otherwise as the court thinks fit cannot be read to mean that the

District Court is empowered to grant leave with no terms or conditions whatsoever;

(3) Leave to appear therefore cannot be granted without terms or conditions;

(4) The District Court does indeed have a wide discretion with regard to the terms on

which leave can be granted, as demonstrated by the use of the words otherwise as

the court thinks t, with the only limitation on such discretion being the

requirement of the imposition of a term;

(5) It is not mandatory to impose security, as evinced by the use of the conjunction or;

(6) In imposing terms, the District Court must be mindful of the objectives of the Act,

and its discretion must be exercised judicially.

32

Facts of the case revisited

Having referred to the applicable provisions of the Act, I shall now consider the course of

acon adopted by the Defendants. On 26th April 2018, the Defendants led an applicaon

in terms of Secon 6(2), duly supported by the adavit of the Defendants, seeking inter

alia the following relief:

^w& meusKs,slref.a kvqj ksIam%Nd lrk ksfhda.hla ,nd fok f,i;a" ^wd& js;a;slrejkag jsreoaOj we;=,;a lr we;s ffkihs ;Skaoq m%ldYh" ksh; ;Skaoq m%ldYhla njg

m;a fkdlr jsiqrejd yerSfuS ksfhda.hla ,nd fok f,i;a" ^we& js;a;slrejkag jsreoaOj we;=,;a lr we;s ffkihs ;Skaoq m%ldYh" ksh; ;Skaoq m%ldYhla njg

m;alsrSug lr we;s b,a,Su m%;slafIAm lsrSfuS ksfhda.hla ,nd fok f,i;a" ^wE& by; ^w&" ^wd& iy ^we& fPao hgf;a ksfhda. .re wOslrKh ,nd fkdfokafka kus js;a;slrejkag

fuu kvqjg fldkafoais jsrys;j fmkS isgsu iy fya;= oelajSug wjir ,nd fok ksfhda.hla ,nd fok f,i;a" [emphasis added] ^b& bka miq js;a;slrejkaf.a W;a;rh bosrsm;a lsrsug wjir ,nd fok ksfhda.hla ,nd fok f,i;a"

I have already concluded that the Act does not contemplate the granng of leave without

terms or condions and to that extent, the applicaon of the Defendants did not come

within either of the three paragraphs of Secon 6(2). Although specic reference has not

been made to Secon 6(2)(c), given the maers raised in the adavit and the

aforemenoned prayer, it is clear that the Defendants were seeking leave to appear and

show cause under and in terms of paragraph (c).

The following objecons had been raised by the Defendants in their applicaon:

(a) The documents annexed to the plaint are not originals nor have they been translated

to Sinhala;

(b) The rate of penal interest spulated in the Agreement is contrary to Central Bank

guidelines relang to the imposion of penal interest;

33

(c) The Defendants have only obtained an overdra facility and that an overdra facility

does not fall within the denion of a debt;

(d) A facility secured by a mortgage bond is outside the denion of debt and cannot

be the subject maer of an acon under the Act; and

(e) The Defendants have repaid a sum of Rs. 55,998,005, which fact has been

suppressed by the Plain, and that the said sum of money has not been set o

against the monies that the Defendants have overdrawn from their account.

With regard to each of the above, I must state as follows:

(a) I have already considered the relevant provisions of the Act and arrived at the

conclusion that it would suce for copies of the instrument, agreement or

document to be tendered with the plaint and for the originals to be produced if

ordered by Court in terms of Secon 8;

(b) Secon 23 of the Act provides that the pares may agree on the rate of interest and

it is only when agreement has not been reached that market rates would apply. In

terms of Secon 22 however, No sum of money which constutes a penalty for

default in payment, or delay in payment, of a debt shall be recoverable in an acon

instuted for the recovery of such debt, in terms of the procedure laid by this Act.

In Car Mart Ltd and Another v Pan Asia Bank Ltd [(2004) 3 Sri LR 56], an argument

was raised that the total sum sought to be recovered in the acon includes the

amounts charged as penal interest and that in view of Secon 22, the Bank cannot

recover penal interest in an acon led under the Act, thereby rendering the whole

plaint bad in law and accordingly prevenng the Court from entering a legally valid

decree nisi. The Court, referring to the proviso to Secon 6(3) which reads thus,

Provided that a decree nisi, if it consists of separate parts may be discharged in part

and made absolute in part , held as follows at page 59:

This provision is similar to section 388(2) proviso of the Civil Procedure Code. The

proviso to section 6(3) empowers the court to vary the decree nisi at the end of

34

the action. If the defendant at the end of the case satisfies court that a sum of

money is not legally due from him or a sum not legally recoverable from him (such

as the sum referred to in section 22) the court has power to make adjustments to

the decree nisi before making it absolute. If the court has no such power it would

lead to an injustice.;

(c) I have already arrived at the conclusion that an overdra facility falls within the

denion of a debt under the Act, as long as such facility is reected in a wrien

promise or agreement between the pares, and the other requirements are

sased. Perhaps, I should reiterate that what is relevant is not the nomenclature

aached to the wrien promise or agreement but that the amount claimed must be

capable of being ascertained from such wrien promise or agreement at the me of

the instuon of the acon;

(d) The denion given to debt permits a facility secured by a mortgage bond to be

recovered by way of an acon instuted in terms of the Act.

It is a maer of regret that these objecons connue to be raised, in spite of the Act being

clear and in the backdrop of many judicial pronouncements addressing the same, and

especially in proceedings instuted under an Act that has been introduced to expedite the

recovery of debts. The objecons raised by the Defendants are not only frivolous but once

raised, required the learned District Judge to give his mind to such objecons at the cost

of his valuable judicial me. The situaon is made worse when an appeal is made to the

High Court and thereaer to this Court, wasng the valuable me that both Courts could

otherwise allocate to other more deserving cases that require their aenon.

What aggravates the situaon in this appeal even further is that:

(a) The Defendants, having admied that they obtained the credit facility, and in spite

of a further admission in wring that the outstanding debit balance was Rs. 76

million as at 31st March 2015, raised as their primary defence that a sum of Rs. 56

million paid by them has not been credited to their current account. The Defendants

however did not produce the relevant deposit slips to establish that such a sum has

35

in fact been deposited by them and that such sums have not been credited to their

account. The failure to provide proof by way of the deposit slips was crical to this

claim of the Defendants. The explanaon for this failure is simple. Any person with

a basic knowledge of banking is well aware that the elementary nature of an

overdra facility granted on a long term basis is such that the bank allows the

customer to withdraw as well as deposit monies simultaneously and on a connuing

basis, as long as the overdra limit is not exceeded. Thus, even if one accepts the

claim of the Defendants that they deposited Rs. 56 million, they have failed to

establish that such monies have not been credited;

(b) Although the Mortgage Bond had been tendered with the plaint and even though

the forced sale value of the property was xed at Rs. 75 million in terms of a valuaon

report obtained in January 2012, the Defendants did not claim that the said property

was sucient to secure the repayment of the amount in default nor did they move

that they be granted leave to appear and defend in terms of Secon 6(2)(b). In other

words, the queson of law that is now before this Court has not been raised by the

Defendants before the District Court. That was a very costly mistake on the part of

the Defendants, which has resulted in two appeals spanning over four years.

Order of the District Court

The learned District Judge has considered each and every objecon raised by the

Defendants and has rejected them for the reasons contained therein, which reasons are

not being challenged in this appeal. With the several objecons of the Defendants having

been rejected, the learned District Judge has quite rightly held that the Defendants have

not made out a prima facie sustainable defence, which posion too is no longer in issue.

What follows immediately aer the said nding are the nal two paragraphs of the Order,

which read as follows:

ta wkqj mkf;a 6^2&^nS& j.ka;sh wkqj ffkihs ;Skaoq m%ldYh ksh; ;Skaoq m%ldYhla m;a lrkq ,enqjfyd;a tlS ffkihs ;Skaoq m%ldYfha i|yka uqo,a m%udKh mshjSu i|yd hqla;s iy.; npg iy m%udKj;a f,i fmkS hk wemhla js;a;slre jsiska imhkq ,ensh hq;= nj fmkS hhs'

36

ta wkqj ffkihs ;Skaoq m%ldYfha i|yka uqo,a fyda tls uqo,g irs,k f,i m%udKj;a wemhla js;a;slrejka jsiska bosrsm;a lsrsfuka miqj muKla kvqjg fmkS isg ffkihs ;Skaoq m%ldYhg tfrysj

fya;= oelsjsu i|yd 1 iy 2 jk js;a;slrejkag wjir fous'

It is true that the learned District Judge has not considered whether the mortgage already

in place was an adequate security to cover the decree nisi in terms of Secon 6(2)(b) but

the blame for that cannot be aributed to the learned District Judge but solely to the

Defendants for not raising it. Although Secon 6(2)(b) places the onus on the Court to be

sased that the security is sucient, the Court could not have done so in the absence of

the Defendants placing that material before Court, especially with regard to the current

value of the said property?

However, given the manner in which the Order had been craed, it was open to the

Defendants to move Court to accept as security the property mortgaged by them which

had a forced sale value of Rs. 75 million. Instead of doing so, the Defendants opted to le

a peon of appeal in the High Court seeking leave to appeal against the said Order of the

District Court.

Appeal to the High Court and its judgment

Having heard both pares, the High Court had granted leave to appeal as well as a stay of

the said Order.

In addion to the objecons raised before the District Court, the Defendants raised the

following two maers in its peon of appeal:

(a) The learned District Judge has failed to consider that he should act under Secon

6(2)(a) or (b); [1994 wxl 09 ork Kh wdmiq whlr .eksfuS ^jsfYaI jsOsjsOdk& ^ixfYdaOk& mkf;a 06 ^2& j.ka;sh wkqj js;a;sldr-fm;aiuslrejka jsiska fya;= oelajsu i|yd wjir m;k b,a,Sula bosrsm;a l, jsg tlS j.ka;sfha ^w& iy ^wd& Wmj.ka;s wkqj .re wOslrKh l%shd l<hq;= njg jk lreK .re W.;a w;sfral osid jsksiqrejrhd i,ld n,d fkdue;s nj]. (b) The learned District Judge failed to consider that the Defendants have already

mortgaged a property valued at Rs. 75m when he directed the Defendants to place

a security adequate to secure the sum in the decree nisi.

37

While the maer in (b) was never urged before the District Court, as far as the maer in

(a) is concerned, the learned District Judge has acted under Secon 6(2)(b) although not

at the instance of, and therefore with no assistance from the Defendants. This complaint

is therefore completely unwarranted. Even though the maer in (b) had been reiterated

in the wrien submissions led by the Defendants before the High Court, it has been done

half-heartedly, with the focus being very much on seeking to set aside the Order on the

basis that the learned District Judge failed to appreciate that the Defendants had made

out a prima facie sustainable defence warranng leave to appear being granted under

Secon 6(2)(c).

Although in its judgment delivered on 15th July 2020, the High Court had considered the

principal objecons and overruled them for the reasons set out therein, the High Court

has not considered whether the mortgaged property was an adequate security for the

purposes of Secon 6(2)(b). Aggrieved by the above judgment, the Defendants led their

peon of appeal before this Court on 18th August 2020, seeking to set aside the said

judgment of the High Court and the Order of the District Court.

Queson of law

It is in the above factual and legal circumstances that I must consider the aforemenoned

queson of law, which for convenience is reproduced below:

Did the Civil Appellate High Court err in law by arming the District Court order

dated 21st February 2019 by holding that the Defendants are required to deposit

security under Secon 6(2)(a) or 6(2)(b) of the Debt Recovery Act as amended

notwithstanding the fact that the Defendants have furnished a mortgage of a land in

order to obtain the monies that are referred to in the plaint led by the Plain in

the District Court?

I have already stated that once the District Court forms the view that the defendant has

not made out a prima facie sustainable defence and is therefore not entled to leave

under Secon 6(2)(c), the District Court shall act under Secon 6(2)(a) or (b), even though

the defendant may not have sought leave under paragraphs (a) or (b). Although in this

38

case, the learned District Judge has allowed the Defendants to deposit a sum of money

equivalent to the sum specied in the decree nisi or to furnish a security which is

reasonable and sucient to sasfy the sum menoned in the decree nisi, the reality is

that the learned District Judge has not considered whether that requirement could be

sased by accepng as security for the purposes of Secon 6(2)(b) the same property

mortgaged to the Plain at the me the credit facility was obtained. This becomes even

more signicant in view of the Plains failure to explain in the plaint why it chose not to

proceed by way of parate execuon, although such a course of acon was available to it.

The queson that I must answer is did the learned District Judge err in law when he failed

to do so? In searching for the answer to that queson, I shall bear in mind the raonale

for the introducon of the Act and its provisions and the fact that the Act was meant to

expedite the recovery of debts owed by customers to a lending instuon. On the face of

it, the provisions of the Act are lender friendly and accords with its objecve. However,

that does not mean that it is a piece of legislaon that is heavily weighted in favour of the

lender, for there are provisions that amply safeguard the rights of the debtor, as well. In

the applicaon of the Act, it is the duty of the Court to strike the correct balance between

the conicng interests of the pares. I shall examine in that light the raonale for the

requirement to deposit security in order to proceed with the challenge to the decree nisi.

The raonale is simple. If the defendant makes out a prima facie sustainable defence, the

discreon with regard to the terms on which leave should be granted is with the learned

District Judge. However, where the defendant fails to make out a prima facie sustainable

defence, the Act mandates that security be deposited, whether it be money or otherwise,

and that it be sucient to sasfy the sum of money specied in the decree nisi. The

intenon of the Legislature in requiring a security is therefore to ensure that if the

defendant fails in his or her bid to prevent the decree nisi being made absolute, the

plain must be able to immediately access the security, with Secon 13 of the Act

providing that a decree absolute shall be deemed to be a writ of execuon issued to the

scal in terms of Secon 223(3) of the Civil Procedure Code.

I am however mindful that where the Defendants have pledged an immovable property

as security for the underlying credit facility, which is readily realisable by resorng to

39

parate execuon in terms of the provisions of the Recovery of Loans by Banks (Special

Provisions) Act, No. 4 of 1990, but the Plain has chosen instead to invoke the provisions

of the Act, and especially in the absence of an explanaon by the Plain as to why it

cannot pursue the security already available, it is inherently unfair and unreasonable to

direct the Defendants to furnish further security which to the Court may appear

reasonable and sucient to sasfy the sum menoned in the decree nisi. To hold

otherwise would mean that the Plain would have access to two securies, very much

in excess of the sums of money due to it, leaving the Defendants at the mercy of the

Plain in the event of the decree nisi being made absolute. This certainly could not have

been the intenon of the Legislature.

The learned Counsel for the Plain presented two arguments as to why the property

already mortgaged could not have been considered as security for the purposes of Secon

6(2)(b).

The rst was that Secon 6(2) provides that the Court shall grant leave to appear and show

cause against the decree nisi upon the defendant furnishing such security, and that the

use of the word furnishing contemplates a new security as opposed to a security which

has already been given. I am not in favour of taking such a restricve view for the reason

that the discreon with regard to the adequacy of the security must always remain with

the Court. In exercising such discreon, the Court shall bear in mind the wording in

paragraph (b) i.e., security as to the court may appear reasonable and sucient for

sasfying the sum menoned in the decree nisi in the event of it being made absolute;.

This discreon must not be interfered with, especially in a case such as this, where there

already is a security.

The second argument of the learned Counsel for the Plain was based on Secons 16

and 17(3) of the Act, which specically mandates the Court to direct the tendering of cash

or a guarantee from a bank for the sasfacon of the enre claim. It must be noted that

Secon 16 applies when further proceedings in the District Court are stayed by the Court

of Appeal upon an applicaon for leave to appeal from an order made in the course of any

acon and that Secon 17(3) applies where leave to appeal to this Court is granted against

a decree absolute. It was the posion of the learned Counsel that similar words in the

40

statute should be interpreted similarly and for that reason, the security that is

contemplated by Secon 6(2)(b) must also be cash or a bank guarantee.

I cannot agree with this argument for two reasons. The rst is that while Secon 6(2)(b)

confers upon the Judge the discreon to decide on the type of security, with the

requirement being that such security be reasonable and sucient for sasfying the sum

menoned in the decree nisi, neither Secon 16 nor Secon 17(3) gives any such

discreon to the Court. Instead, both Secons specically set out the type of security to

be deposited thereunder. The second is that the stage at which security is ordered under

Secons 16 and 17 is much later than when an applicaon is made under Secon 6(2)(b),

and by which me there is already a nding with regard to the liability of the borrower.

I am therefore not in agreement with the said two arguments of the learned Counsel for

the Plain.

Conclusion

In the above circumstances, I am of the following view:

(a) Where a defendant has already pledged an immovable property as security for the

same loan that is sought to be recovered through the acon led under the Act and

the defendant moves that leave to appear and show cause be granted by accepng

the said property as security, the learned District Judge must consider if such security

is adequate for the purposes of Secon 6(2)(b) and whether it is reasonable and

sucient for sasfying the sum menoned in the decree nisi;

(b) However, this is subject to one crucial condion, that being that the onus of

sasfying the learned District Judge that the security already in place is reasonable

and sucient to sasfy the sum menoned in the decree nisi shall always be with

the defendant;

(c) In this appeal, the Defendants completely failed in that regard in spite of the Plain

having pleaded the mortgage bond in its plaint. The Defendants also had the duty of

demonstrang to the District Court and the High Court that the value of the property

41

is sucient to cover the amount of the decree nisi or at least a part thereof. This is

crical, as how else would the learned Judges know the value of the security already

oered? Had that material been placed before the District Court or even the High

Court, it would have enabled the Court to decide whether the said security is

reasonable and sucient for sasfying the sum menoned in the decree nisi;

(d) Although the Defendants did raise the issue currently before us in the High Court, it

was a half-hearted aempt, and was subject to the same inrmies that I have

referred to in the previous paragraph. Hence, it cannot be said that the High Court

erred in law when it failed to consider the adequacy of the security already

mortgaged to the Plain for the purposes of Secon 6(2)(b).

I would therefore answer the queson of law raised in this appeal in the negave. The

Order of the District Court delivered on 21st February 2019 and the judgment of the High

Court dated 15th July 2020 are armed. This appeal is accordingly dismissed, with costs

xed at Rs. 100,000.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT Vijith K. Malalgoda, PC, J I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Yasantha Kodagoda, PC, J I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT