==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal under an in terms

of Article 127 of the Constitution read with

Section 5(c) of the High Court of the

Provinces (Special Provisions)

(Amendment) Act No. 54 of 2006.

SC/Appeal No. 01/2016 1. Saranasin Patabandigei Jayatissa,

SC/SPL/LA /116/2014 Puhulgaya Road, Ambalanthota.

CA No. 111/99 (F)

D.C. Hambanthota Case No.

1189/L

2. Saranasin Patabandigei Sirisena,

Malpettawa, Ambalanthota.

PLAINTIFFS

vs Saranasin Patabandigei Justin, Karagasara, Kudabolana,

Ambalanthota. DEFENDANT AND BETWEEN

1. Saranasin Patabandigei Jayatissa, Puhulgaya Road, Ambalanthota.

2. Saranasin Patabandigei Sirisena, Malpettawa, Ambalanthota. PLAINTIFF-APPELLANTS

2

vs

Saranasin Patabandigei Justin, (Deceased) Karagasara, Kudabolana,

Ambalanthota.

Saranasin Patabandigei Jayasena, Karagasara, Kudabolana, Ambalanthota.

SUBSTITUTED DEFENDANT- RESPONDENT AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Saranasin Patabandigei Jayatissa (Now

Deceased) Puhulgaya Road, Ambalanthota. 1st PLAINTIFF-APPELLANT-PETITIONER-APPELLANT 1a. Loku Yaddehige Malani Chandralatha, Puhulyaya Road, Ambalanthota. 1b. Saranasin Patabandigei Damith Chaminda Puhulyaya Road, Ambalanthota. 1c. Saranasin Patabandigei Manjula Priyadarshani, Puhulyaya Road, Ambalanthota. 1d. Saranasin Patabandigei Nirosh Shaminda, Puhulyaya Road, Ambalanthota. 1e. Saranasin Patabandigei Sanjula Prasadini, Puhulyaya Road, Ambalanthota. 1f. Saranasin Patabandigei Osani Sajeewani,

3

Puhulyaya Road, Ambalanthota.

SUBSTITUTED 1a-1f PLAINTIFF-APPEALLANT-PETITIONER-APPELLANTS vs 2. Saranasin Patabandigei Sirisena

(Deceased) Malpettawa, Ambalanthota. 2a. Saranasin Patabandigei Palika,

No. 917/1C, Agirikula Road, Kottawa, Pannipitiya. SUBSTITUTED 2a PLAINTIFF-APPELLANT-

PETITIONER-APPELLANT

vs

Saranasin Patabandigei Justin (Deceased) Karagasara, Kudabolana, Ambalanthota. Saranasin Patabandigei Jayasena, Karagasara, Kudabolana, Ambalanthota.

SUBTITUTED DEFENDANT-

RESPONDENT RESPONDENT-

RESPONDENT

BEFORE : Yasantha Kodagoda, P.C., J. A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J. M. Sampath K. B. Wijeratne J. COUNSEL : Rohan Sahabandu, P.C., with Chathurika Elvitigala

4

and S. Senanayake instructed by Koggala Wellala Bandula for the Substituted Plaintiff-Appellant-Petitioner-Appellants.

Samhan Munzir with Uthpala Karunasinghe instructed by Nilu Welgama for the Substituted-Defendant-Respondent- Respondent-Respondent. ARGUED ON : 30.09.2025 DECIDED ON : 03.03.2026 M. Sampath K. B. Wijeratne J.

Introduction

The Plaintiffs-Appellants-Appellants (hereinafter referred to as the “Plaintiffs-

Appellants”) filed the action bearing No. 1189/L in the District Court of

Hambantota against the Defendant-Respondent-Respondent (“the Defendant-

Respondent”) by plaint dated June 24, 1991 and later filed an amended plaint

on February 03, 1992. Plaintiffs-Appellants sought, inter alia, a declaration

that the Plaintiffs Appellants are the lawful owners of the land in dispute and to

evict the Defendant-Respondent from the said land who alleged to have been in

unlawful and forcible possession. In his answer, the Defendant denied several

averments in the Plaint and sought the dismissal of the Plaintiffs–Appellants’

action, while also claiming a declaration that he, the Defendant–Respondent,

has succeeded to the interests of the subject matter in question upon the demise

of his mother, Karalenchinahamy. The Learned District Judge after trial,

dismissed the action of the Plaintiffs-Appellants holding in favour of

Defendant-Respondent.

Being aggrieved by the Judgment of the Learned District Judge, Plaintiffs-

Appellants appealed to the Court of Appeal.

5

The instant appeal arises from the judgment of the Court of appeal dated June

03, 2014 that affirmed the judgment of the learned District Judge dated

December 02, 1997.

Having considered the submissions of both the parties, this Court granted

special leave to appeal on the following questions of law raised in the

paragraph 23 of the petition:1

“ b) Did the District Court and the Court of Appeal misapply S. 60 of

the Land Development Ordinance to the facts of the instant case?

c) Did the District Court and the Court of Appeal err in not

comparing the document P3 with the entries in the register of

permits/grants, a careful perusal of which would reveal that the

nomination had been registered in 1986, prior to the death of

Karalenchihamy.

e) Did the Courts below err in not appreciating that P3 was

accepted as a valid document and acted upon by the Authority

concerned and registered the same as a valid nomination?

f) Could the District Court and the Court of Appeal act on the ipse

dixit of the Defendant without any proof that the thumb impression is

not the thumb impression of Karalenchihamy?

g) Could the Defendant challenge P3 without making the authorities

concerned parties to the action?

j) Did His Lordship in the Court of Appeal when affirming the

Judgement of the District Court fail to appreciate the guidelines set

down in Mahavithana's case 64 NLR 217.”

1 Journal entry dated 11.01.2016.

6

Factual Background

The original owner of the Grant in respect of the land in question was one

William, the father of both the Plaintiffs-Appellants and the Defendant-

Respondent. Upon his demise, his spouse, Karalenchinahamy being the

nominee, succeeded to his interests in the land.

It is the position of the Plaintiffs-Appellants that Karalenchinahamy prior to her

death had nominated in writing the Plaintiffs-Appellants as nominees to

succeed upon her death. However, Defendant-Respondent in his amended

answer maintained that since he is the eldest son of deceased

Karalenchinahamy he is entitled to succeed to her interest under the provisions

of Land Development Ordinance.

The learned District Judge dismissed the action of the Plaintiffs-Appellants on

the ground that there is no material before the Court to arrive at the conclusion

that a valid nomination has been made according to the law, nominating

Plaintiffs-Appellants to succeed to the interests of the said Karalenchinahamy.

The learned judge of the Court of Appeal affirmed the conclusion of the learned

District Judge.2

Analysis

Section 2 of the Land Development Ordinance, No. 19 of 1935, as amended,

defines “holding” as a land alienated by a Grant under this Ordinance. Chapter

VII of the Land Development Ordinance lays down procedural rules relating to

who is entitled under this Chapter to succeed to that land or holding upon the

death of the permit-holder or owner of such holding.

2 CA/111/99 F dated 03.06.2014.

7

Now let me turn to the question as to who is entitled to succeed to the interests

of the land when an owner of a holding dies without leaving a spouse, or if the

nomination is invalid in the eyes of law.

Section 72 of the Land Development Ordinance provides that,

Section 72- If no successor has been nominated, or if the nominated

successor fails to succeed, or if the nomination of a successor

contravenes the provisions of this Ordinance, the title to the land

alienated on a permit to a permit-holder who at the time of his or

her death was paying an annual instalment by virtue of the

provisions of section 19 or to the holding of an owner shall, upon the

death of such permit-holder or owner without leaving behind his or

her spouse, or, where such permit-holder or owner died leaving

behind his or her spouse, upon the failure of such spouse to succeed

to that land or holding, or upon the death of such spouse, devolve as

prescribed in rule 1 of the Third Schedule

Scope of the law on succession prior to the amendment brought in by

Amendment Act No. 11 of 2022 was in the following manner; (a) Sons (b)

Daughters (c) Grandsons (d) Granddaughters (e) Father (f) Mother (g) Brothers

(h) Sisters (i) Uncles (j) Aunts (k) Nephews (l) Nieces.

In the instant case both the Plaintiffs- Appellants who claimed to have been

nominated to succeed to the interests of the said Karalenchinahamy, comes

within the purview of groups of relatives enumerated in the Rule 1 of the third

schedule and therefore, have the opportunity of being nominated as successors

to such a grant. However, if such nomination turned to be invalid in the eyes of

law, the defendant in this case who is the eldest son of the Karalenchinahamy,

is entitled to succeed to her interests.

8

Law relating to Nomination of a Successor

The procedural rules relating to nomination of a successor, cancellation of a

nomination, and registration are laid down in sections 52-67 of the Land

Development Ordinance.

Section 56 elaborates on the manner in which a nomination is effected.

‘56 (1) The nomination of a successor and the cancellation of any

such nomination shall be effected by a document substantially in the

prescribed form executed and witnessed in triplicate before a

Government Agent, or a Registrar of Lands, or a divisional

Assistant Government Agent, or a notary, or a Justice of the Peace.

(2) The provisions of subsection (1) shall not apply to any

nomination or cancellation of a successor made by last will in the

manner hereinafter provided, or to the nomination and cancellation

of a successor to a land alienated on a permit made in the manner

provided in section 87.

(3) A document by which the nomination of a successor or the

cancellation of any such nomination is effected under subsection (1)

shall not be deemed to be an instrument affecting land for the

purposes of the Registration of Documents Ordinance, nor shall the

provisions of Chapter II of that Ordinance apply to any person

before whom any such document is executed.’

Section 58 provides,

‘58 (1) A document (other than a last will) whereby the nomination

of a successor is effected or cancelled shall not be valid unless and

until it has been registered by the Registrar of Lands of the district

9

in which the holding or land to which that document refers is

situated.

(2) Regulations may be made prescribing the procedure for the

registration of documents whereby nominations of successors are

effected or cancelled and for all matters connected therewith or

incidental thereto, including the registers which shall be kept and the

fees which shall be charged for such registration.’

[emphasis added]

Section 60 reads as follows;

’60. No nomination or cancellation of the nomination of a successor

shall be valid unless the document (other than a last will) effecting

such nomination or cancellation is duly registered before the date of

the death of the owner of the holding or the permit-holder.’

[emphasis added]

A careful perusal of the aforesaid sections clearly reveals that, for a successor

to succeed to a holding upon the death of its owner, the nomination of such

successor must have been duly registered prior to the death of the owner. Thus,

the one of the cardinal questions before us is whether there exists a valid

nomination that is duly registered prior to the death of the owner of the

holding.

Validity of the Instrument Nominating the Successor

According to the submissions of Plaintiffs-Appellants, the nomination (‘P3’)

was signed on September 04, 1986 and it was registered on October 29, 1986

whereas Karanchinahamy died on September 08, 1989. It is the contention of

the Plaintiffs-Appellants that both District Court and the Court of Appeal

mistakenly considered the entry on February 08, 1991 which is in respect of

10

transferring rights to nominee as the date on which the nomination was

registered (Paragraph 9 of the Petition), a fact which is also admitted by the

Defendant-Respondent in his written submission. The relevant paragraphs of

the submissions read as follows;

“3. However, the Learned District Judge as well as the Judge of the

Court of Appeal reasoning in their judgment has come to the finding

that the nomination has been registered after the death of the

mother which is wrong on the face of the document marked P2.

4.However, even if the said reason is wrong, the purported

nomination marked P3 is still not valid for the other reasons

submitted elsewhere. in these submissions.” 3

Plaintiffs-Appellants further state that as authorities have transferred the land in

question by endorsement to the two Plaintiffs by giving title to the Plaintiffs, it

could be assumed that ‘P’3 has been properly effected and registered.

The Defendant-Respondent submit that as per section 58 of the Land

Development Ordinance, no nomination is valid unless it is executed in

triplicate and duly attested by the person mentioned therein and as per the

evidence of the witness from Divisional Secretary’s office Hambantota,

purported nomination has only one copy and two other copies were never

received.

However, when going through the evidence it is clearly evident that the said

nomination has been duly registered and the interests of the said land also have

been already transferred to the Plaintiffs-Appellants.

The evidence-in-chief of land Registrar of Hambantota also corroborate this fact.

3 Written Submission of Defendant-Respondent-Respondent.

11

“පැ. 03 ඉඩම් රෙජිස්ට්‍රාර් නිකුත් කෙපු එකක්. හම්බනරතාට දිසාපති තුමාරෙන

ආව එකක්. ඔප්පපුරවන ආව එකත් ඒක සෙණසිංහ පටබැදිරේ ජයතිස්ට්‍ස සහ සෙණසිංහ

පටබැදිරේ සරිරස්ට්‍න

යන අයරේ නම් ඉඩම් ලියා පදිිංචි රේඛණය අනුව 655 ප්‍රධාන පත්‍රරේ නව අයිතිකරුවන

වශරයන ලියා පදිිංචි රවලා තිරබනවා. කිසම රේඛයක් නැහැ රමය අවලිංගු කිරීමක් රහෝ

පරීක්ෂණයකට කැදවා තිරබන බවට ඉඩම් රෙජිස්ට්‍රාර් කාර්යාලරයන”

(Page 75 of the Appeal brief)

In the re-examination also he further vouches for the validity of the ‘P3’.

ප්‍ර. පැ . 03 රේඛණය රම් දක්වා වලිංගු රේඛණයක්ද අවලිංගු රේඛණයක්ද?

උ- ලියාපදිිංචි කිරීම අනුව වලිංගුය.

ප්‍රාරේශීය රේකම් තුමාරේ රේඛණය වලිංගු රේඛණයත් බවට පිලි අෙන ලියා පදිිංචි

කෙ තිරබනවා

(Page 76 of the Appeal brief)

Section 114 of the Evidence Ordinance provides as follows,

‘114. The court may presume the existence of any fact which it thinks

likely to have happened, regard being had to the common course of

natural events, human conduct, and public and private business in

their relation to the facts of the particular case.

Illustrations

(a) - (c) […]

(d) the judicial and official acts have been regularly

performed;

(e) - (h) […]’

[emphasis added]

12

Accordingly, as the nomination in question has been duly registered it could be

presumed that the correct procedure has been followed in doing so, unless

Defendant-Respondent is able to rebut that presumption with clear and cogent

evidence.

In the Instant case, Defendant-Respondent also raises doubt as to the

genuineness of the thumb impression on the ground that the Justice of Peace

who attested ‘P3’ has failed to state the thumb impression is of

Karalenchinahamy.

When going through the totality of evidence the content of the nomination

paper marked ‘P3’ clearly identifies the parties who have signed the document.

The author of the document is clearly identified as Karalenchinahamy at the top

of the document. Further letters sent by said Karalenchinahamy indicating her

intention to nominate Plaintiffs-Appellants (documents marked ‘V2’,

‘V3’operates rather adversely to the Defendant-Respondent who questions the

genuineness of the signature which claimed to be of Karalenchinahamy. It is

noteworthy that the Defendant-Respondent has not led single evidence to

disprove the genuineness of the signature nor has he taken any actions against

the purported forgery. The Defendant-Respondent has neither marked it subject

to proof nor raised objection to admitting it as evidence at the closure of the

case. In such circumstance, I am of the opinion that failure of Justice of Peace

to state the thumb impression is of Karalenchinahamy does not make a

significant difference as the content of the document clearly indicates who the

executor is.

Plaintiffs-Appellants further assert that since ‘P3’ is not objected to when

tendering evidence, it is evidence for all purposes of law. It is the position of

the Defendant-Respondent that since, the Plaintiffs-Appellants called none of

the witnesses to ‘P3’ nor the Justice of Peace who authenticated the document,

it is inadmissible as evidence.

13

Before going to the substantive issue, let me first clarify the law relating to it.

Prior to the enactment of Act No 17 of 2022, whenever execution was in issue,

formal proof of due execution of an instrument is necessary as per Section 68

of the Evidence Ordinance. However, in the case of Sri Lanka Ports Authority

and another vs Jugolinija - Boal East4 which was decided under the old law it

was held that ‘" If no objection is taken, when at the close of a case documents

are read in evidence, they are evidence for all purposes of the law. This is the

cursus curiae of the original civil courts." This position is further clarified with

the enactment of Act No 17 of 2022 with the introduction of new Section

154A.

Section 154A which was newly introduced under the said Amendment,

provides as follows;

154A (1) Notwithstanding the provisions of the Evidence Ordinance

(Chapter 14), in any proceedings under this Code, it shall not be

necessary to adduce formal proof of the execution or genuineness

of any deed, or document which is required by law to be attested,

other than a will executed under the Wills Ordinance (Chapter 60),

and on the face of it purports to have been duly executed, unless

(a) in the pleadings or further pleadings in an action filed under

regular procedure in terms of this Code, the execution or

genuineness of such deed or document is impeached and raised as

an issue; or

(b) the court requires such proof

[….]”

[emphasis added]

4 (1981) 1 Sri L R 18.

14

This case was before the District Court prior to the enactment of the Act, and

was not objected to at the time of marking. Even if it is assumed it requires

proof as law stands prior to the Amendment of the Act, the transitional

provision reads as follows;

‘3. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 2 of this Act, and the

provisions of the Evidence Ordinance, in any case or appeal pending on the

date of coming into operation of this Act –

a. (i) if the opposing party does not object or has not objected to it

being received as evidence on the deed or document being tendered

in evidence; or

(ii) if the opposing party has objected to it being received as

evidence on the deed or document being tendered in evidence but not

objected at the close of a case when such document is read in

evidence,

the court shall admit such deed or document as evidence without

requiring further proof;”

b. […]’

[emphasis added]

Shiran Gooneratne J.’s dicta in the case of Premalal Leelananda Thilakaratne

and another vs Hewa Hakuruge Wijaya Nandasiri Kumara and others5

clearly depicts the effect of transitional provision as follows;

“As the law stood at the time of the trial and the High Court appeal,

these principles remained fully in force. Therefore, both the District

Court and the Civil Appellate High Court were duty-bound to

5 SC Appeal No. 138/2009 SC Minutes on 07/08/2025.

15

examine whether the Deed of Gift had been duly executed in

accordance with the requirements of the Evidence Ordinance and

prevailing judicial authority at the time. […] In the present matter,

Deed of Gift No. 1040 was marked in evidence without objection at

the time of tendering or at the closure of the Plaintiff’s case.

Similarly, Deed of Revocation No. 39, although marked “subject to

proof” when tendering, was also not objected to at the close of the

case. Therefore, by operation of Section 3 of the 2022 Amendment,

these documents are now deemed to be admitted as evidence.”

Shiran Gooneratne J. in the same case observes that,

“The above transitional provision applies to all cases and appeals

pending as of the date the law came into force, which is 17th of

February, 2022. Since this appeal was pending before this Court as

of that date, the transitional provision applies to it without

exception. Accordingly, I am compelled to apply the procedural rules

introduced by the amendment, regardless of whether the trial or

appellate proceedings were concluded prior to the Amendment

coming into force.”

Therefore, at this juncture, the document marked ‘P3’ ought to be admitted as

evidence for all purposes of law considering the fact that no objection was

taken at the closure of the Plaintiffs-Appellants case.

In Mahavitharana vs Inland Revenue Commissioner6 where the court was

confronted with the question whether the transaction concerned is an adventure

in nature of trade for tax purposes, the court looked into the scope and nature of

the powers in reviewing questions of fact and questions of law. Here, H. N. G.

6 64 NLR 217.

16

Fernando, J citing Indian case of Naidu & Co. vs The Commissioner of

Income Tax7 held that,

“There thus arises for consideration the scope and nature of the power

which this court has, upon a Case Stated, to reject conclusions reached by

the Board on questions of fact. I have in this connection derived valuable

aid from a judgment of the Supreme Court of India in Naidu & Co. v. The

Commissioner of Income Tax 1[1 1959 A. I. R. 359 (S. C.)] which dealt with

the corresponding functions of the High Court in India upon references of

questions of law under section 66 of the India Income Tax Act, 1922.

[…]

It would seem following these dicta, with which I most respectfully agree,

that it is open to this court to reconsider the correctness of the inference

drawn by the Board of Review as to the assessee's intention, only-

(a) if that inference has been drawn on a consideration of inadmissible

evidence, or after excluding admissible and relevant evidence,

(b) if the inference was a conclusion of fact drawn by the Board but

unsupported by legal evidence, or

(c) if the conclusion drawn from relevant facts is not rationally possible,

and is perverse and should therefore be set aside.”

It appears to me that learned Counsel for the Petitioner-Appellant is in the view

that the trial Judge had not drawn correct inferences from the evidence led. The

Appeal Court can set aside those inferences only if such facts are based on

7 [1 1959 A. I. R. 359 (S. C.)].

17

inadmissible evidence, rejection of admissible evidence or if the inferences are

unsupported by evidence or conclusion reached is irrational or was perverse.

Here, the question before the learned District Judge is a mixed question of law

and fact. In my view, a judge in analysing evidence must consider the totality

of evidence rather than each single fact in isolation. As such, when going

through the totality of evidence it is clear that there is overwhelming evidence

to the effect that the nomination in question has been by a free agent with full

appreciation of its consequences which I have already discussed in this

judgment. Throughout this case, it is clearly evident to us that

Karalenchinahamy had a rather close relationship with the Plaintiff-Appellants

whereas her relationship with the Defendant-Respondent in this case is quite

strained. Nonetheless, the learned District Judge has come to the conclusion

that the nomination in question is invalid on mere assumptions and irrelevant

material.

For the said reasons, I am of the view that the learned Judge of the Court of

Appeal has failed to appreciate the fact that leaned trial judge has taken

irrelevant facts into consideration while ignoring the relevant facts, thereby

coming to an erroneous conclusion.

Conclusion

I answer the questions of law raised in the following manner;

“b) Did the District Court and the Court of Appeal misapply S. 60 of the

Land Development Ordinance to the facts of the instant case?” - Yes

“c) Did the District Court and the Court of Appeal err in not comparing the

document P3 with the entries in the register of permits/grants, a careful

perusal of which would reveal that the nomination had been registered in

1986, prior to the death of Karalenchihamy.”- Yes

18

“e) Did the Courts below err in not appreciating that P3 was accepted as a

valid document and acted upon by the Authority concerned and registered the

same as a valid nomination?”- Yes

“f) Could the District Court and the Court of Appeal act on the ipse dixit of

the Defendant without any proof that the thumb impression is not the thumb

impression of Karalenchihamy?’- No

“g) Could the Defendant challenge P3 without making the authorities

concerned parties to the action?”- No

“j) Did his Lordship in the Court of Appeal when affirming the Judgement of

the District Court fail to appreciate the guidelines set down in Mahavithana's

case 64 NLR 217.” – Yes

For the aforesaid reasons, I allow the appeal and set aside the judgment of both

the District Judge and the learned Judge of the Court of Appeal. The learned

District judge is directed to enter judgment in favour of the Plaintiffs granting

reliefs (අ) and (ආ) of the amended plaint. This Court is of the Plaintiffs have

not sufficiently proved damages and therefore not entitled to the relief in (ඇ).

Parties shall bear their own costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Yasantha Kodagoda, P.C., J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J. I agree. JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT