==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 24

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application made

under Article 140 of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka read along Section Article 160 of

the Anti-Corruption Act No.09 of 2023.

1. Kusum Priyadharshini Epa Weihana,

51/4, Pushpadana Mawatha,

Kandy.

[Petitioner in S.C. (Writ) 03/2025]

2. Isuru Pulasthi Bandara Polgasdeniya,

No. 4/1, Mandakini Glow,

Greenlands Lane,

Colombo 05.

[Petitioner in S.C. (Writ) 04/2025]

S.C. (Writ) Application Nos. 03/2025,

04/2025 & 05/2025

3. Chandula Ramali Rambukwella,

No. 51/4, Pushpadana Mawatha,

Kandy.

[Petitioner in S.C. (Writ) 05/2025]

Petitioners

Vs.

1. Judge of the High Court,

High Court No.1,

Colombo 12.

Page 2 of 24

2. Commission to Investigate Allegations of

Bribery or Corruption,

36, Malasekara Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

3. Director General,

Commission to Investigate Allegations of

Bribery or Corruption,

36, Malasekara Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

4. Mr. R Sumendra,

Assistant Superintendent of Police,

Assistant Director (Investigation 2),

Commission to Investigate Allegations of

Bribery or Corruption,

36, Malasekara Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

5. Justice W.M.N.P. Iddawala,

Chairman,

Commission to Investigate Allegations of

Bribery or Corruption,

36, Malasekara Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

Page 3 of 24

6. Mr. K.B.Rajapakse,

Commissioner,

Commission to Investigate Allegations of

Bribery or Corruption,

36, Malasekara Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

7. Mr. Chethiya Goonasekera,

Commissioner,

Commission to Investigate Allegations of

Bribery or Corruption,

36, Malasekara Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

8. Officer-In-Charge,

Investigation Officer,

Commission to Investigate Allegations of

Bribery or Corruption,

36, Malasekara Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

Respondents

Before: Hon. Janak de Silva, J.

Hon. K. Priyantha Fernando, J.

Hon. Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

Page 4 of 24

Counsels: Farzana Jameel, P.C., with Suren Gnanaraj, Rashmi Dias, Rikaz Riffard,

Shabnam Mohamed and Anuk Darmasena for the Petitioner

Sudharshana De Silva, SDSG with Navodi De Zoysa, SC for the 1st

Respondent

Subashini Siriwardena, DDG with Anusha Sammandapperuma, ADL and

Gaya Rajapaksha, ADL for the 2nd to 8th Respondents

Argued on: 30.06.2025

Decided on: 03.11.2025

Janak De Silva, J.

In these three applications, the Petitioners are impugning several freezing orders

issued by the 2nd Respondent (CIABOC) upon the assets of the 1st, 2nd and 3rd

Petitioners in terms of the Anti-Corruption Act No. 09 of 2023 as amended (Act).

Parties agreed that all three applications may be consolidated and one order given in

determining whether notice should be issued by Court.

The Petitioners are related. The 2nd Petitioner is the son-in-law of the 1st Petitioner.

The 3rd Petitioner is the daughter of the 1st Petitioner.

The impugned freezing orders were made in terms of Section 53(1) of the Act,

pursuant to a Suspicious Transaction Report (‘STR’) sent from the Financial Intelligence

Unit of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka by letter dated 05.03.2024 addressed to the

Director General of the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption

(CIABOC).

The assets subject to the impugned freezing orders are as follows:

Petitioners 1st FREEZING

ORDER

(27th of June 2024)

2nd FREEZING

ORDER

(11th Nov 2024)

3rd FREEZING

ORDER

(11th Nov 2024)

Kusum

Priyadarshini Epa

Weihana

Fixed Deposit at

HNB of Rs. 30 Mn.

Savings Account &

Fixed Deposit at

Sampath Bank

Savings Account at

Commercial Bank

Page 5 of 24

Isuru Pulasthi

Bandara

Polgasdeniya

(Son-in-law)

Fixed Deposit at

HNB of Rs. 14.125

Mn.

Motor Vehicle –

CBK 8549

Savings Account at

BOC

Chandula Ramali

Rambukwella

(Daughter)

HNB assurance

PLC life Insurance

Policy of Rs. 8 Mn.

Savings Account at

Sampath Bank

Savings Account at

DFCC

These freezing orders were subsequently confirmed and extended by the 1st

Respondent acting in terms of Section 53(3) of the Act.

All three applications were filed on 20.03.2025 and 21.03.2025 seeking writs of

certiorari quashing the initial freezing orders issued by the 2nd Respondent and their

subsequent confirmations and extensions by the 1st Respondent as well as prohibition

against the 2nd Respondent from extending the freezing orders any further.

The Petitioners claim that the decision of CIABOC to issue the freezing orders and the

decision of the 1st Respondent to confirm and extend them are illegal and ultra vires,

primarily due to their ex parte nature.

The contentions of the Petitioners at the stage of support raised several important

questions of law on the interpretation of the Act. As such, Court heard parties

extensively and reserved order on whether notice should be issued.

As this is one of the first cases in which the provisions of the Act arise for consideration

by this Court, let me begin by tracing the historical context of the Act. Moreover, it is

a trite rule of interpretation that it is permissible for Court to consider the historical

context of any law in its interpretation.

Antecedents of Corruption

Corruption is not a new plague. It was in existence in early civilizations at all levels of

government.

In the late Roman Republic, abuse of power was rampant particularly amongst the

nobility who were governing overseas provinces. Members in the Senate were passive

Page 6 of 24

observers as some had behaved the same way earlier or were hoping to do so when

their time came. However, Cicero, considered by some to be Rome’s greatest

statesman, scholar, orator, philosopher and lawyer was honest and took the view that

corruption was a cancer that ate at the heart of a State.

In his address to the jury during the trial of Gaius Verres, a former Governor of the

island of Sicily, Cicero stated [How to Run A Country, An Ancient Guide for Modern

Leaders, Marcus Tullius Cicero, Selected, translated, and with an introduction by Philip

Freeman, Princeton University Press, 2013, pages 55-56] as follows:

“And so, gentleman of the jury, I hope that I can finish this prosecution knowing

that I have done my duty both to the Sicilians and to the Roman people. But I

want everyone to know that if you do not live up to my high expectations and

fail to convict Verres, I will continue my work and bring charges against anyone

who might have offered you bribes as well as against anyone among you who

might have brought guilt upon himself by accepting them. So let me say to those

who would dare to play their cunning tricks and interfere with the pursuit of

justice against the defendant in this case, beware, for they must be prepared to

deal with me when I expose them to the Roman people. I hope they will see that

I have been vehement, persevering, and vigilant as a prosecutor of this enemy

of our Sicilian allies. Let them know that I will be just as adamant and relentless

as a prosecutor in the future if the need arises and even more so, for I shall be

speaking on behalf of the Roman people.”

Historical chronicles explain how corruption was prevalent within the governance

structure, including the treasury as well as the judiciary, during the days of the Sinhala

Kings and the various attempts made to deal with it.

According to Amerasinghe [A. R. B. Amerasinghe, The Legal Heritage of Sri Lanka, The

Law and Society Trust, Sarvodaya Vishva Lekha Publishers (1999), pages 197-198]:

“In King Niśśankamalla’s inscription found near the Van-Äla, Polonnaruwa, it

appears that the Accountants of the Treasury caused suspicion in the King’s

Page 7 of 24

mind as to their integrity. The King, therefore exhorts them, in case they are in

need of anything, to take it after informing the authorities. Those who act

otherwise are threatened with royal disfavour and a hint is given of its dire

consequences. A person who misappropriated gold, silver, money, iron, lands,

or cattle or slaves, the King warned, would “be tormented by the fire of the

anguish called remorse”. Officials were prohibited from accepting gifts or except

in accordance with custom, taking anything for their subsistence (citing tablets

of Mahinda at Mihintale, Epigraphia Zeylanica, Vol. I, p. 105). The Badulla Pillar

Inscription records the fact that the receipt of gifts by judges was ‘contrary to

custom’. The Dhammaddhaja-Jataka, the Buddha-Sala-Jataka, the Mahabodhi-

Jataka and the Khandhala-Jataka refer to the replacement of corrupt judges and

the reversal of their decisions [Citing Dhammaddhaja-Jataka (Jataka No. 220)

which refers to the story of an unjustly ruled matter by a corrupt official that

had been overturned by the Buddha in one of his forms]. Aggabodhi VII (772-

777 AD) dismissed dishonest judges (euphemistically described at the time as

discharging their duties with ‘cunningness’ […])… and judging according to

justice, he rooted out unjust judges.”

The Badulla pillar-inscription did refer to the exaction of illegal fines and the receipt of

gifts by the dandanayaka (a judge and high military official) contrary to custom.

However, the inscription also records the fact that when the problem was reported to

King Udaya IV (946-954 AD), he took steps to rectify the matter by ordering that “a

decree should be passed and promulgated prohibiting the unlawful acts committed in

violation of the institutions established in the time of King Kassapa IV (898-914 AD)”;

and the officials visiting the place were required to ensure that the rules were

observed [Ibid. page 201].

Corruption was not a practice endemic to the natives. It was prevalent even amongst

the foreign invaders.

Page 8 of 24

De Silva [K.M. De Silva, A History of Sri Lanka, Vijitha Yapa Publications (2005), page

235] describes the prevalence of bribery and corruption amongst Dutch officials as

follows:

“From the experience gained in these years the Dutch adopted a policy of

selective restrictions and incentives affecting the Indian traders. While the

Bengal, Surat and north Malabar traders were offered incentives as an

encouragement to trade with the island, restraints – though not as severe as

those of 1670 – were imposed on the South Coromandel traders. The VOC

regarded the boat traffic with south India as being especially harmful to its

interests and was, therefore, intent on keeping it under control. These boatmen

had an expert knowledge of the coast of the island and the Dutch cruisers had

virtually no success in hampering them in their efforts to beat the restrictions.

Above all, they resorted to bribery, corruption being endemic among Dutch

officials. The collusions between them and the traders enabled the latter to

escape the full rigour of the company’s trade monopoly, to say nothing of the

duties due on their goods. Governor Becker found that the senior officials of the

company at Galle had formed a partnership to engage in illegal private trade in

cloth. Such corruption was the chief reason why the smuggling of cloth

continued until the end of the eighteenth century. Thus the company’s profits

from textiles never matched their true potential, and their profits from areca too

kept declining.” (emphasis added)

Religion and Corruption

The existence of corruption from early civilization is somewhat perplexing given that

major religions unite in their condemnation of bribery and corruption in all its

manifestations.

Page 9 of 24

Buddhism highlights the importance of the leaders of a country being free of bribery

and corruption. Adhamma Sutta of Aṅguttaranikāya explains how corrupt leadership

has adverse consequences not only on the entire social order but also on nature and

the physical environment:

“Monks, at a time the kings are unethical, the royal servicemen become

unethical. When the royal servicemen become unethical, the Brahmin

householders become unethical. When the Brahmin householders become

unethical, those in the townships and provinces become unethical. When the

townships and provinces become unethical, the moon and sun move unevenly.

When the moon and sun move unevenly, the stars and the constellations move

unevenly. When the stars and constellations move unevenly, then the night and

day occur unevenly. When the night and day occur unevenly, the fortnights and

months become uneven. When the fortnights and months become uneven,

winds blow unevenly and in the wrong direction. When winds blow unevenly

and in the wrong directions, deities become disturbed. When the deities become

disturbed, the sky does not bring proper rainfall. When there is no proper

rainfall, the grains ripen unevenly. When humans eat unevenly ripened grains,

their life span is shortened, and they lose their beauty and power and are struck

by many ailments. Monks, at a time the kings are ethical the opposite to the

above happens. When cattle are crossing a (water way), if the leading bull goes

crooked, all of them go crooked as the leading one has gone crooked. Even so,

among humans, if one considered the chief behaves unethically, the rest will

follow suit. If the king is unethical, the whole country rests unhappily. When

cattle are crossing a (water way), if the leading bull goes straight, all of them go

straight as the leading one has gone straight. Even so, among humans, if one

considered the chief, indeed conducts oneself ethically all the rest follow suit. If

the king is ethical, the whole country rests happily.”

Page 10 of 24

The Bible strongly condemns the practice of bribery. For I know how many are your

transgressions and how great are your sins - you who afflict the righteous, who take a

bribe, and turn aside the needy in the gate (Amos 5:12). Who lends money to the poor

without interest; who does not accept a bribe against the innocent. Whoever does

these things will never be shaken (Psalms 15:5). Thou shalt take no gift: for the gift

blindeth the wise, and perverteth the words of the righteous (Exodus 23:8). You must

not distort justice; you must not show partiality; and you must not accept bribes, for

a bribe blinds the eyes of the wise and subverts the cause of those who are in the right

(Deuteronomy 16:19). For oppression makes a wise man mad, and a bribe corrupts the

heart (Ecclesiastes 7:7).

Hinduism emphasizes the importance is also unequivocal in its condemnation of

bribery or corruption. He who takes unlawful gifts goes to the Adhomukha (or head-

inverted) hell. (Vishnu Purana: A System of Hindu Mythology and Tradition, H.H.

Wilson, Vol. II, page 218). That king whose subjects are harassed by officials receiving

bribes, by thieves in his kingdom, is roasted in hell (Padma Purana, Bhoomi Khanda,

Chapter 67). Commissioned to a task, one should not touch bribes for by such

appropriate one becometh liable to fetters or death (Mahabharata, Virata Parva).

Accepting bribe is a sin and those who accept the bribe are thrown to hell (Vamana

Purana, Chapter 37). A king should always be alert with those who take bribe

(Manusmriti, Chapter 9). Appointed to a task, one should not touch riches. Having

obtained unearned riches, one faces imprisonment or death (The Mahabharata,

Translated by Bibek Debroy, Vol. 4, page 12).

The Quran is unequivocal in condemning corruption. Who break the covenant of Allah

after contracting it and sever that which Allah has ordered to be joined and cause

corruption on earth. It is those who are the losers (2:27). And [recall] when Moses

prayed for water for his people, so we said, “Strike with your staff the stone.” And there

gushed forth from it twelve springs, and every people knew its watering place. “Eat

and drink from the provision of Allah, and do not commit abuse on the earth, spreading

corruption (2:205). And when he goes away, he strives throughout the land to cause

Page 11 of 24

corruption therein and destroy crops and animals. And Allah does not like corruption

(2:60).

International Response

The impact of bribery and corruption on a nation was appreciated from time

immemorial. According to Cicero (supra. xviii), greed, bribery, and fraud devour a

country from the inside, leaving it weak and vulnerable. Corruption is not merely a

moral evil, but a practical menace that leaves citizens at best disheartened, at worst

seething with anger and ripe for revolution.

In K.P.K.L.P. Maduwanthi v. S.M.G.K. Perera and Others [S.C.F.R. Application No.

23/2021, S.C.M. 18.11.2022 at page 19], I held that bribery or corruption in the public

sector is a cancer destroying public confidence in the system of governance. It must

be eliminated by enforcing the rule of law in which this Court has an imperative role

to play.

In Dissanayake v. Director General, Commission to Investigate Bribery and

Corruption and Another [S.C. Appeal 160/2017, S.C.M. 21.11.2023 at pages 10-11]

my learned brother Kodagoda, P.C., J. held as follows:

“At grass-roots level (as in this case) bribery and corruption by the lower rungs

of the public service causes inconvenience to the public, and affects the

organized manner of the delivery of the services of the government to the

people and public administration. At higher levels of governance, bribery and

corruption have more serious consequences which adversely affect policy

formulation, decision-making, integrity of governance, macro-economic

development, investor confidence and the reputation of the country.”

Corruption has adverse implications domestically as well as globally. United Nations

Convention against Corruption (UNCAC) is an attempt by the United Nations to address

the debilitating impact of corruption on society at large. It is an international response

to the concerns about the seriousness of problems and threats posed by corruption to

the stability and security of societies, undermining the institutions and values of

Page 12 of 24

democracy, ethical values and justice and jeopardizing sustainable development and

the rule of law.

UNCAC recognizes that corruption may involve vast quantities of assets, which may

constitute a substantial proportion of the resources of States which threatens the

political stability and sustainable development of those States. It acknowledges the

links between corruption and other forms of crime, in particular organized crime and

economic crime, including money laundering.

The Act

Our legislature has from time to time, adopted several measures to address the

challenges posed by bribery and corruption [See Imposition of Civic Disabilities (Special

Provisions) Act No. 14 of 1965, Kariapper v. Wijesinghe (68 NLR 529), Kariapper v.

Wijesinghe (70 NLR 49), Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or

Corruption Act, No. 19 of 1994].

The Act, certified on 08.08.2023, was enacted to give effect to certain provisions of the

United Nations Convention against Corruption (UNCAC), signed and ratified by Sri

Lanka in 2004, and other internationally recognized norms, standards and best

practices. A Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption (CIABOC)

was established to detect and investigate allegations of Bribery, Corruption and

offences related to the Declaration of Assets and Liabilities and associated offences.

The CIABOC is empowered to direct the investigations and institute proceedings for

offences of Bribery, Corruption and offences related to the Declaration of Assets and

Liabilities and associated offences. The Bribery Act (Chapter 26), the Commission to

Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption Act No. 19 of 1994 and the Declaration

of Assets and Liabilities Law No. 1 of 1975 were repealed.

Freezing Order

The primary attack of the Petitioners on the freezing orders made by CIABOC is that

they could not have been made ex parte.

Page 13 of 24

Section 53(1) of the Act, vests CIABOC with power to make freezing orders. A freezing

order, as correctly submitted by the Petitioners, is where the CIABOC prohibits by

written order, any person identified in Section 53(1) from parting with, dealing with or

otherwise disposing of property identified in the freezing order.

It can do so only where an inquiry or investigation is being conducted under Section 42

of the Act. Before proceeding to examine the contours of Section 42 of the Act, let me

briefly digress to set out the legislative history of Section 53 of the Act.

In terms of Section 53(2) of the Act, a freezing order is valid for seven (7) days. The

CIABOC must, within the 7 days, make an application to the High Court seeking

confirmation of the freezing order and if required, its extension. It is through this

mechanism that freezing orders are brought within judicial purview.

When the Act was gazetted in bill form, Clause 53 provided for a freezing order to be

valid for three (3) months. However, in Anti-Corruption Bill Determination [S.C.S.D.

16-21/2023, pages 40-41], Court determined that the three (3) months in Clause 53

has no rational connection to the objects of the Bill and therefore is arbitrary.

Accordingly, Court determined that Clause 53(1) of the Bill is inconsistent with Article

12(1) of the Constitution and can only be passed with the special majority required

under paragraph (2) of Article 84. Court also opined that the inconsistency will cease

if the period is brought down to 7 days. Hence, the seven-day time period in Section

53 of the Act. I observe that this is the only ground on which Clause 53 of the bill was

assailed for constitutionality.

Returning to my analysis, pursuant to Section 42 of the Act, CIABOC may commence a

preliminary inquiry where the commission of an offence referred to in Section 41 of

the Act is disclosed upon (i) receipt of any information, or (ii) upon receipt of a

complaint, or (iii) ex mero motu or (iv) based on any other material received by it. The

purpose of conducting a preliminary inquiry is to determine whether there exist

reasonable grounds to believe that an offence under the provisions of the Act has been

committed. An investigation may be conducted where after the conduct of a

Page 14 of 24

preliminary inquiry, CIABOC is satisfied that an offence referred to in Section 41 of the

Act has been committed.

Nevertheless, CIABOC may authorize the conduct of an investigation without a

preliminary investigation where it is satisfied that there exist reasonable grounds to

believe the committing of an offence referred to in Section 41 of the Act.

The power of CIABOC to issue freezing orders is not unfettered but subject to certain

safeguards. Moreover, it is designed for a specific purpose.

Article 31(1) of UNCAC requires each State Party to take, to the greatest extent possible

within its domestic legal system, such measures as may be necessary to enable

confiscation of (a) proceeds of crime derived from offences established in accordance

with UNCAC or property the value of which corresponds to that of such proceeds; (b)

property, equipment or other instrumentalities used in or destined for use in offences

established in accordance with UNCAC.

Article 31(2) of UNCAC requires each State Party to take such measures as may be

necessary to enable the identification, tracing, freezing or seizure of any item referred

to in paragraph 1 of Article 31 for the purpose of eventual confiscation. Thus, measures

such as tracing, freezing or seizure form part of an investigative process which seeks to

identify and eventually confiscate proceeds of crime derived from offences established

in accordance with UNCAC or property the value of which corresponds to that of such

proceeds.

It is important to note at this stage, that the Act provides for the forfeiture of both

movable and immovable properties in certain specified circumstances [See Section

109(8) of the Act].

Accordingly, freezing orders are investigative tools provided for an effective

investigation and are means to an end and temporary in nature. Such temporary

measures are required to prevent property which may lawfully be forfeited from being

taken outside the jurisdiction or dealt otherwise so as to make a preliminary inquiry

Page 15 of 24

or investigation pursuant to the Act an exercise in futility. The final goal is to make

them available for forfeiture as provided for in the Act.

Freezing of assets allegedly to have acquired from illegal activity (criminal offences)

were first introduced under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act No. 05 of 2005,

Financial Transaction Reporting Act No. 06 of 2005 and Convention on the Suppression

of Financing of Terrorism Act No. 25 of 2005. They all carry almost identical or similar

provisions.

There can be a parallel drawn between the freezing orders issued under the Act and

interlocutory orders such as Mareva injunctions and Anton Pillar orders available in

English law. These are used in English legal practice to maintain the status quo and

prevent relevant parties from acting in manners which may affect the final outcome

of legal proceedings.

Alexander [Alexander, Kern (1997), "The Mareva Injunction and Anton Piller Order: The

Nuclear Weapons of English Commercial Litigation", Florida Journal of International

Law: Vol. 11: Iss. 3, Article 8, page 490] states that:

“To maintain the element of surprise, speed and secrecy are required in applying

for both a Mareva and an Anton Piller order. An ex parte order is therefore

necessary otherwise the defendant will have notice of the action and the

opportunity to dissipate assets if not restrained.”

The Petitioners rely on Section 42(4)(f) of the Act to try and establish that a statement

must be recorded from them before a freezing order is made by CIABOC. However,

the contention is misplaced for several reasons. The reference there is to an

investigation. Nevertheless, in terms of Section 53(1) of the Act, a freezing order can

be made at any time after the commencement of a preliminary inquiry which precedes

an investigation. Moreover, the recording of the statement of any person who has

committed as offence referred to in Section 41 can be done at any time during the

investigation.

Page 16 of 24

Therefore, I have no hesitation in rejecting the contention of the Petitioners that

CIABOC should have, as a pre-condition to the issuing of any freezing order, followed

the rules of natural justice by granting the Petitioners a hearing including recording

their statement. Such an interpretation will defeat the very purpose of freezing orders.

Making the recording of a statement from the party whose property may be the

subject matter of a freezing order puts that party on notice. We live in a world of

advanced technologies where the property in issue can be moved out of the reach of

the Act and CIABOC within seconds. Moreover, the freezing orders that can be issued

by CIABOC is valid only for seven (7) days and can be extended only by judicial

oversight.

Before parting from the discussion of the initial making of a freezing order, I must state

that the Act does contemplate instances where property that is subject to a freezing

order may eventually be found, during or at the end of an investigation, to be property

lawfully acquired. As much as an arrest is not illegal merely because the prosecution

ended in an acquittal, a freezing order does become unlawful merely because it is

subsequently found that the property was lawfully acquired.

Judicial Oversight

Section 53(2) of the Act requires CIABOC to, within seven (7) days of the making of a

freezing order, make an application to the High Court seeking its confirmation and if

needed, for its extension.

Upon such an application being made, Section 53(2) of the Act requires the High Court

to consider two matters. They are:

(a) Whether there are sufficient reasons for the making of such freezing orders,

(b) Grant an extension for such periods as it considers necessary.

Clearly, the High Court must not mechanically extend freezing orders made by CIABOC.

Court must give its judicial mind as to whether continuing with the freezing order is

warranted. Having considered the journal entries in the respective cases, I am satisfied

that the learned High Court judge has brought his judicial mind to bear on the issues

Page 17 of 24

placed before him and made orders confirming and extending the freezing orders.

Court must be satisfied that there are sufficient reasons for the making of such freezing

orders. What are sufficient reasons differs depending on the point of time at which

CIABOC decides to issue a freezing order.

Where a freezing order is issued upon the commencement of a preliminary inquiry,

the test is whether the information received in terms of Section 42(1) of the Act

discloses the commission of an offence referred to in Section 41 of the Act [Section

53(3) read with Section 42(3) of the Act].

Where a freezing order is made upon CIABOC authorizing the conduct of an

investigation directly without the conduct of a preliminary inquiry, the test is whether

the information received in terms of Section 42(1) of the Act discloses reasonable

grounds to believe the committing of an offence referred to in Section 41 of the Act

[Section 53(3) read with Section 42(3) of the Act].

The learned President’s Counsel submitted that no investigative material whatsoever

was placed before the High Court. To require CIABOC to reveal all the investigative

material in its possession will be self-defeating and render the provisions in the Act

nugatory.

The principal question that arises for consideration is whether the Petitioners should

have been given notice of the application made pursuant to Section 53(2) of the Act

so as to enable them to be heard by the High Court prior to the exercise of its

jurisdiction.

I am mindful that the principle of legality is a rule of interpretation with two key

components. Firstly, Parliament assumes that the statutory powers it grants will be

interpreted by the Courts, as far as possible, in conformity with fundamental legal

values, Secondly, any abrogation by Parliament of fundamental legal values must be

set forth in clear and unambiguous terms.

Page 18 of 24

In R v. Secretary of State for the Home Department; Ex parte Simms [(2000) 2 AC 115

at 131], Lord Hoffman expounded its modern formulation as follows:

“[…]the principle of legality means that Parliament must squarely confront what

it is doing and accept the political cost. Fundamental rights cannot be

overridden by general or ambiguous words. This is because there is too great a

risk that the full implementation of their unqualified meaning may have passed

unnoticed in the democratic process. In the absence of express language or

necessary implication to the contrary, the courts therefore presume that even

the most general words were intended to be subject to the basic rights of the

individual.”

The learned President’s Counsel relying on the decisions in Sundarkaran v. Bharathi

[(1989) 1 Sri LR 46], Sarath Amunugama and Others v. Karu Jayasuriya, Chairman,

United National Party and Others [(2000) 1 Sri LR 172] submitted that the rules of

natural justice formed part of the essential principles of justice. The failure to adhere

to such fundamental principles will render any decision illegal an ultra vires.

The learned SDSG relying on Section 112 of the Act, countered that it was permissible

for the CIABOC to rely on the words “ex parte” in Section 8(1) of the PMLA Act to be

applied mutatis mutandis in respect of the confirmation and extension of a freezing

order made under Section 53 of the Act.

The learned President’s Counsel on the other hand countered that the words mutatis

mutandis must be interpreted in accordance with the decision in Visuvalingam et. Al

v. Liyanage et al. No. 1 [(1983) 1 Sri LR 203] which laid down a necessity test.

Section 112 of the Act reads as follows:

“112. (1) 2006 අංක 5 දරන මුදල් විශුද්ධිකරණය වැළැක්වීමේ පනත යටමේ සඳහන් කරන ලද නීති විමරෝධී ක්‍රියාවක්ව වන වරදක්ව යේ තැනැේමතකු විසින් මේ පනත යටමේ සිදුකරන ලද අවස්ථාවක දී, ඒ වරද සිදුකරන තැනැේතාට එමරහිව මේ පනත යටමේ සිදු කරන ලද වරදකට අමතරව, ඒ පනත යටමේ වන වරදක්ව සඳහා ද ම ෝදනා ම ානු කරනු ලැබිය හැකි ය.

(2) 2006 අංක 5 දරන මුදල් විශුද්ධිකරණ වැළැක්වීමේ පනමේ විිවිධාන, අවශ්‍ය මවනස් කිරීේ සහිතව එම පනත යටමේ එකී වරද සේබන්ධමයන් වන පරීක්වෂණ, විමර්ශ්‍න සහ නඩු කටයුතු සඳහා අදාළ කර ත යුතු අතර සහකාර මපාලිස්

Page 19 of 24

අිකාරීවරයකුට මහෝ මවනේ යේ මපාලිස් නිලධරයකුට එකී පනමේ සිදු කරන ලද යේ සඳහනක්ව, මේ පනත යටමේ වන මකාමිෂන් සභාව මගින් නේ කරන ලද යේ නිලධරයකුට කරන ලද සඳහනක්ව මලස කියවා මේරුේ ත යුතු ය.”

“(1) Where any person commits an offence under this Act, which amounts to

an unlawful activity within the meaning of the Prevention of Money Laundering

Act, No. 5 of 2006, such person may be charged for an offence under that Act

in addition to an offence under this Act.

(2) The provisions of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, No. 5 of 2006

shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to the inquiries, investigations and proceedings

respect of such offence under that Act and any reference in the said Act to the

Assistant Superintendent of Police or any other police officer shall be read and

construed as a reference to an officer designated by the Commission under this

Act.” (emphasis added)

At the Bill stage, Section 112(2) referred only to proceedings and did not cover

inquiries and investigations. Thus, in the Anti-Corruption Determination (supra. page

56), it was held:

“Sub-clause (2) provides for the application of the provisions of Money

Laundering Act No. 5 of 2006 to apply for proceedings of the offence of money

laundering under the Bill. However, it has omitted its application to preliminary

inquiries and investigations which the Commission is mandated to perform

under the Bill.

This is irrational and defeats the objects of the Bill. We determine that Clause

112 is inconsistent with Article 12(1) of the Constitution and can only be passed

with the special majority required under paragraph (2) of Article 84.

The learned ASG submitted that the following amendment will be moved at the

Committee Stage:

Page 106 Clause 112: delete lines 10 and 11 and substitute the following:-

“Act, No. 5 of 2006 shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to the inquiries, investigations

and proceedings in respect of such offence under that Act and any”

The inconsistency will cease if the above amendment is made.

Page 20 of 24

Section 112(2) of the Act must be interpreted in the context of this intervention by

Court. Accordingly, the application of the provisions of Money Laundering Act No. 5 of

2006 as amended must apply to preliminary inquiries and investigations which CIABOC

is mandated to perform under the Act.

Moreover, it was held in Anti-Corruption determination (supra. pages 13-14) that:

“According to the said Act, ‘unlawful activity’ is defined inter alia as ‘an offence

under the Bribery Act’ (emphasis added). It is pertinent to observe that Clauses

112(1) and (2) of the Bill provides for charging any person under both the Bill

and the Prevention of Money Laundering Act No. 5 of 2006 and making

applicable the relevant provisions under that Act to such proceedings. Through

this legislative scheme a clear nexus and a link is established between the two

pieces of legislation complementing the scope and content of each other.”

According to Section 41(b) of the Act, CIABOC is empowered to hold a preliminary

inquiry or conduct an investigation, as the case may be, regarding the allegations

contained in any information or complaint made to it or any material received by it

under Section 42 where any such allegations or any material received discloses the

commission of an offence under the PMLA Act when the unlawful activity within the

meaning of PMLA Act is committed in the same transaction together with an offence

under the provisions of this Act.

The freezing orders issued on the assets of all three Petitioners by CIABOC specifically

refer to the offence of money laundering and Section 7 of the PMLA Act.

Section 8(1) of the PMLA Act as amended by Act No. 40 of 2011 reads as follows:

“(1) The Police Officer issuing the Freezing Order under the provisions of section

7 shall within the seven days during which such order shall be in force, make an

exparte application to the High Court seeking confirmation of such Freezing

Order and also if the circumstances so necessitate, request an extension of the

original period of seven days.” (emphasis added)

Page 21 of 24

In the Anti-Corruption Bill determination [S.C.S.D. 16-21/2023], it was held (supra. at

page 21), that Sovereignty in Article 3 of the Constitution includes the right to a

Government free of bribery or corruption. The Act must be interpreted in a manner to

make this right attainable and not merely illusory.

In the aforesaid circumstances, I hold that CIABOC is entitled to make an ex parte

application to the High Court to confirm the freezing orders it may make as well as to

seek its extensions. Therefore, the complaint of the Petitioners of the violation of the

rules of natural justice in making, confirming and extension of the impugned freezing

orders must necessarily fail.

In this context, it is important to note that Section 53(12) of the Act provides

safeguards to ensure that legitimate interests are not impinged by the grant of a

freezing order. It reads as follows:

“(12) මේ වගන්තිය යටමේ තහනේ නිමයෝගයක් කිරීමට මෙර, එවැනි නිමයෝගයක්

මගින්ත බලෙෑමට ලක් වූ යේ තැනැේතකුමේ නීතයනුකූල වයාොරයට මහෝ මවනේ

අවශ්‍යතා වලට හානි විය හැකි බව ඒ මවනුමවන්ත කරනු ලබන ඉල්ලීමක් මත

මහාධිකරණමේ මතය වන්තමන්ත නේ, එවැනි ගිණුමක්, මේෙළක් මහෝ ආමයෝජනයකට

අදාළ ඕනෑම අතයවශ්‍ය ගනුමදනුවක් එම අධිකරණය විසින්ත නියම කරනු ලැබිය හැකි

ෙරිදි මකාමිෂන්ත සභාව විසින්ත බලය ෙවරන ලද නිලධරයකුමේ අධීක්ෂණයට යටේව සහ

මඟමෙන්තීම යටමේ සිදු කිරීමට අවසර ලබා දීමේ නිමයෝගයක් කිරීමට මහාධිකරණයට

හැකිය.’’

“(12) Before making a freezing order under this section, the High Court may on

an application made in that behalf, if the High Court is of the opinion that such

an order may damage the legitimate business or any other interest of any

person affected by such freezing order, make order permitting any essential

transaction relating to such account, property or investment to be carried out

subject to such supervision and under the direction of an officer authorized by

the Commission as may be directed by such court.”

Page 22 of 24

Notwithstanding the reference to “before making a freezing order”, I am of the view

that this applies to both the confirmation as well as extension of freezing orders. The

words “any person” is of wider import and includes the Petitioners. Accordingly, they

have the opportunity to make an application to the High Court, if they so desire, to

obtain permission to carry out any essential transaction subject to judicial supervision.

Judicial Confirmation and Extension

The Petitioners have sought writs of certiorari against the acts of the 1st Respondent

confirming and extending freezing orders made by the 2nd Respondent. This is

misconceived in law.

In terms of Section 160(1) of the Act, this Court has been vested with writ jurisdiction

only where relief is sought against CIABOC.

Seizure of Vehicle of the 2nd Petitioner

Admittedly, physical possession of the Mercedes Benz motor vehicle bearing number

CBK 8549 belonging to the 2nd Petitioner was taken over by CIABOC. The learned

President’s Counsel submitted that this was not a course open to CIABOC. In particular,

it was pointed out that, CIABOC had already made a freezing order in terms of Section

53(1) of the Act restraining the Commissioner General of Motor Traffic from

registering a transfer of the 2nd Petitioner’s motor vehicle which was subsequently

confirmed and extended.

I have no hesitation in rejecting this contention. Section 45 of the Act empowers

CIABOC to seize any property which it has reasonable grounds to believe is evidence

of the commission of any offence under the Act. The reference to specified items

mentioned in Section 45(1)(b) of the Act being found in a vehicle does not exclude a

vehicle which itself is evidence of the commission of any offence under the Act. The

reference to an article in Section 45(1)(b) includes a vehicle which is evidence of the

commission of any offence under the Act. This power is complemented by the

provisions in Section 53(5) of the Act.

Page 23 of 24

The Respondents raised several preliminary objections to these applications including

futility, undue delay, availability of alternative remedy and suppression and/or

misrepresentation of material facts. However, in view of the conclusions reached

above, there is no need to address them.

To summarize:

(1) Sovereignty in Article 3 of the Constitution includes the right to a Government

free of bribery or corruption. The Act must be interpreted in a manner to make

this right attainable and not merely illusory.

(2) CIABOC may commence a preliminary inquiry where the commission of an

offence referred to in Section 41 of the Act is disclosed upon (i) receipt of any

information, or (ii) upon receipt of a complaint, or (iii) ex mero motu or (iv)

based on any other material received by it. The purpose of conducting a

preliminary inquiry is to determine whether there exist reasonable grounds to

believe that an offence under the provisions of the Act has been committed. An

investigation may be conducted where after the conduct of a preliminary

inquiry, CIABOC is satisfied that an offence referred to in Section 41 of the Act

has been committed.

(3) Nevertheless, CIABOC may authorize the conduct of an investigation without a

preliminary investigation where it is satisfied that there exist reasonable

grounds to believe the committing of an offence referred to in Section 41 of the

Act.

(4) CIABOC has the power to issue freezing orders as soon as a preliminary inquiry

or an investigation is commenced.

(5) The power of CIABOC to issue freezing orders is not unfettered but subject to

certain safeguards. Moreover, it is designed for a specific purpose.

(6) Freezing orders are investigative tools provided for an effective investigation

and are means to an end and temporary in nature. Such temporary measures

are required to prevent property which may lawfully be forfeited from being

Page 24 of 24

taken outside the jurisdiction or dealt otherwise so as to make a preliminary

inquiry or investigation pursuant to the Act an exercise in futility. The final goal

is to make them available for forfeiture as provided for in the Act.

(7) There was no duty on CIABOC, as a pre-condition to the issuing of any freezing

order, to have followed the rules of natural justice by granting the Petitioners a

hearing including recording their statement. Such an interpretation will defeat

the very purpose of freezing orders.

(8) CIABOC is entitled to make an ex parte application to the High Court to confirm

the freezing orders it may make as well as to seek its extensions.

(9) In terms of Section 160(1) of the Act, this Court has been vested with writ

jurisdiction only where relief is sought against CIABOC.

For all the foregoing reasons, I hold that the Petitioners have failed to establish a prima

facie case for notice.

Notice is refused.

Application is dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

K. Priyantha Fernando, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT