==== BLOCKS ==== 

In the matter of an application for to leave

to appeal under and in terms of Article 128

of the Constitution read with Section 5 (c)

(1) of the High Court of the Provinces

(Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990 as

amended by the High Court of the

Provinces (Special Provisions)

(Amendment) Act No. 54 of 2006.

Green Lanka Shipping Ltd,

Green Lanka Tower,

46/46,

Nawam Mawatha,

Colombo 02.

AND

In the matter of an application under

Section 270(e) read with Section 534 of

the Companies Act No.07 of 2007 to wind

up Green Lanka Shipping Ltd by court.

Evergreen Marine Corporation

(Taiwan) Ltd,

No.166, Sec 2, Mingsheng East Road,

Taipei 104, Taiwan,

SC / HCLA / 15 / 2022

HC (civil): 49 / 2016 (CO)

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

SC / HC / LA / 15 / 22 1

Republic of China.

PETITIONER

-Vs-

G.J. David,

SJMS Associates,

Chartered Accountants,

Level 03, No.11 Castle Lane,

Colombo o4.

LIQUIDATOR

AND NOW BETWEEN

G.J. David,

SJMS Associates,

Chartered Accountants,

Level 03, No.11 Castle Lane,

Colombo o4.

LIQUIDATOR – PETITIONER

-Vs-

Evergreen Marine Corporation

(Taiwan) Ltd,

No.166, Sec 2, Mingsheng East Road,

Taipei 104, Taiwan,

Republic of China.

SC / HC / LA / 15 / 22 2

PETITIONER – RESPONDENT

BEFORE : S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

A. H. M. D. NAWAZ, J. &

SAMPATH B. ABAYAKOON, J.

COUNSEL : Nihal Fernando, PC with Rohan Dunuwile and Lakdev

Unamboowe instructed by Tharika Pussewela for the

Liquidator - Petitioner.

Suren de Silva for the Petitioner - Respondent.

ARGUED &

DECIDED ON : 11.09.2025

A. H. M. D. NAWAZ, J.

We have heard the submission of both Counsel.

Leave to Appeal is granted.

Both Counsel inform the Court that they will not be filing written submissions and move

the Court to pronounce judgment under the proviso to Rule No. 16(1) of the Supreme

Court Rules.

This Court has perused the order of the learned High Court Judge of the Commercial

High Court dated 03.02.2022 on an application made under section 270 (e) read with

section 534 of the Companies Act, No. 7 of 2007 to wind up a company known as Green

Lanka Shipping Limited by Court. The winding up order was made as far back as

September 2016. A provisional liquidator was appointed and it is quite clear that this

liquidator has been functioning since 23.09.2016.

The liquidator sought an order in the course of this winding up proceedings for the

following reliefs:

SC / HC / LA / 15 / 22 3

1. He is entitled to remuneration as provided under section 289 (2) of the Companies

Act read with Rule 119 of the winding up rules.

2. He is also entitled to the cost and expenses of the liquidation inter-alia;

3. He is also entitled to the liquidators remuneration at the rate of 5% from the gross

realization of the assets of the company and 3% on the disbursement made by the

liquidator.

There were several interim reports that the liquidator submitted and in those interim

reports, the liquidator brought to light that his staff had been carrying out the functions

as officers of Court, incurring cost and expenses for almost five years since September

2016 but they had not received any remuneration for the services thus rendered.

It has to be brought to the notice of this Court that the said liquidator has realized a sum

of Rs 527 million by way of disposal of the only immovable property that this company

had namely, a container yard. That statement is found at “X4” - a document which is

drawn to the attention of this Court as well.

The learned High Court Judge has concluded that the liquidation process has not yet

been completed. The liquidation remains pending, and the liquidator has yet to discharge

and conclude his duties and functions. The learned High Court Judge further observed

that Section 289(2) of the Companies Act does not provide for the payment of interim

remuneration to a liquidator.

The learned High Court Judge takes the view that the liquidator would be entitled to his

fees and reasonable remuneration for his expenses only when the liquidation process has

been completed.

In this connection, Rule 119 pertaining to winding up is quite clear in that it states that

the remuneration of a liquidator, unless the Court otherwise orders, shall be fixed by

the committee of inspection and shall be in the nature of a commission or percentage of

which one part shall be payable on the amount realized, after deducting the sums if any,

paid to secured creditors other than debenture holders, out of the proceeds of their

securities, and the other part of the amount distributed as dividends.

SC / HC / LA / 15 / 22 4

The learned Commercial High Court Judge takes the view that, since the liquidation

process has not yet been finalized, the full extent of the expenses attendant upon the

liquidation has not yet been ascertained. In that context, the payment of remuneration

to the liquidator at this stage, it is reasoned, would occasion prejudice to those creditors

and stakeholders whose claims fall to be satisfied upon the final distribution at the

conclusion of the liquidation process

The 9th schedule to the Companies Act makes it quite clear as to the preferential claims

that have to be settled in a liquidation proceeding. On top of that range of creditors who

have to be paid, lies the liquidator whose fees and expenses properly incurred by him in

carrying out his duties and powers have to be met with as a priority.

Mr. Nihal Fernando the learned President’s Counsel contends that though the liquidator

has expended his energy and money in regard to this liquidation process, it is quite unfair

that any payment that is withheld would cause prejudice to such a liquidator.

Mr. Suren de Silva the learned Counsel contends that if the liquidator is paid the

quantum of money that he has submitted, it would reduce the amount of the quantum of

money that would be available at end of the proceeding for defraying the other creditors

who are queuing up for their lawful claims. These contending claims have also been made

before the learned High Court Judge. The learned Commercial High Court Judge has

looked at the amount that has been put forth before him as professional fees and

expenses but takes the view that it is quite disproportionate. At this stage, this Court

takes into account the case of In re H.L. Pope, Liquidator1.

In this case Arthur Wijeyewardene, J. declared that the District Court has power to fix

the remuneration of the liquidator of a company, by way of salary or on a percentage

basis, after notice to the creditors.

This Court takes the view that the original Court that has the power to fix the

remuneration has to be guided by his adjudicatory powers of ascertaining the veracity of

such a quantum. The Supreme Court has also stated in the aforesaid case that the Court

has also power to make such interim payment as may be prudently made that is in

accordance with the English practice. Any payment so made will be subject to the

1 (1938) 41 NLR 428

SC / HC / LA / 15 / 22 5

condition that the whole or part of such amount may have to be repaid if it is found to be

regular, at a later stage, on an audit of the liquidator’s accounts. As such, it is quite

evident that even a claim which is made to the liquidator can be reclaimed later on an

audit of the accounts.

In the circumstances, having taken into account the statutory provisions and the case

law we think it appropriate that the professional fees of the liquidator has to be met by

way of a payment to be decided up to an amount of Rs. 3 million by way of an interim

payment.

This Court leaves the decision making of the quantum of professional fees to be paid to

the learned Commercial High Court Judge. As regards the expenses which the liquidator

incurred, this Court takes the view that it has to be computed and paid when the assets,

if any, that are to be marshaled in the future are brought into the pool and then decided

when preferential claims are decided.

The learned Commercial High Court Judge is directed to expedite the conclusion of this

case within 06 months. To the extent of the variation of the order of the learned High

Court Judge, we set aside this order and we remit this case back to the Commercial High

Court to proceed with the remaining proceedings and bring this matter to a close within

the time limit we have specified.

The learned Counsel Mr. Suren de Silva who appears for the original Petitioner –

Respondent brings to the notice of this Court that the learned High Court Judge has also

taken cognizance of the entitlement of the Petitioner for his reasonable expenses and

that it should be considered after their professionals fees are paid. The learned

Commercial High Court Judge is directed to apply the preferential claims list in

accordance with the law and decide this matter as expeditiously as possible.

Judge of the Supreme Court

SC / HC / LA / 15 / 22 6

S. Thurairaja, PC, J Judge of the Supreme Court

I agree.

Sampath B. Abayakoon. J Judge of the Supreme Court

I agree.