IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Henri Edama,

New Heaven,

Kahaththewela,

Prise Road,

Bandarawela.

Plaintiff

SC APPEAL NO: SC/APPEAL/189/17

SC LA NO: SC/HCCA/LA/347/16

HCCA BADULLA NO: UVA/HCCA/BDL/38/2014(F)

DC BANDARAWELA NO: L/1671

Vs.

A.L.G. Somasiri,

No. 444, Bindunuwewa,

Bandarawela.

Defendant

AND BETWEEN

A.L.G. Somasiri,

No. 444, Bindunuwewa,

Bandarawela.

Defendant-Appellant

2 SC/APPEAL/189/17

Vs.

Henri Edama,

New Heaven,

Kahaththewela,

Prise Road,

Bandarawela.

Plaintiff-Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

Henri Edama,

New Heaven,

Kahaththewela,

Prise Road,

Bandarawela.

Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant

Vs.

A.L.G. Somasiri,

No. 444, Bindunuwewa,

Bandarawela.

(Deceased)

Defendant-Appellant-Respondent

Arabegoda Loku Gamage Bandula

Karunarathne Perera,

No. 444, Bindunuwewa,

Bandarawela.

3 SC/APPEAL/189/17

Substituted Defendant-Appellant-

Respondent

Before: Yasantha Kodagoda, P.C., J.

Janak De Silva, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Ravindra Anawaratne for the Plaintiff-Respondent-

Appellant.

Sandamal Rajapakshe for the Substituted Defendant-

Appellant-Respondent.

Argued on: 25.10.2022

Written submissions:

by the Defendant-Appellant-Respondent on 18.07.2017.

by the Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant on 19.03.2018.

Decided on: 16.12.2022

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The plaintiff filed this action in the District Court of Bandarawela seeking

a declaration of title to the land described in the first schedule to the

plaint, ejectment of the defendant from a portion of that land as described

in the second schedule to the plaint, and damages. The defendant filed

answer seeking dismissal of the plaintiff’s action, a declaration that he is

the owner of the land described in the second schedule to the plaint by

prescription and deeds, and compensation in a sum of Rs. 50,000 for

malicious prosecution. After trial, the District Court held with the

plaintiff. On appeal, the High Court of Civil Appeal of Badulla set aside

the judgment of the District Court and dismissed the plaintiff’s action.

4 SC/APPEAL/189/17

This Court granted leave to appeal against the judgment of the High

Court on the following questions of law.

Did the High Court err in law in holding that the plaintiff has failed

to identify the land in suit?

Did the High Court err in law in holding that the land claimed by the

defendant tallies with the land depicted in plan V22 of the

defendant?

Did the High Court err in law in holding that the plaintiff has failed

to prove title to the land?

The High Court predominantly set aside the judgment of the District

Court on the basis that the land in suit has not been identified. This is a

perverse finding. There was no such issue at all before the District Court.

On the contrary, the defendant in the schedule to the answer expressly

stated that the land in suit is depicted as lot 1 in plan No. 6049.

According to the plaint, the land described in the first schedule to the

plaint is depicted as lots 1 and 2 in plan No. 205. The learned High Court

Judge states that plan No. 205 was neither produced nor could be found

in the case record. This is incorrect. This plan is found in the case record

as part of P7. Plan No. 6049 (referred to earlier) was prepared to show the

encroachment of the defendant as described in the second schedule to

the plaint. Plan No. 6049 and its report were marked as X and X1. The

surveyor who prepared this plan also gave evidence. In his report as well

as in his evidence, he clearly states that it was prepared by the

superimposition of plan No. 205 referred to in the first schedule to the

plaint. The surveyor was not cross-examined on the accuracy of the plan

or his evidence. His evidence remains uncontroverted. The learned High

Court Judge in the judgment says the surveyor has not superimposed

lots 1 and 2 on plan No. 6049. It seems that the learned High Court Judge

5 SC/APPEAL/189/17

has not read the brief properly, and the argument before the High Court

has been disposed of on written submissions.

The third admission recorded at the trial is that possession of the

disputed land described in the second schedule to the plaint was handed

over to the defendant in execution of the order made in the section 66

application filed regarding this dispute. It is that portion which is

depicted as lot 1 in plan No. 6049.

I cannot possibly understand why the learned High Court Judge decided

to dismiss the plaintiff’s action predominantly on non-identification of

the land. It appears that the learned High Court Judge has been misled

by the misleading written submissions filed before him. The question of

identification of the land cannot be raised for the first time on appeal. It

is not a pure question of law but a mixed question of fact and law.

The learned High Court Judge states that the defendant’s title deeds

marked V2, V4 and V5 describe a land of 80 feet in length and 40 feet in

breadth which is about 11.6 perches, and it is depicted in the plan

marked V22. There is no necessity to refer to V22. As I have already made

clear, the defendant clearly identifies the disputed land in the plan

marked X.

The plaintiff did not present his case in the District Court on the basis

that he is the paper title holder of the land described in the second

schedule to the plaint. In that context, there was no necessity to give

undue prominence to the defendant’s deeds. After all, the High Court did

not grant the defendant’s cross-claim. As crystalised in the issues, the

defendant’s case was that he prescribed to the disputed portion of the

land. Thereafter, by issue No. 13, the defendant in my view in passing

says that he purchased the land on deed No. 158. If the defendant rested

his case chiefly on paper title, he ought to have raised that issue first and

6 SC/APPEAL/189/17

then, if necessary, an issue on prescriptive title. He does not even raise

an issue seeking compensation for improvements to the land in case the

substantive issue is decided in favour of the plaintiff. Let me reproduce

the defendant’s issues for a better understanding of what I endeavour to

say:

10. විත්තිකරුවන්ගේ උත්තතරගේ සිය උපගේඛණගේ විස්තරකර ඇි පරිදි ගෙෙ නඩුවට

සම්බන්ධ ඉඩම් ගකොටස ග ෝ එහි අතුරු ඉඩම් ගකොටසක් ග ෝ පැමිණිලිකරු කිසිෙ දිනක

බුක්ිවිඳ ගනොෙැත්තගත්ත ද?

11. පැමිණිේගේ සවිස්තරව දක්වො ිගබන පැමිණිලිකරුට අයිිවොසිකම් ලැබී ඇතැයි කියනු

ලබන ඔප්පුව ෙත ඔහුට ඇිවූවොයැයි කියනු ලබන එකී අයිිවොසිකම් එකී ඔප්පුවට

පෙණක් සිෙොවී ිගබන්ගන් ද?

12. ගෙෙ නඩුවට සම්බන්ධ ගේපල ගෙෙ නඩුගේ විත්තිකරු විසින් ඔහුගේ ුර්වගොමී

අයිිකරු වූ බුක්ිකොරයන් සෙග වසර 100කට ආදීන ඉතො දීර්ඝ කොලයක් ිස්ගස්

බුක්ිවිඳ ිගබන්ගන්ද?

13. එකී දීර්ඝ කොලීන බුක්ියට අෙතරව විත්තිකරු ගෙෙ නඩුවට සම්බන්ධ ගේපල

1994.02.01 දින ප්‍රසිේධ ගනොතොරිස් පි. ලංකොධිකොර ෙ තො විසින් ලියො ස ික කළ

අංක 0158 දරණ විකුණුම්කොර ඔප්පුව ෙත මිලදීගැනීෙ කරණ ගකොටගගන අයිිය

ිගේද?

14. විත්ති උත්තතරගේ 7 වන ගේදගේ වඩො විස්තර කර ඇි පරිදි පැමිණිේගේ ‘අ’

උපගේඛණගේ විස්තර කර ඇි ඉඩම් ගකොටස තුල විත්තිකරු ගම් වන විට ලක්ෂ

විසිප කට (රු: 25,000,000/=) වඩො වටිනො නිවසක් සිය ගපෞේගලික වියදමින්

ගගොඩනගොගගන එහි පදිංචිව සිටින්ගන්ද?

15. විත්තිය විසින් ගෙගතක් ඉදිරිපත්ත කරන ලද විසඳිය යුතු ප්‍රශ්නයන්ට ඔවුන්ගේ වොසියට

පිළිතුරු ලැගබන්ගන්නම් ඔවුන් සිය උත්තතරගේ අයදුගම් අයද ිගබන සියලු ස න

ලබොගැනීෙට සුදුසු වන්ගන්ද?

Deed No. 158 which is referred to in issue No. 13 has been marked as

V4. It is noteworthy that in the schedule to this deed the vendor also

refers to the order given in favour of the defendant in the section 66

application as a source of title. It is clear that the said deed has been

executed after the section 66 application to consolidate the possession of

7 SC/APPEAL/189/17

the defendant confirmed in the section 66 application. The reference to

the section 66 application itself shows the strength of the vendor’s title

to the land which he conveyed to the defendant by V4.

The learned High Court Judge says the schedule to the defendant’s deeds

tallies with the plan marked V22. This is also incorrect. This plan has

been prepared seven years after the institution of the action. The plan

V22 depicts a land of 11.3 perches. The extent of the land referred to in

the deeds is 2/5 share of a land of 80 feet in length and 40 feet in breadth.

This is equivalent to 4.7 perches, not 11.3 perches.

It is strange that the learned High Court Judge has not mentioned a word

about the defendant’s main claim – prescriptive title.

It is also strange that the learned High Court Judge has not mentioned

the plaintiff’s title deeds. The plaintiff filed this action on paper title. The

District Court accepted those deeds and held that the plaintiff is the

paper title holder of the land. If the High Court reverses that finding, it

behoves the High Court to give reasons. This was not done; nor was an

attempt made to do so.

The learned High Court Judge says the plaint does not disclose the date

on which the cause of action accrued to the plaintiff. These matters

cannot be taken up for the first time in the appellate Court. If that were

the case, even the District Court could not have dismissed the action at

first sight. In terms of section 46 of the Civil Procedure Code, the Court

can return the plaint for amendment.

Learned counsel for the defendant makes a new case for the defendant,

in that counsel seeks to argue that the title deeds of both parties do not

refer to the same land but to two different lands situated in two villages

and that the lands have been registered in different folios in the Land

Registry. These are not questions of law but questions of fact. They

8 SC/APPEAL/189/17

cannot be agitated for the first time in the Supreme Court. The matters

put in issue by the defendant in the trial Court are reflected in the issues

I reproduced above.

I unhesitatingly set aside the judgment of the High Court and restore the

judgment of the District Court and allow the appeal with costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Yasantha Kodagoda, P.C., J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Janak De Silva, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court