IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Lanka Orix Leasing Company Plc 100/1, Sri Jayawardenapura Mwatha, Rajagiriya. Plaintiff Vs.

SC (CHC) Appeal No. 23/2016

HC. (Civil) NO. 477/09/MR

1. Meera Mohideen Mohammadu Azar No.329, Jumma Mosque, Meerauwodai, Oddamawaddi. 2. Gopalan Kamalanathan, Visnu Kovil Road, Kiran. 3. Gopalan Padma Yogan, Kumaralaya Veethi Kiran. Defendants

AND

2. Gopalan Kamalanathan, Visnu Kovil Road, Kiran. 3. Gopalan Padma Yogan, Kumaralaya Veethi Kiran. 2nd and 3rd Defendants- Petitioners

Vs.

SC (CHC)Appeal No.23/2016

2

Lanka Orix Leasing Company Plc 100/1, Sri Jayawardenapura Mwatha, Rajagiriya. Plaintiff-Respondent 1. Meera Mohideen Mohammadu Azar No.329, Jumma Mosque, Meerauwodai, Oddamawaddi.

1st Defendant-Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN 2. Gopalan Kamalanathan, Visnu Kovil Road, Kiran. 3. Gopalan Padma Yogan, Kumaralaya Veethi Kiran. 2nd and 3rd Defendant-Petitioner- Appellants

Vs.

Lanka Orix Leasing Company Plc. 100/1, Sri Jayawardenapura Mwatha, Rajagiriya. Plaintiff-Respondent- Respondent 1. Meera Mohideen Mohammadu Azar No.329, Jumma Mosque, Meerauwodai, Oddamawaddi.

1st Defendant-Respondent- Respondent

SC (CHC)Appeal No.23/2016

3

BEFORE : PRIYANTHA JAYAWARDENA, PC.J.

A.H.M.D. NAWAZ, J.

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

COUNSEL : Senaka de Silva for the 2nd & 3rd Defendant-Petitioner- Appellants.

Shanaka De Livera with Miss. Devni Yasara Abeygunawardana, AAL instructed by De Livera Associates for the Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent.

No appearance for the 1st Defendant-Respondent- Respondent

ARGUED ON : 07th June, 2023

DECIDED ON : 27th February, 2024

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

This is a direct appeal preferred by the 2nd and 3rd Defendant-

Petitioner-Appellants (hereinafter referred to as the 1st and 2nd Appellants

respectively) seeking to set aside an order pronounced by the Commercial

High Court on 13.05.2016. With the pronouncement of the said order, the

Commercial High Court dismissed their application under Section 86(2) of the

Civil Procedure Code, by which they sought to set aside the ex parte decree

that had been served on them.

The 1st Defendant-Respondent-Respondent entered into an agreement

with the Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent Company (hereinafter referred to

as the Respondent Company) in September 2008, to purchase a vehicle

morefully described in the schedule A to the plaint and to pay its value in 48

SC (CHC)Appeal No.23/2016

4

instalments of Rs. 51,611.00, at the interest rate calculated at 31% per annum.

The two Appellants stood as the guarantors for the said 1st Defendant-

Respondent-Respondent. The 1st Defendant-Respondent-Respondent, after

payment of a sum of Rs. 103,642.00, had fallen into arrears. The said

agreement was terminated on 20.12.2008. The Respondent Company had

thereupon instituted the instant action on 22.09.2009, seeking to recover its

dues from the three defendants. It also sought to recover possession of the

said vehicle.

With institution of the instant action before the Commercial High

Court, the Respondent Company moved that summonses be served on the

three defendants by way of registered post as well as through the Fiscal of the

District Court of Batticaloa, since they are resident in that jurisdiction. Upon an

order of Court made to that effect, the Registrar of the Commercial High

Court, by way of a Precept, conveyed the said order of Court to the Fiscal of

the District Court of Batticaloa.

The entry made on 25.11.2009 in the case record by the Registrar of the

Commercial High Court indicated that the Fiscal of Batticaloa Court had

reported back of the confirmation of personal service of summonses on the 1st

and 2nd Appellants on 16.11.2009. This factor was then brought to the notice of

Court by Journal Entry No. 2 of the same date. He further reported that the

summons issued on the 1st Defendant-Respondent-Respondent could not be

served as he was not found in the given address. However, the 1st and 2nd

Appellants did not present themselves before the original Court on that day

(02.12.2009) nor did they file answer through an Attorney-at- Law. The Court

had thereupon decided to proceed with the trial against the Appellants ex

parte. Court directed the Respondent Company to take necessary steps on the

SC (CHC)Appeal No.23/2016

5

1st Defendant-Respondent-Respondent, on whom summons could not be

served.

The ex parte trial against the Appellants commenced and concluded on

26.07.2012. During the said ex parte trial, the Respondent Company presented

evidence and marked documents P1 to P11 in support of its case. The

Commercial High Court thereupon delivered its judgment in favour of the

Respondent Company on 06.11.2016. The ex parte decree was served on the 1st

and 2nd Appellants on 07.02.2013, once again through the Fiscal of the District

Court of Batticaloa. The Appellants, by their application under Section 86(2) of

the Civil Procedure Code dated 20.02.2013, moved Court to set aside the said

ex parte decree.

At the conclusion of the ensuing inquiry, the Commercial High Court,

decided to dismiss the Appellants application with costs by its order

pronounced on 13.05.2016. Being aggrieved by the said order, the Appellants

preferred the instant appeal and sought to challenge the validity of the order

of the High Court on a total of eleven grounds of appeal, as set out in

paragraph 23 of their petition of appeal.

With the presentation of the notice of appeal as well as the Petition of

Appeal to the original Court, the Court Record was transmitted to the

Registry of this Court for the preparation of appeal briefs. The Appellants

have paid brief fees on 13.02.2019 and collected their copies on 05.01.2022 but

were not represented when this appeal was mentioned in open Court on

01.10.2021 for the first time. The Court made no order. Thereupon, the

Appellants, by way of a motion on 18.05.2022, moved Court that their appeal

be restored back to the hearing list. A Counsel, representing the Appellants,

supported the said motion on 21.06.2022 and the appeal was accordingly

restored and was set down for hearing on 28.11.2022, with consent of the

SC (CHC)Appeal No.23/2016

6

parties. The Appellants tendered written submissions to Court with a motion

dated 20.10.2022.

However, on that day, an application was made on behalf of the

Appellants, by which they sought to reschedule the hearing of their appeal on

the basis that their Counsel had returned the brief and they have retained a

new Counsel recently. The Court considered the application of the Appellants

favourably and granted a postponement. The appeal was fixed for hearing

once more on 07.06.2023, as it was a convenient date for the said newly

retained Counsel for the Appellants. When the appeal was taken up for

hearing on 07.06.2023, the Appellants made a similar application for

postponement of the hearing, but this time the Court was not inclined to grant

any further postponements for hearing of the instant appeal, which had been

filed in the year 2016, and decided to take the matter up for hearing.

The oral submissions of the Respondent Company were concluded on

07.06.2023. Although the Appellants have already tendered their written

submissions, this Court afforded another opportunity for the parties to tender

written submissions, if they so wished. A four-week time period,

commencing from the date of hearing, was granted to the parties. Only the

Respondent Company availed of this opportunity.

It must be noted at the outset of this judgement that, in spite of setting

out several grounds of appeal in paragraph 23 of their petition of appeal, the

Appellants have confined themselves into following three grounds of appeal

in their written submissions;

a. The Commercial High Court failed to consider that no evidence was

led to show that summonses were served on the two Appellants,

b. The Commercial High Court failed to consider that Section 60 of the

Civil Procedure Code empowers only a Fiscal Officer or a Grama

SC (CHC)Appeal No.23/2016

7

Niladhari to serve summons on a defendant and the witness who

claims to have served summons is a process server of the Court, who

is not authorised to serve summons on a defendant,

c. The Commercial High Court erred in admitting evidence of the said

process server, who claims to have served summons without any

authority.

These three grounds of appeal are considered in this judgment in that

order.

In support of their first ground of appeal, the Appellants submitted to

Court that the Commercial High Court had fallen into grave error in its failure

to consider that the assumption of jurisdiction over two Appellants is made

only upon summons being duly served on them. Since the evidence presented

by the Respondent Company was insufficient to establish that the summonses

were served on the Appellants, they contend that not serving summons is a

failure that goes to the root of the jurisdiction of the Commercial High Court

to hear and determine the action instituted against them by the Respondent

Company. Therefore, the Appellants submit that the ex parte judgment is a

nullity and, in the absence of a valid judgment against them, there was no

necessity to move Court to vacate a non-existing ex parte decree.

In view of the Appellants contention that the ex parte decree impugned

in these proceedings is a nullity, it is important to consider the legal effect of

an ex parte judgment, that had been entered against them without first serving

summons. This Court had consistently taken the view that if a defendant, on

whom an ex parte judgment and decree were entered against, was not served

with summons, both the judgment and decree would be considered to be a

nullity. A series of judgments, commencing with the judgment of

Mohammadu Cassim v Perianan Chetty (1911) 14 NLR 385 accept this

SC (CHC)Appeal No.23/2016

8

position. Lascelles CJ stated in the said judgment that (at p. 388) [A] judgment

is null and void, and cannot be executed against a person who is not served with

summons, after following a Queens Bench decision in Wigram v Cox, Sons,

Buckley & Co (1894) 1 QBD 795.

Thus, if the Appellants could establish before the Commercial High

Court that the summonses were not served on them, that factor would

undoubtedly render the judgment, upon which the ex parte decree was issued,

a nullity.

The Appellants are perfectly right in their submissions that the legal

validity of the ex parte judgment and decree of the original Court depends on

the fact that the procedure laid down in law for the service of summons was

duly complied with. They also contend there was no evidence placed before

the trial Court by the Respondent Company to establish that the summonses

were served on them. In view of the said contention, this is a convenient

point to consider whether there was evidence before the Commercial High

Court confirming service of summonses on each of the Appellants.

The Commercial High Court, in its impugned order, considered the

evidence of the Appellants as well as of the Respondent Company, presented

before it during the inquiry under Section 86(2). The Court preferred to accept

the evidence of the witness for the Respondent Company over the evidence of

the two Appellants on the footing that it is totally worthy of credit and

concluded that the Appellants have not discharged the onus of proving that the

summons were not served on them.

Although the Commercial High Court found that the Appellants have

failed to discharge their onus of proving that the summonses were not served

on them, they, in presenting their contention before this Court, submitted that

SC (CHC)Appeal No.23/2016

9

there was no evidence placed before the original Court by the Respondent

Company that it had personally served summons on them. Thus, it appears

that the Appellants challenge the validity of the determination made by the

Commercial High Court that it was their burden is to establish summonses

were not served. It appears that the Appellants dispute on whom the burden

lies in an application under Section 86(2). In the circumstances, it is helpful, if

a brief reference to the applicable statutory provisions are made on the

question whether there was evidence presented before the trial Court as to

the service of summons, before I venture into determine on whom the burden

lies to establish that particular factor.

The Commercial High Court, before making an order under Section 84,

to proceed against the Appellants ex parte, was satisfied that the Appellants

were served with summons and they did not file answer on the summons

returnable date. Then the question is on what evidence did the Court satisfy

itself that the summonses were served on the Appellants?

The answer to that question could be found upon a consideration of the

statutory provisions contained in Section 61 of the Civil Procedure Code. The

Civil Procedure Code (Amendment) Act No. 14 of 1997, by Section 3 of that

Act, repealed Sections 59, 60 and 61 of the principal enactment and substituted

same with new Sections. After the said amendment, Section 61 reads as

follows;

When a summons is served by registered post, the advice of delivery

issued under the Inland Post Rules, and the endorsement of service, if

any, and where the summons is served in any other manner, and

affidavit of such service shall be sufficient evidence of the service of the

summons and of the date of such service, and shall be admissible in

SC (CHC)Appeal No.23/2016

10

evidence and the statements contained therein shall be deemed to be

correct unless and until the contrary is proved.

The first part of the Section refers to a situation where the summons

served by registered post. It then proceeds to deal with the situation where the

summons is served in any other manner. In the instant appeal, the Summonses

were served by a process server and therefore such service could clearly be

taken as an instance where the summons served in any other manner. The

remaining part of the said Section provides for how the service of summons

could be established. The applicable part of the Section in this regard reads

affidavit of such service shall be sufficient evidence of the service of the summons

and of the date of such service, and shall be admissible in evidence and shall be

sufficient evidence of the service of the summons.

The evidence before the trial Court which confirm the service of

summonses on the Appellant was therefore the affidavit of the process server

who affirmed to the fact. The affidavit of the process server was marked as V1

and was annexed to the report prepared by the Fiscal of the District Court of

Batticaloa addressed to the Commercial High Court. Thus, the contents of that

affidavit shall be sufficient evidence of the service of the summons. The contents

of the affidavit of the process server, confirming personal service of summons

on the defendants named in them accordingly provided a legally valid

admissible evidence to the original Court, facilitating it to determine that the

summonses were personally served on each of the Appellants. Similar view

taken by Somawansa J (P/CA) in Chandrasena v Malkanthi (2005) 3 Sri L.R.

286, where his Lordship observed;

It is to be noted that the affidavits tendered by the Fiscal in proof of

service of summons as well as the decree would bring in the provisions

contained in section 61 of the Civil Procedure Code for it is provided in

SC (CHC)Appeal No.23/2016

11

the said Section that an affidavit of such service shall be sufficient

evidence of the service of summons and of the date of such service and

shall be admissible in evidence and the statement contained therein shall

be deemed to be correct unless and until the contrary is proved.

Accordingly, if the respondent wishes to contradict the facts stated in

those affidavits, it is incumbent on the respondent to lead evidence in

order to controvert and or contradict the affidavit.

Thus, the order of the Court made on 02.12.2009 determining to

proceed to try the two Appellants ex parte was made on legally admissible

direct evidence as to the fact of personal service of summons. This reasoning

provide answer to the Appellants contention that the Respondent Company

did not place evidence to establish on personal service of summons.

In turning to the question on whom the burden lies to establish that the

summonses were served, the Commercial High Court held that the

Appellants have not discharged the onus of proving that the summons were not

served on them. The Court had thereby imposed the burden of establishment

of the fact of not serving summons on the Appellants, which they say is

erroneous.

Section 86(2) provides an opportunity for a defendant, who had been

served with an ex parte decree, to have that ex parte judgment and decree set

aside by making an application within a stipulated time period to Court. The

said Section further imposes a duty on such a defendant to satisfy Court that

he had reasonable grounds for such default, if he was to successfully move

Court to set aside the ex parte judgment and decree. What the Appellants have

urged before the Commercial High Court to purge their default was that the

summonses of the action were not served on them, either by post or

personally. Undoubtedly, this is a reasonable ground for the trial Court to set

SC (CHC)Appeal No.23/2016

12

aside its ex parte judgment and decree entered against the two Appellants,

provided they satisfied the Court of the existence of the said reasonable

ground in terms of Section 86(2).

The use of the word satisfy in Section 86(2), instead of the word

proof in terms of Section 3 of the Evidence Ordinance, signifies that the

required degree of proof is not beyond reasonable doubt or even the balance

of probabilities, but clearly of a lesser degree. This Court even recommended

adopting a liberal approach as opposed to rigid standard of proof, in

satisfying a Court of the reasonableness of the grounds urged by a defaulting

defendant (vide judgment of Sanicoch Group of Companies by its Attorney

Denham Oswald Dawson v Kala Traders (Pvt) Ltd and Others 2016 Vol.

XXII, 44, at p. 48).

In this context, it is important to note that Section 84, which empowers a

Court to proceed to trial ex pare of the defendant, provided for several

situations to be taken as instances of default. Not only if a defendant fails to

file his answer on or before the day fixed for answer is taken as a default, even

if he fails to file answer on a subsequent date fixed for answer or even fails to

appear on the day fixed for hearing of the action are also be taken as instances

of default. In purging default, a defendant is entitled under section 86(2) to

adduce evidence to prove that he was prevented from appearing in Court by

reason of accident or misfortune or not having received due information of

the proceedings about the case. Since the circumstances that would be urged

by a defendant to purge his default may vary in relation to each situation,

each of these situations would have to be considered by Courts on case by

case basis to satisfy itself, whether the particular set of circumstances urged by

a defendant could be considered as reasonable. Hence, the adoption of a

SC (CHC)Appeal No.23/2016

13

liberal approach is generally recommended in determining what a reasonable

ground is; in terms of Section 86(2).

However, adoption of such a liberal approach could not be taken as an

universal approach that could be applicable in all situations. This aspect was

noted in Abdul Wadood v Ahamed Lebbe (SC Appeal No. 153/2014 decided

on 10.06.2016) when the Court stated that [A] liberal approach is possible where

a Court has to decide on the reasonableness of default, but not as regards stringent

procedure pertaining to a jurisdictional issue which could be described as a patent

want of jurisdiction which is not curable for non-objection/acquiescence or waiver.

Similarly, if there is a specific legislative provision which sets out the degree

to which such a defendant should satisfy Court of the reasonableness of the

ground he had relied upon to purge his default, then in such a situation too, a

defendant should comply with the statutorily imposed degree of proof.

In this context, a clear distinction could be made in respect of a

defendant who, in an application to purge default under Section 86(2), claims

that he was not duly served with summons from a defendant, who relied on

any other ground he may have chosen to urge before Court, to purge his

default.

When a defaulting defendant takes up the position that he was never

served with summons as a reasonable ground and thereby seeking to set aside

an ex parte judgment and decree, the nature of the burden imposed on such a

defendant had already been considered by superior Courts. It has been

consistently held that it was for the defaulting defendant to establish the fact

that summons was not served. In the judgment of Sangarapillai and Brothers

v Kathiravelu (Sriskanthas Law Reports, Vol II, p. 99) Siva Selliah J held (at.

P.106) that the burden squarely lay on the defendant who asserted that no

summons was served on him to establish that fact . The underlying rationale

SC (CHC)Appeal No.23/2016

14

for imposition of such a burden of proof on a defendant is due to the deeming

provisions contained in Section 61. Relevant part of the Section 61 which

states that the affidavit containing that the summons was duly served should

be taken as correct unless and until the contrary is proved. Thereby the said

Section imposed a heavier burden on such a defendant to prove the contrary

to what stated in the affidavit of the process server. In the amended Section

61, the relevant part reads where the summons is served in any other manner,

an affidavit of such service shall be sufficient evidence of the service of the summons

and of the date of such service, and shall be admissible in evidence and the statements

contained therein shall be deemed to be correct unless and until the contrary is

proved (emphasis added).

In Civil Procedure Code, the word prove can be found, in addition to

Section 61, in Sections 114(1), 159,161,162 and 163. Section 114(1) provides for

the documents to be placed on the record. The Section however, limits those

documents to the ones that are proved or admitted. Section 159(1) deals with

how a signature of a person is proved while Section 160 deals with the

proving of signature of an illiterate person. Section 161 deals with old

documents of which actual execution need not be proved. Section 162

provides for proving of a copy of an absent original and, finally, Section 163

states that each party to prove its case with oral and documentary evidence.

Thus, the Section 61 too, by adopting the same standard of proof,

imposes a similar burden on a defendant to prove the contrary of what the

process server states in his affidavit regarding service of summons. This has

been the standard of proof consistently applied by Courts in such situations,

as indicative from the judgment of this Court in ABN-Amro Bank NV v

Conmix (Private) Limited and Others (supra) where Mark Fernando J, stated

(at p. 12) thus;

SC (CHC)Appeal No.23/2016

15

If there has been no due service of summons (or due notice), but the Court

nevertheless mistakenly orders an ex parte trial, then for that breach of

natural justice, Section 86 (2) provides a remedy: a defendant's default can be

excused if it is established that there were reasonable grounds for such

default, and one such ground would be the failure to serve

summons (emphasis added).

What it means to prove, a verb used in legal proceedings, was

described in relation to Section 3 of the Evidence Ordinance by Coomaraswamy,

in his treatise titled Law of Evidence, Vol 1, at p. 117. Learned author states [A]

fact is said to be proved when, after considering the matters before it, the Court either

believes it to exist or considers its existence so probable that a prudent man ought,

under the circumstances of the particular case, to act upon a supposition that it

exists. He further adds [A] fact is said not to be proved when it is neither proved

nor disproved following the judgment of Emperor v Shafi Ahamad (1929) 31

Bom. L.R. 515.

Thus, the resultant position would be that a defendant, who seeks to

purge his default by claiming that summons was not served on him, should

satisfy Court by proving that claim, in terms of Section 61. In these

circumstances, the question this Court must answer in relation to the ground

of appeal is did the Appellants prove that summonses were not served on

them either by post or by personally?

In their application under Section 86(2) the Appellants stated that a

person claiming to be the Fiscal of District Court of Batticaloa had served an ex

parte decree on them on 07.02.2013 and despite the reference made in the said

ex parte decree that summonses were duly served on them, they were never

served with summons either by post or by personal service.

SC (CHC)Appeal No.23/2016

16

In this regard, it must be noted that, after an inquiry in to the

Appellants application under Section 86(2), the Commercial High Court

preferred to accept the evidence presented by the Respondent Company

through its witness as worthy of credit and rejected the Appellants

application. The Court, after citing David Appuhamy v Yasassi Thero (1987) 1

Sri L.R. 253, acted on the dicta of that judgment i.e., an ex parte order made in

default of appearance will not be vacated if the affected party fails to give a

valid excuse for his default, and concluded that the Appellants have not

discharged the onus of proving that the summons were not served on them. In other

words, the Court held that the Appellants failed to prove that they were not

served with summonses.

Significantly, during the inquiry under Section 86(2), both Appellants

were content with merely stating in their evidence that they did not receive

summons either by post or personally. No specific reference was made to the

events of the date referred to in the affidavit of the process server indicating as

the date on which the summonses were personally served on the two

Appellants. Instead they chose to explain the circumstances under which they

signed on the agreement, upon which they were sued. In the end, there were

no sufficient material placed before Court by the Appellants in this regard.

Accordingly, the evidence presented by the Appellants confine to an isolated

verbal assertion that they were not served with summons, which claim the

Court decided to reject in its totality.

On the other hand, the record itself indicated that summonses were

issued on the Appellants both by post and through the Fiscal of the District

Court of Batticaloa. The entry in the record signifies the return filed by the said

Fiscal, who reported to Court that summonses were served on the two

Appellants but not on the 1st Defendant-Respondent-Respondent. A specific

SC (CHC)Appeal No.23/2016

17

date is mentioned in the entry as the date on which personal service of

summons had taken place. Journal Entry No. 2 of 02.12.2009 informs the Court

that summonses on the two Appellants were served on 16.11.2009. The two

Appellants were neither present in Court nor were represented.

During the inquiry the witness called by the Respondent Company

stated that he functioned as the process server (is;dis fnokakd) of the District

Court of Batticaloa and, in relation to the instant matter, he did personally

serve summons on the two Appellants on 13th November 2009 by visiting

their places of dwelling, as per the given addresses in the Precept. He reported

of the confirmation of service of summons by an affidavit, marked as V1.

The Journal Entry No. 2, being a contemporaneous record of the claim

that summonses were served on the Appellants, taken together with the

contents of the affidavit of the process server, there was sufficient evidence

before the Commercial High Court to conclude that the summonses were

served on the Appellants, as claimed by the Respondent Company. Section 61

is specific on this aspect as it states the affidavit of the process server being

sufficient admissible evidence of the facts it stated. More importantly the

Section also stated that, the statements contained therein shall be deemed to be

correct unless and until the contrary is proved (emphasis added).

The Appellants, upon being cross examined by the Respondent

Company, conceded that they were residing in the given addresses both on

13th and 16th November 2009 (the dates on which summonses were served on

each of them) and there was no reason for them not to receive any letter, sent

by post and delivered to their respective addresses. Of course, both

Appellants denied that they were personally served with summons by the

same process server, who at a subsequent point of time, had personally

delivered the ex parte decree on them as well.

SC (CHC)Appeal No.23/2016

18

The evidence before Court is indicative of the fact that the Appellants

were served with summons by way of registered post as well as personally.

There is no material to indicate that the registered articles were returned

undelivered. None of the Appellants specifically deny not receiving them by

post either. However, the Respondent Company did not tender delivery

advices or the endorsements of service as evidence before Court, in relation to

the fact that summonses were also served through post. However, the

affidavit of the process server confirming personal service of summons and

the report of the Registrar of District Court of Batticaloa addressed to the

Registrar of the Commercial High Court, resulting in the making of the

Journal Entry No. 2 of 02.12.2009, which conveyed to Court that the

summonses were duly served on the two defendants, taken together, is

sufficient proof of the completion of the formal process of service of

summons. Since, the affidavit V1, in terms of Section 81, shall be sufficient

evidence of the service of the summons and of the date of such service and shall be

admissible in evidence the statements contained therein shall be deemed to be

correct, until and unless the Appellants prove the contrary.

Once the affidavit of the process server is received by Court providing

evidence of proof of service, the burden shifts on to the Appellants to prove

that they were not served with summonses. They could have discharged their

burden by leading credible evidence to contradict the contents of the affidavit,

which are deemed to be taken as correct by operation of law. If they could

establish that fact, then the burden shifts back on to the Respondent Company

to rebut that evidence by calling the relevant process server who personally

delivered summons on them.

SC (CHC)Appeal No.23/2016

19

When the trial Court decided to treat the evidence of the process server

as worthy of credit over the evidence presented by the Appellants to the

contrary, it is an indication itself that they have collectively failed in the

discharge of their burden, imposed by Section 61. It is also an indication that

the statements contained in the affidavit of the process server, coupled with

his oral evidence, tested with cross examination, were accepted by the

Commercial High Court as credible and reliable evidence reflecting the

correct factual position. Despite the unconvincing evidence presented by the

Appellant, the Respondent Company did call the process server, who

affirmed in V1 and in his oral testimony that the summonses were duly

served. That evidence effectively rebutted the Appellants weak denial. The

Commercial High Court, in its impugned order, rightly concluded that the

Appellants have failed to successfully discharge the onus of proving that the

summonses were not served on them.

In view of the reasoning contained in the preceding paragraphs, it is my

considered view that the first ground of appeal urged by the Appellants is

devoid of any merit.

The second and third grounds of appeal urged by the Appellants

alleging that the Commercial High Court erred in its failure to consider that

the summonses were not duly served on them, as they were not served by the

Fiscal or Grama Niladhari and that the said Court erred in admitting evidence

of the process server, who served summons on them without any authority,

should be considered now for merits.

The Appellants, in support of the said grounds of appeal, submitted

that the original Court, in reaching the conclusion that the summonses were

duly served on the Appellants had erroneously acted upon the irrelevant and

inadmissible evidence of a process server, who is not a competent officer of

SC (CHC)Appeal No.23/2016

20

Court to serve summons. They relied on Section 60(1) of the Civil Procedure

Code, in support of that contention, where the provisions conceding to the

position that only a Fiscal or a Grama Niladhari could duly serve summons on a

defendant, and not a process server, who had no such conferment of authority

by law. These two grounds of appeal were urged by the Appellants based on

the evidence of the witness called by the Respondent Company to give

evidence on their behalf to establish the summons and the ex parte decree were

served upon the two Appellants, who described his job description as is;dis

fnokakd (Server of Summons).

It cannot be helped not to notice the obvious conflict between the first

ground of appeal and the other two grounds of appeal, urged by the

Appellants. In the first ground of appeal, the Appellant take up the position

that summonses were never served on them. In placing reliance on the second

and third grounds of appeal, the Appellants tacitly admit that summonses

were served, but for want of proper authority conferred on the process server

to serve summons, they were not duly served. Despite the inherent

contradiction between these grounds of appeal, it must be acknowledged that

this contention relates to an important procedural step in civil litigation. In the

circumstances, I propose to deal with these two grounds of appeal in a more

descriptive manner. Since the role of the process server in the service of

summons is placed under close scrutiny, it is necessary to trace the origins of

the term process server, in civil litigation process.

Section 60 of the said Civil Procedure Code (Chapter 86 Legislative

Enactments of Ceylon - Revised Edition 1938) states the service of summons

shall be made on the defendant in person; but if, after reasonable exertion, the Fiscal is

unable to effect personal service, he shall report such inability to the Court . This

Section specifies that the service of summons on a defendant should be made

SC (CHC)Appeal No.23/2016

21

by the Fiscal. However, in proof of service, the term process server appears in

Section 85 of the said Code, instead of Fiscal as it states if the Court is

satisfied by affidavit of the process server, stating the facts and circumstances of the

service, or otherwise, that the defendant has been duly served with summons, .

The Fiscals Ordinance of 1867 (Chapter 8 Legislative Enactments of

Ceylon - Revised Edition 1938), created a Fiscals Department and the Governor

General had power to appoint a Fiscal and Deputy Fiscals for the provinces

and districts. Section 4 of the said Ordinance empowered a Deputy Fiscal,

who was appointed to a particular district, could license as many process

servers for the service and execution of process issued by Courts within that

district. The term process was defined in Section 17 of the said Ordinance to

mean all citations, monitions, summonses, mandates, subpoenas, notices, rules,

orders, writs, warrants and commands issued by Court.

In view of the said legislative arrangement, Section 85 of the said Code

provided statutory recognition to the contents of an affidavit presented by a

process server, who could assert that the defendant had duly been served

with summons.

The transformation of the service of summons and processes under

different enactments over the past two centuries was considered in Leechman

& Company Ltd v Rangalle Consolidated Ltd (1981) 2 Sri L.R. 373, by Soza J.

His Lordship observed (at p. 378);

The Fiscal and his deputy are officials who earlier functioned under the

provisions of the Fiscals Ordinance No. 4 of 1867 as amended from time

to time (Cap. 11 L.E.C. - 1956 Revision). Under Section 4 of the Fiscals

Ordinance it was lawful for the Fiscal or Deputy Fiscal to appoint by

writing under his hand any person to execute process in any particular

case and process by that ordinance included all citations, monitions,

SC (CHC)Appeal No.23/2016

22

summonses, mandates, subpoenas, notices, writs, orders, warrants and

commands issued by the Court. The Administration of Justice Law No.

44 of 1973 came into force 1st January 1974 and by its Section 3 Chapter

1, the Fiscals Ordinance was repealed. By virtue of section 39(l) of the

Administration of Justice Law, to each court established under the new

laws provision was made for the appointment of a Registrar, Fiscal and

such other officers as may be necessary for the administration of such

Court and the performance of its duties including the service of process

and the execution of decrees and other orders. It is a matter of common

knowledge that the Registrar of every Court was invariably appointed as

Fiscal. Under section 62 of the Judicature Act No. 2 of 1978, Chapter 1

of the Administration of Justice Laws was repealed but of course this did

not bring the Fiscals Ordinance back to life. Section 52 of the Judicature

Act like section 39 (1) of the Administration of Justice Law before it,

provided for the appointment of Registrars, Fiscals and other officers the

administration of every Court and the performance of its duties

including the service of its process and execution of its decrees and

orders. The old practice was adhered to and every Registrar was

appointed Fiscal.

A new Constitution was adopted in 1978. In addition, Judicature Act

No. 2 of 1978 was enacted. Section 3 of the Civil Courts Procedure (Special

Provisions) Law No. 19 of 1979 brought the provisions of the Civil Procedure

Code (Ordinance No. 2 of 1889, Cap. 101, Legislative Enactments of Ceylon,

Revised Edition 1956) as amended from time to time and was in force on 31st

December 1973, back into operation, governing civil Courts and its procedure

and thereby replacing the provisions of Administration of Justice Law No. 44

of 1973.

SC (CHC)Appeal No.23/2016

23

Presently, the Judicial Service Commission, in the exercise of powers

conferred under Article 111H (1) of the 1978 Constitution and Section 52(1) of

the Judicature Act No. 2 of 1978, appoints Scheduled Public Officers as

Registrars/Deputy Fiscals to Courts. Section 52(1) of the Judicature Act No. 2

of 1978 (as amended) empowers the appointment of a Registrar, Deputy Fiscal

and such other officers as may be necessary for the administration and for the

due execution of the powers and the performance of the duties of such Courts

including the service of process and the execution of decrees of Court and

other orders enforceable under any written law. Inclusion of the phrase

service of process in the said Section is significant in the present context.

Section 5 of the present Civil Procedure Code states the term Fiscal

includes a Deputy Fiscal. Section 52(3) of the Judicature Act imposes on such a

Deputy Fiscal that he shall be responsible for the service of process issued by

that Court and the execution of decrees and orders made by that Court .

The post of process server that existed and functioned under the Fiscals

Ordinance, too was transformed into an appointment under the Public Service

Commission with a formal title of is;dis yd weialSis ls%hd;aul lrkakd . They are

appointed by the Secretary to the Ministry of Justice, acting under the

authority of Public Service Commission, according to a Scheme of

Recruitment formulated for that post and placed in the salary scale PL 2 -

2016. Once appointed, they are assigned to a specific area within the

geographical jurisdiction of a Court to which they are attached to by the

judicial officer, who preside over that Court. In the absence of a formal

nomenclature for the post of is;dis yd weialSis ls%hd;aul lrkakd in English, the

more popular description of process server is used in this judgment.

SC (CHC)Appeal No.23/2016

24

Thus, the appointment of a process server, who could be considered as

such other officer for the purpose of service of process and execution of

decrees, is accordingly sanctioned by Section 52(1) of the Judicature Act.

Once a Court orders that summons be served on a defendant who

resides outside of its jurisdiction, the Registrar/Deputy Fiscal of the original

Court, by addressing a Precept to Fiscal to Serve, would convey the summons

issued by that Court to the relevant Registrar/Deputy Fiscal, whose area in

which the defendant resides. Section 357 of the Civil Procedure Code made it

a duty of every Fiscal, who receives a Precept to Fiscal to Serve, execute same

either by himself by his officers.

The Registrar/Deputy Fiscal, accordingly assigns the task of serving

summons on that defendant to the process server (is;dis yd weialSis ls%hd;aul

lrkakd), with the said precept as authorized by Section 357. The process server

should report back to his Court by way of an affidavit (Section 371), whether

the summons was served personally on the defendant or not for the reasons

stated therein. In the instant appeal, since the action was instituted in the

Commercial High Court in Colombo and the Appellants are residents of

Batticaloa, the High Court directed its Registrar/Deputy Fiscal to serve

summons on the defendants through the Registrar/Deputy Fiscal of the

District Court of Batticaloa.

The evidence of Kadiravelu Nallaratne, who served as the process server

of that Court, revealed that the summonses issued on the two Appellants and

sent by the Commercial High Court of Colombo to his Court were assigned to

him for service. The witness being the process server of that Court, after

making entries in the relevant Register, had taken steps to serve the

summonses personally on the two Appellants. He confirmed that the

summonses were duly served on the two appellants in his returns to the

SC (CHC)Appeal No.23/2016

25

Court. The legally prescribed process of serving summons was therefore

complied with by the Deputy Fiscal of the District Court of Batticaloa and by

the is;dis fnokakd who acted on his precept.

The Appellants objection to the legality of service of summons by a

is;dis fnokakd and not by the Fiscal or a Grama Niladhari is based on the specific

reference made to the two officers in that Section. Clearly the Appellants

contend that summons could be served properly either by Fiscal or Grama

Niladhari and no other. In view of the statutory provisions referred to in the

preceding paragraphs, it is my view that the mere absence of a specific

reference to a process server (is;dis yd weialSis ls%hd;aul lrkakd) in Section 60, does

not make it illegal for a Court to satisfy itself of the fact that summons was

served, (a necessary pre requisite in Section 84 to proceed ex parte,) upon the

affidavit of such service as it is a course of action made permissible by

provisions of Section 61.

In the absence of any specific words confining the said affidavit only to

a Fiscal or a Grama Niladhari in Section 84 and since Section 61, makes an

affidavit of a is;dis fnokakd/ is;dis yd weialSis ls%hd;aul lrkakd shall be sufficient

evidence of the service of summons, and the contents of the said affidavit of

the is;dis fnokakd/ is;dis yd weialSis ls%hd;aul lrkakd of the District Court of

Batticaloa is deemed to be correct unless and until the contrary is proved by

the Appellants, it is my considered view that the Commercial High Court had

rightly relied on the affidavit V1 as well as the oral evidence of the process

server to hold that there was due service of summonses on them.

In view of the forgoing, I am of the view that the second and third

grounds of appeal of the Appellants are also devoid of any merit.

Accordingly, the order of the Commercial High Court dated 13.05.2016,

SC (CHC)Appeal No.23/2016

26

dismissing the application of the Appellants under Section 86(2) and

imposition of costs, is hereby affirmed.

The joint appeal of the Appellants is dismissed with costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

PRIYANTHA JAYAWARDENA, PC.J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

A.H.M.D. NAWAZ, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT