1

IN THER SUPRERME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Inoka Sulari Nissanka

121/C,

Kaluwairippuwa west,

Katana.

Plaintiff

SC Appeal No. 104/2015

NWP/HCCA/KUR/93/2008F Vs.

DC/Kuliyapitiya Case no.12857/P

1. Stela Karmon Nissanka,

121/C,

Kaluwairippuwa West,

Katana.

2. Nissanka Appuhamilage Kema

Senehelatha Nissanka,

No.382, Kandurugashena,

Kuliyapitiya.

3. G. G. Krishantha Sisira Pathirana,

No.382, Kandurugashena,

Kuliyapitiya.

Defendants

AND

Nissanka Appuhamilage Kema

Senehelatha Nissanka,

No.382, Kandurugashena,

Kuliyapitiya.

2nd Defendant-Appellant

2

G. G. Krishantha Sisira Pathirana,

No.382, Kandurugashena,

Kuliyapitiya.

3rd Defendant-Appellant

Vs

Inoka Sulari Nissanka

121/C,

Kaluwairippuwa west,

Katana.

Plaintiff-Respondent

Stela Karmon Nissanka,

121/C,

Kaluwairippuwa West,

Katana.

1st Defendant-Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

G. G. Krishantha Sisira Pathirana,

No.382, Kandurugashena,

Kuliyapitiya.

Substituted 2nd Defendant-Appellant-

Appellant

G. G. Krishantha Sisira Pathirana,

No.382, Kandurugashena,

Kuliyapitiya.

3rd Defendant-Appellant-Appellant

Vs

3

Inoka Sulari Nissanka

121/C,

Kaluwairippuwa west,

Katana.

Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent

Stela Karmon Nissanka,

121/C,

Kaluwairippuwa West,

Katana.

1st Defendant-Respondent-

Respondent

BEFORE: L. T. B. Dehideniya, J.

S. Thurairaja, PC, J.

E. A. G. R. Amarasekara, J.

COUNSEL: C. J. Ladduwahetty for the Substituted 2nd and 3rd Defendants-

Appellants-Appellants.

Lionel K. Patabendi with Asela Patabendi for the Plaintiff-Respondent-

Respondent.

ARGUED ON: 11.02.2020

DECIDED ON: 11.01.2023

E A G R Amarasekara, J.

The partition action relevant to this appeal was filed by the Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent

(hereinafter sometimes referred to as the Plaintiff) in the District Court of Kuliyapitiya to

partition the land called Ambagahamulawatte of A: 0 R: 1 P: 30 in extent which was more

fully described in the scheduled to the plaint dated 12.03.2001. Admittedly, the original

owner of the said land was one Nissanka Appuhamilage Don Daniel Nissanka who died leaving

as his heirs, his daughter the 2nd Defendant-Respondent-Respondent, Khema Senehelatha

Nissanka (hereinafter referred to as the 2nd Defendant) and his son, Sisira Siriwimal Nissanka.

The original owner was the grandfather of the Plaintiff and the 3rd Defendant-Respondent-

4

Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the 3rd Defendant). He was also the father-in-law of

the 1st Defendant-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the 1st Defendant). The

Plaintiff is the daughter of the 1st Defendant and 1st Defendant was married to Sisira Siriwimal

Nissanka, the son of the original owner who died leaving the 1st Defendant (his wife) and the

Plaintiff (his daughter) as his heirs. The 3rd Defendant is the son of the 2nd Defendant. Upon

the demise of the original owner a testamentary case was filed in the District Court of

Kuliyapitiya and the 2nd Defendant has been appointed as the administrator. The above facts

were not disputed. No dispute has arisen as to the identity of the corpus. Thus, under the

normal course of events, with demise of the original owner, the property which belonged to

the original owner should devolve on his daughter (2nd Defendant) and his son, Sisira Siriwimal

Nissanka in equal shares, namely undivided of the property to each of them, and with the

demise of Sisira Siriwimal Nissanka his share should devolve equally on the Plaintiff and the

1st Defendant giving each of them share of the property. Since the 2nd Defendant has

executed the deed of gift no.3085 dated 05.11.1999, 2nd Defendants share should go to the

3rd Defendant subject to the life interest of the 2nd Defendant.

As against the position taken up by the Plaintiff which is compatible with the devolution of

title described above, the 2nd and 3rd Defendants have claimed prescriptive title to the entire

property described in the schedule to the plaint. The position taken up by the 2nd and 3rd

Defendants is that there was an agreement between the children of the original owner,

namely the 2nd Defendant and Sisira Siriwimal Nissanka. As per the agreement they say that

the 2nd Defendant and her brother agreed;

a) to sell the property called Mahamaligashena which was at Puttalam to settle the

debts of the original owner, especially the debts to the Agricultural and Industrial

Credit Corporation of Ceylon and

b) after such sale, to give the rest of the property at Puttalam to Sisira Sriwimal Nissanka

and to give the property in dispute to the 2nd Defendant to retain as her own.

c) the balance to be shared by the 2nd Defendant and her brother Sisira Siriwimal

Nissanka.

The evidence led at the trial shows that other than the subject matter of the partition action

related to this appeal and the land at Puttalam mentioned above, there had been another

5

property called Veehena that belonged to the original owner which has been partitioned

through an action filed in the district court of Marawila.

The decisions of the courts below indicate that the learned judges of those courts, namely the

judge of the District Court of Kuliyapitiya and the learned High Court Judges of the Provincial

High Court of Kurunegala hearing Civil Appeals, have come to the conclusion that exchange

of property as described above has not been proved by the 2nd and 3rd Defendants. Thus, the

District Court has decided to partition the land in dispute by refusing to accept the stance

taken by the 2nd and 3rd Defendants and the said decision of the District Court has not been

interfered with by the learned High Court Judges sitting in appeal over the said decision of

the District Court.

Being aggrieved by the decision of the Provincial High Court of Kurunegala, the 2nd and 3rd

Defendants have come before this court and leave has been granted on the questions of law

mentioned in paragraph 26(a) and (f) of the petition dated 07.11.2014. The said questions of

law are mentioned below;

a) Did the learned District Judge disregarded or ignore his own findings of facts in coming

to his conclusion of law on the question of prescription of the 2nd and 3rd Defendants?

f) Did the learned High Court make a serious error regarding the law of ouster when they

held that the presumption of prescription would not arise in this case?

It is true that the evidence led at the trial indicates that the 2nd and 3rd Defendants were in

possession of the land in dispute after the death of the original owner for about 27 years. As

per the pedigree which is not in dispute, the 2nd Defendant became a co-owner. In law the

possession of a co-owner is the possession of the other co-owners. It is not possible for one

co-owner to put an end to that possession by any secret intention in his mind. Nothing short

of ouster or something equivalent to ouster is needed to prove the commencement of an

adverse possession against the other co-owners- Vide Corea V Appuhamy 15 NLR 65. Thus, it

is necessary for a co-owner who comes to possess a land as a co-owner to prove how his

possession became adverse to the possession of the other co-owners. In this regard, the co-

owner who claims prescription must place evidence to prove the commencement of adverse

possession by proving ouster or something equivalent to ouster or place evidence sufficient

6

to presume that ouster has taken place 10 years prior to filing the action. If it is a very long

possession that has commenced prior to the time that is within the knowledge of the available

witnesses, and if the nature of the possession indicates that the relevant party has been in

possession as sole owner, it is reasonable for a court to presume the existence of an adverse

possession. However, in the case at hand, the 2nd Defendant became a co-owner after the

death of her father, the original owner. Then if anything similar to ouster took place it has to

be within her knowledge and, if she intends to claim prescriptive title to the co-owned land,

she should prove ouster or circumstances similar to ouster. This is especially so, when one

considers the family relationship between the parties and the fact that one party resided at

Puttalam considerably away from the disputed land. Unless ouster or something similar to

that is proved, such facts may encourage a court to presume that the possession is permissive

or that the possession of the 2nd and 3rd Defendant is also the possession of the other co-

owners who resided at Puttalam. As held in Sideris V Simon 46 NLR 273, in an action between

co-owners the question whether a presumption of ouster may be made from long and

undisturbed and uninterrupted possession is one of fact, which depends on the circumstances

of each case. As per Abdul Majeed V Ummu Zaneera 61 NLR 361, among other things, the

relationship of the co-owners and where they reside in relation to the situation of the

property are relevant matters that should be considered in whether a presumption of ouster

should be drawn or not. It is natural in our culture if co-owners reside in different places, one

co-owner or few of them to enjoy the co-owned property till the co-ownership is terminated.

As mentioned above, the 2nd Defendant, after the death of her father, started possession as

a co-owner and it should be within her knowledge if she started to possess adversely. Thus,

she should be able to prove ouster or something similar to ouster if such an event took place.

Coupled with that, the relationship between the parties and the distance of residence of the

Plaintiff and the 1st Defendant to the situation of the property in issue make it difficult to

presume ouster or a commencement of an adverse possession merely because of the 2nd and

3rd Defendants are in possession for a period of 27 years or so.

Hence, I now consider whether the 2nd and 3rd Defendants were able to establish ouster or

the commencement of adverse possession against the Plaintiff and the 1st Defendant through

the other evidence led before the trial judge. In this regard the 2nd Defendant and the 3rd

7

Defendant rely on the purported agreement mentioned above between Sisira Siriwimal

Nissanka who was the father of the Plaintiff and the husband of the 1st Defendant. If such an

agreement to exchange the balance of the Puttalam land with the land in issue was in

existence, 2nd Defendant should have started adverse possession prior to the death of the

said Sisira Siriwimal Nissanka. However, the evidence given by the 2nd Defendant on

26.02.2008 at pages 3 and 4 of the District Court proceedings (pages 159 and 160 of the brief)

stands against the stance taken up by the 2nd Defendant. There she admits that after the

death of her brother the share of the land in question devolved upon his daughter and wife,

namely the Plaintiff and the 1st Defendant. If, she and her brother terminated the co-

ownership by an agreement with her brother to exchange the properties after settling the

loans of her father, the property in question cannot be a co-owned property to be inherited

by the Plaintiff and the 1st Defendant. She further admits in her evidence that there was no

written agreement (See page 160 of the brief which is page 4 of the District Court proceedings

of 26.02.2008). If there was no agreement attested by a Notary relating to exchange of land,

it cannot be a valid agreement. On the other hand, if her position is that she commenced

adverse possession after an oral agreement with her brother that cannot stand as she admits

the title of the wife and the child of the brother after his death. While admitting title of

another at a given time one cannot maintain that her/his possession was adverse to them at

that time. Thus, her own evidence is contrary to the position that she commenced adverse

possession following the agreement with her deceased brother to exchange lands of Puttalam

and Kuliyapitiya.

The 2nd Defendant in her evidence has also stated that she and the heirs of Sisira Sriwimal

Nissanka, namely the Plaintiff and the 1st Defendant became the co-owners of the entirety of

the land in Puttalam which was 100 acres in extent excluding the 2 acres acquired by the State

(see pages 122 and 135 of the brief). Though, there was an agreement entered between heirs

of the original owner and one Joseph M Perera to sell some land and settle the loans of their

father, they could not sell property as agreed by the said agreement- vide pages 126, 135

to138 of the brief. Thereafter, she states that 50 acres were sold to settle the loans due from

the estate of the deceased father and she and her brother became the heirs to the balance

50 acres - vide pages 138 and 139. She has further stated that after the death of her brother,

his wife the 1st Defendant possessed the balance 50 acres at Puttalam and 1st Defendant has

8

sold those 50 acres by two deeds and she did not take any steps against that even though she

had lawful right to 25 acres since she had completely handed over the said property to her

brother vide pages 138 to 144 of the brief. It must be noted that if she says that she had a

lawful right to 25 acres of land in Puttalam after the death of her brother it is contrary to her

original stand which was to indicate that her adverse possession commenced following an

agreement with her deceased brother by exchanging properties at Puttalam and Kuliyapitiya.

As mentioned earlier, such an agreement is not valid unless executed in writing before a

notary. The above position taken up while giving evidence by the 2nd Defendant indicates that

her purported adverse possession did not commence even based on an oral agreement when

her brother was among the living by giving him balance 50 acres in Puttalam and she taking

the possession of Kuliyapitiya land as her own. Her version indicated through evidence states

that she became an owner of 25 acres of the land in Puttalam after the death of her brother

but relinquished her rights to that property to own the property in Kuliyapituya as her own,

owing to the agreement with her brother which is invalid before law in terms of section 2 of

the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance. If she had commenced adverse possession after the heirs

of her brother became co-owners based on an agreement that adverse possession has to be

based on an agreement between her and the heirs of her brother. Otherwise, she has to prove

some other overt act from which she commenced her adverse possession. There is no such

agreement between her and the heirs of her brother produced before court. A party cannot

commence adverse possession with a secret intention. Other than the purported agreement

between the 2nd Defendant and her brother, no other overt act has been referred as the

commencement of adverse possession.

On the other hand, the deed no.169 dated 18.08.77 executed by her to sell 50 acres of the

land in Puttalam does not indicate that she sold it as the administrator of the estate of the

father to settle the loans due from the estate of the deceased father. She has sold her rights

as the owner of a divided 50 acres of the Puttalam land for a consideration of Rs.33000.00.

In the schedule of the said deed, boundary to the east has been described as the land

belonging to the heirs of Sisira Siriwimal Nissanka which means the Plaintiff and the 1st

Defendant. As per the attestation, out of said consideration, Rs.24000.00 has been paid to

her and only Rs.9000.00 has been retained by the vendee to pay the installment due to

9

Agricultural and Industrial Credit Corporation loan. As per the evidence led at the trial, the

estate of the deceased father of the 2nd Defendant had cash worth of Rs.12798.00 while there

were liabilities of Rs 68,048/- as payment due to the State and Rs. 26250/- as payment due to

Agricultural and industrial development Corporation- vide page 172 of the brief. Further, as

per the evidence at pages 173 and 176 of the brief, on 10.06.1982, the 2nd Defendant had

stated before the judge in the testamentary proceedings that she had already paid Rs.23126/-

of the above mentioned Rs.26250/-. She has further undertaken to pay the balance without

burdening the Plaintiff and the 1st Defendant of the present action. As per the evidence at

pages 174 and 175, it appears that the testamentary case is not yet concluded and devolution

properties of the estate has not been yet tendered to the said court. Even the Attorney-at-

Law and Notary public who attested the said deed has stated in evidence that he was not

aware about any testamentary case pending- vide page 116 of the brief. Thus, it is clear, the

2nd Defendant sold the 50 acres not as the administrator but as the owner of a divided 50

acres of the land in Puttalam and paid only a portion of the loan by selling it.

Similarly, as per the evidence led at the trial, balance 50 acres of the land in Puttalam has

been sold by the heirs of the said Sisira Sriwimal Nissanka- vide evidence at pages 104,105,

140,141,142,143 and 144 of the brief. Deed no.175 dated 26.04.1978 is the deed by which

the 1st Defendant sold her rights in 25 acres in the land in Puttalam. As per the attestation,

out of the consideration of Rs.18000/-, Rs.13153/- has been paid to the Agricultural and

Industrial Corporation. Thus, it is clear that even the heirs of the brother of the 2nd Defendant

took part in paying the loan of the estate of the deceased father of the 2nd Defendant. Further

it appears that, when the 2nd Defendant stated to the District Court hearing the testamentary

action that she has paid Rs.23126/- of the loan to the Agricultural and Industrial Corporation,

the sum paid by the 1st Defendant is also included in that sum.

However, the evidence referred to above indicates that the 2nd Defendant and the heirs of

her brother dealt with their entitlement in the Property in Puttalam separately and the 2nd

Defendant treated her portion of land as a divided portion even when executing the deed of

sale for her portion and she executed the said deed as the owner of the 50 acres and not as

the administrator to sell part of the estate to settle a loan. It is also evinced that both parties

have contributed to settle the loan to Agricultural and Industrial Corporation. The said

10

evidence is not compatible with the position that the 2nd Defendant sold 50 acres to settle

the loans of the deceased father and she gave her 25 acres that should come to her from the

land in Puttalam in lieu of the land in Kuliyapitiya, the subject matter of the partition action

related to this appeal. Thus, the 2nd Defendants stance regarding such exchange of lands and

selling of 50 acres from the estate to settle the loan is not reliable. The 3rd Defendant was not

a party to such agreement if there was any, and he cannot speak to the truth of it and he in

his evidence-in-chief itself has said that he knows nothing about the testamentary case.

On the other hand, as per the evidence referred to above, it appears still the testamentary

action is not concluded. The 2nd Defendant is the administrator who holds responsibilities as

a fiduciary towards all the heirs. As far as she remains the administrator of the estate of the

deceased father, she has to manage the properties belonging to the estate of the deceased

for the benefit of the heirs subject to her duties as the administrator. Thus, not only as a co-

owner but also as a fiduciary she must prove ouster or something similar to that to claim

prescriptive rights against other heirs to a property belonging to the estate of the deceased.

As explained above she has failed in proving such ouster or commencement of adverse

possession from some event similar to ouster.

The 2nd and 3rd Defendants in their written submissions have referred to certain answers given

by the Plaintiff while giving evidence. At page 103 of the proceedings, when it was suggested

to the Plaintiff that 2 acres of the land in Puttalam was acquired by the State and 50 acres of

it were sold to settle the loans of her grandfather, she has answered admitting that, and

learned District Judge has referred to that admission in his judgment-vide page 192 of the

brief. At page 105 of the brief the Plaintiff has stated that after the death of her father the

land was possessed by them after a division caused through the intervention of court. The

learned District Judge has referred to this statement of the Plaintiff at page193 of the brief.

For the following reasons, this court or a court below cannot rely on those answers.

Even the father of the Plaintiff was a minor when the testamentary case was filed and

the Plaintiff was only 2 years when her father died. Thus, she cannot give evidence

with first-hand knowledge of such facts relating to any agreement to sell 50 acres to

settle loans of her grandfather. She must have come to know about that from another

source and such source is not before court to test the truth of it. On the other hand,

11

as explained above the deeds executed by the 2nd Defendant and the 1st Defendant

and the other evidence before this court do not support that there was such

settlement but indicate that the parties have dealt separately with regard to their

rights in the land in Puttalam. Moreover, both parties had paid the loan and it appears

that it was the mother of the Plaintiff (1st Defendant) who contributed more towards

paying the loan.

If there was any decision to divide the properties among the parties through a court,

it has to be in writing and no such decision, permission or direction is placed as

evidence at the trial. No oral evidence of the Plaintiff who seems to have no personal

knowledge can be accepted for what should have been in writing unless it is proved

that primary evidence is destroyed or not available and the Plaintiff has first-hand

knowledge of such decision, permission or direction.

It is not uncommon in Sri Lanka that co-owners amicably possess different parts of the

co-owned property for convenience without terminating their co-ownership. The

Plaintiff through whatever the admissions or statements made as above has not

admitted such division was with the intention of terminating the co-ownership to give

exclusive ownership to separated parts of the estate of the deceased grandfather.

The 2nd and 3rd Defendants try to fault the Plaintiff and the 1st Defendant for not calling the

1st Defendant to give evidence. There is no evidence to say that she was a party to or she

witnessed the purported oral agreement between the 2nd Defendant and her brother. On the

other hand, as elaborated above the evidence including the documentary evidence make the

version of the 2nd and 3rd Defendants unacceptable. Moreover, the burden of proving

prescriptive title is on the 2nd and 3rd Defendants who claim prescriptive title. Besides, the

presumptions such as;

A co-owners possession is the possession of other co-owners,

When a possession of a person may be referable to a lawful title, that person is

presumed to possess by virtue of his/her lawful title,

A person who has entered into possession of land in one capacity is presumed to

continue to possess it in the same capacity,

12

stands for the benefit of the Plaintiff and the 1st Defendant. As such, the 2nd and 3rd

Defendants should have proved ouster or something equivalent to ouster to prove the change

of their status in relation to the subject matter of the partition action related to this appeal

and to prove their adverse possession. As explained above, the 2nd and 3rd Defendants have

not placed reliable and sufficient evidence to prove or presume ouster. Evidence led at the

trial indicates that it is more probable that there had been an amicable partition of the land

at Puttalam but not an exchange of lands between parties. Thus, I cannot find fault with the

conclusions reached by the learned High Court Judges or the learned District Judge.

Hence, the questions of law quoted above have to be answered in the negative and in favour

of the Plaintiff and the 1st Defendant.

Therefore, this appeal is dismissed with costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

L.T.B. DEHIDENIYA, J.

I agree

Judge of the Supreme Court

S. THURAIRAJA, J.

I agree

.

Judge of the Supreme Court.