1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Leave to Appeal in terms of the Article 128 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka read with section 5c of the High Court of the Provinces (special Provisions Act No. 19 of 1990 as amended by the Act No. 54 of 2006. Eliyadura Osman Weerasena Silva, No.4/3, Train Houses, Modera Moratuwa. SC. Appeal.67/2015 Plaintiff S.C.(H.C.C.A) LA.248/12 WP/HCCA/Kalutara03/2005 (F) D.C Horana 365/L VS. EliyaduraPadmaRanjani, No.126, Batuwita, Gonapola Junction. Defendant AND Eliyadura Padma Ranjani, No.126, Batuwita, Gonapola junction. Defendant-Appellant Vs. Eliyadura Osman Weerasena Silva No.4/3, Tain Houses, Modara, Moratuwa. Plaintiff-Respondent

2

AND NOW Eliyadura Padma Ranjani, No.126, Batuwita, Gonapola junction. Defendant-Appellant-Petitioner Vs. Eliyadura Osman Weerasena Silva, No.4/3, Train Houses, Modera Moratuwa. Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent BEFORE: B.P.ALUWIHARE, PC, J, PRIYANTHA JAYAWARDENA, J & ANIL GOONERATNE, J. COUNSEL: Yasas de Silva for the Defendant-Appellant-

Appellant.

E.B.Atapattu with PrasanjeewaPattiarachchi

instructed by Ms. P. Weerasekera for the Plaintiff-

Respondent-Respondent

WRITTEN

SUBMISSIONS: 10.04.2015 20.04.2016 by the Appellant

09.05.2016 by the Plaintiff-Respondent-

Respondent

3

ARGUED ON: 12.05.2017. DECIDED ON: 14.12.2017 ALUWIHARE, PC, J: The Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the

Plaintiff) in arei-vindicatio action filed before the District Court of

Horana, inter alia sought:

(a) a declaration that the Plaintiff is the owner of the land,

the subject matter to this application, and

(b) an order for the ejectment of the Defendant-Appellant-

Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Defendant)

therefrom.

This court granted leave to appeal on the questions of law referred to

in sub-paragraphs (a), (b), (c) and (g) of paragraph 23 of the Petition

of the Petitioner which are reproduced below:

(a) Whether the said judgement of their Lordship’s of the Civil

Appellate High Court is contrary to the law and material placed

at the trial?

(b) Whether their Lordships have erred in law by failing to

consider that the Respondent has not proved the necessary

requirement to obtain a judgement of a rei-vindicatio action?

(C) Whether their Lordships have erred in law by failing to

consider that the Respondent has not properly identified and

proved the land in issue and in that event, he was not entitled to

obtain a judgement in his favour?

4

(g) Whether their Lordshipshave erred in law by holding that the

Petitioner has failed to prove her case, as in a rei-

vindicatioaction, the burden is entirely on the Plaintiff?

At the conclusion of the trial before the District Court, the learned

District Judge held with the Plaintiff and aggrieved by the said

judgement, the Defendant appealed to the High Court of Civil Appeals

(Kalutara). The learned Judges of the High Court, affirmed the

judgement of the learned District Judge and accordingly the appeal of

the Defendant was dismissed.

The present appeal arises from the judgement of the High Court of

Civil Appeals.

Background:

According to the Plaint, in the year 1954, the property in suit had

been granted toone Diyaneris Silva by way of a crown grant (P4)

under the Land Development Ordinance. Said Diyaneris Silva

nominated his son Edwin Silva as his successor and had effected the

registration of the said nominee as well (P3). Edwin Silva had died in

the year 1997 and his wife also had passed away thereafter. In terms

of Section 72 of the Land Development Ordinance, the Plaintiff who

happened to be the eldest surviving son of Edwin Silva,became entitled

to the property in suit and the same had been registered with the

Divisional Secretary’s office under reference LDO 753. After the

death of Edwin Silva in 1977, the Defendant who happened to be a

younger sister of the Plaintiff, had come into occupation of a building

that stood on this property which had been used for religious

activities, according to the Plaintiff. The Plaintiff, in 2001, by a letter

5

sent through his attorney, had requested the Defendant to quit the

property and to have vacant possession handed over to the Plaintiff.

The Defendant in her answer had taken up the position that the

property in suit was allotted to Diyaneris Silva by the District Court of

Kalutara consequent to a partition decree in case No. 9646.

It was the position of the Defendant that Edwin Silva inherited the

property in question after the death of his father Diyaneris Silva. After

the death of Edwin Silva, the Defendant being a child of Edwin Silva,

inherited the property. In addition, the Defendant also had taken up

the position that she was in possession of the property for a period of

42 years and she claimed prescriptive title to the property as well.

When the matter was taken up for hearing the learned counsel for the

Defendant submitted that both the judgment of the learned District

Judge as well as the judgment of the High Court of Civil Appeals

cannot be sustained for the following reasons:

(1) The Plaintiff had failed to establish title to the impugned

property.

(2) The Plaintiff had failed to comply with the requirements of

Section 41 of the Civil Procedure Code.

(3) The Plaintiff had failed to discharge the burden of proof he is

required to meet in accordance with the law.

(4) The judgement of the District Court is erroneous in fact and in

law.

6

With regard to the failure on the part of the Plaintiff to establish the

title to the property, it was argued, that although he relied on a State

grant the evidence adduced by the Plaintiff is not clear enough to

show that the Plaintiff is in fact the owner of the impugned property.

At the commencement of the trial, the corpus was admitted by the

parties. The Plaintiff had led the evidence of the Land Officer attached

to the relevant Divisional Secretariat, who had testified to the effect

that in 1954 under the Crown grant P1, a land in extent of 1 Acre, 1

Rood and 11 Perches had been granted to Diyaneris Silva and the

witness also marked in evidence the relevant plan (P2) depicting the

land that was granted to the said grantee. The Land Officer conceded

that the land described in the grant P1 and the Plan P2 is one and the

same land that is referred to in the schedule to the plaint. The witness

also admitted that Diyaneris Silva had nominated his son Edwin Silva

as the successor and that the nomination had been registered (P4).

Thereafter the title of the impugned property had been transferred to

Osman Weerasena Silva, the Plaintiff, in terms of Section 72 of the

Land Development Ordinance consequent to a decision taken by the

Provincial Commissioner of Lands, which had been forwarded for

registration to the Registrar of Lands and the registration had been

effected by the Registrar of Lands. At one point the Plaintiff had

requested that the land be divided among his male siblings, but due to

the protest by the Defendant, on the basis that the impugned property

is private land, the Land Officer had not carried out that request, but

had advised the parties to resolve the dispute through a court of law.

It is also significant that steps had been taken to have the disputed

property surveyed through the surveyor attached to the Divisional

7

Secretariat and the surveyor had confirmed the disputed property is

the same as the land referred to in the grant P1.

The evidence given by this witness remains unassailed and I see no

infirmities in the testimony of this witness to disbelieve him or to have

it rejected and quite rightly the learned District Judge had acted on his

testimony which establishes that the impugned property is a crown

grant.

The next issue is the succession of the impugned property after the

death of Edwin Silva. It is common ground that Edwin Silva had not

nominated a successor. As such, it was the position of the Land

Officer that in terms of Section 72 of the Land Development

Ordinance the Plaintiff was nominated.

I shall advert to the evidence given by the Land Officer in this regard.

His evidence was that the title of the impugned property had been

handed over to Osman Weerasena Silva (the Plaintiff) in terms of

Section 72 of the Land Development Ordinance as per the decision of

the Provincial Commissioner of Lands and the said decision had been

conveyed to the Registrar of Lands by the letter, P5 which says the

perfected schedules are forwarded for the purpose of the transfer of

title to Osman Weerasena Silva (the Plaintiff) of the land referred to in

the grant No.3242, under the provisions of the Land Development

Ordinance.

It was the position of the Land Officer that the transfer of the title of

the grant was made under Section 72 of the Land Development

Ordinance, which deals with the succession upon death of the life-

holder.

8

Section 72 of the Land Development Ordinance; -

72. (1) Upon the death of the life-holder of a holding the

nominated successor, if any, shall succeed to the

holding-

(2) If no successor has been nominated or if the

nominated successor fails to succeed, the title to the

holding shall devolve as prescribed by the rules in

the Third Schedule. (emphasis added) For ease of Reference Schedule 3 of the Land Development Ordinance

is reproduced to below:

THIRD SCHEDULE

RULES

1. (a) The groups of relatives from which a successor may be nominated for the purposes of section 51 shall be as set out in the subjoined table.

(b) Title to a holding for the purposes of section 72 shall devolve on one only of the relatives of the permit-holder or owner in the order of priority in which they are respectively mentioned in the subjoined table, the older being preferred to the younger where there are more relatives than one in any group.

Table (i) Sons. (vii) Brothers.

(ii) Daughters. (viii) Sisters. (iii) Grandsons. (ix) Uncles. (iv)granddaughters (x) Aunts. (v) Father. (xi) Nephews. (vi) Mother. (xii) Nieces. In this rule, " relative " means a relative by blood and not by marriage.

2. Where in any group of relatives mentioned in the table subjoined to rule 1 there are two or more persons of the same age who are equally entitled and willing to succeed, the Government Agent may nominate one of such persons to succeed to the holding. Such decision of the Government Agent shall be final.

** 4. If any relative on whom the title to a holding devolves under the provisions of these rules is unwilling to succeed to such holding, the title thereto shall devolve upon the relative who is next entitled to succeed under the provisions of rule 1. (Emphasis is mine)

9

From the above schedule, it is clear that for the purposes of Section 72,

title devolves on only one relative of the permit holder in the order of

priority, referred to in the third schedule. Furthermore,the sons of the

permit holder have priority over his or her other relatives and the

Plaintiff happened to be the eldest living son at the relevant time as his

sole elder brother had passed away. Death of the elder brother was

acknowledged by the Defendant in her evidence.

The Defendant in her evidence stated that her grandfather became

entitled to the impugned property consequent to a partition decree

and her father inherited the land after the death of her grandfather.

In answer to court she had said that she was told by her father that

her grandfather transferred the property on a title deed, but the

defendant failed to either give details of the deed or to produce the

deed during the trial.

Record Keeper of the District Court of Kalutara also had given

evidence on behalf of the Defendant and produced, the court record

in case No.9646 D.C. Kalutara and that both Diyaneris Silva and his

wife had been allotted 9/96 of the corpus. There is no evidence,

however, to say that there is any nexus between the corpus of the said

partition case and the impugned property of the case before us.

On the material referred to above, one cannot fault the finding of the

learned District Judge that the Plaintiff had proved his title to the

property in suit.

The second issue raised on behalf of the Defendant Appellant, was

that the Plaintiff had not complied with Section 41 of the Civil

10

Procedure Code. It was contended on behalf of the Appellant that the

evidence led at the trial showed that another sister of the parties was

also residing within the corpus and as such Plaintiff is not the only

possessor of the impugned land. It was argued on this basis that the

Plaintiff ought to have referred to the specific portion of land he is

claiming.

It is to be noted that there is no evidence to say that there is a dispute

as to the possession or title of the impugned property between the

Plaintiff and the other sister of the Plaintiff who is also in possession of

a portion of the land or that she also has put forward a claim to the

impugned property. From the evidence led at the trial it appears that

the said sister is in possession with leave and license of the Plaintiff,

thus I hold that there is no non-compliance with Section 41 of the

Civil Procedure Code on the part of the Plaintiff.

The third issue raised on behalf of the Defendant Appellant was that

the Plaintiff had not discharged the burden of proving title. I have

already discussed the evidence placed by the Plaintiff with regard to

the title and I see no reason to reiterate them. It is abundantly clear

from the documents produced and from the oral testimony, the

devolution of title commencing from the original grantee Diyaneris

Silva to his son Edwin Silva and from him to his eldest surviving son,

the present Plaintiff, which had been regularized by the authorities as

reflected in documents marked P4 and P5. According to the evidence

of the Land Officer, the surveyor attached to the Divisional Secretariat

having surveyed the impugned property, had confirmed that it is the

same land as in grant given under R3242 to Diyaneris Silva. Thus, I

am of the view that there is no doubt with regard to the identity of the

corpus. This evidence in my view is relevant and admissible in terms

11

of Section 35 of the Evidence Ordinance, the surveyor being a public

servant and an entry made with regard to what he performed in the

discharge of his official duty.

As a fourth point of argument the Defendant-Appellant contended

that the learned District Judge had erred both in fact and in law, and

drew the attention of the court to an admission purported to have

been recorded and the learned counsel contended that no such

admission had been recorded.

It was submitted that the learned District Judge had referred to an

admission in his judgment to the effect that, both parties agree that the

Defendant is residing in the impugned property, and it was contended

that no such an admission was recorded by the parties.

The admission that was recorded is as follows:

\ï;a;sldrsh fkrmSug b,a,d isêk bvfus msysçu iyd meusKs,slref.a

mosxpsh fuu wOslrK n,iSudj ;=, nj ms,s.kS\

I have considered the evidence led in the case and it is common

ground that the Defendant is residing in a building used for religious

activities within the corpus. The Plaintiff had said that the Defendant

attended their father’s funeral and continued to occupy the building

referred to. The Defendant’s position was that from her childhood,

she was residing in the building. As such I am of the view that no

prejudice had been caused to either party by reference to the

purported admission by the learned District Judge.

12

Upon consideration of the above, I cannot fault either the learned

District Judge with regard to the findings, he had arrived at orthe

Judges of the High Court of Civil Appeals in holding that the learned

District Judge was correct. Accordingly, I answer the three questions

of law on which leave was granted in the negative.

The appeal is dismissed and the Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent will

be entitled to costs here and also costsin the High Court of Civil

Appeals.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

JUSTICE PRIYANTHA JAYAWARDENA.PC

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

JUSTICE ANIL GOONERATNE

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT