1

In the matter of an Application for under and

in terms of Article 17 and 126 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

1. Don Piyasena Karunaratne,

No. 01, Stadium Road, Anuradhapura.

2. Thamara Gunatunge,

No.05, Stadium Cross Road,

Anuradhapura.

3. Magilin Nona Hapangama,

No.03, Stadium Cross Road,

Anuradhapura.

Petitioners

Vs.

1. Anuradhapura Municipal Council,

Anuradhapura.

2. H. P Somadasa,

Mayor,

Anuradhapura Municipal Council,

Anuradhapura.

3. S.S.M Sampath Rohana Dharmadasa,

Municipal Commissioner,

Anuradhapura Municipal Council,

Anuradhapura.

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

SC/FR Application No. 356/2014

2

Before: Jayantha Jayasuriya, PC, CJ.

L.T. B Dehideniya, J.

Yasantha Kodagoda, PC, J.

Counsels: Senany Dayaratne with Nishadi Wickramasinghe for the Petitioners

Darshana Kuruppu with Ms. Sajini Elvitigala for the 1st- 3rd Respondents

Argued on: 22.09.2020

Decided on: 08.11.2022

L.T B. Dehideniya, J.

The Petitioners invoke the jurisdiction of this court alleging the infringement of

Fundamental Rights guaranteed under the Article 12(1) of the Constitution by the

Respondents.

The Petitioners who were former employees of Anuradhapura Municipal Council

(hereinafter sometime referred to as the 1st Respondent) have filed the present application

seeking an order directing the 1st and/or, 2nd and/or, 3rd Respondents to transfer the

4. Honourable Attoreny General

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondents

3

absolute ownership of the houses belonging to the 1st Respondent, which the Petitioners

occupy on tenancies. The Petitioners submit that the Petitioners (and/or their spouses)

were allocated there residencies on a rent purchase basis, pursuant to the direction of the

then Minister of Local Government dated 09.10.1979, under Section 3(1) of the Local

Authorities Housing Act No. 14 of 1964 (as amended) marked as P-3.

Petitioners state that being aware of the continuing practice of departments to transfer of

houses on such tenancy agreements on completion of 20 years, the Petitioners made

various requests to the 3rd Respondent to transfer absolute ownership of the houses to the

Petitioners, but it was of no avail. It was further submitted that the said requests were

made on the basis that, when the direction of the then Minister marked as P-3 read

together with the tenancy agreements, it establishes a Legitimate Expectation on

Petitioners and place confidence in Petitioners that they are entitled to purchase the

houses.

The Respondent’s contention is that the Petitioners are not entitled to absolute ownership

of the said houses on the ground that the houses in question are not low cost houses but

they are official quarters within the meaning of Local Authority Quarters (Recovery of

Possession) Act No. 42 of 1978, in which absolute ownership cannot be granted to

tenants. It was submitted that according to Section 5(A) of the Local Authorities Housing

Act as amended the Local Authority has the power to transfer houses if the monthly rental

of such house did not exceed twenty five rupees and the Advisory Board is satisfied that

the other statutory conditions are fulfilled. Therefore, the Respondents argue that even

assuming the said houses are low-cost houses, since the monthly rental mentioned in the

rent agreements are forty-five rupees, the Respondents have no authority to transfer

4

absolute ownership of the houses to the Petitioners. It is the view of the Respondents that

the Petitioners have not come to Courts with clean hands.

As per the submissions tendered by the parties, it is essential for this Court to examine

the scope of the definition of a low-cost house in the context of existing law and the

tenancy agreement signed by the Petitioners. The 1st Respondent has presented three

categories of houses to consider in a matter similar to the present application. The said

categories are as follows;

1. Slum clearance houses

2. Low-cost houses

3. Staff quarters

The Respondents’ submission is that though absolute ownership of the slum clearance

houses and low-cost houses can be transferred to the occupants, absolute ownership of

staff quarters/official quarters cannot be transferred under the law. It was further

submitted that if the Authority is providing low-cost houses or slum clearance houses, it

has to be stated clearly in the relevant letters or agreements and the words used in the

tenancy agreements of the Petitioners are ‘මාණ්ඩලික නිවාස අංක .... සල්ගාදු හ ෝටලය

ඉදිරිපිට’, in which the words ‘මාණ්ඩලික නිවාස’ should be identified as official/ staff

quarters. Therefore, the Respondents contend that the absolute ownership of the houses

given to Petitioners cannot be transferred to Petitioners and the Petitioners are bound to

handover their houses when they were transferred and/or retired from the service.

When considering whether the Petitioners are entitled to claim ownership of the houses

in question, it is important for this Court to delve into the background of the Petitioners

case and the nature of the tenancy agreement. 1st Petitioner had been allocated a house

5

(vide document marked P-2(a)) with effect from 18.12.1963. 2nd Petitioner had been

allocated a house (vide document marked P-2(b)) with effect from 23.09.1972 and the

3rd Petitioner with effect from 12.02.1965 (vide document marked P-2(c)). All three

Petitioners submit that they occupied the said houses throughout and even at the time the

present application was filed. Further, when considering the factual matrix of the instant

application, it appears that the Petitioners had continued to occupy the houses allocated

to them even after their retirement from service from the Municipal Council.

The Petitioners submit that in or around 1981, the Petitioners received notice of quit in

terms of Local Authority Quarters (Recovery of Possession) Law No. 42 of 1978. The

Petitioners seek to claim the absolute ownership of the houses in question on the ground

that the Petitioners are occupying houses built under the ‘low-cost housing scheme’ of

the Municipal Council. In terms of Section 5(A) of the Local Authorities Housing Act,

as amended, the Local Authority is vested with the power to transfer the absolute

ownership of houses let under Section 3(1) of the Act, if the Advisory Board constituted

for the Local Authority is satisfied that the statutory conditions are fulfilled.

The Petitioners with the belief that their houses belong to the low-cost houses category,

argued that when reading Section 5(A) of the Local Authorities Housing (Amendment)

Act No. 63 of 1979 in conjunction with the direction of the Minister of Local Government

dated 09.10.1979 made under Section 3(1) of the Local Authorities Housing Act No. 14

of 1964 (as amended) marked as P-3 that they are entitled to claim absolute ownership

of the houses they received as former employees of the Municipal Council. However,

Section 5(A) of the Local Authorities Housing (Amendment) Act No. 63 of 1979 clearly

6

states that advisory board has power to transfer houses if the monthly rental of such house

immediately prior to such letting did not exceed ‘twenty-five rupees’.

Section 3(1)

(1) Subject as hereinafter provided, a local authority may, either upon a

resolution passed in that behalf at a duly constituted meeting of that local

authority or upon the direction of the Minister, let to any person any house-

(a) which has vested in that local authority under section 2; or

(b)which has been, or may be, constructed by that local authority

within the administrative limits of that local authority for the

purpose of residence, on such terms as will enable that person to

become the owner of that house and the land appertaining thereto

after making certain number of monthly payments as rent.

Section 5(A)

(1) Where prior to the date of coming into force of this section a house to

which this Act applies has been let to any person under the provisions

of section 3(1) and the monthly rental of such house immediately prior

to such letting did not exceed twenty- five rupees, the local authority

within the administrative limits of which that house Is situated shall,

by an instrument of disposition, transfer, free of charge, that house to

that person. [emphasis added]

The Respondents’ position is that there is no evidence that the houses in question were let

to the Petitioners on the basis that they are “low cost houses” even though Section 3(1) of

7

the Local Authorities Housing Act, as amended, enables local authorities to let houses on

a rent purchase basis. The approval granted by the Secretary to Ministry of Local

Government, Housing and Construction dated 09 October 1979 marked P-3 is limited to

the letting “low cost houses”. Respondents contend that the houses in question are not

such houses but are official quarters. However, in or around 1989, Urban Council of

Anuradhapura had filed a rent and ejectment case (Case No.12715/RE) in the District

Court of Anuradhapura to recover default rent payments related to the houses in question.

The said case being a rent and ejectment case shows that the Urban Council of

Anuradhapura had not considered the houses as official quarters, but had relied upon the

tenancy agreement to file the case. If the local authority considered the said houses as

official quarters, the local authority should have initiated proceedings under the Local

Authority Quarters (Recover of Possession) Law. Therefore, it is the view of this Court

that the Petitioners have received the houses in question on rent basis. This view had been

accepted in the decisions of the applications bearing Nos. HC Anuradhapura Certiorari

19/96, CA (PHC) 108/98, HC Anuradhapura Certiorari 13/94, CA (PHC) 01/96, HC

Anuradhapura Certiorari 23/96 and CA (PHC) 109/98 (marked as P-7 (a), P-7 (b), P-7

(c), P-7 (d), P-7 (e) and P-7 (f), respectively) filed by the Petitioners to seek relief to

quash notices of quit issued by the Respondents.

It was further argued on behalf of the Respondents that the provisions in Section 5(A) of

the Act have no relevance to the present application since the houses in question do not

fulfil the requirements set out in the said Section. Section 5(A) of the Act clearly sets out

that only houses that are required to pay a monthly rent less than twenty-five rupees (Rs.

25/-) could be considered for transferring the absolute ownership. However, according to

8

the documents marked P-2(a), P-2(b) and P-2(c) when the houses were allocated to the

Petitioners, the monthly rent the Petitioners were required to pay was forty-five rupees

(Rs. 45/-).

As discussed above, Section 3(1) of the Local Authorities Housing Act, as amended,

enables authorities to let houses on a rent purchase basis and the Section 5(A) of the said

Act empowers the local authorities to transfer the absolute ownership of houses let under

Section 3(1) if the Advisory Board constituted for the Local Authority is satisfied that the

statutory conditions are fulfilled. When considering the documents marked as P-2(a), P-

2(b) and P-2(c), it appears that none of the said documents are rent purchase agreements,

but, rent agreements. The rent agreements marked as P-2(a), P-2(b) and P-2(c) consist of

certain conditions to be fulfilled by the tenants throughout the rent period, such as; no

permanent fixers, improvements or repairs shall be made without the written permission

of the special commissioner, no trade shall be done within the premises, tenants shall keep

the premises clean and sanitary etc. From the nature of the said conditions, it is clear that

the houses in question were given to the Petitioners on rent basis and not on rent purchase

basis. Therefore, it is evident that none of the agreements on which the relevant houses

were let to the Petitioners’ have been made under section 3(1) of the Local Authorities

Housing Act and there is no condition on any of the agreements to the effect that the

Petitioners are entitled to have the absolute ownership of houses transferred upon

payment of rent for a specified period.

Further, none of the said rent agreements indicate a promise made by the local authority

to transfer the absolute ownership of the houses in question. Further, the phrase “තවද,

ඉන් අනතුරුව හමම නිවස ඔබට කුලියට සින්න වීහේ පදනම මත දීම ගැනද යථා කාලහේදී

9

සලකා බලනු ලැහේ.” in the document marked P-4(f) exhibits a mere consideration by the

local authority. Therefore, it is clear that the local authority has retained the discretion to

transfer the absolute ownership of the houses in question.

Respondents have tendered the supplementary tenement list for the Petitioners’ houses

(documents marked as R-20 and R-21). In terms of the said supplementary tenement list

all the premises that the Petitioners claim absolute ownership are ‘staff quarters’ vested

with the Municipal Council of Anuradhapura. Therefore, according to evidence produced

by the Respondents, the Petitioners have failed to substantiate that the houses under

consideration are classified as ‘low cost’ houses.

The Respondents have drawn the Court's attention to the case C.W Jayasekera v.

Municipal Council of Anuradhapura and Others (SC/FR Application No.63/2013, SC

minutes dated 26.07.2017) where considerably similar circumstances have been

discussed. Petitioner in the said application had been issued with a notice of quit in terms

of the Local Government Official Quarters (Recovery of Possession) Act, similar to the

Petitioners in the present application. However, in clear contrast to the present situation,

the Petitioner failed both in High Court and the Court of Appeal to quash the said quit

notice, and there are no judicial pronouncements that the said house occupied by the

Petitioner is not official quarters, but received in a rent basis. Therefore, it is apparent that

the decision of the case C.W Jayasekera v. Municipal Council of Anuradhapura and

Others cannot be considered in the present application.

As per the aforementioned discussion of the factual matrix and the existing law relating

to the present application, it is the view of this Court that the Petitioner do not have a right

to claim for a transfer the absolute ownership of the houses. Further, it is clear that the

10

Respondent local authority has not given any legitimate expectation to Petitioners to make

such a claim.

By concluding the judgement, this Court adopts the view that no violation of the

Fundamental Right guaranteed to the Petitioners under Article 12 (1) of the constitution

has taken place.

Petition dismissed.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Jayantha Jayasuriya, PC, CJ

I agree

Chief Justice

Yasantha Kodagoda, PC, J

I agree

Judge of the Supreme Court

11