1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application under Article 126 of

the Constitution of Sri Lanka.

Herath Mudiyanselage Wasantha Anura Kumara of

Thammitagama, Nagollagama.

Petitioner

S.C. (FR) Application Vs.

No: 388/2010

1. Headquarters Inspector Channa Abeyratne

Police Station, Maho.

2. Sub-Inspector of Police Ananda

Police Station, Maho.

3. Police Sergeant 55008 Asanka

Police Station, Maho.

4. Police Constable 55037 Navaratne

Police Station, Maho.

5.Deputy Inspector General of Police

North Western Province,

D. I. G’s Office, Kurunegala.

6. Mahinda Balasuriya,

Inspector General of Police,

Police Headquarters,

Fort, Colombo 1.

7. The Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Hulftsdorp, Colombo 12.

Respondents

2

Before: Buwaneka Aluwihare, PC, J.

L.T.B. Dehideniya, J.

S. Thurairaja, PC, J.

Counsel: K. Tiranagama with Mahbooba Rifaideen and Swarnapali Wanigasekera for the Petitioner.

Anura Meddegoda, PC, with Nadeesha Kannangara for the 1st Respondent.

Induni Punchihewa, SC, for the 2nd – 7th Respondents.

Argued on: 14. 01. 2020

Decided on: 26. 07. 2021

Judgement

Aluwihare PC. J.,

The Petitioner, a tenant cultivator, complained of the violation of his fundamental

rights guaranteed under Articles 12 (1), 13 (1) and 13 (2) of the Constitution by

the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th Respondents. Leave to proceed was granted for the alleged

infringement of Articles 12 (1) and 13 (1) by the said Respondents.

The Version of the Petitioner

(1) The Petitioner is a tenant cultivator of a land called Kolongahamulla

Henyaya in Ratmale, Nagollagama. According to the Petitioner, he had

cultivated Papaya in an extent of 5 acres. The Petitioner asserts that, on

7th June 2010, after he returned home having worked at his papaya

plantation, at around 5.30 pm, Police Sergeant Asanka [the correct name

is ‘Asoka’], the 3rd Respondent and Police Constable Navaratne, the 4th

3

Respondent came to his house, and took him into custody, stating that

Venerable Bandiyawatte Pannananda Thero of the Nagollagama Raja

Maha Viharaya had made a complaint against him, and had brought him

to the Maho Police Station, which was about 14 km away from his home.

He had been detained at the Police Station until the arrival of 1st

Respondent, the Headquarters Inspector [HQI].

(2) According to the Petitioner, the 1st Respondent had arrived at the Police

Station at around 11.30 pm and admonished the Petitioner and had

warned him; not to step into the papaya plantation hereafter. The 1st

Respondent had threatened that he would break the Petitioner’s legs and

have him jailed for seven-eight months, if he dared to enter the

plantation again. The Petitioner claims that he was only allowed to go

home around midnight. He had returned home with his uncle Sunil on

his motorcycle, who had come to the police station on hearing that the

Petitioner had been brought to the police station.

(3) The Petitioner alleges that it was the 1st Respondent who was mainly

responsible for his arrest and detention, from about 5.30 pm to 12

midnight, at the Maho Police Station. The Petitioner has tendered two

Affidavits in support of his allegation that it was the 1st, 3rd and 4th

Respondents who were responsible for his arrest; one, being the Affidavit

of the Petitioner’s mother, Anulawathie Kumari (‘P6’) and the other

being the Affidavit of a co-worker, Weerasiri Dissanayake (‘P7’). Both of

them have affirmed that they witnessed the arrest of the Petitioner by the

police officers, in the manner alleged by the Petitioner.

(4) The Petitioner’s mother states in her Affidavit that, after her son was

taken away in a Police Jeep, she went to her brother, Nandasena’s house

where her other brother Sunil had also been present. She states that she

related to them, as to what happened and sought their help. She claims

that in response to her plea, her brother Sunil went to the Maho Police

Station on his motorcycle and returned with her son late at night. She

4

states that when dropping off her son, Sunil told them that he secured

the Petitioners’ release on bail upon the arrival of the H.Q.I. (the 1st

Respondent).

(5) Weerasiri Dissanayake, who worked in the Petitioner’s papaya

plantation states that after work, he accompanied the Petitioner to his

house so that he could receive his day’s wages. He states that he saw three

police officers arrive at the Petitioner’s house in a police jeep and that he

saw them take the Petitioner with them. He states that the Petitioner’s

mother then went to Nandasena’s house to inform him of what had

happened. The Affirmant states that he then stayed at the house till the

Petitioner’s return. He states that the Petitioner was dropped off by his

uncle Sunil around midnight, and that he heard him say that he (Sunil)

secured his release on bail.

(6) Although the Petitioner, in his petition, had averred that some damage

had been caused to his plantation on the following day, i.e., 8th of June,

those events, have no bearing on deciding the issues before us. As such I

do not wish to refer to those events here.

The Version of the 1st Respondent

(7) According to the 1st Respondent, on 7th June 2010, at 11.30 am he had

left for “Mahawa Jayasumana Pirivena” to put in place security

measures, in connection with the visit of the Hon. Prime Minister to the

temple on that day. In support of this assertion, he has annexed copies of

the relevant “out” and “in” entries made by him in the Daily Information

Book [DIB] maintained at the Maho Police Station [‘1R2’].

(8) The 1st Respondent’s position is that, in the afternoon, whilst the 1st

Respondent was on duty, Ven. Bandiyawatte Pangnananda Thero of

Nagollagama Raja Maha Viharaya had informed the Maho Police over

the telephone that the Petitioner had encroached upon a land belonging

5

to the said priest and had commenced cultivating the said land.

Thereupon, the 1st Respondent had directed the 3rd Respondent to

investigate into this complaint and to advise the parties to maintain

peace. On the instructions of the 1st Respondent, the 3rd and 4th

Respondents had proceeded to the Nagollagama Temple, and the 4th

Respondent had recorded a statement from the priest with regard to the

complaint he had made against the Petitioner [A copy of the statement of

the priest has been annexed marked ‘1R4’]. According to the entry made

by the 3rd Respondent at the police station, whilst the statement of the

priest was being recorded by the 4th Respondent, he had made

observations of the land in question.

(9) After meeting the priest, the 3rd and 4th Respondents had met the

Petitioner and informed him about the complaint against him. According

to these Respondents, the Petitioner had informed the 3rd and 4th

Respondents that he had just returned home from his cultivation and that

he would come to the Police station later that day. The 3rd and 4th

respondents had advised the Petitioner to do so and had returned to the

Police Station. A copy of the notes of investigation of the 3rd and 4th

respondents recorded on 7th June 2010, has been produced marked

‘1R5’.

(10) On the same day the Petitioner had come to the Police Station as

undertaken by him and his statement had been recorded by the Police.

In his statement, the Petitioner insists that the dispute over the ownership

of the land that is being cultivated by him, had already been settled with

the true owner of the land on 5th May 2010 and that the Petitioner would

be leaving the land in 4 months’ time (‘1R5’).

(11) The 1st Respondent had categorically denied that the Petitioner was

arrested and brought to the Police Station. His position is that the

Petitioner attended the police station on his own volition. An Affidavit

6

from the Petitioner’s uncle Sunil has been tendered, in order to

substantiate the position that the Petitioner went to the Police Station on

his own volition (‘IR7’).

(12) The 1st Respondent claims that the Petitioner had wished to meet him but

as he was not at the Police station the Petitioner had opted to wait for the

1st Respondent’s return. The 1st Respondent states that when he returned

to the Police station at around 10 pm, the Petitioner informed him that

the priest had made a further complaint against him. The 1st Respondent

states that he advised the Petitioner to maintain peace and to resolve the

matter after consulting Mrs. Chandrika Samarasuriya, who according to

the Petitioner, had title to the disputed property. The 1st Respondent

claims that at no point in time was the Petitioner subjected to unlawful

arrest and/or detention, and that the Petitioner on his own volition

remained there until the 1st Respondent returned to the Police Station.

(13) Further, the 1st Respondent had denied the allegation that he abused

and/or threatened the Petitioner and had stated that, had he conducted

himself in the manner alleged by the Petitioner, the Petitioner’s uncle

Sunil who was present at the time would have witnessed such incident.

Sunil, however, had not made reference to any abuse and/or threat by

the 1st Respondent, in his Affidavit [‘1R6’].

(14) The main form of evidence, in support of the 1st Respondent’s version of

the incident, emanates from the Affidavit of the Petitioner’s uncle, Sunil.

He had averred that he along with the Petitioner went to the Police

Station on a motorcycle and both of them left the police station around

11.00 pm. Strangely, Sunil is silent on the aspect of the Petitioner being

abused and/or threatened by the 1st Respondent. It is pertinent to note

that in the counter affidavit filed by the Petitioner, he had failed to

explain the discrepancy between his version and the version given by his

uncle Sunil, particularly with regard to the arrest of the Petitioner.

7

Violation of Article 13 (1)

(15) Article 13 (1) of the Constitution stipulates that “No person shall be

arrested except according to procedure established by law. Any person

arrested shall b

(16) e informed of the reason for his arrest.” The Petitioner alleges that the 1st

Respondent is mainly responsible for the illegal arrest on 7th June 2010,

while the 3rd and 4th Respondents were guilty of the same, as they carried

out the orders of the 1st Respondent.

(17) In the instant case, the material before this court, to determine whether

there has been a transgression of Article 13 (1) is the assertion of the

Petitioner, which is supported by 2 Affidavits on the one hand and the

assertion of the 1st Respondent supported by an Affidavit [of Sunil] and

the relevant excerpts from the Police Information Book (‘1R2’, ‘1R3’,

‘1R4’ and ‘1R5’) on the other.

Was the Petitioner subjected to an illegal arrest?

(17) Article 13 (1) is comprised of two limbs.

(a) The arrest should be in accordance with the procedure established

by law.

(b) The person being arrested shall be informed of the reasons for his

arrest.

The above postulates that before the police deprive any person of his or

her personal liberty, in the course of discharging what they conceive to

be the powers vested in them, the procedure prescribed by law must be

strictly adhered to and must not be departed from, to the disadvantage

of the person affected.

8

(18) The phrase ‘procedure established by law’ refers to the ordinary and well-

established rules of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.15 of 1979 read

with the amendments thereto.

According to Section 23 (1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act; “In

making an arrest the person making the same shall actually touch or confine

the body of the person to be arrested unless there be a submission to the

custody by word or action and shall inform the person to be arrested of the

nature of the charge or allegation upon which he is arrested.”

(19) The Petitioner denies that on 7th June 2010, he visited the Maho Police

Station on his own volition and asserts that he was arrested by the 3rd and

4th Respondents and taken to the Maho Police Station. The Petitioner further

states that when the 3rd and 4th Respondents arrested him, he was informed

by them that the priest concerned, had made a complaint against him.

(20) In the instant case, the question arises as to whether the Petitioner was

arrested as alleged by him in the first place. The version of the Respondents

is that the Petitioner was requested to come to the police station in order to

inquire into the complaint made by the priest. The sequence of events

averred by the 1st Respondent is as follows;

i. The 1st Respondent maintains that whilst he was on duty at a

location outside the police station, he was informed over the

phone that the priest concerned had lodged a complaint

against the Petitioner.

ii. He gave instructions to the 3rd Respondent to conduct

investigations into the said complaint.

iii. The 3rd and 4th Respondents having gone to the Temple, had

recorded the statement of the priest. According to the same

[‘1R4’] the statement had been recorded at 5.40 pm and the

officers have returned to the police station at 7.35 pm.

iv. The return entry reveals that the officers had returned to the

station after having inspected the land over which the dispute

9

had arisen and after meeting the Petitioner and instructing him

to come to the police station for an inquiry.

v. According to the entry made in CIB at 8.15 pm [‘1R5’] the

Petitioner ‘had appeared at the police station as instructed’. The

3rd Respondent had then proceeded to record the statement of

the Petitioner.

vi. This position is supported by Sunil who states in his Affidavit

that his nephew [the Petitioner], intimated to him that officers

of the Maho police station had requested him to attend the

police station.

vii. Sunil, in his Affidavit, states that around 6.00 pm the Petitioner

left for the police station [on a motorcycle] and he also went

there.

viii. It is common ground that the Petitioner was allowed to return

home and the 1st Respondent’s version is that the Petitioner had

waited at the police station until his arrival at the police station.

(21) Upon consideration of the material placed before court, this court cannot

attribute any reason to disregard the version of the Respondents, especially

in light of the fact that the Petitioner had not controverted the averments of

the affidavit of his uncle, Sunil.

(22) It is to be noted that, as per paragraph 31 of the petition, the Petitioner is

seeking an order from this court in the form of a declaration relating to the

transgression of his fundamental rights of “freedom from arbitrary arrest

and illegal detention and equality and equal protection of the law…” in

connection with the events of 7th June 2010. Although the petition had

referred to a series of subsequent events, those events in my view are not

relevant in deciding whether there had been an illegal arrest and/or

detention of the Petitioner on 7th June 2010.

(23) This court is mindful of the fact that the burden of establishing the alleged

violations is squarely on the Petitioner. The duty of the police is to investigate

10

offences using the lawful powers vested with them. In the instant case, there

in fact was a complaint against the Petitioner and when one considers the

totality of the facts, this court cannot say with certainty that the Petitioner

was arrested as alleged by him. Going by the notes of investigation, his

statement relating to the complaint made by the priest had been recorded

sometime after 8.00 pm. According to Sunil, he and the Petitioner had left

the police station around 11.00 pm. According to the 1st Respondent, he had

not been at the police station when these investigative steps were taken at

the police station and the Petitioner had remained at the station on his own

volition, wanting to meet the 1st Respondent. This position of the 1st

Respondent cannot be rejected either.

(24) In the circumstances, this court is required to give its mind as to whether

the Petitioner has discharged the burden of establishing the alleged

violations under Article 12 (1) and Article 13 (1) of the Constitution.

(25) As his Lordship Justice Amerasinghe observed, in the case of Samanthilaka

v. Ernest Perera and Others 1990 1 SLR 318, where leave to proceed was

granted for the alleged violation of Article 13 (1) of the Constitution among

others; “Being serious allegations of misconduct on the part of an agent of

the State-the police-I looked with caution for a high degree of probability in

deciding which of the facts alleged had been established.” (at page 320)

(26) This court has consistently held that the burden is on the person who alleges

the transgression of his fundamental rights, to establish the violations

alleged, with a high degree of probability. Upon a careful consideration of

the affidavits and examination of the other material filed in this case, on

behalf of both the Petitioner and the Respondents together with the analysis

of the material by the learned counsel who represented the parties, I find

the Petitioner had failed to establish the transgressions alleged, to a degree

of probability required by law, in fundamental rights applications.

11

(27) Considering the above, I hold that the Petitioner has failed to establish that

the Respondents have infringed his fundamental rights enshrined in Articles

12 and 13 (1) of the Constitution and accordingly this application is

dismissed.

In the circumstances of the case, I do not order costs.

Application dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

L.T.B. DEHIDENIYA J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

S. THURAIRAJA PC, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT