==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the maƩer of an appeal under SecƟon 5C of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990, as amended by Act No. 54 of 2006. SC Appeal No: 67/2019 CA No. 891/97(F) DC Maho Case No: 3314/L

1. Ranabahu Mudiyanselage Dingiri Banda 2. Herath Mudiyanselage Ukku Amma

MeƟyanagama, Karambe, Maho PLAINTIFFS

- Vs - Ranabahu Mudiyanselage Sirimalhamy, MeƟyanagama, Karambe, Maho. DEFENDANT And between Ranabahu Mudiyanselage Sirimalhamy, MeƟyanagama, Karambe, Maho. DEFENDANT – APPELLANT Ranabahu Mudiyanselage Ranjith JayaƟssa, MeƟyanagama, Karambe, Maho. SUBSTITUTED DEFENDANT – APPELLANT - Vs - 1. Ranabahu Mudiyanselage Dingiri Banda 2. Herath Mudiyanselage Ukku Amma PLAINTIFFS – RESPONDENTS

2

Ranabahu Mudiyanselage Senarath Bandara Ranabahu, MeƟyanagama, Karambe, Maho. SUBSTITUTED PLAINTIFF – RESPONDENT

And now between Ranabahu Mudiyanselage Senarath Bandara Ranabahu, MeƟyanagama, Karambe, Maho SUBSTITUTED PLAINTIFF – RESPONDENT – APPELLANT - Vs - Ranabahu Mudiyanselage Ranjith JayaƟssa, MeƟyanagama, Karambe, Maho SUBSTITUTED DEFENDANT – APPELLANT – RESPONDENT

Before: S. Thurairaja, PC, J Arjuna Obeyesekere, J K. Priyantha Fernando, J Counsel: Shiraz Hassan for the SubsƟtuted PlainƟﬀ – Respondent – Appellant

S. K. Dahanayake for the SubsƟtuted Defendant – Appellant – Respondent Argued on: 20th October 2023 WriƩen Tendered on behalf of the SubsƟtuted PlainƟﬀ – Respondent – Submissions: Appellant on 12th June 2015

Tendered on behalf of the SubsƟtuted Defendant – Appellant – Respondent on 18th November 2019 Decided on: 23rd October 2025

3

Obeyesekere, J 1) This is an appeal against the judgment of the Court of Appeal delivered on 29th June 2018. Leave to appeal was granted on 18th March 2019 on three quesƟons of law which are set out in paragraph 20 of this judgment. The posiƟon of the parƟes 2) The PlainƟﬀs – Respondents – Appellants [the PlainƟﬀs] ﬁled acƟon in the District Court of Maho on 3rd November 1990. In their plaint, they stated as follows:

(a) The 1st PlainƟﬀ was issued Permit No. 48445 dated 7th August 1963 under the provisions of the Land Development Ordinance in respect of a paddy land in extent of 2A morefully referred to in Schedule ‘A’ to the plaint;

(b) The 2nd PlainƟﬀ was issued Permit No. 63161 dated 25th June 1970 under the

provisions of the Land Development Ordinance in respect of a land in extent of 3A 2R 5P morefully referred to in Schedule ‘B’ to the plaint; (c) The said lands were situated adjoining each other and the PlainƟﬀs have been in conƟnuous possession of the lands referred to in the said permits for a period of over 25 years; (d) In November 1989, the Defendant – Appellant – Respondent [the Defendant]

had forcibly entered the southern porƟon of their land and commenced culƟvaƟng the said extent of land; (e) Pursuant to a complaint made by the PlainƟﬀs, the Defendant had been

directed by the Divisional Secretary to vacate the land encroached by him; (f) The Defendant had once again forcibly entered the said land in September 1990 and culƟvated the said land; (g) Notwithstanding a direcƟve by the Land Commissioner to vacate the said land, the Defendant is aƩempƟng to forcibly enter the land and culƟvate the said land.

4

3) The PlainƟﬀs had accordingly sought the following relief:

w' by; i|yka bvus fuu kvqfjs meusKs,slrejkag whs;s njg ;Skaoq m%ldYhla wd' meusKs,slrejkag whs;s fuys my; Wmf,aLKfha jsia;r flfrk bvus js;a;slre iy

Uyq hgf;a isgsk fiajlhska" ksfhdaPs;hska n,y;aldrfhka iy kS;s jsfrdaoS f,i we;=,a jSu j,lajd,Sug Ujqkag jsreoaOj w;=re ;ykus ksfhda.hla iy jdrK ksfhda.hla we' js;a;slreg fuu bvug we;=,ajSug lsisu whs;sjdislula fkdue;s njg ;Skaoq m%ldYhla 4) The Defendant denied that he has forcibly entered the land of the PlainƟﬀs and stated that he has been in occupaƟon of the land that he is alleged to have encroached for over 25 years. He stated further that he has been issued a permit in 1980 in respect of the said land, in extent of 2A, morefully set out in the Schedule to the answer. This permit was an annual permit in that it was valid only for a period of one year, and had not been extended. 5) Pursuant to the ﬁling of acƟon, the PlainƟﬀs claimed that the Defendant had forcibly entered the said land and was in permanent occupaƟon of the said land. The PlainƟﬀs thereaŌer ﬁled an amended plaint on 5th July 1993 to reﬂect the above posiƟon and prayer (w) of the plaint was amended to read as follows – “by; i|yka bvus fuu kvqfjs meusKs,slrejkag whs;s njg iy fuu bvus nqla;s psosfus whs;sjdislula we;s njg ;Skaoq m%ldYhla” Issues and the trial before the District Court 6) The case proceeded to trial on the amended plaint with the PlainƟﬀs raising inter alia the following issues, numbered as 1, 2, 3 and 16, respecƟvely:

^1& 1993'07'05 fjks osk ixfYdaOs; meusKs,a, wkqj ‘ta’ Wmf,aLkfha jsia;r lr ;sfnk

nlaus.yuq,a, fyak kue;s bvu, bvus iYs%l lsrSfus wd{d mk; hgf;a n,m;%hla u; 1 fjks meusKs,slreg ,enS weoao@ ^2& ixfYdaOs; meusKs,af,a “ns”Wmf,aLkfha i|yka lr ;sfnk bvu meusKs,slref.a Ndrahdj

jk 2 fjks meusKs,sldrshg ,ens ;sfnso@ ^3& js;a;slrejka 1989 fkdjeusnra udifha isg fuu bvus fol n,y;aldrfhka iy kS;sjsfrdaOs

f,i nqla;s js|so@

tfia kus meusKs,slreg meusKs,af,a wdhdpkh wkqj kvq ;Skaoqjla ,efnso@ ^16& js;a;slrejka tu len,s j,ska bj;a lsrsug iykhla ,ensh hq;o@

5

7) Thus, even though in the prayer to the plaint, the PlainƟﬀs had only sought to be declared as the owner of the lands referred to in the permits, and did not seek an order to eject the Defendant, prayer (w) had been amended in the aforemenƟoned manner seeking a declaraƟon that the PlainƟﬀs are enƟtled to the possession of the said lands. The ﬁrst two issues raised by the PlainƟﬀs drew a nexus to the permits issued to them, and with Issue No. 16, made it clear that the ejectment of the Defendant was being sought in accordance with the rights conferred on the PlainƟﬀs by the said permits. The ﬂaw in the prayer to the plaint had been recƟﬁed by raising issues having a nexus to the rights of the PlainƟﬀs under the permits and their consequenƟal right to the ejectment of the Defendant. As pointed out by G.P.S. De Silva, J [as he then was] in Hanaﬃ v. Nallamma [(1998) 1 Sri LR 73], “Once issues are framed the case which the court has to hear and determine becomes crystallized in the issues and the pleadings recede to the background.” 8) The 1st PlainƟﬀ, the Surveyor who prepared Commission Plan No. 4393, an oﬃcer from the Land Commissioner’s Department and two Grama Niladhari Oﬃcers gave evidence on behalf of the PlainƟﬀs. The Defendant gave evidence on his behalf and led the evidence of two persons who had worked for the Defendant on the land that the Defendant is said to have encroached. The Defendant too had obtained a commission to survey the land and even though Plan No. 732/92 prepared pursuant to the commission and the Report of the Surveyor had been marked, the Defendant did not lead the evidence of the Surveyor. 9) Commission Plan No. 4393 contained 14 lots, with the Defendant admiƫng in his evidence that he is in occupaƟon of Lot Nos. 13 and 14 thereof, in extent of 1A 3R 35P, which lots formed part of the land referred to in the permits issued to the PlainƟﬀs. It is noted that even though the land situated to the east of Lot No. 13 is State land and has been culƟvated by the Defendant, he did not present any permit in respect of the land situated to the east of Lot No. 13 or any other permit other than the aforemenƟoned annual permit issued in 1980, thus raising a doubt whether the land referred to in the said permit issued to the Defendant is in fact the land situated to the east of Lot No. 13.

6

10) Be that as it may, the Commission Plan prepared by the Defendant contained ﬁve

lots, with the Defendant admiƫng in his evidence that (a) he is in occupaƟon of Lot Nos. 4 and 5 of the said Plan, in extent of 2A 0R 32.5P, and (b) Lot Nos. 13 and 14 are idenƟcal to Lot Nos. 4 and 5, even though there was a slight diﬀerence between the two plans with regard to the extent of land. 11) The Surveyor who prepared Plan No. 4393 had superimposed Lot No. A1 of FVP No.

2383, which is the land described in Schedule ‘A’ to the plaint, on Plan No. 4393. It is clear from the said superimposiƟon that a part of Lot No. 13 forms part of Lot No. A1 of FVP No. 2383. Based on this, the District Court had concluded that the land occupied by the Defendant is part of the land that has been given by way of a permit to the 1st PlainƟﬀ. The District Court had reached a similar conclusion in respect of the land that was the subject maƩer of the permit granted to the 2nd PlainƟﬀ, even though the land referred to in the permit issued to the 2nd PlainƟﬀ had not been superimposed on Plan No. 4393. Judgment of the District Court 12) By its judgment delivered on 10th November 1997, the District Court held as follows:

“meusKs,af,a ‘ns’ Wmf,aLKfha i|yka bvus lene,a, ‘me' 6’ orK n,m;%h wkqj fofjks meusKs,sldr tps'tus' Wlal= wusudg rPfhka ,enqKq bvu nj wOsIaGdmkh lrk ,o msTqre yd wjidk .us is;shfuka ;yjqrefjs' oeka ud bosrsfha i<ld ne<Sug we;af;a wdrdjq,g wod, bvus lene,a, rPh jsiska m%Odkh lr we;af;a l=uk mdraYjlrego hkakhs' meusKs,slre jsiska ‘me 5’ hkqfjka ,l=Kq lr bosrsm;a lr we;s wxl( 48445 hk bvus iY%sl lsrsu ms<sno wd{ mK; hgf;a we;s wjir m;%h m%Odkh lr we;af;a 1963 wf.daia;+ ui 07 fjks osk oSh' tfiau 2 fjks meusKs,sldr tps'tus' Wlal= wusudg rPh jsiska m%Odkh lr we;s wxl( 63161 ork n,m;%h m%ldr wehg tu bvu ,ens we;af;a 1970 Pqks ui 25 fjks osk oSh' tfiau js;a;slre jsiska ‘js' 1’ f,i ,l=Kq lr bosrsm;a lrk ,o §bvul mosxps jSfus jdraIsl wjir m;%h¶ Tyqg 1980 ksl+;a lr we;s nj lshd isgsk ,oS' js;a;slre ish uq,sl idlaIsfhka lshd isgs mrsos wdrdjq,g wod, bvu wxl( uy$ks$1197 orK n,m;%fha udhsus ;=, msysgs bvu ‘me1’ iy ‘js1’ orK msUqfrys ksrems; ms<sfj,ska f,dgs wxl( 13 iy 14 iy 3 iy 4 nj ms<sf.k we;' Tyqf.a idlaIsh ms<s.kafka kus Tyqg rPh jsiska m%Odkh lr we;s wxl( uy$ks$1197 orK n,m;%h m%Odkh lr we;af;a 1980 jraIfhaosh'

7

rPfha n,m;% m%OdkfhaoS o wfkl=;a Tmamq j,g fuka m%uqL;ajh n, mdkq we;' tkus 1 fjks iy 2 fjks meusKs,slrejkag fuu bvus m%Odkh lr we;af;a ms<sfj,ska 1963 jraIfhaos iy 1970 jraIfhaoS jk w;r js;a;slre jsiska bosrsm;a lr we;s n,m;%h wkqj Tyqg m%Odkh lr we;af;a 1980 jraIfhaoSh' rPh jsiska 1963 iy 1970 os n,m;%hla fuu bvus lene,a, fjkqfjka m%Odkh lr ;snshoS js;a;slre 1980 jraIfhaos by;lS n,m;% wj,x.= fkdlr fjk;a wfhl=g kej; n,m;%hla m%Odkh lsrSug whs;shla ke;'” 13) Thus, the District Court had taken the view that permits had been issued to the

PlainƟﬀs as well as the Defendant in respect of the same land and that since the PlainƟﬀs have priority, the PlainƟﬀs are enƟtled to succeed. It must perhaps be reiterated that in any event, the annual permit issued to the Defendant had not been extended beyond the one year period. The District Court had accordingly answered the issues raised by the PlainƟﬀs in the aﬃrmaƟve. Judgment of the Court of Appeal 14) Aggrieved, the Defendant invoked the appellate jurisdicƟon of the Court of Appeal.

Having carefully examined the facts, the Court of Appeal stated as follows in its judgment:

“The learned District Judge concluded that the land claimed by the PlainƟﬀs and the Defendant were idenƟcal. He further held that the PlainƟﬀs were enƟtled to the relief claimed, including restoraƟon to possession, as the permits issued to them were prior in Ɵme to the permit issued to the Defendant and as such the permit issued to the Defendant was not valid. Hence, this appeal by the Defendant. There is no dispute that the two permits issued to the PlainƟﬀs were issued in 1963 and 1970 whereas the defendant was issued a permit in 1980. This was done without lawfully cancelling the two permits issued to the PlainƟﬀs. In Wimala Herath (deceased) Sarathchandra Rajapaksha and others v Kamalawathie and another [(2013) 2 Sri LR 60] there were two permits issued under the Ordinance in relaƟon to the same State land and the Supreme Court held that it is only aŌer cancellaƟon of the ﬁrst permit on lawful grounds that the land could be divided and separate permits be issued for the divided porƟons. Accordingly, the ﬁnding of the learned District Judge that the permit issued to the Defendant is invalid must be upheld.” [emphasis added]

8

15) The District Court, whilst answering the issues raised by the PlainƟﬀs in the

aﬃrmaƟve held that, “psiosh hq;= m%Yak j,g ,efnk ms,s;=re u; fuu kvqj meusks,af,a

jdishg ;SkaoQ lrus”. As I have already stated, prayer (w) of the amended plaint sought a declaraƟon that the PlainƟﬀs are the owners of the State lands referred to in the permits issued to them and a further declaraƟon that they are enƟtled to the possession of the said lands (fuu bvus nqla;s psosfus whs;sjdislula we;s njg ;Skaoq

m%ldYhla). Due to Issue No. 3 being answered in the aﬃrmaƟve, on the face of it, the District Court had declared the PlainƟﬀs as the owners of the said lands referred to in the said permits and further declared that the PlainƟﬀs are enƟtled to the possession of the said lands. The issue in this case arises from the granƟng of the declaraƟon that the PlainƟﬀs are the owners of the State lands referred to in the said permits. 16) Concerned whether the PlainƟﬀs are enƟtled for a declaraƟon that they are the

owners of the land since the PlainƟﬀs had only been issued a permit under the Land Development Ordinance, the Court of Appeal proceeded to state as follows:

“Whether the PlainƟﬀs are enƟtled to a declaraƟon that they are the owners of the land possessed by them by virtue of permits issued under the Ordinance is a diﬀerent quesƟon altogether, the answer to which must be found independent of the validity of the permit issued to the Defendant.” 17) Having thereaŌer considered the law relaƟng to the concept of ownership, the

judgment of this Court in Palisena v Perera [56 NLR 407], the legal requisites to obtain a declaraƟon of ownership and the enƟtlement of a permit holder for a declaraƟon that he or she is the owner of the corpus, the Court of Appeal expressed the following view, with which I am in agreement:

“The PlainƟﬀs have not been granted any right of alienaƟon to either of the two lots of state land. The right to possession and use and enjoyment are also subject to certain limitaƟons. In the aforesaid circumstances, I have no hesitaƟon in concluding that the PlainƟﬀs are not enƟtled to a declaraƟon that they are the owners of the state lands the possession of which have been given to them on permits issued under the Ordinance.” [emphasis added]

9

18) The Court of Appeal thereaŌer considered whether the PlainƟﬀs are enƟtled to an

order evicƟng the Defendant from the State land which was the subject maƩer of the acƟon, which relief “although not claimed in the plaint was framed as Issue No. 16 and accepted by Court”. Having done so, the Court of Appeal held that:

“it is not possible to grant that relief to the PlainƟﬀs. The relief of ejectment is based on the declaraƟon of ownership sought by the PlainƟﬀs which as explained earlier cannot be granted. … The PlainƟﬀs sought an order of ejectment on the basis of the declaraƟon of ownership they sought to the State land. For the reasons adverted to earlier, they are not enƟtled to such a declaraƟon. Hence, the Court cannot grant an order of ejectment as it is a consequenƟal relief to the declaraƟon of ownership.” 19) On the above reasoning, the Court of Appeal set aside the judgment of the District

Court and dismissed the acƟon of the PlainƟﬀs and the cross claim of the Defendant. QuesƟons of law 20) Aggrieved, the PlainƟﬀs sought and obtained special leave to appeal from this Court

on 18th March 2019 on the following quesƟons of law:

(a) Did the Court of Appeal err in law when it failed to consider that the Court of Appeal can correct or modify the judgment of the District Court in terms of SecƟon 773 of the Civil Procedure Code in order to resolve the actual dispute between the parƟes? (b) Did the Court of Appeal err in law when it failed to consider that this acƟon is

a dispute between permits as admiƩed by the parƟes? (c) Did the Court of Appeal err in law when it failed to consider the actual and real dispute between the parƟes and dismissed the acƟon of the Appellant on the basis that the prayer to the plaint contained the words, “meusks,slrejkag

whs;s njg ;skaoq m%ldYhla”?

10

21) I am of the view that the only quesƟon that needs to be considered in order to

determine this appeal is whether the PlainƟﬀs were enƟtled to the possession of the lands referred to in the said permits by virtue of the said permits and if so, whether the PlainƟﬀs are enƟtled to a consequenƟal order to eject the Defendant from the said lands. Rights under a permit 22) In Palisena v Perera [supra], the plainƟﬀ in whose favour a permit had been issued

under the provisions of the Land Development Ordinance sought to eject the defendant who was trespassing on his land. The trial Court held that the plainƟﬀ was only a licensee and not enƟtled to ask for a possessory decree or to ask that a third party in possession be ejected from the land. Having characterized the acƟon as "a vindicatory acƟon in which a person claims to be enƟtled to exclusive enjoyment of the land in dispute, and asks that, on proof of that Ɵtle, he be placed in possession against an alleged trespasser”, GraƟaen, J held that, “it is very clear from the language of the Ordinance and of the parƟcular permit P1 issued to the plainƟﬀ that a permit-holder who has complied with the condiƟons of his permit enjoys, during the period for which the permit is valid, a suﬃcient Ɵtle which he can vindicate against a trespasser in civil proceedings.” [at page 408; emphasis added]. 23) Referring to the above passage, the Court of Appeal has correctly stated that, “the

raƟo decidendi in Palisena v. Perera (56 NLR 407) does not enable the plainƟﬀ in this case to maintain an acƟon for declaraƟon of ownership to the land given to him under a permit issued in terms of the Ordinance.” The Court of Appeal thereaŌer referred to AƩanayake v Aladin [(1997) 3 Sri LR 386], where having considered the decision in Palisena v Perera, it had been stated that, “Clearly therefore what was decided by GraƟaen, J. was that in a vindicatory acƟon the relief of ejectment would only be consequent to a declaraƟon or vindicaƟon of the right to possess.”

11

24) While it is true that the PlainƟﬀs iniƟally sought a declaraƟon that they are the

owners of the land, through their amended plaint the PlainƟﬀs sought a declaraƟon that they are enƟtled to the possession of the said lands as well, and thereaŌer raised Issue Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 16, correctly capturing the relief that they are legally enƟtled to, without any objecƟon being raised by the Defendant to such issues. The District Court answered the said issues in the aﬃrmaƟve but given the manner in which it worded the last paragraph of the judgment (psiosh hq;= m%Yak j,g ,efnk

ms,s;=re u; fuu kvqj meusks,af,a jdishg ;SkaoQ lrus), I am of the view that the District Court erred by granƟng the enƟrety of the relief prayed for in paragraph (w) of the prayer to the amended plaint, whereas the District Court should have qualiﬁed the above ﬁnding by limiƟng the rights of the PlainƟﬀs to the rights that they have derived by virtue of the permits. I must perhaps add that this error arose primarily owing to the defecƟve pleadings of the PlainƟﬀs. Arguments on behalf of the SubsƟtuted PlainƟﬀ 25) The learned Counsel for the SubsƟtuted PlainƟﬀ presented two arguments before

us. 26) Whilst conceding that the PlainƟﬀs are not enƟtled to a declaraƟon of Ɵtle or

ownership to the lands referred to in the permits, the ﬁrst argument was that the PlainƟﬀs are enƟtled to a declaraƟon recognising their rights conferred on them by the permits which would necessarily include possession of the land and which right, he submiƩed, would include an order for the ejectment of the Defendant from the said land. 27) He accordingly submiƩed that with Issue Nos. 1, 2 and 3 being answered in favour

of the PlainƟﬀs, the District Court could have proceeded to grant him a declaraƟon that the PlainƟﬀs are enƟtled to the possession of the said lands and in view of Issue No. 16, the District Court could have ordered the ejectment of the Defendant. I am in agreement with this submission of the learned Counsel for the SubsƟtuted PlainƟﬀ.

12

28) In Mohammath Ismail Maraikkar Avvakuddy v Atham Lebbe Seiynutheen [SC

Appeal No. 157/2014; SC minutes of 25th July 2025], the plainƟﬀ claimed that he has Ɵtle to the land upon a permit issued under the Land Development Ordinance and the defendant had forcibly occupied the said land. The defendant alleged that the permit of the plainƟﬀ had been fraudulently prepared and that the plainƟﬀ had fabricated documents by means of undue inﬂuence. The plainƟﬀ raised his issues in line with the posiƟon he had taken up in his plaint. The trial Court upheld the posiƟon of the defendant and held that the Ɵtle of the plainƟﬀ is defecƟve. The High Court set aside the judgment of the trial Court and held that the plainƟﬀ has Ɵtle to the land by virtue of the permit.

29) In appeal, the quesƟon was whether the High Court erred in proceeding on the

basis that the plainƟﬀ had Ɵtle to the land ignoring the conclusions reached by the learned District Judge with regard to fraud and undue inﬂuence. Wengappuli, J having concluded that the allegaƟons of fraud and undue inﬂuence have not been established, held that while a permit holder is not enƟtled to get a declaraƟon of Ɵtle to State land, the plainƟﬀ is enƟtled to get an order of evicƟon against the defendant and to eject the defendant. Thus, a holder of a permit issued under the Land Development Ordinance is enƟtled to an order to eject a trespasser. 30) The second argument of the learned Counsel for the SubsƟtuted PlainƟﬀ was that

the Court of Appeal could have granted a lesser relief than what had been prayed for and that had that been done, an order for ejectment could have been made. 31) In AƩanayake v Ramyawathie [(2003) 1 Sri LR 401; at page 409] Bandaranayake, J

[as she then was] having considered if a co-owner of a land who sues a trespasser for a declaraƟon of Ɵtle and ejectment is enƟtled to maintain the acƟon even if he insƟtuted the acƟon as the sole owner of the land and premises, held as follows:

“I am of the ﬁrm view that, if an appellant had asked for a greater relief than he is enƟtled to, the mere claim for a greater share in the land should not prevent him, having a judgment in his favour for a lesser share in the land. A claim for a greater relief than enƟtled to should not prevent an appellant from geƫng a lesser relief. ”

13

32) In Mapa Pathirennehelage Sediris Singho and another v Rajapaksha

Pathirennehelage Renuka and others [SC Appeal No. 199/2018; SC minutes of 20th March 2025], Abayakoon, J stated as follows:

“Having considered a plethora of judgments and legal principles in that regard Mahinda Samayawardhena, J. observed in the case of M. Sudath Harrison and others Vs. W. Piyaseeli Fernando and others [SC Appeal No. 57/2016, decided on 11th September 2023] that; “If the plainƟﬀ in a Rei VindicaƟo acƟon seeks a declaraƟon of Ɵtle to the enƟre land, but at the end of the trial, if the court ﬁnds that the plainƟﬀ is not enƟtled to the enƟre land but only to a porƟon of it, the Court need not dismiss the acƟon in toto. It is a recognized principle that when a plainƟﬀ has asked for a greater relief than he is actually enƟtled to, it should not prevent him from geƫng the lesser relief which he is enƟtled to. ‘Non debet cui plus licet quod minus est non licere’: the greater includes the less. This is a well-established principle in law and also in consonance with common sense.” 33) Thus, even if the PlainƟﬀs had not amended the prayer, I am of the view that the

District Court was enƟtled to grant the PlainƟﬀs (a) a lesser relief as far as their rights to the land were concerned, in terms of paragraph (w) of the prayer to the plaint, that being a declaraƟon that they are enƟtled to possess the said lands in accordance with the terms and condiƟons of the permits issued to them, (b) an order that the Defendant has no right to enter the land, and (c) an order for the ejectment of the Defendant. Conclusion 34) I am in agreement with the above view expressed by the Court of Appeal that the

PlainƟﬀs are not enƟtled to a declaraƟon that they are the owners of the lands referred to in the said permits since they do not possess all the aƩributes that must be saƟsﬁed in order to claim ownership rights. However, the PlainƟﬀs were enƟtled to the relief that I have referred to in the preceding paragraphs, and to that very limited extent, I am of the view that the Court of Appeal erred when it set aside the judgment of the District Court. I would accordingly set aside only that part of the judgment of the Court of Appeal together with those parts of the said judgment

14

that held that the PlainƟﬀs are not enƟtled to a consequenƟal order to eject the Defendant and subsƟtute it with the following:

“The PlainƟﬀs are not enƟtled in law to a declaraƟon of Ɵtle and/or to the ownership of the lands referred to in Permit Nos. 48445 and 63161. However, the PlainƟﬀs are enƟtled to possess the said lands by virtue of and in accordance with the terms and condiƟons of the said permits and to a consequenƟal order to eject the Defendant from the said lands.” 35) Subject to the above, the judgments of the District Court and the Court of Appeal

are aﬃrmed. I make no order for costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT S. Thurairaja, PC, J I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT K. Priyantha Fernando, J I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT