IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Enderutennegedara Shahul

Hameed Nuhun Nihar Nowfil

Lodge,

Bulugahathenne, Akurana.

Substituted Plaintiff-Appellant-

Petitioner-Respondent

Vs.

1. Son of Nagolle Gedera

Appuhamy,

M. M. Podibanda, Kahawatta,

Mullegama, Ambatenna.

2. Thalawinne Gedera Kiri

Menike,

Kahawatta, Mullegama,

Ambatenna.

Defendants-Respondents-

Respondents.

Now By and Between

1A. Enderutennagedara Shahul

Hameed Siththy Faiza,

1B. Enderutennagedara Shahul

Hameed Nizaak,

2

SC/APPEAL/165/2016

1C. Enderutennagedara Shahul

Hameed Fathima Azriya,

1D. Enderutennagedara Shahul

Hameed Mohamed Nawfil,

1E. Enderutennagedara Shahul

Hameed Siththy Nafeela,

1F. Enderutennagedraa Shahul

Hameed Siththy Naleera,

1G. Enderutennagedraa Shahul

Hameed Mohamed Nimlar,

1H. Enderutennagedraa Shahul

Hameed Siththy Nawsila,

1I. Enderutennagedraa Shahul

Hameed Siththy Nakeeba,

184/18, Matale Road,

Katugastota.

Plaintiff-Appellant-Petitioner-

Appellant

SC/APPEAL/165/2016 Vs.

CP/HCCA/KAN/31/2008 (F)

DC/KANDY/L/16374

1. Son of Nagolle Gedera Appuhamy,

M.M. Podibanda,

Kahawatta, Mullegama,

Ambatenna (Deceased).

1A. M. M. Ratnayaka,

1B. M. M. Bandara Menike,

1C. M. M. Mangalika Kumari,

No. 14/2, Kahawattta, Ambatenna.

3

SC/APPEAL/165/2016

Substituted 1st Defendant-

Respondents-Respondents-

Respondents

2. Thalawinne Gedara Kiri

Menike,

Kahawatta, Mullegama,

Ambatenna.

2nd Defendant-Respondent-

Respondent-Respondent

3. Ederutennagedara Shahul

Hameed Nuhun Nihar,

Nowfil Lodge,

Bulugahathenne, Akurana.

Substituted Plaintiff-Appellant-

Petitioner-Respondent

Before: Hon. Justice P. Padman Surasena

Hon. Justice A.L. Shiran Gooneratne

Hon. Justice Mahinda Samayawardhena

Counsel: Rushdhie Habeed with Ayuka Perera and Ms. Kalindi

Dissanayake for the 1A to 1I Substituted Plaintiff-

Appellant-Petitioner-Appellants.

Dr. S.F.A. Coorey with Sudarshani Coorey for the

Defendant-Respondent-Respondent-Respondents.

Argued on: 04.12.2024

Written Submissions:

By the Appellants on 12.08.2020 and 05.02.2020

By the Respondents on 27.01.2021

Decided on: 27.02.2025

4

SC/APPEAL/165/2016

Samayawardhena, J.

The plaintiff filed action in the District Court seeking a declaration of title

to the land in suit and ejectment of the defendants therefrom. The

defendants claimed prescriptive title to the land. After trial, the District

Court dismissed the plaintiffs action on the basis that the defendants

have prescribed to the land. On appeal, the High Court affirmed the

judgment of the District Court. Hence this appeal to this Court.

From what has been admitted in the pre-argument and post-argument

written submissions of the plaintiff, it is clear that the defendants

prescriptive claim must succeed. The plaintiff in his written submission

inter alia states as follows:

The moment the respondents entered into illegal possession of the

land belongs to the plaintiff, the plaintiff in the first instance referred

the matter to the Mediation Board. As there was no settlement, the

plaintiff filed the action in the District Court of Kandy case No. L

10847 in September 1975. This action was withdrawn by the

plaintiff in 1981 reserving the right to bring a fresh action.

Thereafter, the second action bearing No. L 14308 was filed in 1984

alleging that the respondents were to construct buildings and there

was an enjoining order against the respondents not to construct any

buildings and this action also was withdrawn by the plaintiff with

the liberty to file a fresh action. Accordingly, this case bearing No. L

16374 was filed in 1990.

As admitted above, the defendants have been in possession of the land

in opposition to the plaintiffs claim of ownership from September 1975

to 1990. The institution of legal proceedings merely suspends the

running of prescriptive possession, as held in Nizar v. Parakrama

(SC/APPEAL/235/2016, SC Minutes of 28.10.2024). These suspensions

5

SC/APPEAL/165/2016

ceased in 1990. By the time the present action was instituted, the

defendants had already acquired prescriptive title to the land.

Amidst this position, the plaintiff asserts that the defendants initially

commenced possession as licensees. However, no evidence has been

adduced to substantiate this claim.

The plaintiff then puts forward a convoluted argument, claiming that the

land was vested in the Land Reform Commission, later reacquired by him,

and that the defendants could not have prescribed to the land during the

period it remained vested in the Land Reform Commission. The

defendants do not claim to have prescribed against the Land Reform

Commission. If the land indeed belonged to the Land Reform

Commission, how did the plaintiff file multiple actions seeking

declarations of title and the ejectment of the defendants? The plaintiff

instituted these actions on the basis that he owned the land. The plaintiff

cannot blow hot and cold.

There is ample evidence that the defendants have been in possession of

the land for a considerable period of time without recognising any rights

of the plaintiff over it.

I answer the question of law Whether the defendants had discharged the

burden of establishing the prescriptive claim required in law in the

circumstances of the case? in the affirmative. There is no necessity to

address the remaining questions of law. The judgments of the District

Court and the High Court are affirmed, and the appeal is dismissed

without costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

6

SC/APPEAL/165/2016

P. Padman Surasena, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

A. L. Shiran Gooneratne, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court