==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 18

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application in terms of

Article 126 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

SC/FRA/79/2019 1. Meringnage Sugandi Dinesha

Priyangani Fernando.

2. Meringnage Mangala Pushpakumara

Fernando.

Both of No. 618, Athgala, Gampola West.

ORIGINAL PETITIONERS

Loku Kumarage Janidu Wathsara,

No. 618, Athgala, Gampola West.

PETITIONER

Vs.

1. S. Akbar, Sub Inspector of Police,

Officer-in-Charge, Police Post,

Athgala, Gampola.

2. Jayantha Gunawardane,

Headquarters Inspector,

Police Station, Gampola.

Page 2 of 18

3. W.G. Ginige,

Superintendent of Police,

Office of Superintendent of Police,

Mahara, Gampola.

4. Pujitha Jayasundara,

Inspector General of Police,

Police Headquarters,

Colombo.

5. Government Analyst,

Government Analyst Department,

Colombo.

6. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

Before : Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

: Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

: M. Sampath K. B. Wijeratne, J.

Counsel : Petitioner appeared in person

: Induni Punchihewa, S.C. for 1st – 3rd and 6th

Respondents.

Argued on : 06-08-2025

Page 3 of 18

Written Submissions : 17-09-2025 (By the Petitioner)

: 24-10-2025 (By the 1st – 3rd and 6th Respondents)

Decided on : 17-11-2025

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

The original petitioners filed this fundamental rights application stating that

they are initiating this application on behalf of minor Loku Kumarage Janidu

Wathsara, alleging that 1st to 4th respondents violated the fundamental rights

of the said minor guaranteed under the Constitution.

The original petitioners are siblings. The 1st petitioner is the mother of the

earlier mentioned minor, while the 2nd petitioner is the uncle, being the

brother of the 1st petitioner.

The original petitioners have filed this application on their own motion without

any legal assistance, and throughout the case, the original petitioners

represented the minor on their own, while it was the 2nd petitioner who made

submissions to the Court in relation to their application.

When this matter was considered for the granting of leave on 06-06-2019, this

Court granted leave to proceed for alleged violations of the said minors’

fundamental rights guaranteed under Article 12(1) and 13(1) of the

Constitution limiting it only against the 1st, 2nd and 3rd respondents named in

the petition.

Before leave to proceed was granted, having considered the fact that the

petitioners are representing themselves, this Court directed the Hon. Attorney

General to call for a report in relation to the alleged arrest and also a report

whether the productions allegedly taken from the custody of the said minor

had been sent to the Government Analyst, and if so, the Government Analyst

Report. The 1st respondent named in the application has filed his objections

by way of an affidavit, and after the matter was fixed for argument, the 2nd

petitioner has filed written submissions to be filed of record.

Page 4 of 18

It needs to be noted that when this matter was taken up for hearing on 21-

09-2022, the learned State Counsel who represented the respondents had

brought to the notice of the Court that the minor on whose behalf the

petitioners have initiated this application is now a major and 21 years of age

at that time, and therefore, the petitioners are not in a position to proceed

with this application in the capacity they came before the Court.

This has resulted in this Court issuing a notice on the said Loku Kumarage

Janidu Wathsara to be present in Court on the next date, and on 26-01-2023,

it has been ordered that he should file an affidavit disclosing the full details

of the incident and the alleged violations. Although the said order has been

made on the basis that he is the 3rd added petitioner, there has been no

specific order in that regard. It appears that the said person has not filed a

separate affidavit as directed either.

When this matter was taken up for argument on 06-08-2025, it was again

intimated to the Court by the learned State Counsel who represented the 1st,

2nd and 3rd respondents, and the Hon. Attorney General who was named as

the 6th respondent, that the minor on whose behalf this action has been

initiated has now become a major, and therefore, the 1st and 2nd petitioners

no longer have any locus standi to represent him before the Court.

Since the two original petitioners and the person on whose behalf the action

was initiated were present in Court, this Court explained the legal position in

this regard to all three of them in Sinhala language. It was specifically

informed that the petitioners can no longer represent the said minor who is

now a major, and it is only he who can proceed with this action now. The

options available to him to represent himself or to obtain legal assistance

through an Attorney-at-Law of his choice or the option of obtaining legal

assistance from the Legal Aid Commission were also explained. Having

understood the legal position explained to them, the minor, who is now a

major, informed the Court that since the original petitioners have filed

extensive written submissions clarifying their case, it is his wish to obtain a

judgment based on written submissions. The learned State Counsel who

represented the 1st to 3rd and 6th respondents named in the petition also

Page 5 of 18

intimated to the Court that she would also file written submissions as to their

stand. Accordingly, all parties were allowed to file further written submissions

in relation to this application.

It needs to be noted that when the argument of this matter was taken up

before this Court on 06-08-2025, in the journal entries of that day, this Court

has inadvertently referred to the minor mentioned originally in the petition as

the 3rd petitioner, whereas, he has not been referred to as such in the original

petition or the original petition has not been specifically amended by naming

him as the 3rd petitioner.

Having considered the fact that the original petitioners have filed this

application on their own, and in view of the present adult status of the minor

mentioned in the petition, the caption of the petition should stand amended

referring to the petitioners as original petitioners and thereafter, naming the

minor on whose behalf this action was filed, namely Loku Kumarage Janidu

Wathsara, as the petitioner for the purposes of determining this fundamental

rights application.

The facts relating to this application as alleged in the petition can be

summarized in the following manner.

The petitioner has been living with the parents of the original petitioners,

since his mother (the 1st original petitioner) and father were divorced, and his

mother has remarried. At the time of this incident, he had been a 17-year-old

studying in the Advanced Level class at his school. His birth certificate

confirms that he was 17 years and two months old at the time of his arrest.

According to the events as narrated, on 02-02-2019, at around 7.00 p.m. the

petitioner, along with the 2nd husband of the 1st original petitioner, was in the

process of learning to ride a motorcycle in front of the road adjacent to the

ancestral home of the original petitioners. While they were engaged in that

task, a three-wheeler has come and the 1st respondent, along with two others

in civilian clothes, had stopped the three-wheeler in front of them and had

dragged the petitioner into the three-wheeler and had driven away. Without

knowing what happened, the original petitioners had gone to the Gampola

Page 6 of 18

Police Station immediately, where they had come to know that the petitioner

had been arrested by the Gampola Police.

It has been alleged that the persons who arrested the petitioner came while

concealing their identity and never explained the reasons for his arrest to the

husband of the 1st original petitioner who was present at the time of the arrest.

The said husband has given an affidavit marked P-5, explaining the manner

in which the petitioner, who was then a minor, was taken into custody. It is

on that basis it has been alleged that the petitioner’s fundamental rights

guaranteed under Article 13(1) of the Constitution have been violated.

Further, it has been alleged that the police did not provide any information

about the petitioner until 01.00 a.m. in the morning of 03-02-2019, and at

that time, the original petitioners and their relatives who were present at the

police station have seen the 1st respondent and another officer escorting the

petitioner from the upper floor of the police station to the ground floor, and

taking him to the police lockup. It is alleged that when they were allowed to

talk to the petitioner, it was informed by him that the 1st respondent assaulted

him severely, demanding him to show where the drugs were and had later put

a packet of drugs into his pocket and forced him to sign several documents.

It is alleged that the original petitioners and their relatives clearly saw the

marks of assault on the face of the petitioner.

It has been stated that the petitioner was produced before the Acting

Magistrate of Gampola under B-Report No. B123/19 on 03-02-2019 marked

P-7 along with the application, and they came to know that the said B-Report

has been filed on the basis that 2.25 grams of Heroin was recovered from the

possession of the petitioner, which made it impossible for the petitioner to

obtain bail until the Government Analyst Report was available.

It has been alleged that no Heroin was recovered and the petitioner was never

taken to a jewellery shop in order to weigh the alleged productions as stated

in the B-Report. It has also been alleged that the police failed to inform the

learned Magistrate that the petitioner was a minor at that time, which has

resulted in him being remanded as a normal adult person.

Page 7 of 18

It has been alleged that since the prison officials informed the original

petitioners that the petitioner cannot be kept under normal remand custody

since he is a minor, they had to file a motion before the Magistrate’s Court,

which resulted in the learned Magistrate directing that the petitioner to be

held in a children’s home. The original petitioners have stated in their original

petition as to what steps they took in relation to this arrest, claiming that the

petitioner’s fundamental rights guaranteed under the Constitution had been

violated due to the fabrications and the illegal arrest and assault of the

petitioner by the police.

Although leave to proceed has been granted against the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd

respondents mentioned in the petition, the contents of the petition clearly

show that the allegation of the violation of fundamental rights is only directed

against the 1st respondent mentioned, who has been the Officer-in-Charge

(OIC) of a police post situated at Athgala, Gampola, which appears to be a

post established within the jurisdiction of the police area of Gampola.

It appears that the 2nd and the 3rd respondents have been named because of

the fact that the 2nd respondent is the Headquarters Inspector (HQI) of

Gampola Police, and the 3rd respondent is the Superintendent of Police (SP)

of Gampola police division.

The 1st respondent has filed an objection in relation to the application in the

form of an affidavit dated 23-07-2020 and has denied the averments

contained in the petition alleging that he infringed the fundamental rights of

the petitioner.

He has stated that upon receiving information regarding possession of drugs,

he left the Gampola police station at 20.07 hours on the orders of his HQI

along with two other Police Constables after entering the necessary out entry.

He has stated that he was in his official uniform while the other two officers

who accompanied him were in civil attire. He has claimed that upon locating

the suspect mentioned in the information, the suspect was stopped and

questioned, and due to the suspicions arose in the way he answered his

questioning, he searched him and found a parcel containing a substance,

Page 8 of 18

which he identified as Heroin. He also said that upon further search of the

suspect, he found two mobile phones, and in his wallet, there were two

receipts of money deposited in a bank amounting to Rs. 83,000/- and Rs.

50,000/-, Rs. 560/- in cash, and an Identity Card belonging to another

person.

Thereafter, he has arrested the suspect, who is now the petitioner before the

Court, at 22.00 hours on 02-02-2019 for the possession of Heroin and for the

possession of an Identity Card that did not belong to him.

He has stated that at the time of the arrest, he specifically informed the

suspect the reason for his arrest. In order to substantiate these facts, he has

tendered the out entry entered in the information book of the police station

and the return note marked as 1R1 and 1R1A respectively, and a copy of the

arrest notes made marked as 1R2.

It has been stated that after the arrest, he proceeded along with the suspect

to the Gampola Gold Garden Jewellery Store and informed the owner of the

store to come and weigh the productions. When weighed, it has been found

that the substance had a weight of 2 grams and 25 milligrams. It has been

his position that after returning to the Gampola police station, he handed over

the suspect to the Reserve Officer and the necessary entries were made

[1R1(A)].

According to him, he has recorded the statement of the suspect at 06.00 hours

on 03-02-2019, and had thereafter, produced him before the Magistrate’s

Court of Gampola under the mentioned B-Report where the suspect was

remanded. He has claimed that he proceeded to conduct further

investigations as to the suspect by obtaining his telephone records and other

details, and the Government Analyst Report (1R3) dated 23-04-2019

confirmed that the productions recovered from the possession of the suspect

in fact had a pure quantity of 36 milligrams of Diacetylmorphine.

Submitting the document marked 1R4, which is a certificate issued by the

principal of the school attended by the petitioner, it has been contended that

Page 9 of 18

although it has been claimed that the petitioner was a studious student at his

school, he was not a person who attended school regularly.

Denying the allegation that the petitioner was not given food after his arrest

by the police, the 1st respondent has tendered a copy of the relevant page of

the book maintained at the police station in relation to the providing of food

to the petitioner marked as 1R5 to substantiate that food was provided to him

at 09.00 hours on 03-02-2019.

The 1st respondent has admitted that he did not mention the fact that the

petitioner was a minor in the B-Report filed before the Magistrate’s Court,

however it was his position that since the petitioner was represented by a

lawyer, that fact may have been conveyed to the learned Magistrate by his

Counsel. It has been his position that upon the conclusion of his

investigations, the matter was reported to the Hon. Attorney General for

advice in May 2019 and upon the advice received by the Hon. Attorney

General of the letter dated 07-05-2019, the petitioner was charged in terms

of section 78(1)(a) and section 78(5)(a) of the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous

Drugs Ordinance before the Magistrate’s Court of Gampola. The 1st

respondent has stated in his affidavit dated 23-07-2020 that the matter is

fixed for trial on 26-08-2020.

It has been the position of the 1st respondent that he acted at all times

according to the law and not with any prejudice, bias and/or ulterior motives

towards the petitioner, and has denied the allegations against him made by

the original petitioners in their affidavit filed before the Court.

He has also averred that this is an attempt by the original petitioners to

mislead this Court with numerous documents that are irrelevant to this

application and an attempt to circumvent the due process of law in respect of

the conduct of the suspect arrested by him.

Although the original petitioner has been allowed to file counter objections in

relation to the objections filed by the 1st respondent, it has not been complied

with, even though the original petitioners have filed several other documents

to substantiate their original petition.

Page 10 of 18

It needs to be noted that when this matter was taken up before the Court on

26-03-2019 in order to consider granting of leave to proceed, this Court

having observed the investigation notes filed in this regard and the statement

made by the petitioner to the police after his arrest, has observed that facts

revealed in his statement as to certain financial transactions need further

investigations, which has resulted in ordering that further investigations

should be carried out in that regard.

Having considered the above relevant factual matters, I will now focus my

attention on the provisions of the Constitution under which leave to proceed

in relation to this application has been granted.

Leave to proceed has been granted in terms of Article 12(1) under the Right to

Equality, which reads as follows,

12(1). All persons are equal before the law and are entitled to the

equal protection of the law.

Leave to proceed has also been granted in terms of Article 13(1) of the

Constitution, which reads,

13(1). No person shall be arrested except according to procedure

established by law. Any person arrested shall be informed of the

reason for his arrest.

When considering the Articles under which leave to proceed has been granted,

it is clear that although the original petitioners have claimed that the

petitioner was assaulted and subjected to degrading treatment, this Court has

not been inclined to grant leave to proceed in terms of Article 11 of the

Constitution which provides that no person shall be subjected to torture or to

cruel, inhumane or degrading treatment or punishment. This may be so

because this Court was not satisfied that the petition reveals sufficient

material to grant leave to proceed in terms of the said Article.

Having made the above observations, I will now proceed to consider whether

there is material to come to a finding that the actions of the 1st respondent in

arresting the petitioner amount to an infringement of Article 13(1) of the

Page 11 of 18

Constitution before I proceed to consider the provisions of Article 12(1) since

the entire petition revolves around an alleged arrest of the petitioner on a

charge of possessing an unlawful substance.

The degree of proof that is required in a case of fundamental rights violation

has been considered in the case of Velmurugu Vs. The Attorney General

and Another (1981) 1 SLR 406 where it was held,

1. The test applied is the degree of proof, that is, preponderance of

probability, used in civil cases which is not so high as is required in

criminal cases. But there can be degrees of probability within this

standard. The degree depends on the subject matter. Where the

allegation is a serious one of torture and inhumane treatment by the

executive and administrative authorities of the state, a high degree

of probability which is proportionate to the subject matter is

necessary.

Soza, J. elaborated further as to the standard of proof in a fundamental rights

application in the case of Gunawardena Vs. Perera and Others (1983) 1 SLR

305 in the following manner,

“…That the standard of proof should be preponderance of probabilities

as in a civil case. It is generally accepted that within this standard there

could be varying degrees of probability. The degree of probability

required should be commensurate with the gravity of the allegation

sought to be proved. This court when called upon to determine questions

of infringement of fundamental rights will insist on a high degree of

probability as for instance a court having to decide a question of fraud in

a civil suit would. The conscience of the court must be satisfied that there

has been an infringement.”

In this regard, the petitioner does not dispute the fact that he was arrested

on the day of his arrest. The only difference between the versions of the

petitioner and that of the 1st respondent who conducted the raid that led to

his arrest relates to the time of the arrest and the mode of transport the 1st

respondent used to travel to the place of arrest and whether the 1st respondent

Page 12 of 18

and his team were in civilian clothes as alleged by the original petitioners.

Whether the petitioner was not informed as to the reasons for his arrest is

another question that needs determination.

I find that when it comes to the facts with regard to this factual matter, the

only way the Court can come to a finding is by considering both the versions

as placed before the Court by the parties and by coming to a finding whose

version is more probable and can be believed. In this regard, it is the totality

of the facts that should be considered, having in mind, the pending

Magistrate’s Court action instituted based on the raid conducted by the 1st

respondent. The manner in which the original petitioners presented the

petition to this Court is also a relevant factor, in my view.

The official notes of the raid reveal that the petitioner has been arrested after

informing him of the possible charges. There is no dispute that he was

produced before a Magistrate within the stipulated time provided for the police

to detain him, and accordingly, remanded. Though the original petitioners

have complained about the arrest, neither them nor the petitioner has

explained the allegation that at the time of his arrest, he had in his possession

an Identity Card belonging to someone else, which has later been revealed as

belonging to his uncle who was in remand prison at that time, and also two

receipts relating to the depositing of unusually large amounts of money, which

a young person of petitioner’s age cannot be expected to have. I am unable to

believe that they were unaware of the facts reported to the Court as they have

obtained copies of large number of documents relating to this case which they

have filed of record.

The 1st respondent has stated in his affidavit that based on the Government

Analyst Report, a plaint was filed against the petitioner in the Magistrate’s

Court under the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs Ordinance and the

case is pending. Although that fact may not have been within the knowledge

of the original petitioners when they filed this fundamental rights application,

it is a matter well within the knowledge of them and the petitioner at the time

the 1st respondent filed this objection. Although the petitioner has been

allowed to file a response to it by way of a counter objection, he has failed to

Page 13 of 18

tender such. Though they have filed several additional documents, they have

failed to divulge what happened to the Magistrate’s Court case against the

petitioner.

In view of the large number of documents they have obtained and filed before

the Court, I am unable to find any reason as to why they did not obtain a copy

of the Magistrate’s Court case if the case was concluded in favour of the

petitioner or if it is still pending.

In my view, the only assumption that can be reached is that the case is still

pending and commenting on the factual matters that can come up before the

trial Court would be sub-judice as whatever the comment of this Court may

have a bearing on the outcome of the Magistrate’s Court case.

It is the stand of the 1st respondent that when he arrested the petitioner, he

informed him of the possible charges. The original petitioners had not been at

the place of the arrest, but it was the 1st original petitioner’s husband who

has tendered an affidavit marked P-5 along with the petition to substantiate

the version of arrest made by the original petitioners.

When this matter was considered for the granting of leave, the observations

of this Court made on 26-03-2019 show that the Court was also mindful of

the statement made by the petitioner to the police after his arrest in relation

to the financial transactions mentioned and other matters revealed, which

warrants further investigation.

In my view, it is under these circumstances whether the claim of the original

petitioners that the petitioner was arrested without informing him of any

charges or in the manner in which as they allege the arrest was made, it need

to be considered as to which version in that regard can be given more weight

over the other.

In SC (F/R) Application No. 221/2015 decided on 24-10-2023 Aluwihare,

PC, J. observed,

“A particular form is not required for the notification, nor does it require a

complete or detailed description of the charges against the suspect. The

Page 14 of 18

requirement is for the arrested person to be told in simple, nontechnical

language the essential legal and factual grounds for the arrest at the

earliest reasonable opportunity. It is apparent that the Respondents

informed the Petitioner the reasons for the arrest – vide the arrest notes

marked “3R3”, which state that the Petitioner was arrested for

committing the Offence of Criminal Breach of Trust and that she was

informed of the reasons.”

The original petitioners have claimed that those who came to arrest the

petitioner came in a three-wheeler while concealing their identity and forced

the petitioner into it and left. Under the circumstances, the fact that the

petitioner had been a 17-year-old at the time of his arrest, and also the fact

that the raiding police party knew they were conducting a drug raid, and

whether there was a necessity for the police to abduct the petitioner as if they

were carrying out an illegal operation and to make notes falsely as claimed by

the original petitioners, are matters that need consideration.

I am of the view that the 1st respondent had sufficient reasons to arrest the

petitioner as the facts reveal.

In the case of SC (F/R) Application No. 221/2015 (Supra), it was observed

further,

“In order to effect an arrest, a reasonable suspicion must be entertained

in the mind of the Police Officer. The test is objective, and an arrest made

purely on subjective grounds or on a general or vague suspicion would

be arbitrary. The requirement is limited and is not equated with prima

facie proof of the commission of the offence.”

It was held in the case of Channa Pieris and Others Vs. the Attorney

General and Others (1994) 1 SLR 1 at P. 46-47,

“A reasonable suspicion may be based either upon matters within the

officer’s knowledge or upon credible information furnished to him, or upon

a combination of both sources.”

Page 15 of 18

“However, the officer making an arrest cannot act on a suspicion founded

on mere conjecture or vague surmise. His information must give rise to a

reasonable suspicion that the suspect was concerned in the commission

of an offence for which he could have arrested a person without a

warrant. The suspicion must not be of an uncertain and vague nature but

of a positive and definite character providing reasonable ground for

suspecting that the person arrested was concerned in the commission of

an offence.”

For the reasons considered as above, I am unable to come to a finding that

the 1st respondent has failed to sufficiently explain the reasons for the arrest

of the petitioner at the time of his arrest.

The original petitioners have emphasized that the petitioner being a minor at

the time of his arrest, the 1st respondent failed to adhere to the necessary

procedural steps with regard to a minor as required by law.

Admittedly, the petitioner was 17 years and 2 months old at the time of his

arrest.

As per the Age of Majority (Amendment) Act No.17 of 1989, the age of majority

has been defined as 18 years. In terms of the National Child Protection

Authority Act No. 50 of 1998, a child has been identified as someone under

the age of 18 years. Penal Code (Amendment) Act No. 22 of 1995 defines a

child as a person who has not attained the age of 18 years.

However, at the time of the arrest of the petitioner, the relevant Act under

which the 1st respondent should have acted, if he was a minor, would be in

terms of section 17 of the Children and Young Person’s Ordinance No. 48 of

1939 (CYPO) as amended up to the date of the arrest of the petitioner.

Although the earlier mentioned statutes provide, as it is commonly accepted

now, anyone under 18 years of age should be treated as a child, the provisions

of CYPO have given a different interpretation to the word child and young

person under the Ordinance. In terms of section 88, which is the

interpretation section of CYPO, a “child” means a person under the age of 14

Page 16 of 18

years while a “Young Person” means a person who has attained the age of 14

years and is under the age of 16 years.

Although CYPO underwent drastic changes under the Children and Young

Persons (Amendment) Act No. 39 of 2022 which came into effect from 1st

January 2024 in terms of Government Gazette No. 2366/09 dated 08-01-

2024, the said amendment has no applicability to the instant application.

Under the amendment, CYPO has been named as the Children’s Ordinance

and a child has been defined as a person of 18 years of age falling in line with

other relevant statutes.

When it comes to the matter under consideration, the arresting officer only

has to act under section 17 of CYPO if the arrested person was a child or a

young person. Therefore, it is my view that since the petitioner was more than

17 years of age at the time of his arrest, no liability can be imposed upon the

1st respondent for not specifically informing his age to the learned Magistrate

in the B-Report filed in that regard.

However, the copy of the warrant of detention marked and produced as P-41

shows that, the fact of the petitioner being a person of under 18 years of age

has been drawn to the attention of the learned Acting Magistrate before whom

the petitioner was produced. As a result, the learned Acting Magistrate has

ordered that the petitioner should be kept separately from other remand

prisoners. It appears that subsequently, it has been ordered that the

petitioner should be kept in a children’s home, apparently due to an

application made in that regard.

There again, I am unable to find that the 1st respondent has committed an

illegality when he produced the petitioner before the Court.

Next matter that needs attention of the Court is whether Article 12(1) has

been violated by the 1st respondent.

As I have considered earlier, this Court has not granted leave to proceed in

terms of Article 11 of the Constitution after having considered the relevant

material placed before the Court in that regard. Therefore, in my view,

Page 17 of 18

considering Article 11 along with Article 12(1) would not arise on this

occasion.

The petitioner has been arrested on an alleged charge of possessing illegal

drugs and an Identity Card not belonging to him, and he has been charged

before the Magistrate’s Court. There is no allegation that the petitioner was

kept under police custody more than necessary and it is clear that he has

been produced before the Court within the stipulated time period. The

investigation notes produced before this Court provide prima facie material to

conclude that the police had followed the due procedural steps after the arrest

and had conducted investigations based on the material found in the

possession of the petitioner.

Apart from denying that he was arrested while possessing an illegal drug as

claimed by the 1st respondent, there had been no specific denial as to the

other material taken from him by the police, which warrants further

investigations. Whether the charge or charges that had been preferred against

the petitioner have been proved beyond reasonable doubt or not is a matter

for the trial Court in my view, and not a matter upon which this Court can

pronounce a judgment. After his arrest, the productions had been duly sent

to the Government Analyst and a plaint has been filed without delay. Although

the original petitioners and the petitioner in his written submissions had

levelled various allegations against all stakeholders involved in the judicial

process, I am unable to find that as a reason to conclude on the alleged

fundamental rights violation of the petitioner by the 1st respondent.

There is no material before the Court that the 2nd and 3rd respondents have

violated the fundamental rights of the petitioner. As I have considered in

detail, I do not find reasons to conclude that the 1st respondent, while in the

process of arresting and detaining the petitioner, has violated his fundamental

rights guaranteed in terms of Articles 12(1) and 13(1) of the Constitution.

Page 18 of 18

Accordingly, this fundamental rights application is dismissed for want of

sufficient merit.

There will be no costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

M. Sampath K. B. Wijeratne, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court