==== BLOCKS ==== 

0IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal against the Judgment dated 29th April 2014 of the Court of Appeal Application No. CA(WRIT)04/2012. Herath Mudiyanselage Piyasena alias Herath Mudiyanselage Piyasena Kaluhendiwela, Wessagiriya, Kaluhendiwala, Thalwatte Gedera Petitioner Vs. S.C. Appeal No.204/2014 SC (Spl) LA No. 95/2014 Court of Appeal Application No. CA(WRIT) 04/2012 1. Divisional Secretary, Divisional Secretariat, Polgahawela. 2. Commissioner General of Land, Land Commissioner General’s Department, No.7, Hector Kobbekaduwa Mawatha, Colombo 07. 3. The Secretary, Ministry of Lands and Land Development, Battaramulla. Respondents.

S.C. Appeal No. 204/2014

2

AND NOW BETWEEN

Herath Mudiyanselage Piyasena alias Herath Mudiyanselage Piyasena Kaluhendiwela, Wessagiriya, Kaluhendiwala, Thalwatte Gedera Petitioner-Appellant Vs. 1. Divisional Secretary, Divisional Secretariat, Polgahawela. 2. Commissioner General of Land, Land Commissioner General’s Department, No.7, Hector Kobbekaduwa Mawatha, Colombo 07. 3. The Secretary, Ministry of Lands and Land Development, Battaramulla. Both Presently at ‘Mihikatha Madura’, Land Secretariat, No.1200/6, Rajamalwatta Road, Battaramulla Respondent-Respondents.

S.C. Appeal No. 204/2014

3

BEFORE : S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J. A. H. M. D. NAWAZ, J. ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J. COUNSEL : Chula Bandara with Ms. Gayathri Kodagoda and Anuradha Dias for the Petitioner-Appellant Ms. Chaya Sri Nammuni SSC for the Respondent-Respondents ARGUED ON : 01st November, 2021 DECIDED ON : 27th February, 2026

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

The Petitioner-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as “the Appellant”)

invoked the jurisdiction conferred on the Court of Appeal by Article 140 of

the Constitution primarily to seek issuance of a Writ of Mandamus on the

1st, 2nd and 3rd Respondent-Respondents (hereinafter referred to as the 1st,

2nd and 3rd Respondents respectively) compelling them to issue a Land

Grant in respect of a “… land called Malwalgalehena alias Ambakumbura

Pillawa” to the Petitioner.

In delivering the impugned order, the Court of Appeal, proceeded

to dismiss the petition of the Appellant. Aggrieved by that order, the

Appellant sought Special Leave to Appeal against the said order of the

Court of Appeal, by filing of the instant petition.

On 31.10.2014, after hearing the parties; this Court was pleased to

grant Special Leave to Appeal to the Appellant on three questions of law,

S.C. Appeal No. 204/2014

4

that were formulated by him and described in sub paragraphs “b”, “d”

and “e” of his petition dated 10.06.2014.

The said questions of law are as follows;

i. Did the 3rd Respondent act out side/ or in excess of his

authority to hold an inquiry on 29.06.2011 to cancel the

grant issued by His Excellency the President after the

grant had been signed by the President?

ii. Has the 3rd Respondent erred in law by recommending

the acceptance of the Land Grant issued in the name of

the Appellant in terms of Section 3 of the State Lands

Ordinance No. 13 of 1949?

iii. Did the 3rd Respondent mislead the officials of the

Presidential Secretariat by stating that the grant issued

in the name of the Appellant could be revoked under

Section 3 of the State Lands Ordinance No. 13 of 1949,

which all members of the Appellant’s family had failed

to agree to surrender such land to the State?

In view of the scope of the questions of law, it is necessary to make a

brief reference to the factual situation as disclosed by the pleadings filed

before the Court of Appeal.

A land called Malwelgalehena alias Ambakumbure Pillawa, which is in

an extent of 1 Acre and 05.2 Perches, and commonly owned by the

Appellant, his siblings H.M. Punchi Banda, H.M. Sumanawathie and H.M.

Bandara Menika in equal shares. In 1977, this land was acquired by the State

for the declared public purpose of constructing a playground to

S.C. Appeal No. 204/2014

5

Maningamuwa Junior School. The co-owners including the Appellant were

paid compensation for the acquisition of their land. However, the said

school was closed down around in the year 1992 and the land so acquired

remained idle.

In August 2007, the Appellant presented a written request (P5) to the

then Hon. Minister of Land and Land Development, requesting to divest

the ownership of the said land back to him. He was prepared to pay back

the monies paid by the State, as compensation, at the time of its

acquisition.

The 3rd Respondent, on 17.09.2007, called for the recommendation of

the 1st Respondent over the said request made by the Appellant (R1). The

Appellant, by his letter dated 15.06.2008, informed the 1st Respondent that

the other co-owners, namely H.M. Punchi Banda (represented by his eldest

son S.B. Kaluhendiwela), H.M. Sumanawathie and H.M. Bandara Menika, have

informed in writing, that they would make no claim to the ownership of

that land. The 1st Respondent, by his letter dated 29.07.2009 (R3) conveyed

this information to the 3rd Respondent and recommended that the land

could be divested in favour of the Appellant.

In order to proceed with the Appellant’s request, the 1st Respondent

informed the former to deposit a sum of Rs. 26,009.28 and thereby facilitate

the release of the land. The Appellant however did not agree with that

amount and informed the 1st Respondent on 18.12.2009, that he could

deposit only Ra.16,000.00. This dispute over the sum of monies appears to

have erupted over the improvements made to the land by a certain

construction effected by the Ministry of Education.

S.C. Appeal No. 204/2014

6

On 24.12.2009, S.B. Kaluhendiwela, son of H.M. Punchi Banda

informed the 1st Respondent of the retraction of the consent of his and

other family members they have already given to the Appellant that they

have no objections to the land being released only to him. In that letter

nine persons who have an interest, which devolved from the original three

out of the four owners to the land appears to have objections to the

Appellant’s request.

The 1st Respondent thereupon conveyed this development to the 2nd

Respondent via telephone, in addition to sending a letter dated 29.12.2009

(R6). In responding to that letter, the 2nd Respondent instructed the 1st

Respondent to conduct an inquiry into the objection raised by S.B.

Kaluhendiwela by letter dated 06.01.2010 (R7). The Appellant was notified

to appear before the 1st Respondent for an inquiry over the said objection

by letter dated 05.01.2010 (P8).

An inquiry was conducted by the 1st Respondent on 24.02.2010 (R8).

The Appellant did not participate in that inquiry. During that inquiry, the

parties have reiterated their objection to the release of the land to the

Appellant in its totality and have strongly resisted the demarcation of the

land bisecting it in two allotments by carving out a ¼ share for the

Appellant and leaving out the remaining ¾ share. The findings made by

the 1st Respondent consequent upon the said inquiry were conveyed to the

3rd Respondent on 26.02.2010 (R9).

The Appellant personally made representations to the 2nd

Respondent, who thereupon informed the 1st Respondent on 02.03.2010

(P9) that since the Hon. Minister of Lands has already sanctioned the

S.C. Appeal No. 204/2014

7

divesting of the State land, he cannot take note of the objections of other

parties at that stage (P9).

On 06.01.2011, by a letter (P10), the 2nd Respondent instructed the 1st

Respondent that a Land Grant has been made with the approval of His

Excellency the President in favour of the Appellant in relation to the

disputed State land and to take steps to register the said instrument in the

Land Registry. Incidentally, on the same day, by a letter addressed to the

provincial land Commissioner (R10), the 3rd Respondent directed the

former to personally conduct an inquiry into the appeal presented by one

Nanda Kumarihamy Amaratunge on this issue.

The 3rd Respondent, by his letter dated 27.09.2011 (R11), addressed

to the Secretary to the President, conceded that the 2nd Respondent’s

Department has proceeded to complete the paper work in order to divest

the State land in favour of the Appellant, acting in terms of Section

194(2)(c) of the State Lands Ordinance, despite the objections by the other

former co-owners to that land. It also indicates that the issuance of the

Grant to the Appellant was deferred on the instructions of the Hon.

Minister of Lands and after an inquiry to which all the relevant parties

have attended, the 3rd Respondent has decided that it was unreasonable to

divest the land only in favour of the Appellant and it should be divested in

favour of all four original owners. The 3rd Respondent further requested to

cancel the Land Grant made in favour of the Appellant to facilitate the

process of issuing four separate Land Grants to the four original owners.

The Presidential Secretariate, by letter dated 12.01.2012 (R12),

informed the 3rd Respondent that it had taken steps to cancel the Land

S.C. Appeal No. 204/2014

8

Grant issued in favour of the Appellant and, instructed the latter to take

over the ownership of the said land, in compliance with the approval

granted by his Excellency the President, to do so.

It is against this backdrop only the Appellant sought Writ of

Mandamus “… directing the 1st, 2nd and 3rd Respondents to hand over the said

Land Grant issued in the name of the Petitioner [now Appellant] relating to the

said land called Malwalgalehena alias Ambakumbura Pillawa to the Petitioner

according to law.”

Learned Counsel for the Appellant contended that, instead of

making a divesting order under Sections 39 and 39A of the Land

Acquisition Act, the Respondents have resorted to the provisions of the

State Lands Ordinance to issue a Land Grant. It is the position of the

Appellant, once His Excellency the President appended his signature to

that instrument, no objections could be considered for the issuance of the

said Grant, as once such a Grant is made the President could not revoke or

cancel such grant as no legal provisions are provided in the Land Grants

Act to do so.

The Respondents have strongly resisted the application of the

Appellant seeking Writ of Mandamus before the Court of Appeal. It was

their contention that they have acted in bona fide in reporting the relevant

facts and circumstances, in order to ensure that the final determination on

the issuance of the Grant does not infringe upon the rights of other co-

owners and therefore is justified in the circumstances.

The Court of Appeal, having noted that “ [A] mandamus is only

granted to compel performance of a duty of a judicial character where there has

S.C. Appeal No. 204/2014

9

been a refusal to perform it in any way and not where it has been done in one way

rather than the other …” in its impugned judgment, and concluded that it is

“ … before issuing a Writ of Mandamus is entitled to take into consideration the

consequences which the issue of the writ will entail” and therefore ” … A

Mandamus will not issue where it would be futile and could not be obeyed.”

Thus, the primary reason attributed by the Court of Appeal in

dismissing the Appellant’s application was that it became futile to issue a

Writ of Mandamus under the circumstances.

I am unable to find a valid reason to hold otherwise, after

undertaking a careful consideration of the sequence of events that led to

the issuance of the Land Grant and its eventual cancellation by His

Excellency the President.

In this instance, the petition filed before the Court of Appeal by the

Appellant, seeking a public law remedy, is dated 20.12.2011. The last

correspondence the Appellant had with the 1st Respondent annexed to the

said petition is dated 01.02.2011 by which he requested for a date and time

for him to present himself before the officer to receive the Land Grant

issued in respect of that State land.

The Respondents have filed their Statement of Objections on

05.09.2012. The Respondents have annexed the letter dated 12.01.2012,

addressed to the 3rd Respondent by the Presidential Secretariat (R12),

informing him that the Land Grant made in favour of the Appellant has

been cancelled by His Excellency the President.

The documents relied on by the Appellant do not provide any

indication that he was aware of the said cancellation of the Land Grant.

S.C. Appeal No. 204/2014

10

However, when this information was disclosed by documents “R12”, the

Appellant in his Counter Affidavit stated “… once a grant has been issued

under the hand of the President, such grant can be revoked only where the Grantee

act contrary to the conditions laid down in such grant or successors failed to

succeed to such land. I further state that law does not permit even the President to

cancel a grant once it has been issued under the hand of him unless law

specifically provides provisions to do so. I further state that the 3rd Respondent

acted arbitrary and forwarded his wrongful recommendations to the Secretary to

the President misconceiving facts.”

The position taken by the Appellant, in response to the situation

described in R12, is in effect to challenge the process by which the Land

Grant was cancelled. The Appellant also challenged the legality of the

cancellation of the Land Grant issued to him. This brings the issue of the

primary relief sought by the Appellant, by invoking the jurisdiction

conferred on the Court of Appeal under Article 140.

It is already noted that the primary relief sought by the

Appellant is the issuance of a Writ of Mandamus “… directing the 1st, 2nd and

3rd Respondents to hand over the said Land Grant issued in the name of the

Petitioner [now the Appellant] relating to the said land called Malwalgalehena

alias Ambakumbura Pillawa to the Petitioner according to law.”

With the disclosure of R12 by the Respondents and the legal

challenge mounted by the Appellant over the cancellation of the Land

Grant, makes it clear that there was no Land Grant to be handed over to

the Appellant is in existence any longer. Thus, it is clear that the issuance

of Writ of Mandamus would be a futile exercise as it is an order of Court

which could not be obeyed. The legal challenge mounted by the Appellant

S.C. Appeal No. 204/2014

11

in his Counter Affidavit, in response to R12, too is a futile exercise as he

did not seek to nullify the course of action and the decision arrived at by

the Executive to cancel the Land Grant, in the absence of him seeking a

Writ of Certiorari to quash that process.

The Appellant should have advised himself as to the continuity of

his application seeking only a Writ of Mandamus, with the substantial

change of character resulted in with the issuance of R12. However, despite

the obvious futility of the proceedings, the Appellant nonetheless pursued

only for the issuance of a Writ of Mandamus, directing the Respondents to

hand over a non-existent Land Grant.

In view of the reasoning contained in the preceding paragraphs of

this judgment, I proceed to answer the questions of law on which the

instant appeal was heard as follows;

i. Did the 3rd Respondent act out side/or in excess of his

authority to hold an inquiry on 29.06.2011 to cancel the

grant issued by His Excellency the President after the

grant had been signed by the President?

No.

ii. Has the 3rd Respondent erred in law by recommending

the acceptance of the Land Grant issued in the name of

the Appellant in terms of Section 3 of the State Lands

Ordinance No. 13 of 1949?

Does not arise for consideration in view of the reasons stated

in the judgment.

S.C. Appeal No. 204/2014

12

iii. Did the 3rd Respondent mislead the officials of the

Presidential Secretariat by stating that the grant issued

in the name of the Appellant could be revoked under

Section 3 of the State Lands Ordinance No. 13 of 1949,

which all members of the Appellant’s family had failed

to agree to surrender such land to the State?

Does not arise for consideration in view of the reasons stated

in the judgment.

The judgment of the Court of Appeal dated 29.04.2014 is hereby

affirmed.

The appeal of the Appellant is accordingly dismissed. I make no

order as to costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

A. H. M. D. NAWAZ, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT