IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Uduma Lebbe Marikkar Mohomad

Nizar (deceased),

55/1, Hirimbura Cross Road,

Galle.

1st Defendant-Appellant-Appellant

Mohamed Sakeen Mohamed Zahi

Zindan,

105/1, Cross Road, Hirimbura,

Galle.

Substituted 1st Defendant-

Appellant-Appellant

SC/APPEAL/235/2016 Vs.

HCCA/GALLE/111/2006 (F)

DC GALLE 8324/L Mutha Merenne Parakrama

And 5 Others,

61/2, New Lane 1, Dangedera,

Galle.

Substituted Plaintiffs-

Respondents-Respondents

2B. Mohomad Hafeel Pathuma

Risniya,

(New Legal representatives of the

deceased 2nd defendant)

And another

2B & 3A Defendant-Respondents-

Respondents

2

SC/APPEAL/235/2016

Before: Hon. Justice P. Padman Surasena

Hon. Justice Mahinda Samayawardhena

Hon. Justice K. Priyantha Fernando

Counsel: Navin Marapana, P.C. with Saumya Hettiarachchi for the

Substituted 1st Defendant-Appellant-Appellant.

Johnson Peiris for the Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent.

Argued on: 01.07.2024

Written Submissions on:

By the Appellant on 19.07.2024

By the Respondent on 15.07.2024

Decided on: 28.10.2024

Samayawardhena, J.

Introduction

The plaintiff filed this action in the District Court of Galle on 27.06.1974

seeking a declaration of title to, ejectment of the three defendants from,

the land described in the schedule to the plaint, and damages. As

evidenced from issue Nos. 24 and 35 raised at the trial, the 1st defendant

claimed prescriptive title to the land, while the 2nd and 3rd defendants

asserted that they came to the land with the leave and licence of the 1st

defendants father. After trial, the District Court dismissed the 1st

defendants prescriptive claim and entered judgment for the plaintiff. This

was affirmed by the High Court of Civil Appeal of Galle by judgment dated

19.05.2015. Hence this appeal by the 1st defendant to this Court.

This Court has granted leave to appeal on two questions of law:

3

SC/APPEAL/235/2016

(a) Did the High Court of Civil Appeal err in law in failing to consider

that the plaintiffs action is prescribed in law?

(b) Did the High Court of Civil Appeal misunderstand the interim

settlement reached in case No. LN 6699?

Was the plaintiffs action prescribed in law?

The first question of law, in my view, is misconceived in law, as there is

no time period within which an owner of land should come before the

District Court seeking a declaration of title and ejectment of trespassers

from the land. In other words, extinctive prescription has no application

to rei vindicatio actions. Once the action is filed, it falls upon the

defendant to establish acquisitive prescription, should he wish to rely on

such a claim. There is no burden on the plaintiff to prove that the

defendant did not prescribe to the land. Prescriptive possession serves

only as a shield of defence, not as a sword of attack (Terunnanse v. Menike

(1895) 1 NLR 200 at 202). However, these observations will not result in

the dismissal of the appeal. The second question of law addresses the

core issue in the case. The second question of law on which leave to

appeal was granted by this Court is whether the District Court and the

High Court of Civil Appeal erred in law in rejecting the prescriptive claim

of the 1st defendant by misconstruing the interim settlement reached in

case No. LN 6699.

Was the adverse possession proved?

In order to succeed in a claim of prescriptive title, section 3 of the

Prescription Ordinance No. 22 of 1871, which delineates the mode of

acquiring such title, requires proof of undisturbed and uninterrupted

possession, under a title adverse to or independent of that of the owner

of the immovable property, for a period of ten years.

4

SC/APPEAL/235/2016

Proof of the undisturbed and uninterrupted possession by a

defendant in any action, or by those under whom he claims, of lands

or immovable property, by a title adverse to or independent of that

of the claimant or plaintiff in such action (that is to say, a possession

unaccompanied by payment of rent or produce, or performance of

service or duty, or by any other act by the possessor, from which an

acknowledgment of a right existing in another person would fairly

and naturally be inferred) for ten years previous to the bringing of

such action, shall entitle the defendant to a decree in his favour with

costs. And in like manner, when any plaintiff shall bring his action,

or any third party shall intervene in any action for the purpose of

being quieted in his possession of lands or other immovable

property, or to prevent encroachment or usurpation thereof, or to

establish his claim in any other manner to such land or other

property, proof of such undisturbed and uninterrupted possession

as herein before explained, by such plaintiff or intervenient, or by

those under whom he claims, shall entitle such plaintiff or

intervenient to a decree in his favour with costs:

Provided that the said period of ten years shall only begin to run

against parties claiming estates in remainder or reversion from the

time when the parties so claiming acquired a right of possession to

the property in dispute.

There is no dispute that in paragraph 13 of the last amended plaint dated

02.09.1987, the plaintiff averred that the defendants have been in forcible

and unlawful possession of the land since 15.10.1962. In terms of section

58 of the Evidence Ordinance, there is no necessity to prove admitted

facts. If this averment is taken in isolation, in general terms, the 1st

defendants prescriptive claim must succeed.

5

SC/APPEAL/235/2016

However, the plaintiff contended that the 1st defendants possession was

not adverse since 16.01.1963, as the defendants on that date

acknowledged the rights of the plaintiff in the land as evidenced by the

settlement recorded in the previous abortive case No. LN 6699. This

contention was accepted by both Courts below. It is on this basis, the

prescriptive claim of the 1st defendant was rejected.

Was there an acknowledgement of the rights of the plaintiff in the

land?

It is undisputed that adverse possession is a sine qua non for succeeding

in a claim of title by prescription. In Nonis v. Peththa (1969) 73 NLR 1,

the Privy Council stated at page 3 that the parenthetical clause found in

section 3 of the Prescription Ordinancenamely, a possession

unaccompanied by payment of rent or produce, or performance of service

or duty, or by any other act by the possessor, from which an

acknowledgment of a right existing in another person would fairly and

naturally be inferredconstitutes the definition, rather than merely an

illustration, of the phrase adverse possession.

However, in Cadija Umma v. Don Manis Appu (1938) 40 NLR 392, the

Privy Council correctly pointed out at page 396 that While, however, the

clause is no mere illustration, it is not so completely successful an attempt

to achieve the full and self-contained definition as might be wished. A

phrase [adverse possession] having been introduced and then defined, the

definition prima facie must entirely determine the application of the phrase;

but the definition must itself be interpreted before it is applied and

interpreted, in case of doubt, in a sense appropriate to the phrase defined

and to the general purpose of the enactment. Thus in a case where As

possession has been on behalf of B or has been the possession of B

(whether by reason of agency or co-ownership) it seems impossible to apply

this definition clause as between B and A so as to defeat the rights of B.

6

SC/APPEAL/235/2016

Adverse possession, as interpreted in the parenthesis, may encompass

a possession unaccompanied by payment of rent or produce, or

performance of service or duty, or by any other act by the possessor, from

which an acknowledgment of a right existing in another person would

fairly and naturally be inferred but this does not represent an exhaustive

depiction of what constitutes adverse possession.

Whether adverse possession existed for ten years prior to the

commencement of the action, and whether there was any

acknowledgment of a right in the plaintiff during that period, are

questions of fact that must be determined by considering all the facts and

circumstances of the case, rather than focusing on one or two isolated

incidents.

In Silva v. De Zoysa (1931) 32 NLR 199 at 201-202, Macdonell C.J.

eloquently explained this requirement as follows:

To answer this question [whether an inference of acknowledgment

of right in another can be drawn] it is necessary to take all the facts

relevant thereto. The section No. 3 of Ordinance 22 of 1871 speaks

of an actfrom which the acknowledgment of a right existing

another person would fairly and naturally be inferred, so we must

ascertain what the act was before we can say whether or not a

certain inference fairly and naturally arises from it, which is

simply another way of saying that we must know and take into

account all the component parts of that act, for if we do not, if we

simply take one isolated fact apart from its surroundings, we would

not be giving weight to those words in the section which say that the

inference of acknowledgment of right in another must be one that

arises fairly and naturally.

7

SC/APPEAL/235/2016

The proceedings of 16.01.1963 in case No. LN 6699, spanning five pages,

were marked as P8 at the trial. It is impractical to reproduce the entire

proceedings here. However, upon reviewing those proceedings, it

becomes clear that the plaintiff had obtained an ex parte enjoining order

restraining the defendants from appropriating produce and constructing

on the land pending the said action. Upon service of the enjoining order,

the defendants counsel raised several technical objections, as noted in

the proceedings. It was in this context that the aforementioned settlement

was recorded, which reads as follows: At this stage it is agreed that the

2nd defendant will pluck all the nuts from the land in this case, appropriate

the produce and build, if he so desires, all at his risk. After this was

recorded, as per P8, the enjoining order was discharged.

Learned counsel for the plaintiff submits that this conduct reflects that

of an individual of subordinate character agreeing to a settlement in fear

of a full-blown interim injunction that might be granted against him.

When perusing the proceedings, I am unable to accept this submission.

The settlement appears to have been suggested by the plaintiff, not by

the defendants, in view of a potential refusal of the interim injunction in

toto. This is what the plaintiff stated in his evidence in chief while

marking P8:

. 6699

.

.

As I stated previously, the plaintiffs position was that the defendants

have been in forcible possession since 16.01.1963. In this backdrop, the

plaintiff stated that the 2nd defendant (the 1st defendant in the present

action) may enjoy the property, at his own risk. That is, should the

plaintiff succeed, the 2nd defendant would be liable for the repayment of

appropriated produce and would receive no compensation for any

8

SC/APPEAL/235/2016

improvements made. In my view, this settlement cannot be construed as

an acknowledgment by the defendants of the plaintiffs rights to the land.

In Fernando v. Wijesooriya (1947) 48 NLR 320 at 325, Canekeratne J.

(with the agreement of Jayetileke J.) observed that declarations made

merely with a view to compromise a dispute are not sufficient to draw an

adverse inference against the party in possession that such party

acknowledged the rights of the true owner.

There must be a corporeal occupation of land attended with a

manifest intention to hold and continue it and when the intent plainly

is to hold the land against the claim of all other persons, the

possession is hostile or adverse to the rights of the true owner. It is

the intention to claim the title which makes the possession of the

holder of the land adverse; if it be clear that there is no such intention

there can be no pretence of an adverse possession. It is necessary

to inquire in what manner the person who had been in possession

during the time held it, if he held in a character incompatible with

the idea that the title remained in the claimant to the property it

would follow that the possession in such character was adverse. But

it was otherwise if he held in a character compatible with the

claimants titlehis possession may be on behalf of the claimant or

may be the possession of the claimant (p. 396 of 40 N.L.R.) or from

the conduct of the partys possession an acknowledgment of a right

existing in the claimant could fairly and naturally be inferred. To

prevent the operation of the statute, a parol acknowledgment of the

adverse possession by the person in possession must be such as to

show that he intends to hold no longer under a claim of right; but

declarations made merely with a view to compromise a dispute are

not sufficientAngel on Limitation p. 388.

9

SC/APPEAL/235/2016

In my view, both the District Court and the High Court failed to interpret

the purported settlement from the correct perspective and thereby came

to a wrong conclusion.

Does the institution of an action constitute an interruption of

possession?

Proof of uninterrupted possession for ten years preceding the

commencement of the action is another requirement that must be

satisfied by the party claiming prescriptive title. On this premise, learned

counsel for the plaintiff raised an additional question of law during the

course of the argument. He contended that the institution of an action

against a party claiming prescriptive title interrupts the course of

prescription, regardless of the final outcome of the case. He went to the

extent of submitting that Unambuwe v. Janohamy (1892) 2 CLR 103,

which marks a watershed in the development of the law on this issue,

was founded on a mistaken premise and as such should be overruled by

this Bench, along with subsequent decisions that have relied upon it.

This argument was advanced to defeat the 1st defendants prescriptive

claim due to the previous litigation in case No. LN 6699, which I have

already referred to.

The plaintiff filed case No. LN 6699 on 05.10.1962, and that case was

dismissed on a technical objection (failure to file the certificate of non-

settlement together with the plaint) on 18.09.1973. As previously

mentioned, the instant action was filed on 27.06.1974. Accordingly, the

argument of learned counsel for the plaintiff was that the 1st defendant

did not possess the land for the requisite ten-year period prior to bringing

the action to claim prescriptive title.

The old law based on Roman Dutch law was that the institution of an

action constitutes an interruption of adverse possession (Medankara

10

SC/APPEAL/235/2016

Unnanse v. Haligomua Unnanse Ramanathans Rep. 1843-1855 at page

54, Canepady v. Vally Ramanathans Rep. 1862 at page 189, Emanis v.

Sadappu (1896) 2 NLR 261 at 262-263). This was departed from by

Withers J. (with Burnside C.J. in agreement) in Unambuwe v. Janohamy

(supra) where it was held that when an action is instituted against a party

in possession, the running of prescription is suspended until the case is

decided. If the plaintiff is successful, the defendants possession is

deemed to have been interrupted from the date the action was instituted.

Conversely, if the plaintiff is unsuccessful, the continuity of the

defendants possession remains unbroken. As stated by Withers J. at

page 105:

Possession is interrupted, i.e., held in suspense, by an action; and

so long as that action subsists, time is not gained by the occupant

against his adversary pending the same. But if the action is

abandoned or lost, and the defendant remains in possession, the

temporary gap of time opened during the proceedings closes again,

and the period of interruption by the suit enures to him for whom

time and adverse possession are creating a prescriptive tile.

In the case of Simon Appu v. Christian Appu (1895) 1 NLR 288 at 291-

292, Lawrie A.C.J. stated If the actual physical possession has never

been interrupted, it matters not that the possessor has been troubled by

lawsuits, or by claims in execution, or by violence; if he has succeeded in

holding possession, such attempts to oust him only make it the more

certain that he held adversely to those who disputed with him.

This matter was revisited in Emanis v. Sadappu (1896) 2 NLR 261 before

a three-judge Bench comprising Bonser C.J., Lawrie and Withers JJ. The

Bench was not unanimous. Lawrie and Withers JJ. followed Unambuwe

v. Janohamy whereas Bonser C.J. took the view that institution of the

action does interrupt the prescriptive possession. However, Bonser C.J.

11

SC/APPEAL/235/2016

held this view not because he believed the opinion expressed in

Unambuwe v. Janohamy was incorrect, but because, in his opinion, the

Court lacked the authority to alter established law except through

intervention by the Privy Council or via legislative enactment. Bonser C.J.

stated at page 264:

If it were necessary to express an opinion on this point, I should be

content to adopt the view of my brother Withers, whose knowledge

of Roman-Dutch Law is so much greater than mine. But in my opinion

this question is not open; even if the Court as at present constituted

was unanimously of opinion that the original decision was wrong, it

would, I conceive, be out of our power to alter the law as laid down

by our predecessors. That can only be done by the Privy Council

reversing those decisions, or by an enactment of the Legislative

Council.

Lawrie J. declared at page 265:

Here the actual possession of the defendant has not been

interrupted, it has been continuous. He has been twice sued in the

District Court by the plaintiff for the recovery of the lands. In both

actions the plaintiff was nonsuited. His possession has therefore

been proved to have been on a title adverse to or independent of the

plaintiff.

When an action to recover lands is brought against a man in

possession, the currency of that possession in law, though not in

fact, is arrested so long as the action is pending.

If the plaintiff be unsuccessful, if the action ends by a decree against

him or in a nonsuit, then the defendant is in the same position as if

the action had never been broughthis actual possession has not

12

SC/APPEAL/235/2016

been interrupted, the claim on which legal interruption was founded

has not been sustained.

While emphasizing that the Roman-Dutch Law doctrine that a civil action

interrupts the possession so as to necessitate a fresh possession when

the proceedings are terminated for the acquisition of a title by

prescription was swept away by Regulation No. 13 of 1822, which

continued in force until Ordinance No. 8 of 1834 was passed, Withers J.

further explained at page 269 the injustice that would cause if a different

interpretation is given:

The new [Prescription] Ordinance [No. 8 of 1834] clearly to my mind

contemplates by disturbance and interruption a physical

disturbance and a physical interruption of possession.

To wait for nine years and 364 days and then to file a plaint and

serve a summons on the adverse possessor for the purpose of

compelling him to maintain possession for another period of ten

years would render the new legislation nugatory.

The majority decision in Emanis v. Sadappu was followed by De Sampayo

J. in Appuhamy v. Goonathilleke (1915) 18 NLR 469.

In Fernando v. Wijesooriya (1947) 48 NLR 320 at 325-326, Canekeratne

J. (with the agreement of Jayetileke J.) held that If the continuity of

possession is broken before the expiration of the period of time limited by

the statute, the seisin of the true owner is restored; in such a case to gain

a title under the statute a new adverse possession for the time limited must

be had.

If the plaintiff is successful in the lawsuit but possession is not regained

by the plaintiff due to some other reason, the defendant must commence

adverse possession afresh from the date of the decree. Wimalasekere v.

13

SC/APPEAL/235/2016

Dingirimahatmaya (1937) 39 NLR 25 was an action for a declaration of

the title to certain blocks of land, for a decree of possession and

ejectment. The plaintiff had instituted another action previously against

the same defendants, and had been declared entitled to the block in

dispute, but he had omitted to pray for a decree of possession. A

subsequent application for an order of possession having been refused,

he instituted the second action. The District Judge dismissed plaintiffs

action inter alia on the ground that the defendants had acquired title by

prescription. While setting aside the judgment on that point, Maartensz

J. (with whom Abrahams C.J concurred) observed at page 27:

[A] successful action for declaration of title is an interruption of

possession. The decree forces upon the person against whom it is

entered an acknowledgment of title, and if that person continues in

possession the possession can only be calculated for the purposes

of prescription, from the date of the decree. To hold otherwise would

mean that a person who has had adverse possession for say seven

years may claim a title by prescriptive possession if he continues in

adverse possession for three years after the decree. A proposition

which stands self condemned.

In the Privy Council case of Tamel v. Anohamy (1917) 19 NLR 485, it was

held that An unsuccessful action by an owner of land against a trespasser

in possession does not interrupt the running of prescription.

This was reiterated by Canekeratne J. (with the agreement of Jayetileke

J.) in Fernando v. Wijesooriya (1947) 48 NLR 320 at 326:

Where there is a contest as regards the title to a land if the claim of

the parties is brought before a Court for its decision and there is an

assumption that meanwhile the party occupying shall remain in

possession, the running of the statute in favour of the defendant is

14

SC/APPEAL/235/2016

suspended; otherwise a bar will all the while be running which the

plaintiff could by no means avert. If the plaintiff fails in his action

there has been no break in the continuity of possession of the

defendant. If the plaintiff succeeds the continuity of possession of

the one who was keeping the rightful owner out of his possession is

broken; the result of the finding of the Court is to restore the seisin

of the plaintiff.

The above dictum was quoted with approval by Wigneswaran J. in Perera

v. Fernando [1999] 3 Sri LR 259 at 263.

The argument of learned counsel for the plaintiff that Unambuwe v.

Janohamy is wrongly decided cannot be accepted. The institution of an

action ipso facto does not interrupt prescription but only suspends it. At

the end, if the plaintiff succeeds, the defendants possession is deemed

to have been interrupted from the date of filing the action. If the plaintiff

fails, the defendants possession remains uninterrupted.

Conclusion

The second question of law on which leave to appeal was granted is

answered in the affirmative, and the judgments of the District Court and

the High Court of Civil Appeal are set aside. The plaintiffs action shall

stand dismissed as the original 1st defendant has acquired prescriptive

title to the land. The appeal is allowed but without costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

P. Padman Surasena, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

15

SC/APPEAL/235/2016

K. Priyantha Fernando, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court