1

In the matter of an application in terms

of Article 126 read with Article 17 of the

Constitution.

Madapathage Tilak Jayantha Perera,

No. 1395/5,

Hokandara Road,

Pannipitiya.

PETITIONER

VS.

1. State Printing Corporation,

Panaluwa,

Padukka.

2. Sendanayake Arachchige Binara

Jayawardena,

The Chairman,

State Printing Corporation,

Panaluwa,

Padukka.

3. R.M. Nilantha Monarawila,

General Manager,

State Printing Corporation,

Panaluwa,

Padukka.

SC / FR / 248 / 2019

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

2

4. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Hulftsdorp,

Colombo 12.

BEFORE : A.H.M.D. NAWAZ, J.

ARJUNA OBEYESEKERE, J. &

M. SAMPATH K.B. WIJERATNE, J.

COUNSEL : Mangala Niyarepola with Kushini Gunaratna

instructed by Sumudu Atapattu for the Petitioner.

Hashini Opatha SSC for all Respondents.

ARGUED &

DECIDED ON : 20.05.2025.

A.H.M.D. NAWAZ, J.

The Petitioner before this Court impugned his suspension which had been

effected by a letter marked “P34” dated 16.05.2019. The Petitioner alleges that

this act of suspension has resulted in an infringement of his fundamental

rights guaranteed and protected under Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

Having filed this petition on 14.06.2019, the Petitioner filed an amended

petition dated 06.01.2020.

It is on the amended petition that the Supreme Court heard the Petitioner and

granted leave to proceed by its order dated 15.06.2022. Leave was granted

only under Article 12(1) of the Constitution. Statements of objection have been

subsequently filed on behalf of the 1st - 4th Respondents.

When one peruses the prayer in the amended petition one could see that it is

the suspension of the services of the Petitioner from the post of marketing

manager at the 1st Respondent Corporation that has been impugned as null

3

and void. It has to be remembered that even though the suspension took place

on 16.05.2019 and the Petitioner invoked the jurisdiction of this Court on

14.06.2019, the domestic inquiry against the Petitioner has since commenced

upon a charge sheet. In other words, suspension on 16.05.2019 has been

followed by the commencement of a disciplinary inquiry.

The conduct of the disciplinary inquiry or the commencement thereof has not

been challenged either in the original petition or in the amended petition

preferred before this Court. It is only the suspension that forms the principal

complaint or focus of the Petitioner’s application before this Court. It is trite

proposition that a workman could be suspended during the pendency or prior

to the commencement of a disciplinary inquiry. In such a situation it cannot

be argued that the suspension which preceded the domestic inquiry would

be contrary to law.

It has to be borne in mind the disciplinary inquiry conducted against the

Petitioner resulted in termination of services on 25.08.2020. It is brought to

the notice of this Court that the Petitioner has challenged the termination as

unjust and inequitable before the Labour Tribunal, Homagama and that the

inquiry has already begun after the Respondents admitted the termination. It

is intimated that the Respondents have led evidence and closed their case.

The Petitioner is due to commence his case on 23.05.2025. It is not lost on

this Court that the Labour Tribunal proceedings may result in an order in

favour of the Petitioner. It also bears the likelihood of the order being against

him. In the pending Labour Tribunal proceedings, it is crystal clear that the

President of the Labour Tribunal is invested with judicial powers and will

exercise his judicial mind to evaluate the evidence on suspension and rule on

its propriety or otherwise.

In such a situation, this Court cannot possibly proceed to pronounce on the

propriety or otherwise of the suspension when another forum vested with

jurisdiction has embarked upon an inquiry to rule on it. If the Petitioner

succeeds in his application before the learned President of the Labour

Tribunal, there may be appropriate reliefs granted to the Petitioner by way of

4

compensation, back wages or even reinstatement. In the likelihood of such an

eventuality, this Court cannot proceed to pronounce on the suspension as

having resulted in an infringement of the Petitioner’s fundamental rights,

since both the Respondent-employer and the Petitioner could exercise their

rights to establish the lawfulness or otherwise of their respective positions

before the Labour Tribunal.

In the circumstances, we see no merit in allowing the application of the

Petitioner and we proceed to dismiss this application without costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

I agree Judge of the Supreme Court

M. Sampath K.B. Wijeratne, J

I agree Judge of the Supreme Court