IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

1. Herath Mudiyanselage Podi

Nilame,

2. Herath Mudiyanselage

Seneviratne, (Deceased)

2A. H.M. Podinilame,

All of

Bogala Road,

Kotiyakumbura.

Plaintiffs

SC APPEAL NO: SC/APPEAL/52/2018

SC LA NO: SC/HCCA/LA/94/2015

HCCA KEGALLE NO: SP/HCCA/KEG/860/2011/F

DC KEGALLE NO: 25389/P

Vs.

1. Walpola Kankanamalage

Gunarathne of

Morawawka, Ruwanwella.

2. E.N. Margret Nona of

Pattiyamulla, Kotiyakumbura.

(Deceased)

2A. Hapuarachchilage Susantha

Rohan Hapuarachchi of

Pattiyamulla, Kotiyakumbura.

2

3. Dadagama Ralalage

Sumanawathie Menike of

Ampe, Kotiyakumbura.

4. Kanthi Asoka of

Ampe, Kotiyakumbura.

5. Hapuarachchilage Susantha

Rohan Hapuarachchi of

Pattiyamulla, Kotiyakumbura.

6. H.M. Chandrasekara of

No. 20,

Parawatte Janapadaya,

Kotiyakumbura.

7. H.M. Chandrawathie Herath,

C/O W.A. Gunathilake of

Delgamuwa, Warakapola.

8. H.M. Sumanawathie,

C/O S.S. Chandrasekara of

No. 20,

Parawatta Janapadaya,

Kotiyakumbura.

9. H.M. Anula Herath,

C/O V.G.R.S. Raja of

Udapelpita, Weragala,

Warakapola.

10. M.N. Saliya Niroshane Herath of

No. 10965,

Police Official Quarters,

Peduru Kotuwa,

Trincomalee.

Defendants

3

AND BETWEEN

2A. Hapuarachchilage Susantha

Rohan Hapuarachchi of

Pattiyamulla, Kotiyakumbura.

3. Dadagama Ralalage

Sumanawathie Menike of

Ampe, Kotiyakumbura.

4. Kanthi Asoka of

Ampe, Kotiyakumbura.

5. Hapuarachchilage Susantha

Rohan Hapuarachchi of

Pattiyamulla, Kotiyakumbura.

2A, 3rd to 5th Defendant-

Appellants

Vs.

1. Herath Mudiyanselage Podi

Nilame,

2A. H.M. Podinilame,

All of

Bogala Road,

Kotiyakumbura.

Plaintiff-Respondents

1. Walpola Kankanamalage

Gunarathne of

Morawawka,

Ruwanwella.

(Deceased)

4

1A. Seelawathi Podimanike,

1B. Shayamala Gunarathna,

1C. Nalaka Nishantha Gunarathna,

1D. Chanaka Nishantha Gunarathna,

All of

Morawaka, Ruwanwella.

6. H.M. Chandrasekara of

No. 20,

Parawatte Janapadaya,

Kotiyakumbura.

7. H.M. Chandrawathie Herath,

C/O W.A. Gunathilake of

Delgamuwa, Warakapola.

8. H.M. Sumanawathie,

C/O S.S. Chandrasekara of

No. 20,

Parawatta Janapadaya,

Kotiyakumbura.

9. H.M. Anula Herath,

C/O V.G.R.S. Raja of

Udapelpita, Weragala,

Warakapola.

10. M.N. Saliya Niroshane Herath of

No. 10965,

Police Official Quarters,

Peduru Kotuwa,

Trincomalee.

Defendant-Respondents

AND NOW BETWEEN

5

2A. Hapuarachchilage Susantha

Rohan Hapuarachchi of

Pattiyamulla, Kotiyakumbura.

3. Dadagama Ralalage

Sumanawathie Menike of

Ampe, Kotiyakumbura.

4. Kanthi Asoka of

Ampe, Kotiyakumbura.

5. Hapuarachchilage Susantha

Rohan Hapuarachchi of

Pattiyamulla, Kotiyakumbura.

2A, 3rd to 5th Defendant-

Appellant-Petitioners

Vs.

1. Herath Mudiyanselage Podi

Nilame,

2A. H.M. Podinilame,

All of

Bogala Road,

Kotiyakumbura.

Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondents

1A. Seelawathi Podimanike,

1B. Shayamala Gunarathna,

1C. Nalaka Nishantha Gunarathna,

1D. Chanaka Nishantha Gunarathna,

All of

Morawaka, Ruwanwella.

6

6. H.M. Chandrasekara of

No. 20,

Parawatte Janapadaya,

Kotiyakumbura.

7. H.M. Chandrawathie Herath,

C/O W.A. Gunathilake of

Delgamuwa,

Warakapola.

8. H.M. Sumanawathie,

C/O S.S. Chandrasekara of

No. 20,

Parawatta Janapadaya,

Kotiyakumbura.

9. H.M. Anula Herath,

C/O V.G.R.S. Raja of

Udapelpita,

Weragala,

Warakapola.

10. M.N. Saliya Niroshane Herath of

No. 10965,

Police Official Quarters,

Peduru Kotuwa,

Trincomalee. (Deceased)

10A.Sayibudeen Neyi Rahima,

C/O S.M. Rahima of

Trincomalee Road,

Saliya Mawatha,

Mihinthale.

Defendant-Respondent-

Respondents

7

Before: P. Padman Surasena, J.

Yasantha Kodagoda, P.C., J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Harsha Soza, P.C., with Zahara Hassim for the 2A,

3rd to 5th Defendant-Appellant-Appellants.

K. Asoke Fernando with A.R.R. Siriwardane for the

Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondents.

Chathura Galhena with Manoja Gunawardana for

the 1B Defendant-Respondent-Respondent.

Rasika Dissanayake with Chandrasiri Wanigapura

and Shasir Hussair for the 6th, 7th and 9th

Defendant-Respondent-Respondents.

Pulasthi Hewamanna with Harini Jayawardhana

and Anjalee Karunaratna for the 10A Defendant-

Respondent-Respondent.

Argued on : 29.04.2021

Written submissions:

by the 2A, 3rd to 5th Defendant-Appellant-

Appellants on 30.05.2018.

by the Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondents on

20.09.2018.

by the 10th Defendant-Respondent-Respondent

on 23.10.2018.

Decided on: 10.06.2021

8

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The two Plaintiffs filed this action in the District Court of Kegalle

seeking to partition the land described in the schedule to the

plaint among the two Plaintiffs, the 1st and 6th to 10th

Defendants. Of all the Defendants, only the 1st and 2nd

Defendants filed a joint statement of claim. At the trial, apart

from the Plaintiffs, the 2nd to 5th Defendants raised issues. Upon

conclusion of the trial, the learned District Judge delivered the

Judgment partitioning the land depicted in the Preliminary Plan

in accordance with the pedigree set out by the Plaintiffs. The

appeal filed by the 2nd to 5th Defendants against this Judgment

to the High Court of Civil Appeal was dismissed. Hence the

appeal to this Court by the 2nd to 5th Defendants. This Court

granted leave to appeal on the question whether the Plaintiffs

have properly identified the land to be partitioned.

In a partition action, if the corpus cannot be identified, ipso

facto, the action shall fail. If the corpus cannot be identified,

there is no necessity to investigate title, as title shall be

investigated on an identifiable portion of land. The Court shall

not first investigate title and then look for the land to be

partitioned. It shall happen vice versa. The finding that the

corpus has not been identified decides the fate of the case

without further ado, this finding shall only be reached after

careful consideration of all the facts and circumstances of the

case, and not as a convenient method to summarily dispose of

long-drawn-out partition actions without analysing the

complicated pedigrees set forth by the parties to the action.

9

A partition action cannot be filed to partition a portion of the

land. The entire land should be brought into the action and the

co-owners of the whole corpus should be made parties.

In the instant action, as described in the schedule to the plaint,

the land sought by the Plaintiffs to be partitioned is as follows:

The amalgamated land called Egodawatta and

Batalawatta situated at Ampe in Kandupita Pattu of Beligal

Korale of Kegalle District in the Sabaragamuwa Province

and bounded on the North by Paddy Field, East by Paddy

Field, South by Limit of Galpathage Watta, and West by

Ditch and Stone Fence, and containing in extent 15 Lahas

of paddy sowing area.

In terms of section 16(1) of the Partition Law, the Court issued a

commission to survey the land and prepare the Preliminary Plan

depicting the said land sought to be partitioned. The

Preliminary Plan together with the Report was received by Court

in 1991. In the Preliminary Plan, the land surveyed is described

in the following manner:

The amalgamated land called Egodawatta and

Batalawatta situated at Ampe in Kandupita Pattu of Beligal

Korale of Kegalle District in the Sabaragamuwa Province

and bounded on the North by Madugahamula Kanati and

Aswaddume Paddy field, East by Aswaddume Paddy field

and Gamsabha road, South by Millagahamula Watta alias

Hitinawatta, and West by Madugahamula Kanati and

Paddy field containing in extent 1 acre, 1 rood and 32

perches.

10

In the Report to the Preliminary Plan, the surveyor records that

at the survey the 2nd Defendant informed him that a portion of

the land on the western boundary should be included in the

corpus. However the 2nd Defendant did not show the portion

which shall be included in the corpus to the surveyor. Neither

was such an application made to Court.

According to section 16(2) of the Partition Law, on the

application of a defendant, the Court can direct the surveyor to

survey any larger or smaller land than that pointed out by the

Plaintiff to him.

Section 16(2) reads as follows:

The commission issued to a surveyor under subsection (1)

of this section shall be substantially in the form set out in

the Second Schedule to this Law and shall have attached

thereto a copy of the plaint certified as a true copy by the

registered attorney for the Plaintiff.

The court may, on such terms as to costs of survey or

otherwise, issue a commission at the instance of any party

to the action, authorizing the surveyor to survey any larger

or smaller land than that pointed out by the Plaintiff where

such party claims that such survey is necessary for the

adjudication of the action.

Perhaps in consideration of the said observation made by the

surveyor in his Report, the Court granted at least eight specific

dates for consideration of the Preliminary Plan prior to the 1st

and 2nd Defendants filing their statement of claim in 1994. But

none of the Defendants took steps to take out a commission to

11

prepare an alternative Plan to show the portion of land

purportedly excluded in the Preliminary Plan.

As I mentioned earlier, only the 1st and 2nd Defendants filed a

joint statement of claim. The 3rd to 5th Defendants informed the

Court that they would abide by the statement of claim filed by

the 1st and 2nd Defendants.

In the second paragraph of the statement of claim of the 1st and

2nd Defendants, it is repeated that the entire land to be

partitioned is not depicted in the Preliminary Plan, as a portion

of the land on the western boundary has been left out. However,

even in the statement of claim, the 1st and 2nd Defendants do not

specify the excluded portion or at least the extent of it.

This is against section 19(2) of the Partition Law which lays

down the detailed procedure to be followed by a Defendant who

seeks to have a larger land partitioned. In short, such a

defendant shall take all the steps afresh that a plaintiff in a

partition action shall take, which include compliance with the

provisions of sections 12-18 of the Partition Law. No such steps

were taken by the 2nd-5th Defendants.

Section 19(2) reads as follows:

19(2)(a) Where a defendant seeks to have a larger land

than that sought to be partitioned by the Plaintiff made the

subject-matter of the action in order to obtain a decree for

the partition or, sale of such larger land under the

provisions of this Law, his statement of claim shall include

a statement of the particulars required by section 4 in

respect of such larger land; and he shall comply with the

12

requirements of section 5, as if his statement of claim were

a plaint under this Law in respect of such larger land.

(b) Where any defendant seeks to have a larger land made

the subject-matter of the action as provided in paragraph (a)

of this subsection, the court shall specify the party to the

action by whom and the date on or before which an

application for the registration of the action as a lis pendens

affecting such larger land shall be filed in court, and the

estimated costs of survey of such larger land as determined

by court shall be deposited in court.

(c) Where the party specified under paragraph (b) of this

subsection fails to comply with the requirements of that

paragraph, the court shall make order rejecting the claim to

make the larger land the subject-matter of the action, unless

any other party, in whose statement of claim a similar claim

shall have been set up, shall comply therewith on or before

the date specified in paragraph (b) or within such extended

period of time that the court may, on the application of any

such party, fix for the purpose.

(d) After the action is registered as a lis pendens affecting

the larger land and the estimated costs of the survey of the

larger land have been deposited in court, the court shall-

(i) add as parties to the action all persons disclosed in

the statement of claim of the party at whose instance

the larger land is being made the subject-matter of

the action as being persons who ought to be included

as parties to an action in respect of such larger land

under section 5; and

13

(ii) proceed with the action as though it had been

instituted in respect of such larger land; and for that

purpose, fix a date on or before which the party

specified under paragraph (b) of this subsection shall,

or any other interested party may, comply with the

requirements of section 12 in relation to the larger

land as hereinafter modified.

(e) Where the larger land is made the subject-matter of the

action, the provisions of sections 12, 13, 14 and 15 shall,

mutatis mutandis, apply as if the statement of claim of the

party seeking a partition or sale of the larger land were the

plaint in the action; and-

(i) such party shall with his declaration under section

12, in lieu of an amended statement of claim, file an

amended caption including therein as parties to the

action all persons not mentioned in his statement of

claim, but who should be made parties to an action

for the larger land under section 5, and such

amended caption shall be deemed for all purposes to

be the caption to his statement of claim in the action;

(ii) summons shall be issued on all persons added as

parties under paragraph (d) of this subsection and all

persons included as necessary parties under sub-

paragraph (i) hereof;

(iii) notice of the action in respect of the larger land

shall be issued on all parties to the action in the

original plaint together with a copy of the statement of

claim referred to above;

14

(iv) the provisions of section 20 shall apply to new

claimants or parties disclosed thereafter.

(f) If the party specified by the court under paragraph (b) of

this subsection or any other interested party fails or

neglects to comply with the provisions of section 12, as

hereinbefore modified on or before the date specified in that

paragraph, the court may make order dismissing the action

in respect of the larger land.

(g) Where the requirements of section 12 as hereinbefore

modified are complied with, the court shall order

summonses and notices of action as provided in paragraph

(e) of this subsection to issue and shall also order the issue

of a commission for the survey of the larger land, and the

provisions of sections 16, 17 and 18 shall accordingly apply

in relation to such survey.

Although at the outset the 1st and 2nd Defendants filed a joint

statement of claim, the 1st Defendant seems to have later

accepted the Preliminary Plan and the pedigree of the Plaintiffs.

Ultimately, on the seventh date of trial, the 2nd to 5th Defendants

made an application to Court to issue a commission for an

alternative Plan. Notwithstanding this was a belated application,

the Court took the case out of the trial roll and directed the said

Defendants to take steps to issue the commission. However no

steps were taken, and on the commission returnable date the

said Defendants informed the Court that an alternative Plan was

not necessary. Such was the nature of the complaint of the 2nd

to 5th Defendants.

15

The 2nd to 5th Defendants raised issues at the trial. The first

issue was whether the land to be partitioned was depicted in the

Preliminary Plan and, if not, whether the Plaintiffs could

maintain this action. The District Court answered this issue

against the said Defendants. This issue was not specific and

shall be understood in line with the second paragraph of the

statement of claim of the 1st and 2nd Defendants, where they

state that the entire land to be partitioned was not depicted in

the Preliminary Plan because a portion on the western boundary

had not been brought into the action.

It is significant to note that the complaint of the 2nd to 5th

Defendants is not that a different land was surveyed but that the

entire land was not surveyed; or, to be more specific, that a

portion on the western boundary was not surveyed.

At the trial, the Preliminary Plan and the Report were marked X

and X1 respectively by the 1st Plaintiff, without objection.

Notwithstanding that the 2nd to 5th Defendants did not take out

a commission for an alternative Plan, if they still had some

concerns that a portion of the land had been left out by the

surveyor, they could have summoned the surveyor to give

evidence. This was not done.

Section 18(1) deals with the return of the surveyor’s commission

after the preliminary survey.

Section 18(2) states inter alia that the Preliminary Plan and

Report may be used as evidence without further proof subject to

the surveyor being summoned to give oral testimony on the

application of any party to the action.

Section 18(2) of the Partition Law reads as follows:

16

The documents referred to in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of

subsection (1) of this section may, without further proof, be

used as evidence of the facts stated or appearing therein at

any stage of the partition action:

Provided that the court shall, on the application of any party

to the action and on such terms as may be determined by

the court, order that the surveyor shall be summoned and

examined orally on any point or matter arising on, or in

connection with, any such document or any statement of

fact therein or any relevant fact which is alleged by any

party to have been omitted therefrom.

Let me now consider on what basis the 2nd to 5th Defendants

state that a portion of the land on the western boundary is not

included in the corpus. As I stated earlier, this was not

addressed in the statement of claim but is discernible by going

through the questions put to the 1st Plaintiff by learned Counsel

for the 2nd to 5th Defendants during the course of the cross

examination in the District Court. The 1st Plaintiff was cross

examined by learned Counsel for the 2nd to 5th Defendants on

the extent of the land to be partitioned. The cross examination

was based on the premise that in the area where the land to be

partitioned is situated (at Ampe in Kegalle), 8 lahas of paddy

sowing area is equal to 1 acre. This was also emphasised in the

written submissions tendered to the District Court after the

conclusion of the trial. The 1st Plaintiff admitted this during the

course of the cross examination.

The 1st Plaintiff in his evidence in chief described the boundaries

of the schedule to the plaint as the land surveyed by the

surveyor. These are the same boundaries which are stated in all

17

the title deeds of the Plaintiff. They are P1 executed in 1961, P2

executed in 1980, P3 executed in 1939, P4 executed in 1927,

and P5 executed in 1929. It is significant to note that all the

deeds marked by the 2nd to 5th Defendants carry the same

boundaries. They are 1V1 executed in 1965, 1V2 executed in

1980, 3V1 executed in 1988, 4V1 executed in 1988, 5V1

executed in 1965, and 5V2 executed in 1988.

The extent of the land as described in the old deeds (for

instance, P5 executed in 1929) is 15 lahas of paddy sowing area.

The schedule to the plaint is a reproduction of the land

described in these old deeds. Without surveyor Plans being

available, the extent of the land given in these old deeds is

speculative. Hence it was a common occurrence at that time for

a deed to purport to convey either much more or much less than

what a person was entitled to.

According to the above conversion (i.e. 8 lahas of paddy sowing

area being equal to 1 acre in that area), it was the position of the

2nd to 5th Defendants before the District Court that the

Preliminary Plan shall depict a land little less than 2 acres but

instead depicts a land only in extent of 1 acre, 1 rood and 32

perches. It is on this basis the said Defendants took up the

position that only a part of the land was surveyed by the

surveyor.

However, the position of the learned President’s Counsel for the

2nd to 5th Defendants before this Court is contradictory. His

position before this Court is that according to the accepted

Sinhala land measures, as cited in Ratnayake v. Kumarihamy

[2002] 1 Sri LR 64 at 80, 7 lahas is equal to 1 bushel, and 1

bushel being 2 roods, 14 lahas is equal to 4 roods or 1 acre.

18

According to this conversion, learned President’s Counsel

submits that 15 lahas would be a little over one acre, viz. 1 acre

and 12 perches, but the surveyor surveyed a land of 1 acre, 1

rood and 32 perches, a land in excess of the land to be

partitioned, and therefore there is a serious question as to the

identification of the corpus.

This is a textbook case for highlighting the unreliability in

comparing ancient land measures with English standard

equivalents.

In Ratnayake v. Kumarihamy (supra), the Plaintiff filed a

partition action seeking to partition a land of 4 lahas of

kurakkan sowing extent. The extent of the land shown in the

Preliminary Plan was 8 acres, 1 rood and 16 perches, which the

contesting Defendants contended was far in excess of the extent

described in the schedule to the plaint. Counsel for the

Defendants contended that the English equivalent to the

customary Sinhala measure of 1 laha of kurakkan sowing extent

is 1 acre, and the Preliminary Plan depicted a land more than

double the correct extent. However upon consideration of the

totality of the evidence led in the case, the District Court held,

and the Court of Appeal affirmed, that the land described in the

Preliminary Plan was the land described in the schedule to the

plaint, notwithstanding that it did not correspond to the

traditional Sinhala measurement. On appeal, the Supreme

Court upheld the Judgment of the Court of Appeal, which is

reported in Ratnayake v. Kumarihamy [2005] 1 Sri LR 303.

Udalagama J. in the Supreme Court stated at 307-308:

I would also reiterate the observations of the President of

the Court of Appeal in the impugned judgment that land

19

measures computed on the basis of land required to be

sown with Kurakkan vary from district to district depending

on the fertility of soil and quality of grain and in the said

circumstances difficult to correlate the sowing extent with

accuracy. Thus there cannot be a definite basis for the

contention that 1 Laha sowing extent be it Kurakkan or

even paddy would be equivalent to 1 acre.

This is a common issue confronted by Judges and Lawyers in

partition actions where the extent of the land in old deeds is

given by way of traditional land measures based on paddy or

kurakkan sowing extent without reference to a Plan. The

Plaintiff reproduces in the schedule to the plaint the schedule to

the old deeds prepared decades if not centuries ago as the land

to be partitioned. The surveyor commissioned to prepare the

Preliminary Plan records the existing boundaries of the land, not

the old boundaries stated in the schedule to the plaint. The

surveyor further records the extent of the land in English

standard measures and not ancient land measures. The

difficulties arise when the traditional land measures are

compared with the English standard equivalents. The common

conversion tables found in various sources are unreliable.

If I may reiterate what has already been stated by experienced

Judges in the past, it is not possible to correlate sowing extents

accurately with surface extents. Such a correlation depends on

various factors such as the size and quality of the grain, the

fertility of the soil, the peculiarities of the sower and local

conditions (e.g. the violence of the wind at the time of sowing

and the water supply to the sowing area). In unfertile soil the

seed would be sown thicker than in fertile soil. An

20

inexperienced sower would scatter seeds unevenly, thereby

requiring more seeds than an experienced sower. If the quality

of the grain, be it paddy or kurakkan, is poor, more grain would

be necessary than if the quality were high. It is also relevant to

note that the sizes (the capacity) of the traditional measures

such as lahas and neliyas differ not only between districts but

also within districts.

In addition to the 2nd to 5th Defendants disputing the

identification of the corpus by making a comparison between

sowing extent and surface area, the said Defendants attempted

before the High Court and this Court to add another string to

their bow when they stated that, of the four boundaries shown

in the Preliminary Plan, two boundaries differ from the

boundaries given in the title deeds. I must mention that this is

an afterthought. This was not in their contemplation when they

filed their statement of claim (after the Preliminary Plan had

been tendered to Court).

As I have already emphasised, the boundaries in the schedule to

the plaint are given as stated in the deeds of which the first one

was executed as far back as 1927. The land was surveyed to

prepare the Preliminary Plan in 1991, i.e. 64 years after the

execution of the first deed produced in the case. The 2nd to 5th

Defendants admit that the northern and eastern boundaries as

stated in the deeds correspond with those in the Preliminary

Plan. But they say the southern and western boundaries do not

match. This argument on boundaries, similar to the argument

on the extent of the land, is unsustainable.

The 3rd and 5th Defendants gave evidence on behalf of the 2nd to

5th Defendants. The 5th Defendant in his evidence in chief did

21

not speak about the boundaries or the extent of the land. In

fact, in the cross examination he admitted that the land

described in the schedule to the plaint is the land in suit, which

means it is the land depicted in the Preliminary Plan.

The 3rd Defendant in her evidence in chief stated that a portion

on the western boundary was not included in the corpus. I have

already dealt with this matter to a certain extent.

Let me first deal with the southern boundary. According to the

deeds, the southern boundary is “the limit (boundary) of

Galpathage Watta”. According to the Preliminary Plan, the

southern boundary is Millagahamula Watta alias Hitina Watta.

The 3rd Defendant in her cross examination accepted that

Millagahamula Watta alias Hitina Watta and Galpathage Watta

are one and the same land. Learned President’s Counsel for the

2nd to 5th Defendants submits that the 3rd Defendant did not

make a spontaneous admission to this effect and the said

answer was only in response to a leading question put to her

during the cross-examination. I am unable to accept this

submission. The same question has been asked or suggested

more than once.

Even assuming there was no such admission, it is noteworthy

that in the old deeds the southern boundary is identified by the

owner of the land and not by the name of the land. Galpathage

Watta means “the land belonging to Galpatha”. In the

Preliminary Plan, the surveyor records the existing boundaries.

Galpatha, who is mentioned in the old deeds, would not have

been among the living at the time of the survey, and his

descendants and successors would have been in possession of

the land to the south of the land to be partitioned. Instead of

22

giving the names of the present owners of the land on the

southern boundary, the surveyor has recorded the name of the

land. This discrepancy cannot be interpreted as the southern

boundary in the Preliminary Plan being different from the

boundary of the title deeds.

The same principle applies to the western boundary. The old

title deeds identify the western boundary as “Ditch and Stone

Fence”. In the Preliminary Plan prepared 64 years after the first

known deed executed in 1927, the surveyor identifies the

western boundary as Madugahamula Kanati (the name of the

land) and the Paddy Field. This does not necessarily mean there

is a discrepancy in the western boundary. The name of the land

to the western boundary is not given in the old deeds. The ditch

and the stone fence which existed many moons ago cannot be

expected to have remained unchanged when the surveyor went

to the land more than 64 years after the execution of the first

known deed. Furthermore, the stone fence indicates that there

were two lands separated by a fence in 1927.

It is a grave error to conclude in partition actions that the

identification of the corpus is not established upon a mere

superficial comparison of the schedule to the plaint, which is a

reproduction of the schedules to old deeds, with the existing

boundaries as depicted in the Preliminary Plan. Boundaries do

not remain unchanged. They change over the years due to

various factors, be it natural or man-made. Whether or not the

Preliminary Plan represents the land described in the schedule

to the plaint shall be determined upon a consideration of the

totality of the evidence led in the case and not solely by such a

comparison.

23

Learned President’s Counsel for the 2nd to 5th Defendants makes

another point to contend that the land to be partitioned has not

been properly identified. This relates to the Survey Report

tendered to Court together with the Preliminary Plan. The

surveyor has not stated in the Report that the land surveyed by

him is in his opinion substantially the same as the land sought

to be partitioned as described in the schedule to the plaint.

Section 18(1)(a)(i)-(viii) of the Partition Law sets out the several

items which shall be included in the Report. Section 18(1)(a)(iii)

refers to the above requirement. In the Report relevant to this

case, both this question and the answer are not there. This is

different from leaving the question unanswered or answering the

question in the negative. It is not clear whether the surveyor

failed to mention it by mistake in his handwritten Report. It may

have even been intentional since the 2nd Defendant had told the

surveyor that a portion of the land to the west should be

included in the corpus and the surveyor was awaiting further

directions. Without raising this issue for the first time in this

Court, the 2nd to 5th Defendants should have raised it in the

District Court when the Court granted the parties a number of

dates for consideration of the Preliminary Plan. I accept that the

surveyor shall record the above-stated question and answer it in

the Report. (Sopaya Silva v. Magilin Silva [1989] 2 Sri LR 105)

However, failure to answer this question or answering it in the

negative shall not be decisive. In other words, the Court cannot

dismiss a partition action on the basis that the surveyor in his

Report to the Preliminary Plan has failed to answer or answered

in the negative the question “Whether or not the land surveyed

by him is in his opinion substantially the same as the land sought

to be partitioned as described in the schedule to the plaint”. Nor

can the Court blindly accept that the Preliminary Plan depicts

24

the entire land to be partitioned, if the surveyor in his Report

answers the above question in the affirmative. Whether or not

the land has been correctly identified shall be finally decided not

by the surveyor but by the Court having taken into

consideration the totality of the evidence adduced before it. The

answer to the said question by the surveyor is undoubtedly an

important item of evidence but it cannot decide the whole case.

I must also add that in terms of section 16(2) of the Partition

Law, together with the commission a copy of the plaint shall also

be sent to the surveyor. In the commission issued in this action,

the surveyor was directed to survey the land described in the

schedule to the plaint and prepare the Preliminary Plan

accordingly. Although the surveyor failed to answer the

question required by section 18(1)(a)(iii), he states in the Report

that he executed the commission in terms of the directions

given. This means what is depicted in the Preliminary Plan is

the land described in the schedule to the plaint. This

observation shall not be taken as licence for Court

Commissioners to be remiss in their duties in sending Reports to

Court in partition actions.

In the facts and circumstances of this case, I hold that the land

to be partitioned as stated in the schedule to the plaint is

depicted in the Preliminary Plan. The corpus has been properly

identified. I answer the question of law in respect of which leave

was granted in the affirmative.

The Judgment of the High Court of Civil Appeal is affirmed and

the appeal is dismissed with costs.

25

Judge of the Supreme Court

P. Padman Surasena, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Yasantha Kodagoda, P.C., J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court