1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Leave to

Appeal under and in terms of the Article

128(2) of the Constitution read with Section

5C of the High Court of Provinces (Special

Provisions) (Amendment) Act No. 54 of

2006.

Ummu Yasmin Mulafer, No. 39/5, Railway Lane,

Colombo 02.

Plaintiff

SC Appeal No: 23/2019 SC Leave to Appeal No: SC/HCCA/LA/185/2018 HCCA Case No: WP/HCCA/HO/43/2017 (F) DC Kaduwela Case No: 277/L Vs.

1. Merinnage Rupika Wijesingha,

No. 9/D/193, Jayawadanagama,

Battaramulla.

2. P. Sunil Lakshman Fernando,

No. 3/D/47, Jayawadanagama,

Battaramulla.

Defendants

AND

2

Ummu Yasmin Mulafer,

No. 39/5, Railway Lane,

Colombo 02.

Plaintiff-Appellant

Vs. 1. Merinnage Rupika Wijesingha,

No. 9/D/193, Jayawadanagama,

Battaramulla.

2. P. Sunil Lakshman Fernando,

No. 3/D/47, Jayawadanagama,

Battaramulla.

Defendant-Respondents

AND NOW BETWEEN

Merinnage Rupika Wijesingha,

No. 9/D/193, Jayawadanagama,

Battaramulla.

1st Defendant-Respondent-Petitioner

Vs. Ummu Yasmin Mulafer,

No. 39/5, Railway Lane,

Colombo 02.

Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent

3

P. Sunil Lakshman Fernando,

No. 3/D/47, Jayawadanagama,

Battaramulla.

2nd Defendant-Respondent-Respondent

Before: Justice L.T.B. Dehideniya

Justice Yasantha Kodagoda, PC

Justice A.L. Shiran Gooneratne

Counsel: Thanuka Nandasiri with Susil Wanigapura appear for the 1st

Defendant-Respondent-Petitioner.

Shafraz Hamza, AAL appears for the Plaintiff-Respondent-

Respondent instructed by R.M. Irsath.

Argued on: 18/05/2022

Decided on: 06/10/2022

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

The Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent (referred to as the Plaintiff) filed Plaint dated

28/06/2010 against the 1st and 2nd Defendant-Respondent-Petitioners (referred to as the

1st and 2nd Defendants, respectively) in the District Court of Kaduwela seeking inter

alia, a declaration of title to a corpus of 3.17 perches in extent , identified as residential

premises bearing assessment No. 9/D/193, Jayawadanagama, Battaramulla, morefully

4

described in the schedule to the Plaint, the ejectment of the 1st Defendant and all those

holding under her, restoration of possession of the said allotment to the Plaintiff and

damages.

The said premises was initially vested with the National Housing Development

Authority and by Deed No. 914 dated 18/01/1990, marked ‘P1’, was transferred to one

Wijeyanthi Miguel Hewaratne and thereafter by Deed No. 2198 dated 08/11/2006,

marked ‘P2’, the said Wijeyanthi Miguel Hewaratne transferred the said property to the

2nd Defendant. The 2nd Defendant by Deed No. 16 dated 21/01/2008, marked ‘P3’,

transferred the property to the Plaintiff. The 2nd Defendant, the brother-in-law of the 1st

Defendant, and his parents vacated the premises and handed over vacant possession to

the Plaintiff within two weeks of the said Deed of transfer dated 21/01/2008. The cause

of action of the Plaintiff arises on the continued occupation of the said premises by the

1st Defendant.

The 1st Defendant in her answer claimed inter alia, entitlement to the said property by

prescription against her predecessors in title and sought for a dismissal of the Plaint.

The Plaintiff filed replication dated 13/05/2011, and claimed that the 1st Defendant was

a licensee of the 2nd Defendant and therefore, the 1st Defendant cannot claim

prescriptive title to the subject matter. The 2nd Defendant admitted the Plaintiffs title

and prayed for a dismissal of the action.

There was agreement between the parties on the identity of the corpus and the Plaintiffs

documentary title to the subject matter. At the conclusion of the trial the learned District

Judge by Judgement dated 31/07/2013 held inter alia, that the 1st Defendant resided in

the said premises for over 10 years, made improvements and has acquired prescriptive

5

title to the corpus in suit and accordingly, decided in favour of the 1st Defendant and

granted relief as prayed for in the answer.

Aggrieved by the said decision, the Plaintiff appealed to the Homagama High Court of

Civil Appeal seeking, inter alia, to set aside the said Judgement dated 31/07/2013. The

Civil Appeal Court, by Judgement dated 03/05/2018, held that the 1st Defendant did not

satisfy adverse, undisturbed and independent possession against the true owner and as

such cannot claim prescriptive title. The 1st Defendant is before this Court challenging

the said Judgement.

This Court by Order dated 08/01/2019, granted Leave to Appeal on the questions of

law stated in paragraph 19 (a) and (c) of the Petition of Appeal dated 06/06/2018, as set

out below.

1. Did Honourable Judges of the Provincial High Court of Western Province

(Exercising Civil Appellate Jurisdiction) Holden at Homagama err in law and fact

to hold that the Petitioner has failed to establish her prescriptive title to the subject

matter?

2. Did Honourable Judges of the Provincial High Court of Western Province

(Exercising Civil Appellate Jurisdiction) Holden at Homagama err in fact to hold

that the Petitioner is a licensee of the 2nd Defendant?

The 1st question of law is formulated on the basis that, the 1st Defendant is the licensee

of the 2nd Defendant and therefore, the 1st Defendant cannot claim prescriptive title to

the subject matter. The 2nd Defendant became the absolute owner of the premises in suit

by Deed of Transfer No. 2198, dated 08/11/2006, marked ‘P2’ and the Plaintiff by Deed

of Transfer No. 16, dated 21/01/2008, marked ‘P3’.

6

The 1st Defendant’s position is that subsequent to her marriage to the brother of the 2nd

Defendant, the 2nd Defendant and their parents agreed to part with the subject matter in

her favour and since then, the 1st Defendant enjoyed the said premises as her own (ud

dominus). The 1st Defendant in her testimony before the trial court, marked several

documents in proof of improvements carried out on the said premises to establish

independent and adverse possession to that of the interest of the 2nd Defendant.

The Plaintiff raised Issue No. 6 to establish that the 2nd Defendant as the vendor was

obligated to hand over vacant, uninterrupted and peaceful possession to the Plaintiff,

but failed to fulfil his duty by not placing the Plaintiff in possession of the subject

matter. A verbal agreement had been reached between the Plaintiff and the 2nd

Defendant to hand over vacant possession of the premises to the Plaintiff by

07/02/2008.

The position of the Plaintiff is that the 1st Defendant was an occasional visitor to the

subject matter. It is contended that the 1st Defendant unlawfully and forcibly remained

in the said premises until 07/02/2008, two weeks from the date of transfer of the

premises in suit to the Plaintiff. The said agreement was not a precondition to the said

transfer. Eventhough the Plaintiff claimed in her replication dated 13/05/2011, that the

1st Defendant was a licensee of the 2nd Defendant, the 2nd Defendant has not subscribed

to such a stand anywhere in these proceedings.

The transfer of the premises by the 2nd Defendant to the Plaintiff by Deed dated

21/01/2008, marked ‘P3’ was on the basis that the 2nd Defendant was the vendor and

the absolute owner of the premises. In paragraph 12 of the Plaint the cause of action

against the 2nd Defendant was limited to a claim in damages. Accordingly, the trial court

permitted both causes to proceed in one and the same action.

7

The 1st Defendant also contended that she was in possession of the said premises since

1993, through her marriage to the 2nd Defendant’s brother and claims entitlement to

their matrimonial house on the basis that the 2nd Defendant and their parents agreed to

transfer the property to her husband.

As noted earlier, the said premises was initially owned by the National Housing

Development Authority and by virtue of Deed marked ‘P1’ dated 18/01/1990, was

transferred to one Wijeyanthi Miguel Hewaratne. By Deed marked ‘P2’ dated

08/11/2006, the said Wijeyanthi Miguel Hewaratne transferred the said property to the

2nd Defendant. There is no evidence that the said Wijeyanthi Miguel Hewaratne was in

possession of the said property since 1990 or that the 1st Defendant was a licensee of

the said Wijeyanthi Miguel Hewaratne.

Knowing the settled law as we do, in the case of immovable property, when a Defendant

claims prescriptive title adverse to and independent of that of the Plaintiffs title,

initially, the burden is on the Plaintiff to prove title to the land in suit on a balance of

probability.

The issue that arose for determination in the instant case is whether the Plaintiff’s

documentary title to the subject matter by virtue of Deed No. 16 dated 21/01/2008,

ranks higher than the 1st Defendant's claim of prescriptive title. As noted earlier, the

documentary title of the Plaintiff to the premises in suit is unchallenged and therefore,

the burden now shifts to the 1st Defendant to establish the plea of prescriptive title with

strong and cogent evidence.

8

Prescriptive title of the 1st Defendant

In Priyangika Perera vs. Gunasiri Perera (SC Appeal No. 59/2012), Prasanna

Jayawardena PC, J. observed that;

“a plaintiff who claims a right of way by prescription must establish the requisites

stipulated in section 3 of the Prescription Ordinance. This means that, as set out in

section 3, the Plaintiff has to prove that: he has had undisturbed and uninterrupted

possession and the use of the right of way for a minimum of ten years and that such

possession and use of the right of way has been adverse to or Independent of the owner

of the land and without acknowledging any right of the owner of the land over the use

of that right of way.”

As observed earlier, the Plaintiff came into Court to vindicate her paper title which is

uncontested. In the circumstances, the learned counsel for the Plaintiff submitted that

the 1st Defendant failed in discharging the burden of proof on prescriptive title. The

learned Counsel relied on Juliana Hamine vs. Don Thomas (59 N.L.R. 546 at page

548), where L.W. De Silva A.J. held,

“The paper title being in the 2nd and 3rd Defendants, the burden of proving a title by

prescription was on the Plaintiff. That burden he has failed to discharge. Apart from

the use of the word possess, the Witnesses called by the Plaintiff did not describe the

manner of possession. Such evidence is of no value where the Court has to find a title

by prescription. On this aspect, it is sufficient to recall the observations of Bertram C.J.

in the Full Bench Case of Alwis vs. Perera [(1919) 21 N.L.R. at 326]:

“I wish very much that District Judges - I speak not particularly, but generally - when

a witness says ‘I possessed’ or ‘we possessed’ or ‘We took the produce’, would not

confine themselves merely to recording the words, but would insist on those words

9

being explained and exemplified. I wish District Judges would abandon the present

practice of simply recording these words when stated by the witnesses, and would see

that such facts as the witnesses have in their minds are stated in full and appear in the

record.”

When deciding whether the 1st Defendant had acquired prescriptive title, the Civil

Appeal High Court, whilst correctly asserting that there is a burden cast upon the 1st

Defendant to establish her prescriptive title to the subject matter, has totally disregarded

to examine and evaluate the oral evidence led before the trial court.

The 1st Defendant in her oral evidence before the District Court claimed that she was in

possession of the said premises since 1993 through her marriage to the 2nd Defendant’s

brother, had taken care of her husband’s parents and considered the said premises as

their matrimonial house. She also claimed that improvements were made to the house

as her husband’s parents and the 2nd Defendant agreed to transfer the premises to her

husband. In the impugned Judgement the Civil Appeal High Court was correct in

observing that, “the 2nd Defendant (the predecessor in title of the Plaintiff), his parents

and the 1st Defendant were in possession of the subject matter when the Plaintiff

purchased the same.”

The 1st Defendant tendered to Court document marked ‘1V1’, the Birth Certificate of

the daughter of the 1st Defendant born in 1994, where the informer address refers to the

impugned property. Extracts of the electoral register and the Grama Niladhari

Certificates to establish that the 1st Defendant was residing in the said premises from

1993 to 2010, marked ‘1V2’ to ‘1V19’ and ‘1V20 and 1V21’, respectively. The receipts

to prove the purchase of raw material used for structural improvements to the premises

were also tendered in evidence. It has not been established in evidence that the 2nd

10

Defendant had in any manner interrupted the 1st Defendant carrying out such

improvements or alterations.

The Plaintiff closed her case reading in evidence documents marked ‘P1’ to ‘P3’.

Documents ‘P7’ and ‘P9’ were marked during cross examination of the 1st Defendant

by the Plaintiff. In the proceedings before the District Court dated 16/07/2012, a

statement made by the 1st Defendant to the Thalangama Police dated 07/02/2008 was

marked as ‘P9’ and the affidavit tendered by the 1st Defendant to the Magistrates Court

of Kaduwela, was marked as ‘P6’. The Civil Appeal High Court in their findings have

extensively referred to and acted upon ‘P6’ and ‘P9’ (both documents were referred to

as the affidavit of the 1st Defendant), “tendered to the Magistrates Court of Kaduwela

in Case Bearing No. 72869 (instituted under Section 66 of the Primary Courts

Ordinance)”. Document marked ‘P7’ is the affidavit filed by one Ayarin Alawathi, the

mother-in-law of the 1st Defendant. In the action instituted in the Magistrates Court, the

1st Defendant was given possession of the impugned premises.

In the said Judgement, the Civil Appeal High Court erroneously referred to ‘P9’ as the

affidavit tendered by the 1st Defendant. The proceedings dated 12/02/2008, held before

the Magistrates Court of Kaduwela in Case Bearing No. 72869, is marked ‘P9’.

According to the said proceedings the 1st Defendant had agreed to purchase the subject

matter for Rs. 1,450,000/- in order to arrive at a settlement. Thereafter in the affidavit

dated 16/03/2008 marked ‘P6’ (also referred to by the appellate court as ‘P9’), in the

Magistrates Court, the 1st Defendant referred to the said proceedings dated 12/02/2008

and explained her position stating that the agreement to settle the dispute was

conditional upon the handing over of a room occupied by the parents of the 1st

Defendant. She further states that due to fear and intimidation by the parties involved,

11

the settlement did not go through. Based on the said consideration to settle this action,

the appellate court came to a precise conclusion that the 1st Defendant has no ud

dominum and adverse possession against the true owner to the subject matter. In

arriving at the said conclusion, the Appeal Court was utterly misdirected when it failed

to appreciate the compass of Section 66(6) of the Primary Courts’ Procedure Act, where

it is mandated upon the learned Magistrate “to make every effort to induce the parties

and the persons interested (if any) to arrive at settlement of the dispute” before fixing

the case for inquiry.

Based on the same affidavit the Court also came to a decisive finding that;

“the 2nd Defendant purchased the property in 1990 and from 1997 the possession of the

1st Defendant has been disturbed by the former. As such, it is established that the 1st

Defendant did not have undisturbed possession for a period of ten years as required in

law”.

This finding too, is totally erroneous for the following reasons;

Firstly, the evidence led before the District Court does not challenge the 1st Defendants

position of continuous possession being converted to “disconnected and divided” due

to any disturbance created by any party.

Secondly, the 2nd Defendant was never the owner, a licensor, lessor, or a landlord of the

impugned property during the said period.

Withers, J. in Siman Appu vs. Christian Appu, (1895) 1 NLR 288 observed that,

“possession is "disturbed" either by an action intended to remove the possessor from

the land, or by acts which prevent the possessor from enjoying the free and full use of

12

the land of which he is in the course of acquiring the dominion, and which convert his

continuous user into a disconnected and divided user”.

It is an admitted fact that the 2nd Defendant acquired documentary title to the subject

matter on 08/11/2006 by Deed No. 2198, marked ‘P2’. The 2nd Defendant was living at

No: 3/D/47, Jayawadanagama, Battaramulla and not in the impugned property

(9/D/193, Jayawadanagama, Battaramulla). The 2nd Defendant has never enjoyed

ownership of the subject matter at any time prior to 2006. The above observation clearly

indicate that the reliance placed upon the affidavit marked ‘P6’, also referred to as ‘P9’,

to say the least, is irrational and/or misconceived in law and in fact.

The appellate court also relied on document marked ‘P7’, the affidavit filed by Ayarin

Alawathi, to establish that the 1st Defendant visited the subject premises to take care of

her husband’s parents. The Plaintiff never relied on the said affidavit, as it were, to

confront the 1st Defendant on the issue of leave and licence. Notwithstanding the

evidence, the Court held that on facts transpired from the said affidavit filed by Ayarin

Alawathi, the 1st Defendant became a licensee only for the purpose of looking after the

parents. As observed earlier no evidence was led to establish that the 1st Defendant was

a licensee of the 2nd Defendant with a leave and licence or as an agent who entered the

premises in a subordinate character with the latter’s permission.

Prior to the institution of action in the Magistrates Court the 2nd Defendant did not give

any undertaking to the Plaintiff to dispose of the 1st Defendant from the subject

premises. In the circumstances, it is clearly observed that the appellate court merely

extracted facts from Ayarin Alawathi’s affidavit in support of its reckoning.

In D. R. Kiriamma vs. J.A. Podibanda 2005 (BLR) 9, Udalagama, J. made reference

to the requisite elements of law in establishing prescriptive possession as,

13

“Onus probandi or the burden of proving possession is on the party claiming

prescriptive possession. Importantly, prescription is a question of fact. Physical

possession is a factum probandum. Considerable circumspection is necessary to

recognize prescriptive title as undoubtedly it deprives the ownership of the party having

paper title. title by prescription is an illegality made legal due to the other party not

taking action”

The court also made reference to the following passage in Walter Perera’s “Laws of

Ceylon”, 2nd Edn. 396, which reads as follows;

“as regards to the mode of proof of prescriptive possession, mere general statements of

witnesses that the Plaintiff ---- have possessed the land for a number of years exceeding

the prescriptive period are not evidence of uninterrupted and adverse possession to

support a title of prescription. It is necessary that the witnesses should speak to specific

facts and the question of possession has to be decided by court”.

The learned District Judge having placed due weight on the Plaintiff’s documentary

title to the property was mindful to shift the burden to the 1st Defendant to prove her

claim on prescriptive title. The trial judge considered that the 1st Defendant was in

possession of the said premises from 1993 and had given due consideration to the

electoral register from 1993 to 2010 and to the Grama Niladhari certificates when

evaluating evidence. The trial court also considered the expenditure incurred by the 1st

Defendant to complete the construction of the house.

The oral evidence, the supporting documents, or the payment receipts on incurred

expenses on improvements made, remained uncontradicted in cross examination.

“Where the Petitioner has led evidence sufficient in law to prove his status, ie, a factum

probandum, (the physical possession of the 1st Defendant in this appeal) the failure of

14

the Respondent to adduce evidence which contradicts it adds a new factor in favour of

the Petitioner. There is then an additional ‘matter before the court’, which the definition

in section 3 of the Evidence Ordinance requires the court to take into account, namely,

that the evidence led by the Petitioner is uncontradicted. The failure to take account of

this circumstance is a non-direction amounting to a misdirection in law”. (L. Edrick

De Silva vs. L. Chandradasa De Silva 70 NLR 169)

The Plaintiff’s main contention that the 1st Defendant had lived in the impugned

premises with a leave and licence of the 2nd Defendant has not been established nor has

it been subscribed to by the 2nd Defendant in these proceedings.

Gratiaen J. in Chelliah vs. Wijenathan 54 NLR 337, held that;

“Where a party invokes the provisions of section 3 of the Prescription Ordinance in

order to defeat the ownership of an adverse claimant to immovable property, the burden

of proof rests squarely and fairly on him to establish a starting point for his or her

acquisition of prescriptive rights”.

In the instant case the starting point of the acquisition of prescriptive title by the 1st

Defendant from 1993 was never challenged. There is also no evidence of payment of

rent, any other obligation of the 1st Defendant to her husband’s parents or any party,

which could have had a negative impact on her claim. The documentary evidence

tendered to the trial court has clearly bolstered the oral evidence of the 1st Defendant.

The District Court has satisfactorily discharged its duty to examine and evaluate the

available evidence in totality, prior to arriving at its finding. In the circumstances the

District Court was correct in holding that the 1st Defendant has led evidence sufficient

in law to discharged the burden of acquiring prescriptive possession.

15

For the aforesaid reasons, I am inclined to hold that the 1st Defendant has proved

undisturbed and uninterrupted possession of the impugned premises for over 10 years

prior to bringing of this action.

Accordingly, both 1st and 2nd questions of law are answered in the affirmative.

The Judgement of the Civil Appeal High Court dated 03/05/2018 is set aside and the

appeal is allowed.

Appeal allowed. No costs ordered.

Judge of the Supreme Court

L.T.B. Dehideniya J.

I agree

Judge of the Supreme Court

Yasantha Kodagoda PC, J.

I agree

Judge of the Supreme Court