1

In the matter of an appeal under and in terms of

Article 128 (2) of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

1. Ranasinghe Arachchilage Wilson

And 7 others

All of,

No.19, YMBA Shopping Complex,

Kandy Road,

Vavuniya.

PETITIONERS – APPELLANTS –

PETITIONERS – APPELLANTS.

-Vs-

1. Welupillei Wasantha Kumar,

The Secretary,

Urban Council,

Vavuniya.

SUBSTITUTED PETITIONER – 1ST

RESPONDENT– 1ST RESPONDENT

– 1ST RESPONDENT

2. V. Jayatilleka,

President,

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

SC / APPEAL / 102 / 2021

SC / SPL / LA / 264 / 2018

CA / PHC / 74 / 2000

HC Vavuniya Revision

HCV / Rev / 07 / 99

MC / Vavuniya / 2890

2

Y.M.B.A, Kandy Road,

Vavuniya.

SUBSTITUTED RESPONDENT –

2ND RESPONDENT 2ND

RESPONDENT – 2ND

RESPONDENT

Before: E.A.G.R. Amarasekara, J,

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J, &

Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J

Counsel: Manohara De Silva, PC with Nadee Lankatilleke and Kaveesha Gamage

for the Petitioners – Appellants – Appellants.

K.S. Ratnavel with S. Thanikumar for the Petitioner – 1st Respondent –

1st Respondent – 1st Respondent.

Gamini Hettiarchchi for the Substituted Respondent – 2nd Respondent –

2nd Respondent – 2nd Respondent.

Argued on: 08.10.2024

Decided on: 16.06.2025

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J

1. This appeal raises the usually recurring question whether a person who is not a

party and who had no notice of proceedings in which his interest was at stake can

impugn a judicial order that has been made against him or his interests. The

Appellants in this case constitute a class of such interest holders who complained

to the High Court of the Northern Province in Vavuniya and subsequently

3

preferred an appeal to the Court of Appeal when they did not succeed in their

appeal. It all started in the Magistrate’s Court of Anuradhapura where the

Appellants before this Court had that adverse order issued against them as far

back as 19 May 1999. It has to be mentioned at the outset that though the subject

matter – a Pilgrims Rest turned a shopping complex – is situated in Vavuniya

within the Urban Council limits of Vavuniya, the adverse order I have referred to

above was issued by the learned Magistrate of Anuradhapura given that as is well

known, Vavuniya was a theatre of war in 1993 and as the Courts in Vavuniya were

non-functional, the lis between the Urban Council of Vavuniya and the President,

YMBA Vavuniya commenced in the Magistrate’s Court of Anuradhapura which

eventually issued the adverse order against the Appellants.

2. Let me also introduce the parties to the case at bar in the Magistrate’s Court of

Anuradhapura. It was the Urban Council of Vavuniya who took the President,

YMBA under Section 28 (A) (3) (a) of the Urban Development Authority Law, No.

41 of 1978 as amended by several Acts that followed the principal enactment (the

UDA Law). The Appellants were never parties to this action but at the end of the

action the Appellants were ordered to be evicted from the shopping complex where

the Appellants ran their business.

3. Having described the parties to the Magistrate’s Court proceedings, I must state

the legal relationship that existed between the Appellants and the YMBA,

Vavuniya. The YMBA had obtained a permit issued by the Urban Council,

Vavuniya for construction of a Pilgrims Rest where the pilgrims could rest their

souls after a spiritual journey or in the course of it. It is in evidence that the

Appellants had made substantial contributions to the YMBA, Vavuniya which

built such a place of repose but they could not prosecute that purpose as there was

a prosecution of a war during that time. In consequence, the YMBA, Vavuniya let

the building complex to the Appellants who became the tenants of the YMBA and

successfully ran their respective businesses in the shopping complex.

4

4. In other words, there was a change of user and what was meant to be a Pilgrims

Rest transformed to be a shopping complex. The Appellants thus were the tenants

who held a contractual relationship with the YMBA, Vavuniya.

5. As it does happen in cases such as this, the Vavuniya Urban Council issued a

notice on the President, YMBA Vavuniya in October 1993 under Section 28 (A) (1)

(a) of the Urban Development Authority Law, No. 41 of 1978 (as amended) alleging

that the YMBA had contravened Sections 8 J (1) of the aforesaid law by

constructing a shopping complex within the premises bearing assessment No. 19,

Horawapothana Road, Vavuniya and the said notice directed the President, YMBA

Vavuniya, who it alleged had executed the said development activity, to cease such

development activity forthwith and to restore the land on which such development

activity was being executed to its original condition. The notice gave the President,

YMBA 10 days before which the aforesaid directions were to be fulfilled.

6. As could be seen, the aforesaid directions are identically found in Section 28 (A)

(1) (a) and (b) of the UDA Law. It is worth noting while the notice referred to (a)

and (b) as above, the notice is silent on 28 (A) (1) (c). As the provision makes it

clear, Section 28 (A) (1) (c) provides for the demolition of any building or work.

7. Thus, the notice issued on the YMBA, Vavuniya did not require it to demolish the

shopping complex. It only required the YMBA, Vavuniya to restore the land on

which such development activity has been executed to its original condition.

8. Subsequent to this notice, the Secretary, Vavuniya Urban Council made an

application to the Magistrate’s Court of Vavuniya praying inter alia ; for issuance

of a mandatory order under Section 28 (A) (3) of the UDA Law authorizing the

demolition of the unauthorized building at No. 19, Horawapothana Road,

Vavuniya.

9. It repays attention that the notice initially issued did not necessitate a demolition

of the shopping complex but it rather required the restoration of the premises to

5

its original condition. The upshot of the notice was the transformation of the

shopping complex to Pilgrims Rest but the application quite strangely requested

the authorization of the demolition of the shopping complex. In other words, even

the recipient of the notice – the YMBA, Vavuniya was not served with any notice

of a prospective demolition. The Vavuniya Urban Council clearly exceeded its

jurisdiction when it asked for the demolition of the shopping complex.

10. Now the forum had shifted to the Magistrate’s Court of Anuradhapura and the

question arises as to what transpired in that Court.

11. The learned Magistrate of Anuradhapura did what neither party had sought. The

learned Magistrate’s order dated 19 May 1999 could be bifurcated into two parts.

In the first part of the order, he took the side of caution and chose not to order the

demolition of the building, which the Vavuniya Urban Council had sought in the

prayer to its application to the Magistrate’s Court. Even though the Vavuniya

Urban Council had prayed for an order for demolition, given the fact that it could

be used or converted as a Pilgrims Rest for which the permit had been granted the

learned Magistrate appears to have leant against the demolition of the building.

It was the second part of the order that Mr. Manohara de Silva, PC complained

about as having adversely affected the interests of the tenants. The second part of

the order mandated the eviction of the tenants (the Appellants) from the shopping

complex before 19 June 1999.

12. The Appellants had taken on tenancy their space in the shopping complex but the

learned Magistrate ordered their eviction when nobody had sought that remedy.

Should the tenants not vacate the premises before 19 June 1999, the assistance of

the police could be obtained to eject the tenants. Aggrieved by the order of the

Magistrate, the Appellants preferred a revision application to the High Court of

Northern Province holden in Vavuniya.

The revisionary application of the Appellants to the High Court sitting in

Vavuniya.

6

13. Though the Appellants were not parties to the proceedings in the Magistrate’s

Court of Anuradhapura, they were entitled to move the High Court in revision as

they had been adversely affected by the order of the Magistrate. The Supreme

Court in Fernando v. Republic of Sri lanka1 declared that the Court can

exercise its powers of revision when a matter is brought to its notice by a person

who though not a party to the case, is adversely affected by any order or

proceedings in the case.

14. The High Court concluded the Magistrate’s order fell within Section 28 (A) (3) (a)

of the UDA Law which empowers the Magistrate to make the following orders ;

(a) to discontinue the use of any land or building.

(b) to demolish or alter any building of work.

(c) to do all such other acts as such person was required to do by such notice,

as the case may be.

15. According to the learned High Court judge of the Northern Province Hon. S.

Sriskandarajah (as he then was), the order of eviction made by the learned

Magistrate was tantamount to effecting the discontinuance of the use of any land

or building.

16. On an appeal preferred against the judgement of the High Court, the Court of

Appeal affirmed the judgement of the High Court and stated that the Appellants

were not entitled to any notice as those entitled to notice have been specifically

mentioned in Section 28 (A) (1) of the UDA Law. Thus, the Court of Appeal by its

judgement dated 13 July 2018 dismissed the appeal of the Appellants.

17. All three Courts have now declared in unison that the word “person” on whom

notice should be issued would connote “... the person involved with the executing

or has executed or has caused such development activity to be caused…”. The

Court of Appeal concluded that the tenants would not come within “the person”

mentioned in Section 28 (A) (1). I would disagree with such a proposition. Section

1 79 N.L.R Vol II at p 402

7

28 (A) (1) cannot be viewed in isolation and it has to be read with powers of

Magistrates to hold an inquiry and make orders in terms of Section 28 (A) (3).

Before I set down my reasons that the discretionary power bestowed on the

Magistrate extends to giving notice and affording a hearing even to those parties

who would be adversely affected by the order of the Magistrate, let me shed a few

thoughts on some procedural matters that surface in the case.

18. However, it has to be noted if discontinuance of the use of the land would include

the freeing of the shopping complex from the tenants, it was not specified in the

notice that was served on the YMBA, which has obtained the permit from the

Urban Council. The pre-condition to the exercise of the power in Section 28 (A) (1)

of the UDA Law is a written notice that requires the recipient of the notice to effect

the following ;

(a) to cease such development activity forthwith ; or

(b) to restore the land on which such development activity is being executed or

has been executed to its original condition ; or

(c) to secure compliance with the permit under the authority of which that

development activity is carried out or engaged in, or with any term or

condition of such permit,

and for the purpose of compliance with the requirements aforesaid –

(i) to discontinue the use of any land or building; or

(ii) to demolish or alter any building or work.

19. Section 28 (A) (2) states that it shall be the duty of the person on whom a notice is

issued under subsection (1) to comply with any requirement in such notice within

the time specified in such notice or within such extended time as may be granted

by the authority on application made in that behalf.

20. Thus, the Magistrate granted a relief of ordering the eviction of tenants when it

was not even specified in the written notice. The written notice under Section 28

(A) (1) must be specific as to the violation of the permit and the discontinuance of

the use of the land or building must be specified as to the steps that must be taken

if it was a violation of the permit.

8

21. In the case of Wilbert Perera v. Gunawardane, Prosecuting Officer, Urban

Development Authority2, Justice Jayalath with Justice Siva Selliah stated that

it is manifest that the Respondent is entitled to show cause before the Magistrate

before a mandatory order is pronounced and that the Magistrate is required to

hear the Respondent when he evinces an interest to show cause against the

mandatory order. In this context, Justice Jayalath remarked

“The provision gives a Magistrate a measure of judicial

discretion in making an order. Bearing this in mind we are of the

opinion that the learned Magistrate should have held an inquiry that

the UDA has complied with the requirements under Section 28 (A) (1)

of the said law and thereafter, to have satisfied himself the Petitioner

has failed to comply with the requirements in the notice before making

his order – this he has failed to do”.

22. Instead of exercising his discretion to hold a fair inquiry, the learned Magistrate

has made an order in the instant case evicting the tenants when the precedent

notice made no reference to Section 28 (A) (1) (c) (i) or (ii). I am compelled to

observe that the learned Magistrate cannot order the termination of tenancy

rights with no notice to the tenants or the landlords and without having embarked

upon an inquiry.

23. In the circumstances the learned High Court judge of Vavuniya erred in law by

affirming the decision of the Magistrate of Anuradhapura to eject the Appellants

from the premises. Dheeraratne, J in Sirisena Cooray v. Tissa Dias

Bandaranayake3 observed;

“Over the years frontiers of Lord Atkin’s formula – have

been advanced by judicial decisions it is no longer the duty to

act judicially or quasi-judicially which attracts review but the

duty to act fairly…”

2 CA 546 / 85, MC Mount Lavinia 24135, CA minutes dated 22nd October 1980 3 (1999) 1 Sri.L.R. 1 at p 16

9

24. These principles have been extended not only to those having a legitimate

expectation but also to those having interest in property or contingent rights. The

force of the argument that the Appellants made contributions to the construction

of the building on the YMBA premises in Vavuniya and having paid monthly

rentals continuously they enjoy proprietary interest in the property as tenants

cannot be lost on this Court.

25. I take the view that the Appellants before being ordered to be evicted must have

been given notice and afforded a hearing to ascertain the extent of their interest

as tenants of the property. It is a cardinal principle of natural justice that even if

the statute is silent on giving notice and affording a hearing, rules of natural

justice are implied standards which must be strictly followed by authorities vested

with discretionary power. In the instant case, even though Section 28 (A) (3) of the

UDA Law does not expressly provide for notice and hearing to parties other than

those expressly recognized in Section 28 (A) (1), rules of natural justice require the

Magistrate to summon those against whom adverse orders are going to be made

and afford them a hearing. The rules of natural justice have not been observed in

the case and both the Magistrate and the learned High Court judge were in error

in concluding that the Appellants were not entitled to any notice.

26. It is an established principle of law that Courts will have no jurisdiction over

parties who have not been summoned as summons constitute the very foundation

that invests the Court with jurisdiction. If orders are passed against parties who

have not been summoned and whose rights are adversely affected by the orders,

the orders have to become perforce null and void – see Ittepana v. Hemawathie4

27. In these circumstances, this Court answers the questions of law raised in this case

in favour of the Appellants and proceeds to set aside the order of the learned

Magistrate dated 19 May 1999, the judgement of the learned High Court judge

dated 22 February 2000 and the judgment of the Court of Appeal dated 24 July

2018. Thus, we allow the appeal of the Appellants.

4 (1981) 1 Sri.L.R at p 476

10

Judge of the Supreme Court

E.A.G.R. Amarasekara, J

I agree Judge of the Supreme Court

Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J Judge of the Supreme Court

I agree