==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for leave to Appeal

under and in terms of Article 127(2) of the Constitution

read with Section 5C of the High Court of the

Provinces (Special Provisions) (Amendment) Act No.

54 of 2006.

SC/Appeal/150/2015 Budagoda Arachchige Don Chandrawansha,

SC HCCA/LA /653/2014 Wijewardhana, No. 50, Maha Vihara Road,

UVA/HCCA/BDL/30/2011(F) Ambalangoda.

D.C. Badulla Case No.

P/281/4

PLAINTIFF

vs Budagoda Arachchige Don Cyril Wijewardhana, No. 7, Bandarawela Road, Hali Ela, Budagoda Arachchige Don Alfred Wijewardhana, No. 98/6, Ketawala Road, Hali Ela. Themmadura Lalani Shanthi De Silva, Bandarawela Road, Hali Ela, Thilini Sachira Wijewardhana, Bandarawela Road, Hali Ela,

2

Budagoda Arachchige Don Piyadasa alias Premawansha, (Deceased) ‘Shamila Stores’, Bandarawela Road, Hali Ela. DEFENDANTS 6.(sic) Budagoda Arachchige Don Sri Lal Wijewardhana, ‘Shamila Stores’, Bandarawela Road, Hali Ela. SUBSTITUTED 5th DEFENDANT AND BETWEEN Budagoda Arachchige Don Chandrawansha, Wijewardhana, (Deceased) No. 50, Maha Vihara Road, Ambalangoda.

PLAINTIFF - APPELLANT

Budagoda Arachchige Don Deepthi, Chandrawansha Wijewardhana, No. 98/6, Lake Road, Wickramasinghepura, Battaramulla. Budagoda Arachchige Dona Yamuna Chandini Wijewardhana, Etampitiya Estate, Etampitiya. Budagoda Arachchige Dona Manjula Kanthimani Wijewardhana, St. Jame’s Estate, Hali Ela.

SUBSTITUTED - PLAINTIFFS - APPELLANTS vs

1. Budagoda Arachchige Don Cyril Wijewardhana, No.7, Bandarawela Road, Hali Ela,

3

2. Budagoda Arachchige Don Alfred Wijewardhana, No. 98/6, Ketawala Road, Hali Ela. 3. Themmadura Lalani Shanthi De Silva, Bandarawela Road, Hali Ela,

4. Thilini Sachira Wijewardhana, Bandarawela Road, Hali Ela, DEFENDANTS – RESPONDENTS

6. (sic) Budagoda Arachchige Don Sri Lal Wijewardhana,

No 7, Bandarawela Road, Hali Ela.

SUBSTITUTED 5th – DEFENDANT - RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

6. (sic) Budagoda Arachchige Don Sri Lal Wijewardhana,

‘Shamila Stores’, Bandarawela Road, Hali Ela. SUBSTITUTED 5th – DEFENDANT – RESPONDENT -

PETITIONER

vs

A. Budagoda Arachchige Don Deepthi Chandrawansha

Wijewardhana, No. 98/6, Lake Road,

Wickramasinghepura,

Battaramulla.

B. Budagoda Arachchige Dona Yamuna Chandini Wijewardhana, Etampitiya Estate, Etampitiya. (Deceased) B/1- Dharamakula Raja Randeniya B/2 – Achini Sharmila Randeniya

4

B/3 – Charit Anjana Randeniya Etampitiya Estate, Etampitiya C. Budagoda Arachchige Dona Manjula Kanthimani Wijewardhana, St. Jame’s Estate, Hali Ela.

SUBSTITUTED RESPONDENTS- PLAINTIFFS –

APPELLANTS - RESPONDENTS

1. Budagoda Arachchige Don Cyril Wijewardhana, No. 7, Bandarawela Road, Hali Ela, 2. Budagoda Arachchige Don Alfred Wijewardhana, No. 98/6, Ketawala Road, Hali Ela. 3. Themmadura Lalani Shanthi De Silva, Bandarawela Road, Hali Ela, 4. Thilini Sachira Wijewardhana,

Bandarawela Road, Hali Ela,

DEFENDANTS -RESPONDENTS-

RESPONDENTS

BEFORE : A. H. M. D. Nawaz, J. Sobhitha Rajakaruna, J & M. Sampath K. B. Wijeratne J. COUNSEL : Uditha Egalahewa, PC with Damitha Karunarathne for the Substituted – Defendant – Respondent – Appellant.

Chandrasiri de Silva for the 1st Substituted – Plaintiff – Appellant – Respondent. ARGUED ON : 09.05.2025 DECIDED ON : 29.10.2025

5

M. Sampath K. B. Wijeratne J.

The Plaintiff, who is now deceased, instituted the present action to partition the lands

called “Waliliyadda Kumbura” containing buildings bearing assessment numbers 56 and

57, and “Waliliyadda” in an extent of 4 perches and containing buildings bearing

assessment numbers 53 and 54, more fully described in the schedule to the plaint as Land

1 and Land 2, respectively. Upon the issuance of a commission, A.A.S. Amarasekara,

Licensed Surveyor, carried out a preliminary survey and tendered Plan No. 1523 along

with the corresponding report. Thereafter, the 5th Defendant moved for a commission to

the Surveyor General, who tendered Plan No. B/Court/2006/506 along with his report.

The Plaintiff contended that the two lands were once owned by Budagoda Arachchilage

Don Aron Wijewardhana Appuhamy, who transferred the first land described in the

schedule to the plaint by Deed No. 33828 dated June 4, 1946, attested by G.B.

Samaranayaka, Notary Public, to his children: Don Chandrawansha Wijewardhana, the

Plaintiff; Don Siril Wijewardhana the 1st Defendant-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter

referred to as the 1st Defendant); Don Alfred Wijewardhana, the 2nd Defendant-

Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the 2nd Defendant); Don Piyadasa alias

Premawansha, the 5th Defendant; and Don Ariyawansha Wijewardhana. It is stated that

the original owner, Don Aron Wijewardhana Appuhamy, died intestate with respect to the

second land described in the schedule to the plaint, leaving as his heirs the Plaintiff, 1st

Defendant, 2nd Defendant, 5th Defendant, and Don Ariyawansha Wijewardhana.

Subsequently, Don Ariyawansha Wijewardhana died intestate, leaving his widow and his

heir namely, Lalani Shanthi De Silva, the 3rd Defendant-Respondent-Respondent

(hereinafter referred to as the 3rd Defendant), and Thilini Sachira Wijewardhana, the 4th

Defendant-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the 4th Defendant).

While the action was pending, the Plaintiff passed away, and the ‘A, B and C Substituted-

Plaintiffs-Appellants-Respondents’ were substituted in his place. The 5th Defendant also

passed away, and the 6th Defendant-Respondent-Petitioner, who is the Appellant before

6

this Court, was also substituted in place of the 5th Defendant. (Although substituted in the

room of deceased 5th Defendant, he is referred to in the caption as the 6th Defendant-

Respondent-Petitioner.)

The only party who raised a contest was the 5th Defendant and he tendered a statement of

claim disputing solely the identity of the corpus.

At the trial, the deceased Plaintiff and the Commissioner of Court, A.A.S. Amarasekara,

testified. The Plaintiff tendered the extract of the encumbrance sheet where Deed No.

33828 was registered, marked as 'පැ'1 and the extract of the encumbrance sheet where the

second land was registered, marked as 'පැ2’. The deed itself, No. 33828, does not appear

to have been formally marked in evidence; however, a copy of the deed is in the record,

had been marked as 'පැ1 (අ)’. The learned District Judge, having observed this defect in

the production of the deed, nevertheless considered the deed as it was filed of record.

None of the parties invited the learned Judges of the Civil Appellate High Court, or this

Court, to reject the deed on the basis that it was not properly marked and produced.

Accordingly, I see no reason to disregard Deed No 33828.

At the trial, preliminary Plan No. 1523 together with its corresponding report were marked

as 'පැ3’ and 'පැ3’ (අ), respectively. The Plaintiff, during his testimony, at one point sought

to mark the plan made by the Surveyor General but immediately withdrew the initiative.

The 1st to 4th Defendants chose not to lead any evidence. The widow of the original 5th

Defendant gave evidence at the trial regarding the extract from the assessment register

pertaining to buildings Nos. 53, 54, 56, and 57 issued by the Municipal Council, which

was produced as document marked ‘5වි1’.

It appears from the record that the extents of the first and second lands described in the

schedule to the plaint do not tally with the preliminary plan. The Plaintiff, in his evidence,

was unable to identify each land separately with reference to the lots depicted in the

preliminary plan. Under cross-examination (page 102/184), he stated that the lands

described in the schedule to the plaint are depicted as Lots 1 to 4 in the preliminary plan.

7

However, he also stated that the buildings bearing assessment numbers 53 and 54 in item

No. 2 of the schedule to the plaint correspond only to Lot 1.

Upon examining the preliminary plan, it appears that a strip of land between Lots 3 and

4, bearing assessment No. 15, was not surveyed at the request of the parties. It further

appears from the extract of the assessment register marked ‘5වි1’ that the building bearing

No. 15 was previously numbered as 54 and is situated on the second land described in the

schedule to the plaint. Despite these weaknesses in the evidence identifying the corpus,

the case proceeded to judgment.

After the closure of the case, the learned District Judge observed that the parties had failed

to frame issues. Accordingly, he invited the parties to frame their respective issues. The

Plaintiff framed five issues, among which the fourth issue concerned the identification of

the corpus. The 1st to 4th Defendants stated that they would follow the issues framed by

the Plaintiff, while the substituted 5th Defendant did not suggest any issue. It is a well-

settled rule of procedure that, in a partition action, issues are not required to be framed

(John Singho vs Pedris Hamy Et al, 48 NLR 345), as it is the duty of the Court to ascertain

the identity of the corpus and investigate title irrespective of whether the parties have

contested the case. (Sopinona vs Pitipanaarachchi and Two Others, (2010) 1 Sri L.R 87.

The extract of the assessment register marked ‘5 වි 1’ states that the assessment number

of building 57 has been renumbered as No. 9, and the assessment number of building 56

has been changed to No. 13. The Commissioner’s preliminary plan shows Lot 2 containing

the building presently numbered 9, and Lot 3 containing assessment No. 13. Hence, it can

be seen that assessment No. 9, which was previously numbered 57, is within Lot 2, and

the building bearing No. 13, which was previously numbered 56, is situated in Lot 3.

Accordingly, Lot 1, as depicted in the preliminary plan, does not contain any building

referred to in either of the schedules to the plaint. Further, as per the preliminary plan, the

building bearing No. 15, which was previously No. 54, has not been surveyed or included

in the said plan. The building bearing No. 17, which was previously No. 53, is situated in

Lot 4.

8

Hence, it is abundantly clear that the building bearing assessment No. 54 in item No. 2 of

the schedule to the plaint had not been surveyed at all, demonstrating that the entirety of

land No. 2 in the schedule to the plaint had not been surveyed.

The learned District Judge delivered judgment to partition only Lots 2 and 3 in the

preliminary plan, corresponding to the first land described in the schedule to the plaint.

As there was no contest regarding the pedigree, which was supported by Deed No. 33828,

he allotted shares to the parties in the following proportions: one-fifth each to the Plaintiff,

the 1st, 2nd, and 5th Defendants, and one-tenth each to the 3rd and 4th Defendants.

Being aggrieved by the said judgment, the Plaintiff appealed to the Civil Appellate High

Court of Badulla. The learned Judges of the Civil Appellate High Court varied the

judgment, holding that item No. 1 of the schedule to the plaint consists of Lots No. 1 to 3

in the preliminary plan. Thereafter, the 6th Defendant moved this Court seeking leave to

appeal against the said judgment. This Court, after considering the application, granted

leave to appeal on the questions of law stated in paragraph 15 (a) to (d) of the Petition. I

will reproduce the questions of law in paragraph 15 verbatim, namely:

a. Did the Honourable Judges of the said Civil Appellate High Court err in law by

holding that Lot 1 in the aforesaid preliminary plan marked P 3 should constitute

part of the land sought to be partitioned under item 1 of the Schedule to the Plaint?

b. Did the Honourable Judges of the Civil Appellate High Court err in law by holding

that the Petitioner had admitted that the Lot 1 in the aforesaid primary plan marked

P3 constitutes part of the land sought to be partitioned under item 1 of the Schedule

to the Plaint?

c. Did the Honourable Judges of the said Civil Appellate High Court erred in law by

holding that the learned District Judge had given undue weight and placed undue

reliance on certain immaterial facts more particularly on the failure of the Plaintiff

9

to adduce any evidence to prove the old Assessment Nos. of the buildings standing

upon Lot 1 in the aforesaid primary plan marked P3?

d. Did the Honourable Judges of the said Civil Appellate High Court err in law by

disregarding and misinterpreting the evidence placed before the District Court?

The argument before us was confined to the identity of the first land described in the

schedule to the plaint. It was never contested that the entirety of the second land was not

properly surveyed and depicted in the preliminary plan. In fact, it is abundantly clear that

the building bearing assessment No. 54, referred to in item No.2 of the schedule to the

plaint, was not properly surveyed.

The Identity of the Corpus Described as Item No. 1 of the Schedule to the Plaint

Section 18(1)(iii) of the Partition Law No. 21 of 1977 casts the initial burden of

identifying the corpus on the Commissioner. Section 18(1) reads as follows:

18 (1) The surveyor shall duly execute the commission issued to him and, in doing

so shall, where any boundary of the land surveyed by him is undefined, demarcate

that boundary on the ground by means of such boundary marks as are not easily

removed or destroyed and shall, on or before the date fixed for the purpose, make

due return thereto and shall transmit to the court-

(a) a report, in duplicate, substantially in the form set out in the Second

Schedule to this Law, verified by affidavit stating-

(i), (ii) (...)

(iii) whether or not the land surveyed by him is in his opinion

substantially the same as the land sought to be partitioned as

described in the schedule to the plaint;

(iv) – (viii) (…)

10

(b)(i)- (v) (…)

(2) – (4) (...)

If the Commissioner fails to identify the land described in the commission, it is his duty

to report to the Court and seek proper directions (Adikaram vs Mendis, 2012 BLR Vol.

XIX Part II, p. 4, ; Brampy Appuhamy vs Menis Appuhamy, 60 NLR 337). It is important

to note that the Commissioner should not have excluded the strip of land between Lots 3

and 4 merely because the parties agreed that it did not form part of the corpus; rather, he

should have sought instructions from the Court.

I further observe that there is no clear evidence as to the extent of the land described as

item No. 1 of the schedule to the plaint. The plaint and the deed describe it as 40 feet in

length, with a width of 30 feet in one direction and 15 feet in the other. However, the exact

extent of the land within this description was not established by the evidence.

However, with regard to the boundaries of the first land in the schedule to the plaint, it

appears that the Eastern and Western boundaries correspond exactly with those shown in

the preliminary plan. The Eastern boundary of the first land, namely Badulu Oya (river),

is shown in the preliminary plan to the Northeast. The Western boundary is the main road,

which is depicted in the preliminary plan accordingly. The Northern boundary of item 1

in the schedule to the plaint is described as a “two-storied building of Don Aron

Wijewardhana Appuhamy.” The preliminary plan depicts a building bearing assessment

No. 5 to the North; however, there is no evidence as to who owns or owned this building.

The Southern boundary of the first land is described in the schedule to the plaint as a road

reservation, but no such road reservation is depicted in the preliminary plan.

It has been consistently held by this Court that the identity of the corpus in a partition

action must be clearly established in a partition action. (Richard and another vs Seibel

Nona and Others, 2001 2 SLR 1; Brampy Appuhamy vs Menis Appuhamy, 60 NLR 337;

Jayasuriya vs Ubaid, 61 NLR 352; Sopinona vs Pitipanaarachchi and two others, (2010)

1 SLR 87).

11

The Court of Appeal observed in Case No CA/915/99F (C.A Minutes dated 04.08.2014)

that the extent, boundaries, and the names of the lands on the boundaries constitute

material evidence in identifying the corpus. This Court, in Hapuarchchi and Others vs

Podi Nilame and Others (2021) 1 Sri L.R 134 at p. 147), similarly observed;

"It is a grave error to conclude in partition actions that the identification of the

corpus is not established upon a mere superficial comparison of the boundaries

of the land described in the schedule to the plaint, which is a reproduction of the

schedules to old deeds, with the existing boundaries as depicted in the

Preliminary Plan. Boundaries do not remain unchanged; they change over the

years due to various factors, be it natural or man-made. Whether or not the

Preliminary Plan represents the land described in the schedule to the plaint shall

be determined upon a consideration of the totality of the evidence led in the case

and not solely by such a comparison. "

In the instant case, I am of the view that there was no proper identification of the corpus

based either on the boundaries depicted in the plan or on the evidence. I am mindful that

the onus of proof in a partition action is no more than a balance of probabilities

(Karunaratne vs Sirimalie, 53 NLR 444). In Reginald Fernando vs Pabilinahamy and

Others ((2005) 1 SLR 31 at 36), Shirani Bandaranayake J. observed the common fact that

no survey can be conducted secretly.

“Considering the evidence given by the defendant, it appears that either the

defendant was not aware that the land he was in occupation was surveyed until

1987 or that although he was aware that he did not think it is necessary to make

inquiries on such surveying. Both these positions appear to question the

credibility of the defendant. It is unbelievable to be heard to say that in a village

of this country one would not be aware of a survey that was carried out in the

absence of the owner or the licensee for a period of 6 years."

12

This is especially so in a partition action where the fiscal is required to make public

notifications, such as tom-tom beating and the posting of a written notice on the land

(Section 15(3) of the Partition Law).However, these public announcements, together with

an openly conducted survey, do not permit the Court to blindly accept a preliminary plan,

even in the absence of a third party setting up a claim. As Mahinda Samayawardhena J.

observed in Hapuarchchi and Others vs Podi Nilame and Others (supra), the Court should

not mechanically compare the boundaries in the preliminary plan with those in the

schedule to the plaint, but should carefully examine the evidence in identifying the corpus.

In the present case, the extent and boundaries of the first land in the schedule to the plaint

have not been properly explained by any of the witnesses who testified. Although the

Eastern and Western boundaries were clear, the Southern boundary, described as a road

reservation, is not depicted in the preliminary plan. No attempt was made in the evidence

to explain the absence of such an important feature as the road reservation. In Gunasinghe

vs Podiamma and Others1,the Court of Appeal considered a case where three boundaries

of the corpus identically tallied, except for the Eastern boundary, which was indefinite.

The Court held that the mere fact that the Eastern boundary was indefinite or undefined

does not defeat the identity of the corpus2.

In the case at hand, the Southern boundary according to the schedule to the plaint is a road

reservation, the existence of which was not explained. This is not a defect that can be

overlooked. In fact, the Southern boundary of Lot 3 appears to be the building bearing

assessment No. 15, which was previously numbered as 54. It cannot reasonably be

assumed that the building bearing No. 54 was constructed on the road reservation, as it is

said to be located within the second land described in the schedule to the plaint.

1(2009) 1 Sri LR 174. 2At page 178.

13

Be that as it may, the Northern boundary is described as a two-storied building belonging

to Don Aron Wijewardhana Appuhamy. This boundary was never explained in the

evidence. If Lot 1 depicted in the preliminary plan falls within the corpus, the Northern

boundary of Lot 1 should be a two-storied building owned by Don Aron Wijewardhana

Appuhamy. However, there is no evidence to show that the building bearing assessment

No. 5 is a two-storied building or that it was owned by Don Aron Wijewardhana

Appuhamy. If the first land ordered to be partitioned is confined to Lots 2 and 3, the

Northern boundary would have to be Lot 1; yet nowhere in the preliminary plan it is stated

that Lot 1 contains a two-storied building. It should also be noted that neither the

Commissioner nor the Plaintiff made such a statement in their evidence.

Therefore, the finding of the learned District Judge cannot be substantiated with respect

to the Northern and Southern boundaries. Similarly, I find it difficult to uphold the

judgment of the learned Judges of the Civil Appellate High Court in the absence of any

evidence supporting Lot 1 as the Northern boundary of the corpus.

In light of the above analysis, it appears to me that there was a lack of evidence in properly

identifying even the first land described in the schedule to the plaint.

The learned District Judge thereafter referred to the assessment register marked ‘5වි1’and

the buildings mentioned by the Commissioner in his plan and report. The learned District

Judge placed weight on the identification of the buildings by reference to their assessment

numbers.

The learned High Court Judges preferred to treat the Northern boundary of Lot 1 in the

preliminary plan as the Northern boundary of the first land in the schedule to the plaint,

merely because the 5th Defendant failed to frame issues and accepted Lot 1 as part of the

corpus. However, I observe that the substituted 5th Defendant, in evidence, did not admit

Lot 1 as part of the corpus.

14

It appears to me that the parties before the District Court has not assisted the Court in

adducing sufficient evidence to identify the corpus, particularly with respect to the

Northern and Southern boundaries. The Northern boundary is especially important in

determining whether Lot 1 in the preliminary plan falls within the corpus.

I do not find fault with the learned District Judge for relying on the assessment register

with reference to the assessment numbers of the buildings. It appears to me that the said

document carries a significant evidentiary value. It is abundantly clear that the first land

in the schedule to the plaint should contain Lots 2 and 3 as depicted in the preliminary

plan. However, the assessment register itself does not provide evidence as to where the

Northern boundary lies.

Therefore, I answer the questions of law framed before this Court as follows:

(a) Yes.

(b) Yes.

(c) Yes.

(d) Yes.

I set aside the judgments of the learned District Judge and the learned Judges of the Civil

Appellate High Court. I remit the case back to the District Court to call for further

evidence regarding the Northern and Southern boundaries of the land described in item

No. 1 of the schedule to the plaint. If necessary, the learned District Judge may issue a

fresh commission to identify the said boundaries and obtain an explanation regarding the

extent of the entire land.

Furthermore, I dismiss the action with regard to the item No. 2 of the schedule to the

plaint based on the reasons already laid down above and direct the learned District Judge

to order the District Land Registrar to cancel the lis pendens registered in respect of the

said land.

15

The parties shall bear the costs of the appeal in the Civil Appellate High Court and of this

Court, without prejudice to the Plaintiff’s right to claim pro rata costs in the District Court.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

A. H. M. D. Nawaz, J. I Agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Sobhitha Rajakaruna, J. I Agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT