1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application under and

in terms of Article 126 of the

Constitution.

F. A. Azeez

660/22, Main Street

Matale

Petitioner

SC [FR] Application No. 06/2011 Vs.

1. H. M. Gunasekera

Secretary, Ministry of Education &

Higher Education, Isurupaya

Battaramulla

1A Upali Marasinghe

Secretary, Ministry of Education &

Higher Education, Isurupaya

Battaramulla

1B W. M. Bandusena

Secretary, Ministry of Education &

2

Higher Education, Isurupaya

Battaramulla

1C Sunil Hettiarachchi

Secretary, Ministry of Education &

Higher Education, Isurupaya

Battaramulla

1D N. H. M. Chitrananda

Secretary, Ministry of Education &

Higher Education, Isurupaya

Battaramulla

2. M. S. Premawansa

Secretary, Ministry of Education

Central Provincial Council

Gatambe, Peradeniya

2A P. B. Wijeratne

Secretary, Ministry of Education

Central Provincial Council

Pallekelle, Kundasale

2B R. M. P. S. Ratnayake

Secretary, Ministry of Education

Central Provincial Council

Pallekelle, Kundasale

3

2C Gamini Rajaratne

Secretary, Ministry of Education

Central Provincial Council

Pallekelle, Kundasale

3. H. M. Wijesiri Herath

Provincial Director of Education

Department of Education

Central Province, Kandy

3A E. P. T. K. Ekanayake

Provincial Director of Education

Department of Education

Central Province, Kandy

4. A. H. M. H. A. Herath

Zonal Director of Education

Zonal Education office

Galewala

4A A. L. M. Zarudeen

Zonal Director of Education

Zonal Education office

Galewala

4B T. N. Hettiarachchi

Zonal Director of Education

Zonal Education office

Galewala

4

5. Secretary

Public Service Commission

Carl will Place, Colombo 3

6. Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department

Colombo 12

7. Auditor General

Auditor General’s Department

Independence Square, Colombo 7

Respondents

Before : Buwaneka Aluwihare, PC., J

Achala Wengappuli J

Arjuna Obeyesekere J

Counsel: Thilini Vidanagamage instructed by Faris and Associates for the

Petitioner

Yuresha De Silva, SSC for the Hon. Attorney General

Argued on: 27th January 2022

Decided on: 09th August 2022

5

Judgement

Aluwihare PC., J,

The Petitioner in the present application was granted leave to proceed for the

alleged infringement of her fundamental rights guaranteed under Article 12(1) of

the Constitution in respect of the administrative action taken to revoke her

appointment to Class III of the Sri Lanka Education Administrative Service

(hereinafter referred to as the SLEAS).

The Petitioner had applied for an appointment to Class III of the SLEAS, and had

sat for the Limited Competitive Examination held in 1995. Based on the marks she

had obtained at this examination, the Petitioner had been appointed to Class III of

the SLEAS with effect from 4th January 1999, by the Education Service Committee

of the Public Service Commission, by letter dated 4th December 1998 (P1).

Following this appointment, the Petitioner had assumed duties as an Assistant

Director of Education in the Zonal Education Office of Galewala, with effect from

24th February 1999. In addition to the aforementioned duties the Petitioner had

been required to cover the duties of an Assistant Director of Education of the

Pallepola Division with effect from 1st May 2009.

The Petitioner states that she learnt that a letter dated 19th August 2009 (P9) had

been sent by the then Zonal Director of Education (4th Respondent) to the then

Provincial Director of Education (3rd Respondent), stating that the Petitioner’s

appointment to Class III of the SLEAS had been cancelled.

According to the letter (P9), there had been another letter dated 13th March 2000

(1R3), issued by the then Secretary of the Education Service Committee of the

Public Service Commission, cancelling the Petitioner’s appointment, a copy of

which the Petitioner claims, was not given despite her several queries (vide

communications marked P10[a]-P10[d]).

6

By letter dated 23rd August 2009 (P13), the 3rd Respondent had informed the 4th

Respondent that consequent to the cancellation of the Petitioner’s appointment to

the SLEAS (Class III), she should be placed in her former salary scale. Thereafter,

by letter dated 1st September 2009 (P14), the 4th Respondent had informed the

Petitioner that her appointment to Grade III of the SLEAS had been cancelled by

letter dated 13th March 2000 (IR3) and that she had been reverted back to the

Teachers’ Service with effect from 4th January 1999.

The Petitioner had been placed in Grade 1 of the Sri Lanka Teachers’ Service with

effect from 1st February 2003 subject to a new salary scale, by letter dated 16th

September 2009 (P12[a] -[b]).

Thereafter, by letter dated 22nd September 2009 (P15), the Auditor- General had

informed the 3rd Respondent to furnish information regarding the Petitioner, as

she had been paid the salary of a Class III Officer of the SLEAS despite the

revocation of her appointment. The Zonal Education Office had directed the

Petitioner to furnish information on the matter, to which the Petitioner had

responded by letter dated 30th September 2009 stating that she had been correctly

paid for the services she had rendered as an officer of the SLEAS.

Aggrieved by the said cancellation of her appointment, the Petitioner had filed a

complaint with the Human Rights Commission (HRC) on 10th October 2009 (P11),

the receipt of which was acknowledged by the HRC by letter dated 11th November

2009 (P11[a]). The Petitioner states that she was summoned by the HRC for an

inquiry as evinced by the summons for the inquiries held on 7th May 2010 (P11[b])

and 28th September 2010 (P17). The Petitioner, however, states that no

recommendation or decision has been delivered by the HRC, to date.

The Petitioner contends that the decision to cancel her appointment to the SLEAS

and to revert her back to the Teachers’ Service, as well the recovery of the amount

claimed to have been an overpayment constitutes an infringement of the

Petitioner’s rights guaranteed under and in terms of Article 12(1) of the

Constitution.

The learned Senior State Counsel for the Respondents raised two preliminary

objections. Namely, that the application is time barred and that in any event the

7

appointment was cancelled in deference to the order made by this Court, on 29th

October 1999, in cases bearing Nos. SC/FR No. 129/1999, 130/1999 and

131/1999

Article 126(2) of the Constitution stipulates that a person who alleges that any of

his fundamental rights or language rights has or is about to be infringed by

executive or administrative action must within one month of the occurrence

thereof file a petition in this Court praying for relief or redress in respect of such

infringement.

The learned Senior State Counsel argued that the application is time-barred as the

impugned documents marked P12, P14 and P15 had been issued on 16th

September 2009, 1st September 2009 and 22nd September 2009 respectively, while

the amended Petition was tendered on 13th May 2011 and the original Petition was

tendered on 10th January 2011, which is more than one year since the Petitioner’s

fundamental rights under Article 12 (1) were allegedly infringed.

Although this Court has time and again had held that Article 126(2) should be

treated as a mandatory provision, an exception to this rule can be found in the

Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka Act No. 21 of 1996.

Section 13(1) of the Human Rights Commission Act No 21 of 1996 reads as

follows;

“Where a complaint is made by an aggrieved party in terms of Section 14 to the

Commission, within one month of the alleged infringement or imminent

infringement of a fundaments right by executive or administrative action, the

period within which the inquiry into such complaint is pending before the

Commission, shall not be taken into account in computing the period of one month

within which an application may be made to the Supreme Court by such person in

terms of Article 126 (2) of the Constitution.” (Emphasis added).

The provisions of Section 13 (1) of the Human Rights Commission Act stipulate

that if a complaint is made to the HRC within one month of the alleged

infringement, then the period during which an inquiry is pending before the HRC

shall not be taken into account in computing the period of one month within which

8

an application may be made to the Supreme Court in terms of Article 126 (2) of

the Constitution.

The Petitioner has lodged a complaint with the Human Rights Commission on 10th

October 2009 [P11], the receipt of which was acknowledged by the HRC by P11[a].

Copies of the summons for the inquiries held on 7th May 2010 [P11[b]] and 28th

September 2010 [P17] have been submitted to the Court as evidence of its

pendency. It is the position of the Respondents that the Petitioner has failed to

adduce any material reflecting the present position of the inquiry, in order to

invoke the exception of time bar on the basis that a complaint had been made to

the HRC within one month of the alleged infringement in terms of Section 14 of

the Act.

Having regard to the provisions of Section 13 (1) of the Human Rights Commission

Act No. 21 of 1996, time ceases to run for the purpose of computing the one-

month period stipulated in Article 126(2) of the Constitution, thus, we hold that

this application is not time barred.

The cancellation of the Petitioner’s appointment to Class III of the SLEAS

The Petitioner contends that the decision to cancel her appointment to the SLEAS

and to revert her back to the Teachers’ Service contained in the letters marked

P12(a) and (b) is illegal and/or unreasonable and/or discriminatory in law.

The Respondents, however, maintain that the steps which resulted in the

Petitioner’s appointment to Class III of the SLEAS being revoked and the Petitioner

being reverted back to the Sri Lanka Teachers’ Service as well as the steps to recover

the over-payment based on a query of the Auditor-General, were taken in

deference to the order made by this Court, on 29th October 1999, in the cases

bearing Nos. SC/FR No. 129/1999, 130/1999 and 131/1999.

The Petitioners in the cases referred to in the preceding paragraph, had applied for

an appointment to Class III-General Cadre, of the SLEAS on the basis of the Gazette

notification bearing No. 832 dated 10th June 1994 and had sat for the Limited

Competitive Examination held in March 1995.

9

Paragraph 16 of the Gazette [referred to above] provides the scheme of selection

which states that appointments would be given on the basis of the National Ethnic

Ratio. However, appointments had been made on the basis of the language in

which the candidates had sat for the examination.

Since recruitment was enforced contrary to the Gazette, the three Petitioners [in

those cases] had filed fundamental rights applications for the violation of their

rights guaranteed under Articles 12 (1) and (2) of the Constitution. In all three

cases the Court held that there was a violation of Article 12 (1), and proceeded to

quash the appointments made by the Education Service Committee of the Public

Service Commission and ordered that the appointments be made in accordance

with the National Ethnic Ratio which had been criteria published as the basis of

selection in paragraph 16 of the Gazette.

The Respondents state that in deference to this order, those who were given

appointments to Class III of the SLEAS including the Petitioner, had been informed

that the said appointments were cancelled as evinced by the letter dated 13th March

2000 (IR3).

The cancellation of the said appointments has also been referred to in the

Judgement of case No. SC/FR No. 451/2003. The Court had inter alia observed

that;

“In compliance with that judgement the appointments that had been given were

revoked by letter dated 13th March 2000 and new letters had been issued dated

29th March 2000…...”

The Petitioner contends that she was not a party to any of the Fundamental Rights

Applications consequent to which the impugned SLEAS appointments had been

cancelled.

Despite the Petitioner’s assertion that she was not a party to the proceedings of the

aforementioned cases, the Petitioner’s name figures in the list of candidates who

were originally recruited with effect from 4th January 1999, and whose

appointments were subsequently quashed by the order made by this Court on 29th

October 2000. (Vide; the list of the officers appointed to SLEAS Class III with effect

10

from 4th January 1999 which were submitted to court in SC/FR No.129/1999, on

behalf of the Acting Secretary of the Education Service Committee of the Public

Service Commission by motion dated 12th May 1999).

Furthermore, the Petitioner’s name cannot be found in the list of candidates

appointed on the basis of the National Ethnic Ratio, in terms of the order made on

29th October 1999, which was submitted to the Court in the aforementioned

fundamental rights cases, by Motion dated 31st July 2000.

Since the Petitioner falls within the group of candidates whose appointment to

Class III of the SLEAS had been quashed by the Court order dated 29th October

1999, the consequential steps taken by the Respondents to revoke the Petitioner’s

appointment to Class III of the SLEAS, and to reappoint her to the Teachers’ Service

do not amount to an arbitrary exercise of power which would violate the

Petitioner’s rights guaranteed under Article 12 (1) of the Constitution.

Recovery of excess payments

The Petitioner asserts that there is no justification whatsoever to recover the

amount claimed to have been an overpayment in the letter marked P15.

Following the cancellation of the Petitioner’s appointment to Class III of the SLEAS,

the Auditor-General (7th Respondent) by letter dated 22nd September 2009 (P15)

requested information from the 3rd Respondent with respect to the Petitioner, citing

the fact that despite the revocation of the Petitioner’s appointment by letter dated

13th March 2000 (1R3), the Petitioner had been receiving the salary and travelling

allowances of a Class III Officer of the SLEAS.

The Petitioner denies having received the letter the letter dated 13th March 2000,

and states that she became aware of its contents only when the letter was filed in

Court by the State by way of motion dated 21st February 2012.

11

Thus, it was contended on behalf the Petitioner, that no reasonable inference can

be drawn to establish her knowledge of the cancellation of her appointment [by

the letter dated 13th March 2000], as she had performed her duties as a Class III

officer of the SLEAS, her salary had been duly paid and she was granted promotions

and salary increments.

Despite the cancellation of the Petitioner’s appointment to Class III of the SLEAS by

IR3, she had only been officially notified of the said cancellation and her

reappointment to the Teachers’ Service, by letter dated 1st September 2009 (P14).

Up to that point, the Petitioner had been performing her duties as an officer of the

SLEAS. This is further evinced by the fact that she has furnished information from

the database of the Public Service Commission in 2009 [P5(e)]. She had been given

a covering appointment as the Director of Education in charge of the Pallepola

Division in addition to her regular functions with effect from 1st May 2009 (P8),

and her salary increments for the year 2007 too had been approved (P7).

Although, by operation of law, the Petitioner had to revert back to the Teachers’

Service, the fact remains that she served and performed duties entrusted to her as

an officer of the SLEAS until she was formally notified that her appointment to the

SLEAS had been cancelled and that she had been reverted back to the Teachers’

Service, by letter dated 1st September 2009 (P14).

Although this application should be dismissed for the reasons set out above, we

wish to note that under Article 126 (4) of the Constitution, this Court is vested with

extensive power to grant relief or make such directions where deemed necessary

in the exercise of its just and equitable jurisdiction in instances where the

jurisdiction of this court is invoked in terms of Articles 126 (2) of the Constitution.

Referring to articles 17 and 126 of the Constitution, his Lordship Wanasundera J,

in the case of Jayanetti V. The Land Reform Commission (1984) 2 S. L.R. 172,

observed; “These provisions vest this Court with sole and exclusive jurisdiction to

hear and determine any question relating to an infringement of fundamental rights

by executive or administrative action. We are empowered after such inquiries, as

we consider necessary, to grant such relief or make such direction in the case as

we may deem just and equitable. This is an extensive jurisdiction and it carries

12

with it all implied powers that are necessary give effect and expression to our

jurisdiction. We would include within our jurisdiction, inter alia, the power to

make interim orders and to add persons without whose presence questions in issue

cannot be completely and effectually decided. In fact, our present decision in no

way widens the ambit of Article 126 but seeks to articulate its real scope and to

make the remedy more effective.” [emphasis added]

As referred to earlier the Petitioner has enjoyed the promotion granted to her due

to no fault of hers. Even though the relevant authorities had full knowledge of the

fact that the promotions granted in 1999 were not in conformity with the law by

the year 2000, no steps were taken to revert the Petitioner to the position she held

before the promotion was granted. Not only were her services retained as a SLEAS

officer of class III, but had granted her salary increments and furthermore

entrusted her with covering duties of the Zonal Director of Education [P 19].

Thus, it appears that the Petitioner, clearly had been treated as a SLEAS officer of

Class III by the authorities up to August 2009. As such, we do not see any

justification in the demand made by the 7th Respondent [P15] to the 3rd Respondent

to recover a sum of Rs. 1917464.03 from the Petitioner, on the basis that the said

amount was an excess payment that the Petitioner had been paid, with her

salary and other emoluments.

It appears from the documents filed along with the motion dated 19.02.2018, [X1,

X3] that the 3rd Respondent had taken steps to recover certain sums of money from

the Petitioner, presumably, on the basis of the overpayment aforesaid. It is not

possible, however, for this court to ascertain the exact amount recovered from the

Petitioner from the material available in this case.

Accordingly, I consider it appropriate to make the following direction;

The 2nd and 3rd Respondents or their successors are directed to take steps

forthwith to have the amount recovered from the Petitioner, as an overpayment

of salary that was paid to the Petitioner during the period she served as a Class III

SLEAS officer, paid back to the Petitioner.

13

Subject to the above direction, this application is dismissed.

In the circumstances of the case, I order no costs.

Application dismissed

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

JUSTICE ACHALA WENGAPPULI

I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

JUSTICE ARJUNA OBEYESEKERE

I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT