1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for

Special Leave to Appeal to the

Supreme Court under Article 128 of

the Constitution of Sri Lanka.

SC. Appeal 232/14

SC.Spl. LA 163/2013

Court of Appeal No. 101/2011

Anuradhapura HC No. 345/2004 Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12. Complainant

Vs.

Dissanayake Appuhamilage Amarasiri Dissanayake.

Accused

AND BETWEEN

Dissanayake Appuhamilage Amarasiri Dissanayake.

Accused Appellant

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12. Complainant Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

2

Dissanayake Appuhamilage Amarasiri Dissanayake.

Accused Appellant-Appellant

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12. Complainant Respondent- Respondent

BEFORE : S. E. WANASUNDERA, PC, J.

UPALY ABEYRATHNE, J.

K. T. CHITRASIRI, J.

COUNSEL : Raja Dep with K.A. Upul Anuradha Wickremaratne for the Accused Appellant- Appellant

H. I. Peiris DSG for the Complainant Respondent-Respondent

WRITTEN SUBMISSION ON: 29.05.2015 (the Accused Appellant Appellant)

ARGUED ON : 10.11.2016

DECIDED ON : 11.07.2017

UPALY ABEYRATHNE, J.

The Accused Appellant-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

Accused) preferred an appeal to the Court of Appeal against the conviction and

sentence imposed upon the Accused by the learned High Court Judge of

3

Anuradhapura dated 06.10.2011. The Court of Appeal, by judgement dated

28.05.2013, has dismissed the said appeal and affirmed the conviction and the

death sentence. This appeal is from the said judgment of the Court of Appeal.

Leave to Appeal was granted on the grounds set out in paragraph 9 (a), (b) and (c)

of the amended petition of appeal dated 11.11.2013. But in the said amended

petition of appeal, the Accused has not set out any question of law, as required by

Supreme Court Rules, to be considered by this court.

In paragraph 9 of the petition of appeal the accused has stated that the

learned High Court Judge has erred in law allowing to lead in evidence a

confessionary statement which was alleged to have been made by the accused to

the Police Officer on reserve duty at the Eppawala Police Station at about 1.30 a.m.

on 17.10.2000. He has further stated that the Court of Appeal had erred in failing

to consider the submission of the counsel for the accused that the prosecution had

failed to establish the charges in the indictment beyond reasonable doubt and also

the Court of Appeal had erred in coming to the conclusion that the prosecution has

established a strong prima facie case against the accused.

The Accused in this case was indicted in the High Court of

Anuradhapura for having committed murder of a man named Nishshanka

Arachchige Senadeera. The Prosecution has led the evidence of several witnesses.

It appears from the evidence that the case for the prosecution entirely depended on

circumstantial evidence. It has transpired from the evidence that the deceased was

last seen in the company of the accused on a motor cycle ridden by the accused. On

16.10.2000, at about 8.00 p.m. said motor cycle had been given to the accused by

the owner on a request made to that effect by the deceased. About one hour to one

and half hour later the accused had returned the motor cycle to the owner and the

owner has found at that point that the bunch of key of the motor cycle are missing.

4

At the investigation, the said bunch of key was found at the crime scene near the

dead body.

According to the evidence of Police Constable 25019, Sembukuttige

Premasinghe on 17.10.2000, at about 1.30 a.m. the accused, armed with a sword,

had surrendered to Eppawala Police Station. Thereafter the statement of the

accused has been recorded by the Police. Upon the statement of the accused the

Police has recovered the dead body of the deceased. The police have reached to the

crime scene where the dead body was found, according to the directions given by

the accused. At the trial before High Court the Police witness who recorded the

statement of the accused had not been cross examined by the accused. Said

evidence does not contain any confessional statement made by the accused. Even

the accused has not highlighted any such evidence in his petition of appeal or in his

written submissions to this court.

The prosecution has led very strong circumstantial evidence against

the accused. The accused has not given evidence. He has made a very short dock

statement. In his dock statement, he has stated that “I had no animosity with uncle.

We were residing in same house. I do not know anything about this”.

The police witness said that he proceeded to the crime scene and

recovered the dead body on the direction of the Accused. There had been cut

injuries on the dead body. Evidence further reveal that the accused was last seen in

the company of the deceased. Both of them were seen on a motor cycle ridden by

the accused. Said motor cycle was given to the accused on a request made by the

deceased. Owner of the motor cycle inquired the accused about the loss of motor

cycle key. Said motor cycle key was found at the crime scene. Said circumstances

have clearly established the fact that the Accused had been in the crime scene.

Since it appears that the knowledge of the said circumstance was exclusively

5

within the Appellant it should have been explained by him. But the Accused in his

dock statement did not offer any explanation.

In the case of State of Tamil Nadu Vs. Rajendran (1999) Cr.L.J. 4552

the Indian Supreme Court observed that ‘In a case of circumstantial evidence when

an incriminating circumstance is put to the accused and the said accused either

offers no explanation or offers an explanation which is found to be untrue, then the

same becomes an additional link in the chain of circumstances to make it

complete.’

The Appellant in his short dock statement had not offered any

explanation with regard to the strong and incriminating evidence led against him.

When a strong prima facie case has been made out by the prosecution the

Appellant has, though he has not been bound by law to offer any explanation,

failed and omitted to explain the strong circumstantial evidence led against him. In

the case of Rex. Vs. Lord Cochrane and others [1814] Gurney’s Report 479 the

Lord Ellenborough held that “No person accused of crime is bound to offer any

explanation of his conduct or of circumstances of suspicion which attach to him;

but, nevertheless, if he refuses to do so, where a strong prima facie case has been

made out, and when it is in his own power to offer evidence, if such exist, in

explanation of such suspicious circumstances which would show them to be

fallacious and explicable consistently with his innocence, it is a reasonable and

justifiable conclusion that he refrains from doing so only from the conviction that

the evidence so suppressed or not adduced would operate adversely to his interest.”

Abbot J. in Rex Vs. Burdett (1820) 4 B & Ald 161at 162 observed

that “No person is to be required to explain or contradict until enough has been

proved to warrant a reasonable and just conclusion against him, in the absence of

explanation or contradiction; but when such proof has been given, and the nature

6

of the case is such as to admit of explanation or contradiction, if the conclusion to

which the prima facie case tends to be true, and the accused offers no explanation

or contradiction, can human reason do otherwise than adopt the conclusion to

which proof tends.”

In the case of Rajapaksha Devaga Somarathna Rajapaksha And

Others Vs. Attorney General (S.C. Appeal) 2/2002 TAB) Justice Bandaranayke

observed that “With all this damning evidence against the Appellants with the

charges including murder and rape the Appellants did not offer any explanation

with regard to any of the matters referred to above. Although there cannot be a

direction that the accused person must explain each and every circumstance relied

on by the prosecution and the fundamental principle being that no person accused

of a crime is bound to offer any explanation of his conduct there are permissible

limitation in which it would be necessary for suspect to explain the circumstances

of suspicion which are attached to him.”

In the case of Rameshbhai Chandubhai Rathod Vs. State of Gujarat

[2009] INSC 828 (27 April 2009) (SC of India) Dr. Arijit Pasayat, J. observed that

“The incriminating circumstances enumerated above unmistakably and inevitably

lead to the guilt of the appellant and nothing has been highlighted or brought on

record to make the facts proved or the circumstances established to be in any

manner in consonance with the innocence at any rate of the appellant. During the

time of questioning under Section 313 Cr.P.C. the appellant instead of making at

least an attempt to explain or clarity the incriminating circumstances inculpating

him, and connecting him with the crime by his adamant attitude of total denial of

everything when those circumstances were brought to his notice by the Court not

only lost the opportunity but stood self-condemned. Such incriminating links of

facts could, if at all, have been only explained by the appellant, and by nobody

7

else, they being personally and exclusively within his knowledge. Of late, courts

have, from the falsity of the defense plea and false answers given to court, when

questioned, found the missing links to be supplied by such answers for completing

the chain of incriminating circumstances necessary to connect the person

concerned with the crime committed. (See: State of Maharashtra v. Suresh). That

missing link to connect the accused appellant, we find in this case provided by the

blunt and outright denial of every one and all that incriminating circumstances

pointed out which, in our view, with sufficient and reasonable certainty on the facts

proved, connect the accused with the death and the cause of the death of Gracy and

for robbing her of her jewellery worn by her.”

I am mindful of the fact that where a case rests squarely on

circumstantial evidence, the inference of guilt can be justified only when all the

incriminating facts and circumstances are found to be incompatible with the

innocence of the accused or the guilt of any other person. (See Hukam Singh

Vs.State of Rajasthan AIR (1977 SC 1063), Eradu and Ors. Vs. State of Hyderabad

(AIR 1956 SC 316); Earabhadrappa Vs. State of Karnataka (AIR 1983 SC 446);

State of U.P. Vs. Sukhbasi and Ors. (AIR 1985 SC 1224); Balwinder Singh Vs.

State of Punjab (AIR 1987 SC 350); Ashok Kumar Chatterjee Vs. State of M.P.

(AIR 1989 SC 1890). The circumstances from which an inference as to the guilt of

the accused is drawn have to be proved beyond reasonable doubt and have to be

shown to be closely connected with the principal fact sought to be inferred from

those circumstances. In Bhagat Ram Vs. State of Punjab (AIR 1954 SC 621), it

was laid down that where the case depends upon the conclusion drawn from

circumstances the cumulative effect of the circumstances must be such as to

negative the innocence of the accused and bring the offences home beyond any

reasonable doubt. In the case of C. Chenga Reddy and Others Vs State of A.P.

8

(1996) 10 SCC 193, wherein it has been observed thus: "In a case based on

circumstantial evidence, the settled law is that the circumstances from which the

conclusion of guilt is drawn should be fully proved and such circumstances must

be conclusive in nature. Moreover, all the circumstances should be complete and

there should be no gap left in the chain of evidence. Further the proved

circumstances must be consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the

accused and totally inconsistent with his innocence....".

Having regard to the nature of the circumstantial evidence led by the

prosecution I am inclined to accept the submissions of the learned Deputy Solicitor

General that the strong items of circumstantial evidence unexplained by the

accused would in itself be adequate to establish the charges against the accused.

Hence, I am of the view that the learned trial Judge has rightly convicted the

Accused for the charge of murder levelled against him. In the said circumstances I

see no reason to interfere with the Judgement of the Court of appeal dated

06.10.2011. Hence, I affirm the conviction and dismiss the Appeal of the Accused.

Appeal dismissed.

Judge of the Supreme Court

S. E. WANASUNDERA, PC, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

K. T. CHITRASIRI, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court