1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application under Articles 17 and 126 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

1. Talpe Merenchige Eeasha Nanayakkara,

No.139/7A, Akuregoda Road, Pelawatta, Battaramulla. Petitioner SC FR Application 365/2012 Vs,

1. Sathya Hettige, Chairman

1A. Darmasena Dissanayaka, Chairman

2. Kanthi Wijetunga Member

2A. A. Salam Abdul Waid, Member

3. S.C. Mannapperuma, Member

3A. D. Shirantha Wijayatilaka, Member

4. Ananda Seneviratne, Member

4A. Prathap Ramanujam, Member

5. N.H. Pathirana, Member

5A. V. Jegarasasingam, Member

6. S. Thillai Nadarajah, Member

6A. Santi Nihal Seneviratne, Member

7. Sunil S. Sirisena, Member

7A. S. Ranugge, Member

8. A. Mohamed Nahiya Member

8A. D.L. Mendis, Member

2

9. I.M. Zoysa GUnsekara, Member

9A. Sarath Jayathilaka, Member

10. T.M.L.C. Senaratne, Secretary

1st to 10th Respondents all of: The Public Service Commission, No. 177, Nawala Road, Narahenpita, Colombo 05

11. M.I.M. Rafeek,

Secretary to the Ministry of Tourism and Sports, No. 09, Pilip Gunawardena Mawatha, Colombo 07

Also:

The Acting Director General of the Department of Wildlife Conservation, No. 811/A, Jayanthipura Road, Battaramulla.

11A. R.M. D.B. Meegasmulla,

Secretary, Ministry of Sustainable Development and Wildlife, 9th Floor, Sethsiripaya (Old Building), Battaramullla. 11B. Dr. Sumith Pilapitiya, Director General of Wildlife Conservation, No. 811/A, Jayanthipura Road, Battaramulla. 12. The Secretary,

The Ministry of Public Administration, Independence Square, Colombo 07. 13. Director Establishments,

The Ministry of Public Administration, Independence Square, Colombo 07.

3

14. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12. Respondents

Before: Sisira J.De. Abrew J

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J

Murdu N.B. Fernando PC J

Counsel: Faiz Musthapha PC with Shantha Jayawardena and Chamara Nanayakkarawasam

for the Petitioners

S. Barre SSC, for the Attorney General

Argued on: 22.06.2018

Judgment on: 06.09.2018

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J

Petitioners in the fundamental rights applications SC/FR/364/2012 and SC/FR/365/2012 have

come before the Supreme Court alleging violations under Article 12 (1) of the Constitution.

Since the grievance complained by both the Petitioners, and the relief claimed are similar in

nature, all parties to SC/FR/364/2012 agreed to abide by the decision in SC/FR/365/2012.

The Petitioner in SC/FR/365/2012 being a Bachelor of Science Degree holder (in Botany,

Zoology and Chemistry) from the University of Peradeniya in 1983 had responded to an

4

advertisement published in the “Daily News”, newspaper (P-3) of 08.12.1984 by the Project

Coordinator of Mahaweli Environment Project of the Ministry of State and applied to the post

of “Training Officer” in the said project. Consequent to an interview process the Petitioner was

selected to the above post, “Training Officer” of the Mahaweli Environment Project.

According to P-5, the letter of appointment, the said post in the Mahaweli Environment Project

under the Department of Wildlife Conservation, was permanent but non-pensionable post,

subject to a trial period of three years with effect from the date of appointment, i.e.

15.02.1985.

As submitted by the Petitioner, few other graduates were also appointed to the following

positions at the same project during this period.

a) Ecologist (2 posts)

b) Park Planner

c) Rural Sociologist

d) Training Officer (2 posts including the Petitioner)

The Mahaweli Environment Project was a project commenced in the year 1982, funded by

USAID and the Petitioner being an employee of the said project was offered two months

training in the United States of America on Park Management. The said project came to an end

on 30th September 1991 and prior to that, the then Minister of Lands Irrigation and Mahaweli

Development, under whose purview the said project and the Department of Wildlife

Conservation was placed at the time, submitted a Cabinet memorandum dated 14.05.1991,

seeking approval of the Cabinet of Ministers to absorb all the categories of employees recruited

for the Mahaweli Environment Project in to the Department of Wildlife Conservation (P-6).

5

The Cabinet of Ministers, who met on 12.06.1991, had made the following order with regard to

the said Cabinet Paper.

“A memorandum by the Minister of Lands, Irrigation and Mahaweli Development dated

14.05.1991 on Absorption of staff of the Mahaweli Environment Project in to the

Department of Wildlife Conservation was considered and the proposal in the

memorandum were approved”

With the said Cabinet Approval, the Ministry of Lands, Irrigation and Mahaweli Development

had taken prompt steps to absorb the employees of the Mahaweli Environment Project

including the Petitioner to the Department of Wildlife Conservation. Accordingly the Petitioner

was issued with a letter of appointment dated 18.09.1991 absorbing her to the post of

Assistant Director in the Department of Wildlife Conservation (P-8).

The said appointment of the Petitioner as well as the appointments of few others including the

Petitioner in FR/ Application 364/2014 was challenged before the Supreme Court in FR/

Application 148/1991.

Their lordships of the Supreme Court by their order dated 23.02.1994 held that the

appointment of the 2nd to the 7th Respondents to the six new posts of Assistant Director in the

Department of Wildlife Conservation is in violation of the provisions enshrined in Article 12 of

the Constitution, and the appointments of the 2nd to the 7th Respondents as Assistant Directors

in the Department of Wildlife Conservation were accordingly set aside.

Subsequent to the above decision by the Supreme Court, by letter dated 11.01.1995 the 11th

Respondent had informed the Petitioner of removing her from the post of Assistant Director.

6

However by letter dated 17.02.1995 Secretary to the Ministry of Public Administration,

Parliamentary Affairs’ and Plantation informed the 11th Respondent, that the 3 officers referred

to in the said letter (including the Petitioners in 164 and 165 /2014) be permitted to remain in

the same positions they held prior to their absorption as Assistant Director, but for the

Department to take appropriate steps to change the scheme of recruitment in order to absorb

them in to the cadre, as other officers in the project were absorbed in to the Department (P-

15).

As revealed before us the Petitioner was issued with a letter of appointment from the

Mahaweli Environment Project when she was first recruited as the Training Officer on 30th

January 1985 (P-5). When the Cabinet of Ministers approved the absorption of the employees

of the said project, the Petitioner was once again issued with a letter of appointment,

appointing her to the Post of Assistant Director of the Department of the Wildlife Conservation

(P-8), which was quashed by the Supreme Court by the order dated 23. 02.1994.

By letter dated 22.02.1995 the 11th Respondent had informed the Petitioner of the decision to

retain the Petitioner on the same conditions referred to in the letter dated 30th January 1985 as

approved by the Secretary to the Ministry of the Public Administration, Home Affairs’ and

Plantations (P-16) but the said letter cannot be considered as a letter of appointment issued to

the Petitioner. As referred to above in this judgment, the Secretary to the Ministry of the Public

Administration, Home Affairs’ and Plantations by his letter 17.02.1995 had further instructed

the 11th Respondent take steps to absorb the Petitioner to the Department of Wildlife

Conservation as approved by the Cabinet decision, by amending the scheme of recruitment of

the Department Cadre.

7

As revealed before us, the main grievance of the Petitioner complained before this court has

arisen as a result of the 11th Respondent’s failure to implement the said order within a

reasonable time. According to the Petitioner, in spite of several letters sent to various

authorities, no steps were taken by the 11th Respondent to issue a letter of appointment to the

Petitioner until the Petitioner went before the Court of Appeal in a Writ Application seeking the

said relief in June 2007. When the said Writ Application was pending before the Court of

Appeal, the Secretary to the Public Service Commission (the 10th Respondent) by his letter

dated 19th June 2012 absorbed the Petitioner to the post of Education and Training Officer of

the Department of Wildlife Conservation with effect from 05. 04. 1996.

Since the Petitioner could not proceed with the Writ Application thereafter, she withdrew the

said application but decided to file the present application before the Supreme Court alleging

violation under Article 12 (1) of the Constitution for the reason that,

a) By the said letter of appointment issued on 19th June 2012 the Petitioner was once

again absorbed in to the post she was first recruited in the year 1985.

b) Even though the said absorption was to effect from 1996, the promotional aspect of

the said post has not been taken in to consideration, when the said letter of

appointment was issued.

c) The Petitioner was placed on a further period of 3 years on probation by the said

letter.

d) By the year 2000 the Petitioner was receiving a salary higher than of an Assistant

Director in the Department of Wildlife Conservation and therefore the salary

entitlement of the Petitioner would be reduced by the new letter of appointment.

8

This would result the Petitioner,

i. To be placed on a lower salary scale

ii. Return the salary already drawn (or recover by the state)

iii. To be kept at a lower scale for the purpose of the Pension

iv. As a result the Petitioner would draw a lessor pension after serving almost 33

years to the state

When considering the material already discussed above, it appears that there is a long delay in

issuing letter of appointment to the Petitioner or in other words the Petitioner had worked in

the Department of Wildlife Conservation for nearly 17 years without a letter of appointment

being issued to her.

As revealed from P-15, the Secretary to the Ministry of the Public Administration, Home Affairs’

and Plantations has given specific instructions to the 11th Respondent,

i. To permit the Petitioner to remain in the same position referred to in her

first letter of appointment dated 30.01.1985.

ii. To take steps to absorb the Petitioner to the permanent cadre of the

Department of wildlife Conservation as did with the other staff of the

project, by giving effect to the Cabinet decision and amending the

scheme of recruitment

But, the said instruction had not been carried out for 17 years, until the matter was

raised before the Court of Appeal by the Petitioner. Even though the Respondents failed to give

any proper answer for the above delay, some observations were made to the effect that, the

interference by the Petitioner at various levels, too had caused a delay in resolving this issue.

9

But, I cannot agree with the above submission of the Respondents since it is the legitimate

expectation of the Petitioner to receive a letter of appointment for a specific post and to look at

the promotional aspects based on the position offered by the said letter of appointment. When

considering P-15, it appears to me that, even the Secretary to the Ministry of the Public

Administration, Home Affairs’ and Plantations, had shared the same view when he was writing

the said letter by directing the 11th Respondent to take steps to amend the scheme of

Recruitment when taking steps to absorb the Petitioner.

The Respondents have failed to submit any material, to establish any steps taken by the 11th

Respondent to implement the said directive given in P-15 and as revealed before us, by P-25

a decision has been taken to appoint the Petitioner to the same post she was first recruited in

1985, without amending the scheme of recruitment with effect from a date in 1996 subject to

another 3 years’ probation period.

As further observed by me, in P-15 a clear reference had been made to the requirement of

giving effect to the Cabinet decision, and as referred by me in this judgment, the Cabinet of

Ministers by its decision dated 12.06.1991, had approved the memorandum dated 14.05.1991

on absorption of staff of the Mahaweli Environment Project in to the Department of Wildlife

Conservation, had given the Petitioner a legitimate expectation of appointing her to a

permanent post in the said Department. When considering the Cabinet decision referred to

above and the contents in letter P-15, I observe that, by failing to implement the said Cabinet

decision and the direction given in P-15 the 11th Respondent had clearly infringed the equal

protection guaranteed under the Article 12 (1) of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

10

I further observe that the 10th Respondent too had acted in violation of the rights guaranteed

under article 12 (1) of Constitution when he issued the letter of appointment on 19.06.2012

after 17 years, for the absorption of the Petitioner to the same post the Petitioner was first

appointed in the year 1985 without considering any amendments to the scheme of recruitment

in the cadre of the Department of Wildlife Conservation.

Even though I have declared that the above Respondents have infringed the Petitioners

fundamental rights guaranteed under article 12 (1) of the Constitution, I am not inclined to

grant any relief as prayed by the Petitioner in paragraph (c) (d) (e) (f) or (g) to the prayer to the

Petition in the absence of any provisions in the scheme of recruitment of the Department of

Wildlife Conservation with regard to the post of Assistant Director and/or Deputy Director.

However when considering the grievances complained by the Petitioner I make order directing

the Respondents including the 10th, 11th, 12th and 13th Respondents to,

a) Allow the Petitioner to draw the same salary as she was drawing as at 2012 with

earned increments and/or any other salary increments to which the Petitioner

entitled thereafter, based on the salary she drew as at 19th June 2012 by any

other Government/Public Administration circular

b) Allow the Petitioner to retire based on the last salary she drew according to (a)

above

c) Petitioners pension rights to be considered on the last drawn salary referred to

in (b) above

d) The probation period referred to in the letter of appointment dated 19th June

2012 should be considered not from the above date but form 05.04.1996

11

I further make order, directing the state to pay a sum of Rs. 2 million as compensation to the

Petitioner and a further sum of Rs. 200,000/- as cost for this case.

As agreed by all parties the Petitioner to the Fundamental Rights Application 364/12 is also

entitled to the above relief, which is granted to the petitioner in the present application.

Application allowed.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Sisira J.De. Abrew J

I agree,

Judge of the Supreme Court

Murdu N.B. Fernando PC J

I agree,

Judge of the Supreme Court