1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

Patadendi Gedara Ratnayake,

alias

Kumbukgolle Gedara

Ratnayake,

No. 37A,

Ihala Arawwala,

Dambulla.

PLAINTIFF

Vs.

Kumbukgolle Gedara

Ashokamala,

No. 37A,

Ihala Arawwala,

Dambulla.

DEFENDANT

AND

Patabendi Gedara Ratnayake,

alias

Kumbukgolle Gedera

Ratnayake,

No. 37A,

Ihala Arawwala,

Dambulla.

PLAINTIFF-APPELLANT

S.C/Appeal No. 116/2015

S.C. Application No.

SC/HCCA/LA/286/2014

Civil Appellate High Court of Kandy

Case No. CP/HCCA/81/2009 (FA)

D.C. Matale Case No. D/3841

2

Vs.

Kumbukgolle Gedera,

Ashokamala,

No. 37A,

Ihala Arawwala,

Dambulla.

DEFENDANT-RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

In the matter of an Application for

Leave to Appeal under section 5C

of the High Court of the Provinces

(Special Provisions) Act, No. 19 of

1990 as amended by Act No. 54 of

2006.

Kumbukgolle Gedera

Ashokamala,

Ihala Arawwala,

Dambulla.

DEFENDANT-RESPONDENT- APPELLANT Vs.

Patadendi Gedara Ratnayake,

Alias

Kumbukgolle Gedera

Ratnayake,

No. 37A,

3

Ihala Arawwala,

Dambulla.

PLAINTIFF-APPELLANT- RESPONDENT

Before : Priyantha Jayawardena PC, J

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC, J

Murdu N.B. Fernando PC, J

Counsel : Niranjan De Silva with Kalhara Gunawardena for the

Defendant-Respondent-Appellant

Dr. Sunil Cooray for the Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent Argued On : 17th January, 2019 Decided On : 4th October, 2023

Priyantha Jayawardena PC, J

This is an appeal filed by the defendant-respondent-appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

appellant) to set aside the judgment of the Civil Appellate High Court of Kandy (hereinafter

referred to as the High Court), which allowed the appeal filed by the plaintiff-appellant-

respondent (hereinafter referred to as the respondent) against the judgment of the District Court

refusing to grant a divorce to the plaintiff.

Facts

The appellant stated that she got married to the respondent on the 27th of November, 1980.

However, both of them were living in their parents houses. Nonetheless, the respondent frequently

4

visited the appellant at her parents house, and both of them considered the said house as their

matrimonial home.

It was further stated that in 1990, the appellant and the respondent shifted to a new house built by

them (however, this fact was disputed by the respondent) on a land owned by his parents, and

thereafter, they considered the said house as their matrimonial home. Two daughters and a son

were born to them.

The appellant stated that the respondent instituted action in the District Court of Matale on the 15th

of May, 2006 praying for a divorce on the ground that she was guilty of constructive malicious

desertion. The appellant further stated that the respondent had pleaded in his plaint that her

behaviour towards him changed after some time and she had started quarrelling with the

respondent for no apparent reason. The respondent in his plaint further stated that he tolerated the

hostile conduct of the appellant with great difficulty as he wanted to continue with the marriage.

Furthermore, the respondent stated that a land dispute arose between his father and the appellants

mother, and a case was filed in the District Court of Matale. Due to the aforesaid land dispute, the

situation became worse as the appellant frequently quarrelled with the respondent and treated him

in a cruel manner.

Moreover, being unable to tolerate the ill-treatment any further, the respondent left the matrimonial

home on or around the 11th of July, 2004 and shifted to a house built by him on a land owned by

his parents. Thereafter, he took steps to divorce the appellant. However, as a result of the

intervention of his relatives and friends once again, both of them started living in the same house.

The respondent further stated that after some time the appellant started to ill-treat him and

neglected her duties as a wife. Being unable to bear the ill-treatment, he left the matrimonial home

on or around the 5th of January, 2006 leaving some of his belongings in the said home.

The respondent stated that thereafter, he had been living at his brothers house, which is 500 meters

away from where the appellant was residing. Further, since his belongings were still in the

matrimonial home where the appellant was residing, he visited the said house from time to time to

get his belongings when necessary. Moreover, the appellant earns an income from selling paddy

and other crops owned by him and has no other source of income.

5

In the circumstances, the respondent prayed inter alia;

(a) for a divorce on the ground of constructive malicious desertion on the part of the appellant,

and

(b) to evict the appellant from the respondents property.

The appellant further stated that thereafter, she filed an answer denying the allegations made by

the respondent in his plaint. The appellant pleaded in her answer that the matrimonial home was

built with the income earned by both the respondent and herself. Further, the appellant stated that

it was the respondent who abused her and their children and took steps to chase them from the

matrimonial home.

Furthermore, she stated that on or around the 9th of July, 2006 the respondent had assaulted the

younger daughter and the appellant and chased them out of the matrimonial home. Moreover, the

respondent had given their matrimonial home to his brother and his wife and had rented out two

of the rooms in the said house.

The appellant further pleaded that the respondent owned several properties and possesses a fixed

deposit amounting to Rs. 1,000,000/-. In addition to those, he earns a monthly income of Rs.

30,000/- from farming. Moreover, she had no intention of divorcing the respondent and wishes to

continue with their marriage. In the circumstances, the appellant in her answer prayed, inter alia;

(a) to grant an Order directing the respondent to lead to a good family life with the appellant

(b) to grant the divorce on the basis that the respondent had constructively deserted the

appellant if the court is granting a divorce,

(c) to order the respondent to pay permanent alimony amounting to Rs. 1,000,000/-,

(d) to give the matrimonial home to the appellant and their children.

Judgment of the District Court

The trial proceeded inter parte, and upon the conclusion of the trial, the learned District Judge

delivered the judgment holding that the respondent has failed to prove any of the allegations made

by him against the appellant. Further, it was held that in the complaint made by the appellant to

the police on the 14th of July, 2006 the respondent had admitted that he evicted the appellant and

their children from the matrimonial home. Furthermore, at the trial, the respondent admitted that

6

he had given the said house to his brother and had rented out a few rooms of the said house.

Moreover, at the trial, it was proved that the respondent was guilty of constructive malicious

desertion. In the circumstances, the learned District Judge dismissed the plaint filed by the

respondent.

Being aggrieved by the said judgment of the learned District Judge, the respondent appealed to the

High Court on the following grounds;

(i) the evidence led at the trial had not been evaluated properly by the learned District Judge,

and

(ii) the judgment is contrary to law.

Judgment of the High Court

Having considered the said appeal, the learned judges of the High Court allowed the appeal and

set aside the judgment of the District Court on the basis that there was sufficient evidence to prove

that the respondent had to leave the matrimonial home due to the conduct of the appellant. It was

held that the respondent has been very specific in stating to court how the appellant had been

abusive towards the respondent and that the appellant had failed to perform her duties as a wife.

Moreover, even though the trial judge held that the appellant was not cross-examined on the

alleged harassment caused to the respondent, the evidence shows that the appellant was cross

examined on this point. Hence, the appellant is not entitled to alimony on the basis that the

desertion was not due to the fault of the respondent.

Being aggrieved by the said judgment of the High Court, the appellant sought Leave to Appeal

from this court, and this court granted Leave to Appeal on the following questions of law;

(i) Is the judgment of the Civil Appellate High Court of Kandy wrong in law?

(ii) Did the Honourable Civil Appellate High Court of Kandy err in law in failing to analyze

and evaluate and ascribe the relevant probative values to the evidence lead in the instant

District Court case and in overturning the Learned District Judges judgment?

(iii) Did the Honourable Civil Appellate High Court of Kandy err in law in holding that the

defendant is guilty of the matrimonial fault of constructive malicious desertion of the

plaintiff?

7

(iv) Did the Honourable Civil Appellate High Court of Kandy err in law in failing to appreciate

that the plaintiffs evidence was ipse dixit evidence?

(v) Did the Honourable Civil Appellate High Court err in law in erroneously holding that the

defendant had admitted that the plaintiff was compelled to leave the matrimonial home due

to the behavior of the defendant?

(vi) Did the Honorable Civil Appellate High Court of Kandy err in law in holding that the

defendant is guilty of matrimonial fault of constructive malicious desertion of the plaintiff

when there was no clear cogent evidence to evince such?

During the course of the submissions of the learned counsel for the appellant, he informed the

court that the court need not consider the 1st and 5th questions of law stated above.

Did the Civil Appellate High Court of Kandy err in law in holding that the defendant is guilty

of the matrimonial fault of constructive malicious desertion?

In the instant appeal, both parties claim that their spouses maliciously deserted them. Hence, it is

necessary to consider the evidence led at the trial to ascertain;

(a) whether there is evidence to prove the malicious desertion, and

(b) if there is evidence to prove malicious desertion, which party had deserted the spouse.

Evidence at the trial

At the trial, the respondent admitted that the appellant left the matrimonial home because she was

assaulted by him.

: ?

:

Moreover, in the Police complaint made by the respondent on the 14th of July, 2006 he stated that

he had chased the appellant and the children from their matrimonial home.

8

The above admission of the respondent was corroborated by the evidence given by their daughter

and son at the trial.

The evidence of Sandhya Kumari Ratnayake, the daughter is as follows:

: ?

: .

Dinesh Prasanna Kumara Ratnayake, the son, gave evidence and stated:

37/ , .

.

Furthermore, the appellant stated in her evidence at the trial that it was the respondent who

harassed her and the children and evicted them from the matrimonial home. The above position

was admitted by the respondent under cross examination;

:

:

The appellant further stated that on the 9th of July, 2007 the respondent assaulted their daughter,

Sandhya Kumari, with a mamoty. A complaint was made regarding the said incident to the

Dambulla Police Station on the 10th of July, 2006. Thereafter, on the 4th of October, 2006 the Police

instituted proceedings at the Magistrates Court of Dambulla against the respondent. This incident

was also corroborated by both the son and the daughter. Furthermore, the respondent admitted

going to the Mediation Board for assaulting their daughter.

: ,

:

Although the respondent alleged that he left the matrimonial home because of the constructive

malicious desertion on the part of the appellant, the evidence led at the trial proves that the

respondent continued to live in the said home. In fact, the respondent admitted in his evidence that

at the time of instituting action in the District Court, he was residing in the matrimonial home.

: ?

9

: 37 () ,

: 37() ?

:

The answer by the appellant and her evidence led at the trial shows that she refused to grant a

divorce to the respondent as she wants to resume cohabitation. At the trial, the appellant stated that

she cannot afford to get a divorce as she has two children who are of marriageable age.

. .

It is pertinent to note that desertion is a continuing offence and thus, may be terminated at any time

on proof of change of animus or factum. In this context, the respondent has to prove that the

appellant conducted herself with the intention of bringing the conjugal life to an end.

Malicious Desertion

The grounds for divorce are set out in section 19 of the Marriage Registration Ordinance No. 19

of 1907, as amended, sets out the grounds for divorce. It reads thus;

(1) No marriage shall be dissolved during the lifetime of the parties except by

judgment of divorce a vinculo matrimonii pronounced in some competent

court.

(2) Such judgment shall be founded either on the ground of adultery subsequent to

marriage, or of malicious desertion, or of incurable impotence at the time of

such marriage.

(3) Every court in Sri Lanka having matrimonial jurisdiction is hereby declared

competent to dissolve a marriage on any such ground.

[emphasis added]

In addition to the above, section 608(2) of the Civil Procedure Code states;

Either spouse may

10

(a) after the expiry of a period of two years from the entering of a decree of

separation under subsection (1) by a Family Court, whether entered before or

after the 15th day of December, 1977, or

(b) notwithstanding that no application has been made under subsection (1) but

where there has been a separation a mensa et thoro for a period of seven years,

apply to the Family Court by way of summary procedure for a decree of

dissolution of marriage, and the court may, upon being satisfied that the

spouses have not resumed cohabitation in any case referred to in paragraph

(a), or upon the proof of the matters stated in an application made under the

circumstances referred to in paragraph (b), enter judgment accordingly:

Provided that no application under this subsection shall be entertained by the

court pending the determination of any appeal taken from such decree of

separation. The provisions of sections 604 and 605 shall apply to such a

judgment.

In the instant appeal, the respondent alleged that he had to leave the matrimonial home as he was

treated in an inhumane and derogatory manner by the appellant. He further alleged that the

appellant failed to perform her duties as a wife. Accordingly, the respondent relied on section 19(2)

of the Marriage Registration Ordinance to obtain a divorce on the basis of constructive malicious

desertion.

Malicious desertion may be either direct or constructive desertion. The difference between

these two grounds depend on the factum element of the offence. In the case of direct malicious

desertion, the deserting spouse leaves the matrimonial home, while in constructive malicious

desertion, the innocent spouse is forced to leave the matrimonial home due to the expulsive acts

of the other.

Desertion has been defined in the case of Silva v Missinona 26 NLR 116 as:

deliberate and unconscientious, definite and final repudiation of the obligations

of the marriage state and it clearly implies something in the nature of a wicked

mind.

It is pertinent to note that the factum of desertion has an important bearing on the burden of proof

for desertion. Particularly when a spouse leaves the matrimonial home, there is a prima facie

11

inference that the spouse had the required animus deserendi. The onus is then shifted to the spouse

to rebut the said presumption by proof of justa causa, in the absence of which the actual desertion

will be established. On the other hand, in the case of constructive malicious desertion, the spouse

who is out of the matrimonial home must show that the other spouse has acted with the intention

of putting an end to the marriage.

Cruelty by one spouse compels the other to leave the matrimonial home

The respondent stated in his evidence that the appellant frequently quarrelled with him and ill-

treated him, which resulted in him leaving the matrimonial home.

Cruelty by one spouse, which renders cohabitation intolerable for the other, amounts to

constructive malicious desertion by the offending spouse. A similar view was expressed in

Somawathie Dias v Alwis 66 CLW 30, where it was held as follows:

cruelty need not necessarily be physical cruelty inflicted personally by the

defendant on the applicant. It may be physical or mental cruelty caused by persons

whom the defendant has the power to remove from the matrimonial home.

However, there is no evidence to prove that the appellant treated the respondent in a cruel manner

which compelled him to leave the matrimonial home. On the contrary, the aforementioned

evidence led at the trial show that the respondent had chased the appellant and their children from

the matrimonial home.

Termination of Desertion

Conclusive evidence of a settled intention to terminate the conjugal relationship is best illustrated

by proof of abortive efforts for reconciliation. Further, if the offer to reconcile made by the

deserting spouse is rejected by the other spouse, the tables will be turned and the opposing spouse

will be held liable for desertion. A genuine offer of reconciliation was described in Canekeratne

v Canekeratne (supra) as follows:

It is only genuine if there is a fixed and settled intention to offer a resumption of

marital life under reasonable conditions, and it will not be fixed and settled

intention if it is a mere fluctuating desire to resume cohabitation.

12

In the instant appeal, the appellant had not sought a decree of divorce in her answer filed in the

District Court. Further, she had prayed the Court to direct the respondent to commence the married

life with her. Furthermore, the evidence of the appellant shows that she did not want to divorce the

respondent and wanted to continue with the marriage. Moreover, when the maintenance

application filed by the appellant in the Magistrates Court of Dambulla was taken up, she had

informed her wish to resume the marriage, which was refused by the respondent. Further, at the

trial, the appellant categorically stated that she does not want a divorce as she has children of

marriageable age. This position was discussed in Muthukumarasamy v Parameshwary 78 NLR

493, where it was held as follows:

termination of desertion can take place by a supervening animus revertendi,

coupled with a bona fide approach to the deserted spouse with a view to resumption

of life together; and that a deserted spouse must always, until presentation of his

or her plaint, affirm the marriage and be ready to take back the deserting spouse.

[emphasis added]

In the instant appeal, the plaint was filed on the 15th of May, 2006 while the appellant had made

the offer to reconcile the disputes among them on the 9th of May, 2007 when the maintenance

application was taken up in the Magistrates Court. Further, the evidence led at the trial shows

that the respondent had not left the matrimonial home even at the time he gave evidence at the

trial. On the contrary, it was revealed that he chased the appellant and their children from the

matrimonial home.

Did the Civil Appellate High Court of Kandy err in law in failing to analyse and evaluate the

evidence led in the District Court case?

The learned judge of the High Court set aside the judgment of the District Court on the basis that

there was sufficient evidence to prove that the respondent had to leave the matrimonial home due

to the conduct of the appellant.

In evaluation of the evidence given by a witness at a trial, the evidence should be considered as a

whole, and the answers given to certain questions either in evidence in chief or in cross

examination shall not be considered in isolation. Further, a careful consideration of the totality of

the evidence led at the trial shows that there is overwhelming evidence before the District Court

13

to prove that the appellant was not responsible for the offence of committing the matrimonial

offence of constructive desertion. On the contrary, the respondent admitted in his evidence that he

chased the appellant and the children from the matrimonial house.

The trial judges have the benefit of seeing the witnesses giving evidence and it facilitates observing

the demeanour of the witnesses which is useful in evaluating the evidence. In fact, the demeanour

of a witness is one of the matters taken into consideration in accepting or rejecting the evidence of

a witness. However, the appellate courts do not have the opportunity of seeing the witnesses giving

evidence when hearing appeals. Thus, as a practice the appellate courts do not interfere with the

findings of facts of the trial judges unless such findings are perverse.

The above view was expressed by the Privy Council in Fradd v Brown & Co., Ltd., 20 NLR 282,

where it was held that where the controversy is about the veracity of witnesses, immense

importance attaches, not only to the demeanour of the witnesses, but also to the course of the trial,

and the general impression left on the mind of the judge of the first instance, who saw and noted

everything that took place in regard to what was said by one or other witnesses. It is rare that a

decision of a judge of first instance on a point of fact purely is overruled by an appellate court.

Further, a similar view was expressed in Shaik Alli v Jafferjee 3 NLR 368.

Moreover, in Oberholzer v Oberholzer (1921) South African Law Reports Appellate Division

274, Innes CJ held:

These matrimonial cases throw a great responsibility upon a judge of the first

instance; with the exercise of which we should be slow to interfere. He is able not

only to estimate the credibility of the parties but to judge of their temperament and

character. And we, who have not had the advantage of seeing and hearing them

must be careful not to interfere, unless we are certain, on firm grounds, that he is

wrong.

The learned High Court Judge held that there was sufficient evidence to prove that the respondent

had to leave the matrimonial home due to the conduct of the appellant. As stated above, at every

point, the appellant was refusing to give a divorce to the respondent and repeatedly requested the

respondent to start cohabiting with her. However, the respondent did not heed to any of those

requests made by the appellant.

14

In N.J.Canekaratne v Mrs. R.M.D. Canekeratne 66 NLR 380, it was held:

. it is correct to say that the conduct of the parties up to and including the time

of the trial is relevant when the court has to decide who is to blame. Certainly up

to the stage of entering decree nisi it is the duty of each party to provide a

reasonable opportunity for a resumption of married life, and the party who

deliberately and unreasonably refuses to accept that opportunity will be guilty of

malicious desertion.

[emphasis added]

Further, in N.J.Canekaratne v Mrs. R.M.D. Canekeratne (supra), it was held:

a wife who has been deserted by her husband is not liable to be ejected by her

husband from the matrimonial home. (unless alternative accommodation or

substantial maintenance to go and live elsewhere is offered to her).

[emphasis added]

A careful consideration of the evidence led at the trial shows that the appellant was not guilty of

committing the matrimonial offence of constructive malicious desertion. Further, at the trial, it was

proved that the respondent was guilty of constructive desertion of his spouse. In such

circumstances, it is not possible to invoke section 19(2) of the Marriage Registration Ordinance

against a spouse who is not guilty of matrimonial fault.

Hence, I am of the opinion that the respondent has failed to establish that the appellant was guilty

of constructive malicious desertion.

I am also of the opinion that the High Court has failed to analyse and evaluate the evidence lead

in the District Court and erred in setting aside the judgment of the learned District Judge and

allowing the appeal filed by the respondent.

Conclusion

In the light of the above, I am of the opinion that the questions of law posed to this court should

be answered as follows:

15

Did the Honourable Civil Appellate High Court of Kandy err in law in holding that the

defendant is guilty of the matrimonial fault of constructive malicious desertion of the

plaintiff?

Yes

Did the Honourable Civil Appellate High Court of Kandy err in law in failing to analyse and

evaluate the evidence lead in the instant District Court case and in overturning the judgment

of the learned District Judge?

Yes

In view of the foregoing answers, it is not necessary to consider the other questions of law stated

above.

Therefore, the appeal is allowed. I set aside the judgment of the Civil Appellant High Court of

Kandy in Appal No. CP/HCCA/81/2009 (FA) dated 20th of May, 2014 and affirm the judgment of

the District Court of Matale delivered in D/38/41 dated 31st March, 2009.

I order no costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC, J

I Agree Judge of the Supreme Court

Murdu N. B. Fernando PC, J

I Agree Judge of the Supreme Court