IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Edirisinghe Arachchige

Chandrasiri Edirisinghe,

Polwatte Clinic, Debathgama,

Kegalle.

Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant

Edirisinghe Arachchige Saumya

Subashini Edirisinghe of

G 134/2/A, Thalewela, Hettimulla.

Substituted Plaintiff-Respondent-

Appellant

SC APPEAL NO: SC/APPEAL/245/2014

HCCA NO: SP/HCCA/KAG/683/2010

DC MAWENELLA NO: 13163/P

Vs.

1. Edirisinghege Dayawathie

Edirisinghe of B 238/1,

Debathgama, Kegalle.

1st Defendant-Appellant-

Respondent

1a. Thushara Dilrushki of B 238/1,

Debathgama, Kegalle.

Substituted 1st Defendant-

Appellant-Respondent

2

SC/APPEAL/245/2014

2. Medagoda Durayalage Gunasena of

B 238, Debathgama, Kegalle.

2a. Medagoda Durayalage Wasantha

Manel Rajkumar of B 238/1,

Debathgama, Kegalle.

2b. Thushara Dilrushki of B 238/1,

Debathgama, Kegalle.

3. Edirisinghe Pedige Hemadasa of

Polwatte, Debathgama, Kegalle.

4. Edirisinghe Pedige Gunathileke,

C/O E.D. Hemadasa of Polwatte,

Debathgama, Kegalle.

4a. Priyantha Edirisinghe Edirisinghe

of C/O E.D. Hemadasa of Polwatte,

Debathgama, Kegalle.

5. Edirisinghe Pedige Nimal

Chandrasiri of Polwatte,

Debathgama, Kegalle.

6a. Edirisinghe Pedige Nancy

Edirisinghe of Debathgama,

Kegalle. (also 7a and 12th

Defendants)

7. Edirisinghe Pedige Seeladasa

Edisiringhe of Near School,

Debathgama, Kegalle.

7a. Edirisinghe Pedige Nancy

Edirisinghe of Debathgama,

Kegalle. (also 6a and 12th

Defendants)

3

SC/APPEAL/245/2014

8. Edirisinghe Pedige Jayasena

Edirisinghe of Aluthkumbura,

Debathgama, Kegalle.

9. Anton Gamini Edirisinghe of

C/O Jayasinghe Edirisinghe,

Debathgama, Kegalle.

9a. Edirisinghege Jayasinghe of

Debathgama, Kegalle.

10a. Edirisinghege Sunil Edirisinghe of

Debathgama, Kegalle.

11a. E. Ramya Kumari Dissanayake of

Debathgama, Kegalle.

12. Edirisinghe Pedige Nancy

Edirisinghe of Debathgama,

Kegalle. (also 6a and 7a

Defendants)

13. Edirisinghege Raja Wijesena

alias Edirisinghege Wijeratne of

Debathgama, Kegalle.

14. Edirisinghege Hemachandra of

Udabage, Debathgama, Kegalle.

15. Ranhawadi Gedara Thilakawathie

of Udabage, Debathgama, Kegalle.

Defendant-Respondent-

Respondents

Before: Hon. Justice S. Thurairaja, P.C.

Hon. Justice Kumudini Wickremasinghe

Hon. Justice Mahinda Samayawardhena

4

SC/APPEAL/245/2014

Counsel: Dr. Sunil F.A. Coorey with Sudarshani Coorey for the

Substituted Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant.

Sapumal Bandara with Vishmi Abeywardena 1st Defendant-

Appellant-Respondent.

Written Submissions:

By the Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant on 02.02.2015

By the 1st Defendant-Appellant-Respondent on 24.04.2015

Argued on: 18.03.2024

Further Written Submissions:

By the Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant on 06.05.2024

By the 1st Defendant-Appellant-Respondent on 02.05.2024

Decided on: 16.07.2024

Samayawardhena, J.

The plaintiff filed this action in the District Court of Mawanella naming

11 defendants seeking to partition the land called Gederawatte alias

Kospelawatte in extent of 18 lahas of paddy sowing area. The 12th to 15th

defendants intervened subsequently. The contest was between the

plaintiff and the 1st defendant, the plaintiffs sister, regarding the

identification of the corpus, not the pedigree. The 1st defendant sought

dismissal of the action on that basis. The District Court held in favour of

the plaintiff and partitioned the land accordingly. The High Court of Civil

Appeal of Kegalle allowed the appeal of the 1st defendant and dismissed

the plaintiffs action. The plaintiff is now before this Court against the

judgment of the High Court. The appeal is confined to the question of

identification of the corpus.

5

SC/APPEAL/245/2014

In the plaint, the plaintiff sought to partition the land known as

Gederawatte alias Kospelawatte bounded on the North by Aswedduma

Kumbura, Ela Wella; East by Aluth Kumbure Ivura; South and West by

Aluth Kumbure Hene Agala in extent of 18 lahas of paddy sowing area.

The contention of the 1st defendant is that Gederawatte alias

Kospelawatte is one land, while Kospelawatte is another land. The

plaintiff combined both lands and created a fictitious land not identifiable

on the ground.

At the trial, only the plaintiff and the 1st defendant gave evidence. The

plaintiff categorically stated that there are not two lands, but only one

land, which is Gederawatte alias Kospelawatte, and it is this land he

seeks to partition.

The plaintiffs position is not supported by his own evidence.

The plaintiff marked 14 deeds as P1-P14 without any objection. Of these,

the deeds marked P1, P2, P11 and P14 refer to Gederawatte alias

Kospelawatte, while deeds marked P3-P10 refer to Kospelawatte.

Significantly, deeds marked P12 and P13 identify Gederawatte alias

Kospelawatte as one land and Kospelawatte as another land.

By deed marked P12, the plaintiff gifted these two lands to the 1st

defendant and her husband, the 2nd defendant.

In P12, the first land is described as Gederawatte alias Kospelawatte

bounded on the North by Aswedduma Kumbura; East by Ivura of the

same land (i.e. Gederawatte alias Kospelawatte); South and West by

Karunapedige Hene Agala in extent of 18 lahas of paddy sowing area.

The second land is described as Kospelawatte bounded on the North by

Ela Wella; East by Aluth Kumbure Ivura; South and West by Aluth

Kumbure Hene Agala in extent of 18 lahas of paddy sowing area.

6

SC/APPEAL/245/2014

In P12, the plaintiff also sets out how he became entitled to those two

lands: the first land, by Deed of Transfer No. 316 dated 08.11.1979, and

the second land, by Deed of Transfer No. 11097 dated 26.10.1978, along

with several other deeds. Deed No. 316 was marked P2, and Deed No.

11097 marked P9.

Deed marked P13 is the Deed of Cancellation executed by the plaintiff

cancelling the deed marked P12. According to P13, as described by the

plaintiff in the schedule to the deed, these two lands have been registered

in the Land Registry as two different lands in two different folios:

Gederawatte alias Kospelawatte in folio C430/102, and Kospelawatte in

folio C445/200.

Thereafter, the plaintiff had filed an action in the same District Court

(Case No. 526/L) to evict the 1st and 2nd defendants from both lands and

recover damages. The plaint filed in that case was marked 1V2. In that

plaint, the plaintiff clearly mentioned that there are two lands and, in the

prayer, sought ejectment of the 1st and 2nd defendants from both lands.

As suggested by counsel for the 1st defendant during cross-examination

of the plaintiff in the District Court, what the plaintiff has done is to

combine details from both lands into one, albeit with an extent of 18

lahas of paddy sowing area, not double that amount (despite each land

having an extent of 18 lahas of paddy sowing area).

If I may elaborate this further, according to P12, the northern boundary

of Gederawatte alias Kospelawatte is Aswedduma Kumbura, whereas the

northern boundary of Kospelawatte is Ela Wella. The plaintiff in this

action has given the northern boundary of Gederawatte alias

Kospelawatte as Aswedduma Kumbura and Ela Wella.

The eastern boundary of Gederawatte alias Kospelawatte is Ivura of the

same land (Gederawatte alias Kospelawatte), whereas the eastern

7

SC/APPEAL/245/2014

boundary of Kospelawatte is Aluth Kumbure Ivura. The plaintiff in this

action has given the eastern boundary of Gederawatte alias Kospelawatte

as Aluth Kumbure Ivura.

The southern boundary of Gederawatte alias Kospelawatte is

Karunapedige Hene Agala, whereas the southern boundary of

Kospelawatte is Aluth Kumbure Hene Agala. The plaintiff in this action

has given the southern boundary of Gederawatte alias Kospelawatte as

Aluth Kumbure Hene Agala.

The western boundary of Gederawatte alias Kospelawatte is

Karunapedige Hene Agala, whereas the western boundary of

Kospelawatte is Aluth Kumbure Hene Agala. The plaintiff in this action

has given the western boundary of Gederawatte alias Kospelawatte as

Aluth Kumbure Hene Agala.

According to the Preliminary Plan marked X, the boundaries are as

follows: North by Aluth Kumbure Ela; East by Aluth Kumbure Ela and

Aluth Kumbure Hene claimed by K.G. Somawathie; South by Aluth

Kumbure Hene claimed by K.G. Somawathie and Baby Nona; West by

Aluth Kumbure Hene claimed by Seeladasa, Karuna Pediya Watta

according to the 1st and 2nd defendants but Aluth Kumbure Hena

according to the plaintiff, Karuna Pediya Watta according to the plaintiff

but Kospela Watta according to the 1st and 2nd defendants.

The surveyor has surveyed a land of 1 Acre, 1 Rood and 4.30 perches.

Both parties accept that 10 perches is equal to 1 laha of paddy sowing in

that area, resulting in a discrepancy of 24 perches because the plaintiff

sought to partition a land of 18 lahas, equivalent to 180 perches.

The surveyor was not called to give evidence by the plaintiff although the

main contest was the identification of the corpus, and particularly, the

identification of the western boundary.

8

SC/APPEAL/245/2014

According to the report of the Preliminary Plan marked X1, the 1st and

2nd defendants, the 11th defendant and another person who is not a party

to the action were living on that land. The 1st defendant in her evidence

has stated that during her lifetime the plaintiff did not possess the land.

She was 59 years of age at the time. This evidence was not challenged.

The 1st defendants position is that the plaintiff is in possession of an

adjoining portion of land, which was shown by the 1st defendant as lot 1

in plan marked 1V3. According to 1V3, the 1st to 4th defendants, 11th

defendant and another person who is not a party to the action were living

on the land to be partitioned. This plan was also prepared on a

commission issued by the Court at the instance of the 1st defendant.

There is a real dispute regarding the identification of the corpus. The

assertion of the plaintiff that there are not two separate lands by the

names of Gederawatte alias Kospelawatte and Kospelawatte, but only one

common land by the name of Gederawatte alias Kospelawatte, cannot be

accepted. In addition to the plaintiffs deeds referred to above, the

defendants deeds marked 1V5, 3V1-3V5 refer to Gederawatte alias

Kospelawatte, whereas deeds marked 5V1, 9V1-9V3, 10V1 and 11V1

refer to Kospelawatte. The deed marked 1V4 (also marked by the plaintiff

P12) and 11V2 refer to both lands. However, in 11V2, although two lands

are referred to, both are titled Kospelawatte but with different

boundaries. The boundaries of the first Kospelawatte correspond to those

of Gederawatte alias Kospelawatte, while the boundaries of the second

correspond to those of Kospelawatte.

It is not clear which deeds marked in evidence at the trial are relevant to

the land depicted in the Preliminary Plan. The plaintiffs position that all

the deeds are relevant to the land depicted in the Preliminary Plan, which

is described as Gederawatte alias Kospelawatte, cannot be accepted.

9

SC/APPEAL/245/2014

In a partition action, identification of corpus is a sine qua non before

proceeding to the investigation of title. The rationale behind this principle

is that title cannot be investigated in a vacuum or in the abstract without

a specific subject matter. This principle is applicable not only to partition

cases but also to any land case. In essence, if the corpus cannot be

properly identified, the action must fail on that ground alone.

However, I must hasten to add that, after lengthy trials, dismissal of

cases on non-identification of the corpus, without going into the merits

and complexities of the case, should not be a convenient method of

disposing of cases. It must be a well-considered serious decision. The

Court cannot decide on the identification of the corpus by merely

comparing the boundaries and extent of the land described in the

schedule to the plaint, which details have been extracted from old deeds,

with the land surveyed by the Court commissioner. Boundaries change

over the years and so does the extent. The Court also cannot totally

depend on conversion tables that equate traditional land measures to

English standard equivalents. The Court must decide on the question of

identification of the corpus upon consideration of the totality of the

evidence, not on isolated pieces of evidence.

It is also important to note that if a party intends to contest a case on the

identification of the corpus, it must be raised as an issue in the trial

court, as the identification of the corpus is a pure question of fact that

cannot be raised for the first time on appeal.

In Jayasuriya v. Ubaid (1957) 61 NLR 352 it was held that In a partition

action there is a duty cast on the Judge to satisfy himself as to the identity

of the land sought to be partitioned, and for this purpose it is always open

to him to call for further evidence (in a regular manner) in order to make a

proper investigation.

10

SC/APPEAL/245/2014

This was highlighted in several cases of this Court including Brampy

Appuhamy v. Menis Appuhamy (1958) 60 NLR 337, Uberis v.

Jayawardene (1959) 62 NLR 217, Piyasena Perera v. Margret Perera and

Others [1984] 1 Sri LR 57, Abeysinghe v. Kumarasinghe [2008] BLR 300,

Sopinona v. Pitipana Arachchi and Others [2010] 1 Sri LR 87 at 105-108,

Hapuarachchi and Others v. Podi Nilame [2021] 1 Sri LR 134.

The failure to identify the corpus to be partitioned has been considered a

fatal error, amounting to a serious miscarriage of justice. This warrants

the Courts intervention through its extraordinary revisionary jurisdiction

to rectify the injustice, especially when it impacts third parties. The

leading case in this regard is Somawathie v. Madawela [1983] 2 Sri LR

15.

Indian Courts have also regarded the identification of the land in suit as

an imperative requirement. It was held by the Supreme Court of India in

Nahar Singh v. Harnak Singh and Others 1996 (6) SCC 699 that it is well

settled that unless the property in question for which the relief has been

sought for is identifiable, no decree can be granted in respect of the same.

This position was endorsed by the Supreme Court in Pawan Kumar Dutt

and Another v. Shakuntala Devi and Others (2010) 15 SCC 601 at

paragraph 7, where it was opined that specific performance could not be

decreed if there is uncertainty as to the identity of land:

It is clear from the suit agreement that no boundaries of the suit

property which was sold are specified in the agreement. It is not

clear from what point the area is to be measured. It is also not clear

that these 4 bighas 2 biswas is a portion of the land situated in the

middle of the total land or in one portion or at the extreme end or at

a particular place, in other words, there is no clear identity of the

property agreed to be sold. The courts are not expected to pass a

11

SC/APPEAL/245/2014

decree which is not capable of enforcement in the courts of law. If

the argument of the learned counsel for the appellants is to be

accepted and if a decree is to be granted for specific performance,

without identification of the suit property, it will not be possible to

enforce such a decree.

In IDPL Employees Co-Operative Housing Building Society Ltd, Hyderabad

and Another v. B. Rama Devi and Others 2004(5) ALD 632, the following

was stated by the High Court of Andhra Pradesh at paragraph 22:

It is a matter of common knowledge that in a suit for partition, the

important aspects to be undertaken by the Court are ascertainment

of the shares, identification of the property available for partition,

division of the available properly by metes and bounds and

allotment of the divided parts to the parties, commensurate with

their shares.

The Supreme Court of Nigeria in the case of Lasisi Aremy v. Alhaji Lawal

Adetoro (2007) LLJR-SC, articulated this principle more clearly. Pius

Olayiwola Aderemi, J. held as follows:

In my humble view, the only issue raised by the respondent captures

the real matter in controversy in this appeal. Proof of identity of a

piece of land in dispute is of utmost importance if any success is to

be attained in any land suit. A plaintiff seeking the reliefs of the

nature claimed in this matter has a cardinal duty to show, with

certainty, the area of land being claimed and to which he wants the

order of court to relate to; failure to do so, the entire case must stand

dismissed. See Baruwa v. Ogunsola 4 WACA 159; Elias v. Omobare

(1982) 5 S.C. 25; Awere v. Lasoju (1975) N.M.L.R. 100 and

Sangosanya v. Salawu (1975) N.M.L.R. 27. Although a survey plan

is not an absolute necessity in every land case. See Olusanmi v.

12

SC/APPEAL/245/2014

Oshasona (1992) 6 N.M.L.R. (pt. 245) 22; where however a plaintiff

desires to draw up or cause to be drawn up a survey plan showing

the land in dispute, such a plan must show clearly the dimensions

of the land, the boundaries and other salient features. See Arabe v.

Asanlu (1980) 5-7 S.C. 78. The demand for this is in consonant with

the maxim: Id Cerium Est Quod Cerium Reddi Potest; Sed It Magis

Certum Est Quod De Semet Ipso Est Certum meaning: That is

certain which can be made certain; but that is most certain which is

certain on the face of it. See Ayinla v. Adisa (1992) 7 N.W.L.R.

(pt.255) 566.

Learned counsel for the plaintiff complains that the High Court did not

accord sufficient weight to the affirmative answer given by the surveyor

in his report marked X1 to the question Whether or not the land surveyed

by him is in his opinion substantially the same as the land sought to be

partitioned as described in the schedule to the plaint. As held in

Hapuarachchi and Others v. Podi Nilame (supra) at 147-148 the failure to

answer this question or answer it in the affirmative or negative is not

decisive. The Court cannot dismiss a partition action on the basis that

the surveyor in his report to the Preliminary Plan has failed to answer or

answered that question in the negative. Nor can the Court readily accept

that the Preliminary Plan accurately represents the entire land to be

partitioned, if the surveyor in his report answers the above question in

the affirmative. There is no doubt that the surveyors answer to that

question carries great weight. Nevertheless, whether the land has been

correctly identified shall ultimately be decided not by the surveyor, but

by the Court, after considering the totality of the evidence presented

before it.

On the facts and circumstances of this case, I am not satisfied that the

plaintiff properly identified the corpus. The High Court was correct in

13

SC/APPEAL/245/2014

overturning the judgment of the District Court on that basis. I answer

the question of law, whether the High Court was wrong to have set aside

the judgment of the District Court on non-identification of the corpus, in

the negative. I affirm the judgment of the High Court and dismiss the

appeal with costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

S. Thurairaja, P.C., J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court