P a g e 1 | 16

The core question for

In the matter of an appeal under and in

terms

of Article 128 (2) of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

DFCC Bank PLC,

No. 73/5, Galle Road,

Colombo 03.

PLAINTIFF RESPONDENT

PETITIONER APPELLANT

-Vs-

LOLC securities Ltd,

Level 18, World Trade Center,

Colombo 01.

CLAIMANT PETITIONER

RESPONDENT

RESPONDENT

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

SC / APPEAL / 109 / 2018

SC / HCCA / LA / 306 / 2017

WP / HCCA / COL / 39 / 2017

DC COLOMBO / DCL / 03 / 2016

P a g e 2 | 16

1. Saheedul Hijry Mohamed

Risan

alias Saheedul Hijry

Mohamed Rishan,

No. 01, Charles Circus,

Colombo 03.

2. Wedaralagedara Mohamed

Mubarak Siththi Sermile

alias

Sithy Sharmila Rishan,

No. 01, Charles Circus,

Colombo 03.

DEFENDANTS -

RESPONDENTS

RESPONDENTS

RESPONDENTS

Before: Murdu N.B. Fernando, PC, CJ.

S. Thurairaja PC, J &

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J

Counsel: Nigel Hatch, PC with Siroshni Illangage for the Plaintiff

Respondent Petitioner Appellant.

Erusha Kalidasa with Charith Jayasri Thabrew for the Claimant

Petitioner Respondent Respondent.

Argued on: 10.08.2021

P a g e 3 | 16

Decided on: 25.07.2025

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J

1. Determination in this case is whether a third partys claimsuch as a

lien on assets seized from a judgment debtormay properly be

adjudicated in a separate action. At the outset, it is necessary to

untangle the skein of facts to provide context for this issue. The

essential facts of the case can be summarized succinctly.

2. The DFCC Bank (the Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant, hereinafter

sometimes referred to as the Plaintiff) has preferred this appeal to

this Court from the judgment of the Commercial High Court dated

18.05.2017. The Plaintiff instituted this action under the Debt Recovery

(Special Provisions) Act No. 2 of 1990, as amended, against the 1st and

2nd Defendants-Respondents-Respondents (hereinafter referred to as

the Defendants), who were both shareholders and directors of a

company. The Plaintiff sought to recover the sums of Rs. 87,538,561.34

and Rs. 7,666,923.97, allegedly due and owing under a guarantee.

3. The District Court of Colombo, by its order dated 05.08.2014, issued an

Order Nisi. Following a full inquiry, at which the Defendants were duly

heard and represented, the Court, by order dated 19.12.2014, granted

the Defendants conditional leave to appear and defend the action,

subject to their depositing a sum of Rs. 60 million.

4. The Defendants failed to comply with the aforesaid order and thereafter

sought leave to appeal to the High Court against that order. By an order

dated 28.01.2015, the High Court refused leave to appeal. The

P a g e 4 | 16

Defendants further appeal to the Supreme Court was unsuccessful,

with the Supreme Court refusing leave by its order dated 23.04.2015.

Sequestration orders

5. During the pendency of Debt Recovery Action No. DDR/137/2014, the

DFCC Bank made an application seeking the issuance of sequestration

orders under Section 653 of the Civil Procedure Code (CPC), with a

view to securing any decree that may be entered in its favour for the

recovery of sums of Rs. 87,538,561.34 and Rs. 7,666,923.97.

6. Upon the issuance of sequestration orders in its favour under Section

653 of the Civil Procedure Code, the DFCC Bank, as Plaintiff in the

Debt Recovery action, caused notice of the sequestration orders to be

served on LOLC Securities Limited (sometimes referred to in this

judgment as LOLC) through its Attorneys-at-Law, directing them not

to alienate or transfer any assets that were subject to the said orders.

7. On the question of assets thus sequestered or seized, Lord McNaughten

had said poignantly: A creditor of the bankrupt having duly obtained

an attachment in England before the date of the sequestration cannot,

I think, be deprived of the fruits of his diligence.1

8. Before proceeding to the remaining facts, it is appropriate to briefly

refer to the concept of sequestration in civil procedure. Sequestration,

in my view, constitutes an extraordinary form of relief whereby the

property of a defendant may be attached prior to the entry of judgment.

1 (1908) A.C.508, 510-511.

P a g e 5 | 16

Such relief is warranted only in exceptional circumstances: where the

court is satisfied that the plaintiff has established a strong prima facie

case, and where there is reason to believe that the defendant may act

in a manner calculated to defeat the satisfaction of any decree that may

ultimately be entered against him. The Civil Procedure Code thus

requires the Plaintiff to establish a sufficient cause of action.2

9. In such circumstances, the court is empowered to order attachment or

sequestration before judgment, even prior to the final adjudication of

the plaintiffs claim, in order to preserve the subject matter of the

litigation and to prevent the frustration of the courts eventual decree.

10. In the present case, the property attached comprised shares held by

the defendants or their company, which was involved in the loan

transaction with DFCC Bank. Pursuant to the courts order, LOLC

Securities Limited which acted as the Defendants broker for the

purpose of selling these shares on the trading floor of the Colombo Stock

Exchange was duly restrained from alienating or otherwise dealing

with the said shares on behalf of their clients, the defendants.

11. I will now turn to the final judgment rendered in this case and the

subsequent developments.

Decree Absolute in DDR/137/2014

2 See Sec1on 653; also see Pan Asia Banking Corpora/on v Ranasinghe Arachige Thilangani Chandrasena Perera S.C.CHC 26/2010 (SC minutes of 6.04.2017).

P a g e 6 | 16

12. By order dated 15.02.2015, the District Court made absolute the

Decree Nisi. It appears that the Defendants made no attempt to satisfy

the Decree Absolute. The next step was taken by the DFCC Bank to

execute writ in the case. To this end, notice was served on the

stockbrokers, including LOLC Securities, in respect of shares held by

the 1st Defendant in various companies. On 15.05.2015, the Fiscal

served Seizure Notices on the stockbrokers of the 1st Defendant.

13. Thereafter, by notice dated 18 June 2015, the District Court directed

all stockbrokers, including the LOLC Securities, to furnish details

pertaining to the share portfolio owned by the 1st Defendant. LOLC

Securities, by letter dated 23 June 2015, responded by providing

particulars relating to the shareholdings of the 1st Defendant. However,

it was pointed out by the learned Presidents Counsel Nigel Hatch that

the LOLC Securities did not disclose the existence of any purported lien

over the share portfolio owned by the 1st Defendant.

14. Thereafter, upon application by the DFCC Bank, the District Court

duly made order directing the sale of the shares of the 1st Defendant.

Pursuant to this order, sale notices dated 18 December 2015 were duly

served on the LOLC Securities and the other stockbrokers. It is at this

stage that LOLC Securities made a claim application to the District

Court which has given rise to this appeal.

Claim Application Instituted By LOLC Securities

15. It must be stated that by way of the Claim Application the LOLC

Securities sought to prevent the sale of the shares.

P a g e 7 | 16

16. In proceedings bearing Case No. DCL/0003/2016, LOLC Securities

made an application under Sections 241, 242, and 244 of the Civil

Procedure Code, asserting that the 1st Defendant had pledged his

shares as security for credit facilities extended to him by LOLC

Securities. It has to be noted that no reference to any lien was made in

prior communications. It was only for the first time, in this claim

application instituted approximately eight months after the LOLC had

been served with the order of seizure, that this assertion was put

forward.

17. Be that as it may, I observe that the upon the claim application that

was made, there was also an ex parte interim order made by the District

Court.

Preliminary objections

18. The essence of the preliminary objections raised by DFCC Bank was

founded on the assertion that the claim application, styled and

numbered as DCL/0003/2016, constituted a separate and misconceived

proceeding. The contention was that, if at all, such an application

ought properly to have been filed in the main debt recovery action

bearing Case No. DDR/137/2014. Upon inquiry into these objections,

the learned District Judge overruled them and fixed the matter for

inquiry.

19. A leave to appeal application against the order of the District Court of

Colombo was refused by the learned judges of the High Court of Civil

Appeal of the Western Province on 18.05.2017. It is against this order

P a g e 8 | 16

that this appeal has been preferred and this Court has granted leave

on the following questions of law:

1) Has the High Court misdirected itself in law in failing to interpret

and hold that Section 15(1) and the Second Schedule to the Debt

Recovery (Special Provisions) Act No. 2 of 1990 (as amended) read

with Section 15(5) which statutorily mandates that all claims to the

property in issue shall be disposed of in the same Debt Recovery

action precludes in law the maintainability of a separate

Application under Section 241, 242 and 244 of the Civil Procedure

Code?

2) Has the High Court misdirected itself in failing to take cognizance

of the intent and purpose of the Debt Recovery (Special Provisions)

Act No. 2 of 1990 (as amended) which has been judicially construed

as special legislation to expedite the process of recovering loans and

execution of Writs thereunder?

3) Has the High Court erred in law in misinterpreting the case of David

Kannangara V. Central Finance Ltd. (2004) 2 Sri.LR 311 in that

though it is a matter for Court to assign a number to a claim

application, it is a matter for the parties to comply with the Debt

Recovery (Special Provisions) Act No. 2 of 1990 as amended and

institute a claim application under te said Debt Recovery Act as

mandated by Section 15(5)?

4) Has the High Court erred in law in failing to take cognisance that

the Respondent by making a purported Application under the Civil

Procedure Code has avoided the mandatory requirement under the

P a g e 9 | 16

Debt Recovery (Special Provisions) Act No. 2 of 1990 (as amended)

that if there is a claim, security is to be deposited or an undertaking

given that the property sought to be seized would remain in

constructive Fiscal custody until the claim inquiry is concluded?

20. All these questions taper into one single composite which I referred to

at the commencement of this judgment namely whether a third partys

claimsuch as a lien on assets seized from a judgment debtormay

properly be adjudicated in a separate action.

21. Mr. Nigel Hatch, the learned Presidents Counsel, strenuously

contended that the learned High Court Judges erred in failing to give

due consideration to the intent and purpose of the Debt Recovery

(Special Provisions) Act No. 2 of 1990, as amended. In support of his

submission, he cited precedents underscoring the special character of

this legislation. His central contention was that unless the courts

accord primacy to the special provisions contained in the Act, they risk

undermining the clear intention of the legislature by subordinating

those provisions to the general procedural rules set out in the Civil

Procedure Code-see the cases that focus on the special character of the

legislation Bandara v Peoples Bank3; Zubair v Bank of Ceylon4.

22. Mr. Nigel Hatch PC contended that the LOLC followed the wrong

procedure in preferring a claim application under Sections 241, 242,

and 244 of the Civil Procedure Code whilst Section 15 (5) of the Debt

Recovery (Special Provisions) Act mandates that claims to seized

property must be made in the main Debt Recovery Action. But both the

3 (2002) 3 Sri.LR 25. 4 (2000) 2 Sri.LR 187

P a g e 10 | 16

District Court and the Civil Appellate Court disagreed with the

submission and held that the claim application could proceed under the

provisions of the Civil Procedure Code.

23. It is apposite to take note of some important sections which occur in

Part II of the Debt Recovery (Special Provisions) Act in order to

understand the intent and purpose with which this legislation was

enacted by Parliament in 1990 along with a tranche of other

enactments.

Decree absolute as writ of execution

24. The decree nisi made absolute under the Act is converted into a writ of

execution by virtue of Section 13 (1) of the Act. This provision as it

stands amended in 1994 goes on to provide that subject to orders of

court, where a decree nisi entered in an action instituted under the Act

is made absolute, it shall be deemed to be a writ of execution duly issued

to the Fiscal in terms of section 225(3) of the Civil Procedure Code and

notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any other written law, the

execution of the same shall not be stayed.

25. This provision fully underscores the purpose of speedy recovery of

debts which is intended by the legislation and such a writ of execution

is kept alive for a period of 3 years as it has to be executed within that

period. Section 14 prescribes that the fiscal must report to court within

14 days any person resisting the execution of the order.

P a g e 11 | 16

26. One noticeable aspect of the above provision is that the writ of

execution issued under the Debt Recovery (Special Provisions) Act is

indeed a writ of execution issued in terms of the Civil Procedure Code

as Section 225 (3) makes it patently clear. However, what is in

contention between the disputants before this Court is the question of

where a third partys claim such as that of LOLC in this case must be

adjudicated. Is it in the main action or a separate action as invoked by

the LOLC and approved by both the District Court and the Civil

Appellate Court?

27. As I said before, the argument advanced by the learned Presidents

Counsel on behalf of the DFCC Bank is that it has to be investigated in

the main debt recovery action, whilst Mr. Erusha Kalidasa argued that

the reference to provisions relating to writ of execution found in the

Civil Procedure Code incorporates these provisions as component parts

of the Special Legislation and as such, even when a third party such as

LOLC asserts a proprietary claim over the sequestrated assets, such a

claim can be filed under the provisions of the Civil Procedure Code,

28. Mr. Erusha Kalidasa-the learned Counsel for the 3rd party-the LOLC

Securities contended that the application made to the District Court

that contained explicit references to the provisions of the CPC was

properly made and both the District Court and the Civil Appellate

Court arrived at the right conclusion when they held that the LOLCs

application was in order.

Section 15 (5) of the Debt Recovery (Special Provisions) Act

P a g e 12 | 16

29. In the resolution of this dispute section 15 (5) sheds much light. This

provision provides that all claims to property seized by whomsoever

made shall be disposed of in the same action and a decision on such

claim shall be a bar to the institution of any other action for the

recovery of any property seized or to establish any right to such

property or to have the same declared liable to be sold in execution of

the decree in favor of the institution.

30. Mr. Nigel Hatch PC laid emphasis on the section and argued that the

claim of the LOLC Securities must be adjudicated upon in the main

case DDR/137/2014 and not in the new case bearing No DCL/0003/2016.

31. The learned High Court judges disposes of the issue by stating that the

answer to that question lies in the following dicta of Amaratunga J in

Jayawardane v Ran Aweera5

If a person making an application to a court refers to a wrong

section of a statute in the caption as the provision of law under

which such application is made, such reference to the wrong

provision of law in itself will not deprive a court of its jurisdiction

it otherwise has. If the Court has jurisdiction under another

provision of law to deal with the substantive matter raised in the

application, the court has jurisdiction to deal with such matter

notwithstanding the reference to a wrong section in the caption.

32. The Civil Appellate High Court has proceeded on the footing that the

reference in the caption of the claim application to Section 241 is a

5 (2004) 3 Sri.LR 37 at 41.

P a g e 13 | 16

misdescription; however, the Courts jurisdiction has otherwise been

properly invoked. The Civil Appellate Court was indeed articulating the

trite proposition that even if a wrong provision has been inserted in the

caption but the Court has otherwise jurisdiction, the court can proceed

to exercise that jurisdiction. In my view, the civil appellate Court asked

itself the wrong question. This is not a question whether the Court has

jurisdiction or not. The proper question to pose is whether the LOLC

can present a petition in a case otherwise than in the main case. The

answer lies not only in Section 15 (5) of the Debt Recovery (Special

Provisions) Act No 2 of 1990, but also in Section 241 of the CPC.

33. I have already referred to the legislative imprimatur contained in

Section 15(5) of the aforesaid Act, which expressly provides that all

claims must be adjudicated upon in the same action. Similarly, Section

241 of the Civil Procedure Code, under which the Defendants invoked

the jurisdiction of the District Court, stipulates that a third-party

claim, such as that of LOLC, must likewise be presented within the

same proceedings. There exists no procedural basis for instituting a

separate and independent action. It is apposite to examine Section 241

of the CPC.

In the event of any claim being preferred to, or objection offered

against the seizure or sale of, any immovable or movable property

which may have been seized in execution of a decree or under any

order passed before decree, as not liable to be sold, the Fiscal shall,

as soon as the same is preferred or offered, as the case may be,

report the same to the court which passed such decree or order;

and the court shall thereupon proceed in a summary manner to

investigate such claim or objection with the like power as regards

P a g e 14 | 16

the examination of the claimant or objector, and in all other

respects, as if he were a party to the action:

34. The aforesaid section with the lines emphasized make it quite plain

as a pikestaff that the claim of the LOLC Securities shall be

investigated as if LOLC Securities were a party to the action. This

simply means that the claim of the LOLC shall be filed in the same

action namely the main debt recovery action bearing Case No.

DDR/137/2014. Section 241 leaves one in no uncertainty as to the

litigation in which the claim must be preferred.

35. The above is put beyond any shadow of doubt by the holding of

Murugappa Chetty v Samarasekera6. This is a case where a

seizure in execution had been made of certain lands under a decree

which declared them to be specially bound and executable, subject to

the life-interest of one D. P. in them, and D. P. applied to the District

Court that her claim to have the seizure released and the property

declared not liable to be seized and sold in execution be investigated

under section 241 of the Civil Procedure Code :

36. Lawrie, A.C.J held that it was not competent to the District Court to

refer the claimant to a separate action, but that her claim was one to

be investigated and determined under sections 241 and 242.

37. Therefore, when the LOLC instituted the case bearing No

DCL/0003/2016 it was not one initiated under a wrong section as the

learned High Court judges erroneously assumed but was a fresh action

6 1 N.L.R 100.

P a g e 15 | 16

which was quite unauthorized by law. The Court could not have

thought of this case as one that fell within the old main case as there

was no reference to Case No. DDR/137/2014 in the caption. There was

a reference to Case No. DDR/137/2014 only in the body of the

application which had passed muster in the Registry of the District

Court. Therefore it cannot be said to be a mistake or error made by

Court.

38. There has been a violation of the mandatory provisions of Section 15

(5) of the Debt Recovery (Special Provisions ) Act No 2 of 1990 and

Section 241 of the CPC and both the District Court and the High Court

of Civil Appeals were oblivious to procedural requirements more

particularly the last few lines of Section 241.

39. In the circumstances I would answer the questions of law in favor of

the Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant (the DFCC bank) and proceed to set

aside both the orders of the District Court and the High Court

respectively.

40. I would hasten to point out that instead of allowing arguments to

have taken place given the protracted delay that this litigation has

caused, the merit of the claim of the 3rd party yet remains

uninvestigated. A prudent trier of fact could have easily realized the

procedural tangle and avoided this wasteful exercise by amalgamating

the aforesaid DCL/0003/2016 with the main case.

41. No party ever moved for the same and as a result, the procedural

tangle wound its way to this Court.

P a g e 16 | 16

42. Thus, this Court sets aside the orders of both the District Court and

the High Court and allow the appeal of the Plaintiff. The parties will

reflect on the best possible course of action on their part to bring this

litigation to an end.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Murdu N. B. Fernando, PC, CJ

I agree CHIEF JUSTICE

S. Thurairaja, PC, J

I agree JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT