[SC Appeal 10/2024] Page 1 of 11

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal preferred under

articles 127 and 128 (4) of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

read together with Section 8 of the

International Covenant on Civil and Political

Rights (ICCPR) Act No. 56 of 2007.

Commission to Investigate Allegations of

Bribery or Corruption,

No. 36,

Malalasekara Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

COMPLAINANT

-Vs-

Subeya Hakuru Susilrathne,

No. 1/35,

16th Mile Post,

Ihala Siyambalawa,

Eppawala.

ACCUSED

AND THEN BETWEEN

Subeya Hakuru Susilrathne,

No. 1/35,

16th Mile Post,

Ihala Siyambalawa,

Eppawala.

ACCUSED-PETITIONER

-Vs-

01. Commission to Investigate Allegations of

Bribery or Corruption,

SC Appeal NO 10/2024

High Court of Colombo Case No:

HCRA/156/2023

High Court of Colombo Case No:

HCB 124/2021

[SC Appeal 10/2024] - Page 2 of 11

2

No. 36,

Malalasekara Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

02. Director General,

Commission to Investigate Allegations of

Bribery or Corruption,

No. 36,

Malalasekara Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

Subeya Hakuru Susilrathne,

No. 1/35,

16th Mile Post,

Ihala Siyambalawa,

Eppawala.

ACCUSED-PETITIONER-APPELLANT

-Vs-

01. Commission to Investigate Allegations of

Bribery or Corruption,

No. 36,

Malalasekara Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

02. Director General,

[SC Appeal 10/2024] - Page 3 of 11

3

Commission to Investigate Allegations of

Bribery or Corruption,

No. 36,

Malalasekara Mawatha,

Colombo 07.

COMPLAINANT-RESPONDENT-

RESPONDENT

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENT- RESPONDENT

BEFORE : P. PADMAN SURASENA, J,

YASANTHA KODAGODA, PC, J,

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J,

COUNSEL : Accused-Petitioner-Appellant appears in person.

Azard Navavi, SDSG with Gayan Maduwage for the Respondent-Respondent

ARGUED &

DECIDED ON: 03-05-2024

P. PADMAN SURASENA, J.

The Accused Petitioner-Appellant appears in person.

Court heard the submissions of the Petitioner-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Appellant) as

well as the submissions of the Senior Deputy Solicitor General who appeared for Complainant-

Respondent-Respondent and the Respondent-Respondent and concluded the argument of this case.

[SC Appeal 10/2024] - Page 4 of 11

4

The Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption (CIABOC) had filed an indictment

against the Appellant in respect of an incident involving soliciting and accepting a sexual gratification.

The four counts contained in the said indictment are as follows:

Count 01 - for an offence punishable under Section 16 (b) of the Bribery Act ;

Count 02 - for an offence punishable under Section 19 (c) of the Bribery Act ;

Count 03 - for an offence punishable under Section 16 (b) read with Section 25(1) of the Bribery Act ;

Count 04 - for an offence punishable under Section 19 (c) read with Section 25(1) of the Bribery Act.

The High Court of Colombo had assigned the case No. HCB 2122/2015 for the case opened for that

indictment. The sole accused in that case was the Appellant. As the Appellant had pleaded not guilty,

the High Court had commenced the trial in that case.

Halfway through the trial, the Prosecution had sought permission from the learned High Court Judge to

withdraw the said indictment, reserving its right to file a fresh indictment. Accordingly, the learned High

Court Judge had permitted the said application made by the Prosecution and proceeded to discharge

the Appellant.

Later on, the CIABOC has filed a second indictment against the Appellant on the same charges as in

the previous indictment filed of record in case No. HCB 2122/2015. The High Court of Colombo had

assigned the case No. HCB 124/2021 for the case opened for the second indictment. When that case

(case No. HCB 124/2021) was taken up in Court, the Appellant had raised a preliminary objection before

the learned Judge of the High Court against the maintainability of the 2nd indictment (case No. HCB

124/2021) against him on the basis that he has previously been discharged by the High Court from

similar charges in the trial pertaining to the first case (case No. HCB 2122/2015). The learned High

Court Judge, after considering the submissions made by the parties, by his order dated 29-01-2024

(which has been produced marked P 22), has proceeded to overrule the said preliminary objection

raised by the Appellant.

Thereafter, the Appellant had challenged that issue in various forms in several litigations instituted in

different Courts. This was adverted to, in the submissions made by the learned Senior Deputy Solicitor

General.

[SC Appeal 10/2024] - Page 5 of 11

5

In addition to the afore-said several litigations, the Appellant has also filed a petition in terms of section

7 (1) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights Act No. 56 of 2007 (ICCPR Act). In that

Petition, the Appellant had alleged that the CIABOC has violated the Human Right guaranteed to him

under Section 4 (3) of the ICCPR Act which gives him protection against a second prosecution after his

discharge from the first case.

In order to appreciate this argument, we perused the order discharging the Appellant, made by the

learned High Court Judge on 11-10-2021 in the first case (case No. HCB 2122/2015). The relevant part

of the proceeding containing the said order is as follows:

:-

.

.

:-

.

194(03) .

(Signed)

,

From the above Order, it is clear that the Learned High Court Judge has only discharged the Appellant

from the further proceedings relating to the first case (case No. HCB 2122/2015), but had not proceeded

to acquit him from any of the charges in the indictment in that case.

Since the learned High Court Judge had acted under Section 194 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act

No. 15 of 1979, let me at this stage reproduce that section below for easy reference.

Section 194 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.

[SC Appeal 10/2024] - Page 6 of 11

6

(1) At any stage of a trial before the High Court under this Code before the return of the

verdict the Attorney General may, if he thinks fit, inform the Court that he will not further

prosecute the accused upon the indictment or any charge therein, and thereupon all

proceedings on such indictment or charge as the case may be against the accused shall

be stayed and he shall be discharged of and from the same.

(2) The information under this section may either be oral or in writing under the hand of the

Attorney General.

(3) The Prosecuting Counsel may with the consent of the presiding Judge at any stage of

the trial before the return of the verdict withdraw the indictment or any charge therein

and thereupon all proceedings on such indictment or charge as the case may be against

the accused shall be stayed and he shall be discharged of and from the same.

We are mindful of the existence of the provision of law in Section 314 of the Code of Criminal Procedure

Act No. 15 of 1979. We must consider that provision also at this juncture. The said provision is

reproduced below.

Section 314 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.

(1) A person who has once been tried by a Court of competent jurisdiction for an offence

and convicted or acquitted of such offense shall while such conviction or acquittal remain

in force not be liable to be tried again for the same offence nor on the same facts for

any other offence for which a different charge from the one made against him might

have been made under section 166 or for which he might have been convicted under

section 167.

(2) A Person acquitted or convicted of any offence may be afterwards tried for any distinct

offence for which a separate charge might have been made against him on the former

trial under subsection (1) of section 165.

(3) A person convicted of any offence constituted by any act causing consequences which

together with such act constituted a different offence from that of which he was

convicted may be afterwards tried for such last mentioned offence, if the consequences

had not happened or were not known to the Court to have happened at the time when

he was convicted.

(4) A person acquitted or convicted of any offence constituted by any acts may

notwithstanding such acquittal or conviction be subsequently charged with and tried for

[SC Appeal 10/2024] - Page 7 of 11

7

any other offence constituted by the same acts which he may have committed, if the

Court by which he was first tried was not competent to try the offence with which he is

subsequently charged.

As can be seen from the afore-stated Section 314, the Order of the discharge of the Appellant from the

further proceedings relating to the first case by the High Court from similar charges in the first trial does

not fall under any of the four limbs in Section 314 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

However, the argument advanced by the Appellant before us is that he is entitled to be protected from

the second prosecution launched by the CIABOC in the presence of the phrase

in Section 4 (3) of the ICCPR Sinhala Act. We see the significance of this argument as the phrase used

in Section 4 (3) of the ICCPR English Act is the phrase acquitted.

He advanced this argument drawing our attention to the phraseology used by the learned High Court

Judge in his order dated 29-01-2024, marked P 22.

We have considered this issue consciously. Let me juxtapose Section 4 (3) of the ICCPR Sinhala version

with that of the English version.

Section 4 (3) of the ICCPR Sinhala version

, .

Section 4 (3) of the ICCPR English version

No person shall be tried or punished for any criminal offence for which such person has already

been convicted or acquitted according to law.

Thus, we can clearly observe that there is some disparity between the English version and the Sinhala

version of Section 4 (3) of the ICCPR. We are mindful that in a situation of this nature, one has to act

in terms of Article 23(1) of the Constitution. It is reproduced below.

[SC Appeal 10/2024] - Page 8 of 11

8

Article 23(1) of the Constitution:

(1) All laws and subordinate legislation shall be enacted or made and published in Sinhala

and Tamil, together with a translation thereof in English:

Provided that Parliament shall, at the stage of enactment of any law determine which

text shall prevail in the event of any inconsistency between texts:

Provided further that in respect of all other written laws and the text in which such written

laws was enacted or adopted or made, shall prevail in the event of any inconsistency

between such texts.

Thus, when there is a disparity between the Sinhala text and English Text, the Sinhala text must prevail.

This is because as per Article 23(1) of the Constitution, all laws are enacted in Sinhala and Tamil and

not in English. Furthermore, we have to be mindful that the English version of any law is only a

translation of the law which may necessarily have been enacted in Sinhala and Tamil.

Section 11 of the ICCPR Act only states that in the event of any inconsistency between the Sinhala and

Tamil texts of the Act, the Sinhala text shall prevail. Thus, we observe that it is the Sinhala version

which must prevail in case of a discrepancy between the different languages.

The matter does not end there. We now have to consider as to what the Parliament had intended to

achieve through the promulgation of the ICCPR Act. It is to that issue we would now turn.

In order to consider the intention of the Parliament, it is necessary first to consider the background

under which the ICCPR Act was promulgated. Generally, it is in the recitals found in the Preamble of

the Act that the mischief to be remedied, and the scope of the Act are described. Therefore, let us

reproduce the Preamble of the ICCPR Act below. It is as follows:

WHEREAS Sri Lanka is a State Party to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights

which was adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on 16th December, 1966 and

entered into force on 23rd March, 1976:

AND WHEREAS Sri Lanka has acceded to the aforesaid Covenant on 11th June, 1980:

[SC Appeal 10/2024] - Page 9 of 11

9

AND WHEREAS a substantial part of the civil and political rights referred to in that Covenant

have been given legislative recognition in the Constitution of Sri Lanka, as well as in other

legislation enacted by Parliament.

AND WHEREAS it has become necessary for the Government of Sri Lanka to enact appropriate

legislation to give effect to those civil and political rights referred to in the aforesaid Covenant,

for which no adequate legislative recognition has yet been granted.

NOW THEREFORE be it enacted by the Parliament of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka as follows:

Thus, the perusal of the several recitals in the Preamble makes it clear that the Parliament intended to

enact the ICCPR Act with the objective of giving effect to the provisions of the International Covenant

on Civil and Political rights (ICCPR) to which Sri Lanka is a state party.

The said International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights was adopted by the General Assembly of

the United Nations on 16th December 1966. It entered into force on 23rd March 1976. Thus, it is clear

according to the Preamble of the Act that it became necessary for the Government of Sri Lanka to enact

appropriate legislation to give effect to those Civil and Political Rights referred to in the said International

Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Therefore, it is this international obligation which the Parliament

fulfilled by taking steps to enact the ICCPR Act No. 56 of 2007.

Let us now examine the nature of the corresponding right which the International Covenant on Civil

and Political Rights had recognized. The said corresponding provision is Article 14(7) of ICCPR which is

as follows:

No one shall be liable to be tried or punished again for an offence for which he has already

been finally convicted or acquitted in accordance with the law and penal procedure of each

country.

Therefore, the corresponding Civil and Political Right which the Government of Sri Lanka is obliged to

recognize by enacting an appropriate legislation to that effect, is the right of protecting the person from

[SC Appeal 10/2024] - Page 10 of 11

10

being tried or punished again for an offence for which he has already been finally convicted or acquitted.

This becomes clear when one juxtaposes Section 4(3) of the ICCPR Act with its corresponding provision

in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.

Thus, the Civil and Political right which the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights had

sought to protect under its Article 14(7) is the protection against being tried or punished again for an

offence for which the Appellant has already been finally convicted or acquitted. We find no provision

in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights which had sought to protect the Appellant

being tried or punished for an offence from which he has been discharged.

Moreover, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights could not have been drafted in Sinhala

but in one or more international languages of which English is one. Perusal of Section 4 (3) of the

English ICCPR Act shows clearly that it is substantially a reproduction of the provision in Article 14(7) of

the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The purpose of the said provision is clear. That

is to protect all persons from being tried or punished for any criminal offence for which such person has

already been convicted or acquitted according to law.

Furthermore, we see that there are two categories of persons who cannot be tried or punished again

for the same offence under Section 4 (3) of English ICCPR Act. The first category is persons who have

already been convicted for the same offence. The Second category is those who have been acquitted

from the same offence.

However, Section 4 (3) of the Sinhala ICCPR Act has used the phrase instead

of the word acquitted. The meaning of the phrase is, discharged.

If we are to adopt the strict interpretation of the phrase , upholding the argument

of the Appellant to hold that the relevant category of persons who cannot be tried or punished again

for the same offence under Section 4 (3) of the Sinhala ICCPR Act, is the category of those who have

been once discharged from the same offence, then the resultant position would be that there is no

provision to protect the category of persons who have been acquitted once from the same offence.

Ironically, this would lead to the interpretation that Section 4 (3) of Sinhala ICCPR Act has not extended

[SC Appeal 10/2024] - Page 11 of 11

11

any protection to the category of persons who have been acquitted once from the same offence

although the Parliament had taken pains to enact ICCPR Act No. 56 of 2007 with the objective of giving

effect to the provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political rights (ICCPR) to which Sri

Lanka is a state party. We cannot accept that the intention of the legislature in enacting the ICCPR Act

No. 56 of 2007, was not to extend any protection to the category of persons who have been acquitted

once from the same offence but only to extend the protection to the category of persons who have

been once discharged from the same offence. Thus, we are unable to accept the argument of the

Appellant that the provision of law in Section 4 (3) of the Sinhala ICCPR Act must be interpreted strictly

according to its words, and words alone. Such an interpretation would lead to absurdity and defeat the

remedial action envisaged by the legislature to the relevant mischief.

For the foregoing reasons, we reject the argument advanced by the Appellant. Therefore, we also hold

that the learned High Court Judge has correctly decided to reject the argument advanced by the

Appellant.

For the foregoing reasons, we decide to affirm the judgment dated 29-01-2024, dismissing the Petition

filed by the Appellant in the High Court in terms of section 7 (1) of International Covenant on Civil and

Political Rights Act No. 56 of 2007 (ICCPR Act).

This appeal should therefore stand dismissed without costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

YASANTHA KODAGODA, PC, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

AG/-