1 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of section 14 (2) of the Maintenance Act No. 37 of 1999 with leave of the Provincial High Court

Kudaanthonige Rasika Damayanthi No. 106, FC02 Yaya 18, Agunakolapelessa. Applicant SC Appeal 151/2017

Provincial High Court Tangalle Case No. 01/ 2016 Vs, MC/ Agunakolapelessa Case No. 9731 Hewa Walimunige Gamini Yaya 15, D3 Ela, Hakmanagedara, Yakawala, Agunakolapelessa. Respondent And then between

Kudaanthonige Rasika Damayanthi No. 106, FC02 Yaya 18, Agunakolapelessa Applicant-Appellant Vs, Hewa Walimunige Gamini Yaya 15, D3 Ela, Hakmanagedara, Yakawala, Agunakolapelessa. Respondent-Respondent

2

And Now between

Hewa Walimunige Gamini Yaya 15, D3 Ela, Hakmanagedara, Yakawala, Agunakolapelessa. Respondent-Respondent- Appellant Vs,

Kudaanthonige Rasika Damayanthi No. 106, FC02 Yaya 18, Agunakolapelessa Applicant-Appellant-Respondent

Before: Justice Vijith K. Malalgoda PC Justice P. Padman Surasena Justice E.A.G.R. Amarasekara

Counsel: Widura Ranawaka for the Respondent-Respondent-Appellant

W. Dayaratne, PC with Ms. R. Jayawarene for the Applicant-Appellant-Respondent

Argued on: 16.12.2019

Decided on: 11.03.2020

3 Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J

Respondent-Respondent-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Respondent-Appellant) before this

court had filed the instant appeal with leave obtained from the Provincial High Court of Tangalle under

section 14 (2) of the Maintenance Act No 37 of 1999 on the following questions of law,

1) Did the learned High Court Judge err in deciding the required level of burden of proof with

regard to the income of the applicant when making a maintenance order under section 2 (1)

of the Maintenance Ordinance?

2) Did the learned High Court Judge err when she had only considered the amount referred to

as the Appellant’s monthly income, when deciding the monthly maintenance to the

Applicant-Respondent?

3) Has the Applicant refused to live with the Appellant as required under section 2 (1) of the

Maintenance Ordinance?

4) Has the learned High Court Judge failed to appreciate the correct income and the capacity

of the Respondent-Appellant to pay the maintenance under section 2 (1) of the Maintenance

Ordinance?

5) Did the learned High Court Judge err in law when she conclude that the Respondent-

Appellant had to establish his income?

6) Did the learned High Court Judge err in deciding that it is the duty of the Respondent-

Appellant to establish his income when considering the provisions in section 102 and 103 of

the Evidence Ordinance?

As revealed before this court, the Applicant-Appellant-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as

Applicant-Respondent) had commenced proceedings before the Magistrate’s Court of

Angunakolapelessa under the provisions of the Maintenance Act No 37 of 1999 for obtaining

maintenance for herself and her 5 years old child. During the inquiry before the Magistrate, the

Applicant-Respondent, her eldest sister as well as her eldest daughter had given evidence for the

Applicant-Respondent. At the conclusion of the inquiry the learned Magistrate had dismissed her

application and refused granting any maintenance both to the Applicant and her five years old child.

Being dissatisfied with the said order of the learned Magistrate dated 24.11.2015, the Applicant-

Respondent had preferred an appeal to the Provincial High Court of the Southern Province Holden in

Tangalle.

4 In consideration of the said appeal, the learned High Court Judge by her order dated 08.05.2017, had

allowed the appeal and granted maintenance in sum of Rs. 10,000/- with regard to the child and Rs.

5000/- to the mother (Applicant-Respondent) and ordered the effective date as 24.11.2015 for the

maintenance order.

The Respondent-Appellant being dissatisfied with the said order had moved for leave under section

14 (2) of the Maintenance Ordinance on the questions of law referred to above.

However, during the appeal before this court, the learned counsel who represented the Respondent-

Appellant agreed to restrict his appeal to two questions of law contained in sub paragraphs (1) and

(4) which reads as follows;

1). Did the learned High Court Judge err in deciding the required level of burden of proof

with regard to the income of the Applicant when making a maintenance order under

section 2 (1) of the Maintenance Ordinance

4) Has the learned High Court Judge failed to appreciate the correct income and the

capacity of the Respondent-Appellant to pay the maintenance under section 2 (1) of

the Maintenance Ordinance

As observed by this court the entire case for the Appellant and the Respondent relied upon the

provisions of sections 2 (1), 2 (2) of the Maintenance Act No. 37 of 1999 which reads as follows:

Section 2 (1);

Where any person having sufficient means, neglects or unreasonably refuses to

maintain such person’s spouse who is unable to maintain himself or herself, the

Magistrate may, upon an application being made for maintenance, and upon proof of

such neglect or unreasonable refusal, order such person to make a monthly allowance

for the maintenance of such spouse at such monthly rate as the Magistrate thinks fit,

having regard to the income of such person and the means and circumstances of such

spouse.

Section 2 (2);

Where a parent having sufficient means neglects or refuses to maintain his or her child

who is unable to maintain himself or herself, the Magistrate may upon an application

5

being made for maintenance and upon proof of such neglect or refusal, order such

parent to make a monthly allowance for the maintenance of such child at such monthly

rate the Magistrate thinks fit, having regard to the income of the parents and the

means and circumstances of the child.

When going through the provisions referred to above, it is clear that the legislature had expected the

Magistrate who acts under the above provision, when considering an application before him for

maintenance of a spouse and/or a child, to satisfy himself

a) With regard to the spouse whether he or she is unable to maintain him or herself, proof of

such neglect or unreasonable refusal, such monthly rate as the Magistrate thinks fit having

regard to the income of such person, and means and circumstances of such spouse,

b) With regard to the child whether the child is unable to maintain him or herself, such

monthly rate the Magistrate thinks fit having regard to the income of the parents and the

means and circumstances of the child,

when ordering maintenance against the errant spouse or the parent

In addition to the above requirement, it is further observed that there is a general requirement under

section 2 of the Maintenance Ordinance that, “such person against whom the maintenance order is

made should have sufficient means” and then neglects to maintain the spouse or the child as the case

may be.

However, the legal provisions with regard to the awarding of maintenance to the wife prior to 1999

was not identical to the present legal provisions referred to above. The Maintenance Act No. 37 of

1999 was enacted by parliament in the year 1999 and came in to effect from 22nd October 1999. The

Maintenance Ordinance which amended the law relating to vagrants came in to effect on 31st

December 1889 by Ordinance 19 of 1889 which was subsequently amended by Ordinance 13 of 1925

and Act No. 2 of 1971 and 19 of 1972.

Section 2 of the said Ordinance (as amended) which provided for the maintenance for wife as well as

children (legitimate or illegitimate) reads as follows;

“If any persons having sufficient means neglects or refuses to maintain his wife, or his

legitimate or illegitimate child unable to maintain itself, the Judge of the family Court may,

6

upon proof of such neglect or refusal, order such person to make a monthly allowance for the

maintenance of his wife or such child at such monthly rate, as the Judge of the Family Court

thinks fit, having regard to the income of the defendant and the means and circumstance of

the Applicant or such child and to pay the same to such person as the Judge of the Family

Court may from time to time direct. Such allowance shall be payable from the date on which

the application for maintenance is made”.

When awarding maintenance, almost an identical question of law was raised from time to time,

“whether a married woman having sufficient means of her own is entitled to claim maintenance from

her husband even under the said Ordinance.”

This matter was once again raised in the case of Sivasamy V. Rasiah (1943) 44 NLR 241 and a divisional

bench presided by Soertsz SPJ was nominated, since there was a difference of opinion on this issue.

In this case, the two contrary views taken by Macdonell CJ in Silva V. Senaratne (1931) 33 NLR 90

purports to follow an old case Carder Umma v. Calendran (1863- 1868) Ram 141 which was based on

the old Vagrant’s Ordinance, and view taken by Wood Renton CJ in Goonewardene v.

Abeywickreme (1914) 17 NLR 450 was considered by Soertsz SPJ.

As observed by Soertsz SPJ, the view taken by Wood Renton CJ was not considered in his Judgment by

Macdonell CJ. However as observed by Soertsz SPJ, one of the main issues to be considered was the

ambiguity in the use of the word “itself” in section 2 of the Maintenance Ordinance.

Whilst observing the view taken by Wood Renton CJ in Goonewardene v. Abeywickreme, and the

provisions in section 2 and 10 of the Maintenance Ordinance, Soertsz SPJ had resolved the ambiguity

in the following terms,

“The first question that arises for consideration is whether, so far as wives are concerned, the

Maintenance Ordinance provides a certain measure of relief to indigent wives alone, and it

seems to me that there need be no difficulty in answering that question if we guide ourselves

by the plain words of the relevant sections of that Ordinance. Section 2 says: -

“If any person having sufficient means neglects or refuses to maintain his wife, or his

legitimate or illegitimate child unable to maintain itself…. The Magistrate may order

7

such person to make a monthly allowance for the maintenance of his wife or such child

……”

“These words, correctly interpreted, can only mean that while the right of children to

maintenance depends on both their inability to maintain themselves and on the possession of

sufficient means by the father, the right of the wife to maintenance is conditioned only on the

possession of sufficient means by the husband and is not affected by the fact that she has

sufficient means of her own.”

……………………………………………..

“In the case of Goonewardene v. Abeywickreme, as well as in this case, counsel for the husband

sought to interpret the words “unable to maintain itself” as qualifying both the antecedent

words “wife” and “child”, and in support of that interpretation, they relied on Form 2 in the

Schedule of the Ordinance. Wood Renton C.J., appears to have agreed that in that form

“inability to maintain” was applicable to the wife also, but he disposed of the argument with

the word of Lord Penzance in Dean v. Green 8 P.D. 89, that “it would be quite contrary to the

recognized principle upon which Courts of Law have to construe Acts of Parliament to restrain

the operation of an enactment by any reference to the words of a mere form given for

convenience sake in a schedule.” But, for my part, I am unable to agree that in the Form,

inability to maintain is made applicable to the wife. What, in my opinion, the Form does is to

change he neuter “itself” in section 2 into the masculine “himself” and the feminine “herself”

to be applied in that way to the case of a male or female child respectively. Be that as it may,

the words of the section are clear and they must govern the question”

………………………………………………..

“I read section 2 of the Ordinance as entitling a wife to claim maintenance in virtue of her

wifehood alone and to obtain it by proof that her husband has sufficient means.

Section 3 and 4 follow and state the only circumstances in which a husband, although

possessed of sufficient means, may repel his wife’s claim to maintenance. Except in those

circumstances, there are no words in the Ordinance that debar a wife from asking for

maintenance, notwithstanding the fact that she is able to support herself.

But, is contended that by the implication of section 10 of the Ordinance a wife must satisfy

the Court that she has no means of her own in order to obtain an order against her husband.

I have scrutinized that section, but I cannot find that there is, necessarily, such an implication.”

……………………………………………………….

8

“For these reasons, I am of opinion that, on a correct interpretation of the various provisions

of the Ordinance itself, a wife possessed of means is entitled to claim maintenance from her

husband provided he has sufficient means himself.

And that is as it should be for, as observed in the Judgment delivered by Creasy C.J. and

Thomson J, in Ukku v. Thambia (Ram, 1863-1868, p 71):

“the husband, by the marriage contract, takes upon himself the duty of supporting and

maintaining his wife so long as she remains faithful to the marriage vow.”

………………………………………………………..

However, when going through the provision of the Maintenance Act No. 37 of 1999 it is clear that,

the said ambiguity resolved by Soertsz SPJ, had been cleared by the legislature by introducing specific

provisions with regard to the maintenance of the spouse and the child separately.

As already discussed in this Judgement, under section 2 (1) of the Maintenance Act No. 37 of 1999

there is unambiguous provisions requiring that the learned Magistrate may order such person to pay

maintenance, upon proof of,

“a person who is having sufficient income, neglects or unreasonably refuse to maintain

the spouse, whether the spouse is unable to maintain her/himself, having regard to the income of

that person and means and circumstance of the spouse” and all these requirements are necessary

ingredients in making a maintenance order under the provisions of the Maintenance Act No. 37 of

1999.

In establishing the said requirements, sections 11 and 12 of the Maintenance Act No 37 of 1999

provides the procedure to be followed before the learned Magistrate.

Section 11 (1) of the above act provided,

“Every application for an order of maintenance or to enforce an order of maintenance

shall be supported by an affidavit stating the facts in support of the application, and

the Magistrate shall if satisfied that the facts set out in the affidavit are sufficient, issue

a summon together with a copy of such affidavit, on the person against when the

application is made to appear and to show cause why the application should not be

granted.”

9

Section 12;

“The Magistrate may proceed in the manner provided in Chapter V or Vl of the Code

of Criminal Procedure Act No 15 of 1979 to compel the attendance of the person

against whom the application is made and of any person required by the applicant or

the person against whom the application is made or by the Magistrate to give evidence,

and the production of any document necessary for the purpose of the Inquiry.”

When considering the procedure referred to above, it appears that, when an application for

maintenance was made before the Magistrate with an affidavit by the Applicant, the Magistrate is

required to act upon the affidavit if the material submitted are sufficient to act upon, and thereafter

once the Respondent appear before him, to hold an inquiry in the manner provided in Chapter V or

VI of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

As further observed by this court, there are several provisions in the Maintenance Act, which provides

the Magistrate to obtain the necessary details for him to come to a correct conclusion as required in

section 2 of the said Act.

The above provisions introduced to the Maintenance Act will clearly demonstrate the extent to which

the legislature had expected the Magistrate to satisfy when making a maintenance order as provided

by the said Act.

During the argument before us the learned Counsel who represented the Respondent-Appellant took

up the position that the Applicant-Respondent had failed in establishing,

a) That the Applicant-Respondent is unable to maintain herself and

b) The income of the Respondent-Appellant

and submitted that the learned High Court Judge erred in law when she reversed the Judgment

of the learned Magistrate, contrary to the prevailing provisions of the Maintenance Act and the

evidence available in the case in hand.

As already observed in this Judgement, the provisions of the Maintenance Act No 37 of 1999 had

cleared the ambiguity with regard to the maintenance of the spouse and the child by introducing

specific provisions with regard to each category and also introduce the legal frame work to hold an

inquiry for the court to satisfy when making a maintenance order.

10 However, when going through the evidence of the Applicant-Respondent before the Magistrate, it is

observed that except for the following portion of the evidence, no evidence was placed before the

Magistrate with regard her inability to maintain herself and the income of the Applicant-Respondent.

“oekg uf.a Ndrfha orejka fofofkla bkakjd' oekA f,dl= orej;a ;=kafjks orej;a bkakjd f,dl=

orejd .dukaÜ hkjd' ug /lshdjla lrkak yelshdjla keye' iajdñmqreIhd ta fjk fldg ;S%ú,a 6

la f.kdjd hk fldg ;S%ú,a tlla f.kdjd' re' 392000$-lg g%elagrhla f.kdjd' ;S%ú,a r: 7u

ñ,g .;af;a i,a,s ne|,d' fldïmeksfhka .;af;a' tajd f.orska hkfldg wrka .shd' ;S%ú,a

tlla" w;a g%elagrhla" nhsla tlla ;sfhkjd' jdyk ñ,g .kafka l=Uqre lr,d oekg l=Uqre

lrkjd''''''''''''''''……………………………'''' fmdä orejd oeka fudkaáfidß hkjd' f,dl= orejd .kak

mäfhka ;uhs cSj;a fjkafka'”

But however, under cross examination the applicant had admitted the following;

Page 67;

m%( oekg l=Uqrla jev lrkjd fkao@

W( Tõ

m%( ;uqka jev lrk l=Uqr ldf.ao@

W( uf.a i,a,sj,g .;af;a

m%( ldf.kao .;af;a@

W( f.j,a lsÜgqj iqks,a lsh,d uy;a;fhla f.ka

'''''''''''''''

m%( uu fhdackd lrkafka ;uqka fï ú;a;sldrhdf.a l=Uqr oekg wiajoaoñka jev lrkjd lsh,d@

W( Tõ

During the inquiry the Applicant-Respondent’s eldest daughter too had given evidence on behalf of

her. This witness too had admitted the following when she was cross examination at the inquiry;

Page 76;

m%( ;uqka fmdä ldf, b|,d wïud ;d;a;d tlg cSj;ajqfka zos,xldZ lshk ksjfia@

W( Tõ

m%( oekg ;d;a;d fldfyo bkafka@

11 W( ;d;a;f.a wïuf.a f.or uf.a wdÉÑ,df.a f.or

m%( oekg fuu kvqj mjrkak l,ska óg fmr;a wïud ;d;a;g úreoaoj kv;a;= kvqjla mjrd ;snqkd

lsh,d okakjdo@

W( Tõ

m%( ta kvqj b,a,d wialr.;a;d lsh,d okakjdo@

W( Tõ

m%( ta kvqj mjrk ld,fha ;d;a;d fldfyo mosxÑ fj,d ysáfha@

W( wdÉÑ,df.a f.or ysáfh ;d;a;f.a wïuf.a f.or ysáfha

m%( idCIsldßh óg fmr kv;a;= kvqj mjrkfldg ;d;a;g fhdackd l,d fkao ;d;a; bkak zos,xldZ

ksji yd ;d;a;d jev lrk l=Uqr wïug fokak@

W( ;d;a;dg l=Uqre keye'

m%( fmr kvqj mjrkfldg idCIsldßh ÿj yeáhg ;d;a;f.ka b,a,Sula l,dfkao zos,xldZ ksji;a

;d;a;d jev lrk l=Uqr;a wïug fokak lsh,d@

W( Tõ

m%( t;fldg ta wkqj tu kvqj b,a,d wialr.;a;d fkao@

W( Tõ

m%( t;fldg fï l=Uqfr ;d;a;d jev lrkjdo@

W( keye

m%( wo jev lrkafka lõo@

W( uu

m%( wïud fkúo lrkafka@

W( keye

m%( wïud fjkqfjkao lrkafka@

W( Tõ

12 When considering the above evidence it is clear that as a settlement in a previous maintenance action

between the same parties, the Respondent had given his house and the paddy field he worked to his

wife, the Applicant in the case in hand and at the time his eldest daughter gave evidence, the said

eldest daughter admitted that she is working the paddy field given by her father on behalf of her

mother. It is further revealed that neither the Applicant-Respondent, nor the witness placed any

material before the Magistrate to the effect that the Applicant-Respondent is unable to maintain

herself except for the following evidence

Examination in chief at page 61

“oekg uf.a Ndrfha orejka fofofkla bkakjd' oekA f,dl= orej;a ;=kafjks orej;a bkakjd f,dl=

orejd .dukaÜ hkjd' ug /lshdjla lrkak yelshdjla keye' ”

Other than the above evidence both the Applicant-Respondent and her daughter (witness No.02) had

admitted under cross examination that they engaged in cultivation in the paddy field belonging to

them.

Cross examination of the Applicant at page 67;

m%( oekg l=Uqrla jev lrkjd fkao@

W( Tõ

m%( ;uqka jev lrk l=Uqr ldf.o@

W( uf.a i,a,sj,g .;af;a

Cross examination of witness No.2 at page 78;

m%( fmr kvqj mjrkfldg idCIsldßh ÿj yeáhg ;d;a;f.ka b,a,Sula l,dfkao zos,xldZ ksji;a

;d;a;d jev lrk l=Uqr;a wïug fokak lsh,d@

W( Tõ

m%( t;fldg ta wkqj tu kvqj b,a,d wialr.;a;d fkao@

W( Tõ

m%( t;fldg fï l=Uqfr ;d;a;d jev lrkjdo@

W( keye

m%( wo jev lrkafka lõo@

13 W( uu

m%( wïud fjkqfjkao lrkafka@

W( Tõ

From the above evidence, it is clear that both witnesses were engaged in cultivation and the 2nd

witness is cultivating the paddy field given to the Applicant-Respondent by the Appellant-Respondent.

However as observed by this court both the Magistrate as well as the High Court Judge had failed to

consider the above fact in their respective Judgments. In other words, both the Magistrate and the

High Court Judge were not mindful of the fact, whether the Applicant-Respondent had submitted

sufficient evidence before the Magistrate, that she is unable to maintain herself, before coming to a

conclusion.

When refusing maintenance, the learned Magistrate had mainly considered the income of the

Respondent-Appellant and had come to a conclusion that the Applicant-Respondent had failed to

establish the correct income of the Respondent. As already discussed in this Judgment, Maintenance

Act No. 37 of 1999 had provided several provisions to facilitate the court as well as the Applicant to

bring evidence with regard to the income of the Respondent but, as further observed by this court,

the above provisions will help an Applicant who claims that the Respondent is employed at an

institution or drawing a steady income from known sources. But it is difficult to establish the income

of an ordinary villager who is not employed but depend on daily income he gets from odd jobs. In the

said circumstances there is a duty cast upon the Applicant to bring evidence through witnesses who

can speak about the Applicant, and in the instant case I observe that, some effort had been taken to

establish this fact but, the Magistrate had not seen the importance of the said evidence.

When reversing the Judgment of the Magistrate the learned High Court Judge had correctly

considered the evidence led on behalf of the Applicant with regard to the income of the Respondent-

Appellant but had failed to consider whether there is sufficient material before the Magistrate to

conclude that the Applicant is able to maintain herself or not, which is an important ingredient that

has to be established by an Applicant when requesting a maintenance order in support of the said

party.

As referred to in this Judgment, the Respondent-Appellant had agreed to restrict his appeal to the

questions of law contained in questions one and four which refers to a maintenance order made

14 under section 2 (1) of the Maintenance Act No. 37 of 1999 but it does not refer to an order made

under section 2 (2) of the said Act.

As observed by me, the learned High Court Judge when reversing the order of the Magistrate, had

made order under both the above provisions, i.e. under section 2 (1) and 2 (2) of the Maintenance

Act No. 37 of 1999.

Since the Appellant had only challenged the order made under section 2 (1) of the Maintenance Act

No. 37 of 1999, I will not be going in to the validity of the order made under section 2 (2) of the said

Act, making a maintenance order directing the Appellant-Respondent to pay Rs. 10,000/- for the child

of them.

For the reasons given in this Judgement, I quash the maintenance order made under section 2 (1) of

the Maintenance Act No 37 of 1999 which granted Rs. 5000/- as maintenance to the Applicant-

Respondent but make no order with regard to the maintenance order made under section 2 (2) of the

Maintenance Act No 37 of 1999.

The appeal is allowed as far as the order made under section 2 (1) of the Maintenance Act of 37 of

1999 is concerned.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Justice P. Padman Surasena

I agree,

Judge of the Supreme Court

Justice E. A. G. R. Amarasekara

I agree,

Judge of the Supreme Court