==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Appeal in terms of Section 5(c)(1) of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Amendment Act No.54 of 2006.

Beneragama Vidanelage Kumarasiri Premalal,

No. 9, Santha Maria Church Road, Maggona.

Plaintiff

SC Appeal No. 14/2014

SC/HCCA/LA/ No.376/2011

WP/HCCA/KAL/10/2003(F)

D.C. Kalutara Case No.6661/P

V.

1.⁠ Sattambiralalage Don Spiridian Arsakularatne, No.386, Galle Road, Kalutara North.

2.⁠ Sattambiralalage Don Bernadine Reginald Arsakularatne, St. Anthony Furniture Shop, Galle Road, Kuda Payagala 3.⁠ Sattambiralalage Don Anthony Marian Arsakularatne, No. 386, Galle Road, Kalutara North.

2

4. Sattambiralalage Dona Cecilia Francisca Arsakularatne, No.7, Santha Maria Church Road, Maggona. (Deceased) 4A. Kurukulasuriya Merengiralalage Justus Ranjan Fernando, No.7, Santha Maria Church Road, Maggona. 5. Sattambiralalage Don Joseph Alexander Arsakularatne, No. 8/14, Botany Street, Ranwick, New South Wales 2031, Australia, appearing by his Attorney, the 1st Defendant.

Defendants

AND BETWEEN

4A. Kurukulasuriya Merengiralalage Justus Ranjan Fernando, No.7, Santha Maria Church Road, Maggona.

4A Defendant-Appellant

V.

Beneragama Vidanelage Kumarasiri Premalal,

No. 9, Santha Maria Church Road, Maggona.

3

Plaintiff-Respondent 1. Sattambiralalage Don Spiridian Arsakularatne, No.386, Galle Road, Kalutara North.

2.⁠ Sattambiralalage Don Bernadine Reginald Arsakularatne, St. Anthony Furniture Shop, Galle Road, Kuda Payagala. 3. Sattambiralalage Don Anthony Marian Arsakularatne, No. 386, Galle Road, Kalutara North. 5. Sattambiralalage Don Joseph Alexander Arsakularatne, No. 8/14, Botany Street, Ranwick, New South Wales 2031, Australia, appearing by his Attorney, the 1st Defendant.

Defendants - Respondents

AND NOW BETWEEN

4A. Kurukulasuriya Merengiralalage Justus Ranjan Fernando, No.7, Santha Maria Church Road, Maggona.

Defendant - Appellant - Appellant

V.

4

Beneragama Vidanelage Kumarasiri Premalal,

No. 9, Santha Maria Church Road, Maggona.

Plaintiff - Respondent -Respondent

1. Sattambiralalage Don Spiridian Arsakularatne, No.386, Galle Road, Kalutara North. 2. Sattambiralalage Don Bernadine Reginald Arsakularatne, St. Anthony Furniture Shop, Galle Road, Kuda Payagala. 3. Sattambiralalage Don Anthony Marian Arsakularatne, No. 386, Galle Road, Kalutara North. 5. Sattambiralalage Don Joseph Alexander Arsakularatne, No. 8/14, Botany Street, Ranwick, New South Wales 2031, Australia, appearing by his Attorney, the 1st Defendant.

Defendants – Respondents - Respondents

Before : MAHINDA SAMAYAWARDHENA, J. K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J. MENAKA WIJESUNDERA, J.

Counsel : Dr. Sunil F. A. Coorey with Sudarshani Coorey and

5

Neminda Kariyawasam instructed by Buddhika Gamage for the 4A Defendant – Appellant – Appellant. S. N. Vijithsingh for the Plaintiff – Respondent – Respondent. Sunil Wanigathunga with R.L. Dharmawickrama for the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 5th Defendants – Respondents – Respondents.

Argued on : 28.08.2025

Decided on : 19.12.2025

K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J

1. The Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as

the Plaintiff) instituted an action in the District Court of Kalutara

against the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 5th Defendants as well as the 4th

Defendant- Appellant - Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

4A Defendant) seeking to partition a land called ‘Gedarawatta’

morefully described in the schedule to the plaint.

2. According to the Plaint, only the Plaintiff and the 1st and 2nd

Defendants were the co-owners of the corpus for partition, being

entitled to shares. As per the plaint, the shares to be allocated are

as follows: Plaintiff to 6/12 shares, the 1st Defendant to 1/12

shares, and the 2nd Defendant to 5/12 shares. The 3rd to 5th

Defendants were subsequently added as parties to this action.

3. After the trial in the District Court of Kalutara and after

entertaining written submissions from the parties, the judgment

6

in this partition action was delivered on 04.04.2003 [page 463-

478 of the brief]. By the said judgment the issues have been

answered in favour of the Plaintiff and the partition of the corpus

has been ordered as prayed for in the plaint, except that, it was

held that the 4th Defendant is entitled to the house bearing

assessment number 7 and the land covered by it, on the basis of

prescriptive possession.

4. Being aggrieved by the said judgment of the District Court, the 4A

defendant appealed against the same to the Court of Appeal and

later the appeal was heard by the Civil Appellate High Court of the

Western Province sitting in Kalutara. The learned Judges of the

Civil Appellate High Court dismissed the appeal subject to the

variation that the 4A Defendant was held entitled to the road

frontage of the said house. (Aside from the house bearing No. 7

and the land covered by it).

5. Aggrieved by the judgment of the Civil Appellate High Court, the

instant application was filed to this Court by the 4A Defendant,

and leave was granted to all questions of law set out in paragraph

17 of the petition dated 29.09.2011.

6. At the time of argument, the learned Counsel for all parties stated

to the Court that there is no dispute that One Mariyanu

Arsekularatne owned one ½ half of the land in dispute by Deed

No. 6367 dated 05.04.1889 and that it devolved on to the 2nd,

3rd and 5th Defendants respectively. The instant dispute is in

relation to the balance 1/2 share. Counsel for all parties informed

the Court that the question of law can be narrowed down as to

whether it was Mariyanu Arsekularatne or Joronis Arsekularatne

7

who owned the balance half share of the land. Accordingly the

questions of law has been formulated as follows:

i ) Did the learned Judges of the Civil Appellate High Court err

by affirming the finding of the learned trial Judge that

Mariyanu Arsekularathne was the owner of the entirety of the

land to be partitioned and that Joronis Arsekularathne did not

own a half share of the land to be partitioned ?

7. There was no dispute that the corpus for partition was correctly

depicted in the preliminary plan No.267 dated 01.04.1997, which

was marked as X [page 139 of the brief]. The commissioners report

[page 140-142 of the brief] was produced and marked X1.⁠ As

regards to the devolution of title, there was no dispute as to the

devolution of an undivided ½ share of the corpus, namely, the one

Mariyanu Arsakularatne was entitled to is an undivided ½ share

of the corpus on deed No.6367 dated 05/04/1889. That

undivided ½ share later devolved, through a fiscal's conveyance

of 1923, on one Peduru Silva, from whom one Joseph Lazarus

Arsakularatne became owner by right of purchase on deed No.93

dated 23/06/1942 [page 604-608 of the brief]], and who on deed

No.2562 dated 14/08/1979 [page 641-644of the brief] marked

1D15, transferred the said undivided ½ share to the 2nd, 3rd and

5th Defendants, who accordingly own 1/6 share each, in the

corpus.

8. The dispute in this action relates to the devolution of title to the

balance undivided ½ share of the corpus. This balance undivided

½ share was claimed both by the Plaintiff and by the 4A

Defendant.

8

9. In the course of submissions, learned Counsel for the 4A

Defendant set out the manner in which, according to the 4A

Defendant’s case, the balance one-half (½) share of the title

devolved upon the 4A Defendant. It was submitted that, the house

bearing assessment No. 9 along with the the balance undivided ½

share of the land was owned, not by Mariyanu Arsakularatne, but

by Joronis Arsakularatne, on whose death it devolved on his six

children, Marver, John, Patrick, Alphonso, Maria and Peter and

that Peter died unmarried and issueless and his four brothers and

one sister inherited his 1/6 share, each of them thus becoming

owner of an undivided 1/5 share out of the balance ½ share.

Thereafter, John mortgaged his undivided 1/5 share to Patrick by

mortgage bond No.3993 dated 14/01/1921 and that Patrick later

put the bond in suit in D.C.Kalutara Case No.16732 [page 534-

537 of the brief] and obtained an order for the sale of the

mortgaged share. In the meantime, Alphonso and Maria also had

died unmarried and issueless, so that John, Marver and Patrick

became owners of undivided 1/3 share each out of the said

balance ½ share; that thereafter at the fiscal's sale Patrick

purchased the said 1/3 share of John on Fiscal's Conveyance

No.11439 in 1936 [ page 538-541 of the brief]] and also on Fiscal'

Conveyance No.11691 in 1937 [page 542-545 of the brief]. On that

basis Patrick has thus become entitled to an undivided 2/3 share

of the said ½ share. Patrick thereafter transferred his said 2/3

share to Dona Maria Justina (who is the wife of his brother Marver

and mother of 4th Defendant) on deed No.391 dated 22/06/1942

[page 545-548 of the brief], that thereafter Dona Maria Justina

and husband Marver died leaving their four children as their

heirs, namely, Julian Boniface, Jerome Damasus, Francis

Eusebius, and the 4th Defendant. Julian Boniface, Jerome

Damasus and Francis Eusebius died unmarried and issueless

9

and that accordingly, their interests having devolved on their

sister the 4th Defendant, the 4th Defendant became the owner of

the balance ½ undivided share. It was also proved by document

4D19 [page 558-569 of the brief] that on the death of Marver on

09/04/1941, his wife Dona Maria Justina filed his testamentary

action namely D.C.Kalutara Case No.2990, in which the said four

children were named as their children and an undivided 1/3

share of Gederawatte which is the corpus for partition, was

disclosed as being part of the intestate estate of the said deceased

Marver.

10. ⁠The learned Counsel for the 4A defendant contended that the trial

Judge has erroneously come to the conclusion as to the title of

the corpus and the devolution. The Counsel submitted that the

learned trial Judge at the commencement of her reasoning begins

with the incorrect proposition that, "as testified by Maria

Arsakularatne, (the first witness who testified on behalf of the

Plaintiff, and 1st, 2nd , 3rd and 5th ,and 4th Defendant), the

original owner of this property was Dona Mariyanu

Arsakularatne". The Counsel argued that the learned trial Judge

failed to appreciate that it was only the Plaintiff who asserted that

Mariyanu Arsakularatne originally owned the entire corpus. The

Counsel submitted that, the Defendants, particularly the 4th

Defendant, denied that position, and asserted that Mariyanu

Arsakularatne owned only an undivided ½ share, and that the

balance ½ share was owned by Joronis Arsakularatne which ½

share has devolved on the 4th Defendant.

11. The learned Counsel for the 4A defendant further contended that,

the sole reason advanced by the learned trial Judge for holding

that it had not been proved that Joronis Arsakularatne owned an

10

undivided ½ share of the corpus, is that the 4th Defendant was

unable to produce a deed by which Joronis Arsakularatne became

the owner of such ½ undivided share. The Counsel took the

position that, in coming to that finding the learned trial Judge had

firstly, completely lost sight of a large number of other deeds and

documents, namely, 4D10, 4D11, 4D12, 4D13 and 4D14, which

go to prove the pedigree of the 4th Defendant, and has entirely

failed to mention any documentary evidence which go to prove

that Mariyanu Arsakularatne owned the said balance undivided

½ share also. He further added that, the learned trial Judge had

failed to consider that the 4th Defendant and her predecessors in

title have on deeds been in possession of the western half of the

corpus while living in the house therein bearing assessment No.7,

as proved by documentary evidence 4D20 [page 570-586], which

has been occupied by the 4th Defendant and her family for several

decades now.

12. The learned Counsel for the plaintiff submitted that, One

Mariyanu Arsekularathne was the original owner of the entirety

of land in dispute and that he had bought half share of that land

by Deed No. 6367 dated 05.04.1889 and prescribed to the other

half of the land which according to the Counsel, later devolved

unto the plaintiff. In support of this contention, Counsel referred

to Deed No. 252, identified as document marked P6, asserting it

to be the principal instrument relied upon to establish the

prescriptive title of the plaintiff.

13. In addition, the learned Counsel for the Plaintiff contended that

the 4th Defendant is merely a licensee and possesses no greater

right in respect of the land. Counsel maintained that no evidence

had been led to demonstrate that Joronis had prescribed against

11

Mariyanu Arsekularatne. It was argued that there is no material

to show that Joronis had entered upon the land prior to Mariyanu

purchasing the same in 1889 under Deed No. 6367.

14. The learned Counsel further submitted that, although the 1st

Defendant had testified that Joronis constructed a house on the

land, such an act in the absence of any specific overt act, would

not suffice to give proprietary rights beyond that of a licensee.

Citing the case of De Silva v. Commissioner General of Inland

Revenue 80 NLR 282, the Counsel argued that a positive act is

necessary to establish a change of character in possession. The

Counsel for the plaintiff contended that, in the present case, there

was no cogent evidence to establish that they changed their

character as Licensee to prescribe against Mariyanu

Arsekulrathne.

15. The learned Counsel for the Plaintiff in his submissions further

adduced evidence in support of the prescriptive possession

exercised by Mariyanu Arsakularatne and, in particular, by

Peduru Arsakularatne and his children. Reference was made to

Deed No. 742 (marked IV2), which records that the half share

obtained from Deed No. 6367 corresponded to the eastern portion

of the land that was in the possession of the said Mariyanu

Arsakularatne. Deed No. 252 (marked P6 / 4V6), dated 1953,

describes the said half share to the eastern portion as being held

and possessed by right of paternal inheritance (pages 694–695).

The learned Counsel for the plaintiff stated that, subsequently, in

1954, following the execution of Deed of Gift No. 252, Peduru

Arsakularatne’s children mortgaged the said land to Eusunia

Fernando under Deed No. 42 (page 700), describing the property

as the eastern half share of the corpus. This mortgage was

12

redeemed in 1961 (marked P9A, page 700) by payment of the

amount set out in document P10 (pages 703–722). Thereafter,

Dona Justina Arsakularatne, a daughter of Peduru, by Deed No.

4039 (page 730) dated 1968, transferred her one-sixth share

derived from Deed No. 252 to her sister, Dona Maria

Arsakularatne.

16. Furthermore, the learned Counsel for the Plaintiff asserted that,

by Deed No.6 (page 734) dated 1985, Gabriel Arsakularatne,

another child of Peduru, transferred his share in the said eastern

portion to one Hillary Dowson Cooray. In 1987, Dona Maria

Arsakularatne, by Deed No. 96 (page 738), transferred an

additional two-sixths share of the eastern portion to the same

Cooray. Thereafter, by Deed No. 528, the said Cooray transferred

the remaining three-sixths share of the eastern portion to the

Plaintiff. It was submitted that this constituted precisely one-half

share of the corpus, corresponding to the portion not affected by

Deed No. 6367.

17. The learned Counsel for the plaintiff submitted that the said

Eastern portion of the corpus, upon which House No. 9 is

situated, was transferred by the heirs of Peduru Arsakularatne in

recognition of the half share originally prescribed by Mariyanu

Arsakularatne under Deed No. 6367. The series of conveyances

and transactions executed after 1953, therefore, were acts

consistent with continuous prescriptive possession by Peduru

Arsakularatne and his heirs. The Counsel contended that the so-

called artificial mortgage and fiscal sale effected in 1937 by the

children of Joranis Arsakularatne, purporting to convey a one-

fifth share, were rendered null and ineffectual by virtue of the

13

prescriptive rights lawfully acquired and exercised by Peduru

Arsakularatne and his descendants.

18. Moreover, the learned Counsel for the 2nd, 3rd and 5th

Defendants also making submissions, contended that the

schedule to deed No. 252 [Pg 693-696] relied upon by Plaintiff to

claim his title contains a description of the ½ share which is

identical to the description contained in the schedules of deeds

relating to the ½ share which was mortgaged and later passed on

to the 2nd, 3rd & 5th Defendants. The learned Counsel for the

2nd, 3rd and 5th Defendants argued that the search at the land

registry of the above deed has been dispensed with, with the

intention of preventing any disclosure of the fact that Mariyanu

Arsacularatne was entitled only to ½ share of the land. Thereby,

the learned Counsel for the 2nd, 3rd and 5th Defendants

asserted that Mariyanu owned only ½ share of the land on the

Eastern Portion of Gederawatte and mortgaged it and that District

Court of Kalutara sold it at a Fiscal sale and therefore no title

was left to pass on to his children one of whom is Peduru and

through him to the Plaintiff and argued that on that basis the

Plaintiff's claim would necessarily fail.

19. In light of that, the principal issue for consideration in the instant

matter is whether one Joronis Arsekularathne owned a one-half

(½) share in the land that is the subject of the dispute. This claim

was considered and subsequently dismissed by both the District

Court and the Civil Appellate High Court. The dismissal was

primarily on the ground that there was no documentary evidence

adduced by the 4A defendant to establish legal title to the alleged

one-half share of the land. In particular, both Courts noted the

14

absence of any deed or instrument of conveyance giving title to

one Joronis.

20. The learned Judges of the Civil Appellate High Court were of the

view that, in the absence of documentary proof, 4A Defendant’s

assertion amounted to a mere statement, unsupported by any

material evidence. As such, it was held that the 4A defendant had

failed to discharge the burden of proof required to establish title

to the said portion of land and decided that the 4A defendant was

only entitled to the house bearing assessment no. 7 and the front

way road access.

21. Upon a careful examination of the evidence presented, it is

apparent that there is no direct deed or documentary proof of title

in favour of the 4A defendant reflecting how Joronis was

bestowed the half share. However, it is important to note that this

absence does not, in itself, preclude consideration of the other

deeds and documents tendered by the 4A Defendant, which may

be relevant in establishing a claim to title.

22. It is observed that the 4A Defendant has gained title to half (½)

share that was owned by Joronis Arsekularathne as submitted by

the learned Counsel for the 4A defendant and produced in

paragraph 9 and 10 of this Judgement. Thereby the 4A defendant

has now become the owner of the undivided half share of the land

to be partitioned.

23. The sole issue arising in this context is the absence of any deed

or instrument of conveyance evidencing the transfer of title to

Joronis. No document has been produced to establish that legal

title to the subject property was ever formally vested in him.

15

24. In the case of Magilin Perera v. Abraham Perera [1986] 2 SLR

208 it was held,

“Plaintiff having to commence at some point, such owner or

owners need not necessarily be the very first owner or owners

and even if it be so claimed such claim need not necessarily and

in every instance be correct because when such an original

owner is shown it could theoretically and actually be possible to

go back to still an earlier owner. Such questions being rooted in

antiquity it would be correct to say as a general statement that

it could be well nigh impossible to trace back the very first owner

of the land. The fact that there was or may have been an original

owner or owners in the same chain of title, prior to the one shown

by the Plaintiff if it be so established need not necessarily result

in the case of the Plaintiff failing. In like manner if it be seen that

the original owner is in point of fact someone lower down in the

chain of title than the one shown by the Plaintiff that again by

itself need not ordinarily defeat the plaintiff's action. Therefore,

in actual practice it is the usual, and in my view sensible,

attitude of the Courts that it would not be reasonable to expect

proof within very high degrees of probability on questions such

as those relating to the original ownership of land.”

25. As outlined above, the mere absence of an original deed,

particularly one of considerable antiquity, does not, in and of

itself, preclude a valid claim to title. Courts must adopt a practical

and reasonable approach when deciding on questions of

ownership and title, taking into account the totality of the

evidence before them. This includes subsequent deeds and other

documentary material capable of establishing a continuous and

credible chain of title.

16

26. In the present case, although no primary deed evidencing the

original transfer of title to Joronis has been produced, a close

examination of the subsequent deeds clearly support the

existence of a consistent and traceable chain of title. Having

regard to the cumulative documentary evidence and the legal

submissions presented, I find that the 4A Defendant has

established a valid claim to the one-half (½) undivided share of

the land in dispute.

27. Moreover, the learned District Judge, in his judgment,has

observed that both Maria and the 1st Defendant had stated that

Mariyanu was the owner of the entire land. This finding is

inconsistent with the evidence on record, as the testimony at page

286 clearly shows that the 1st Defendant acknowledged

Mariyanu’s ownership only to the extent of ½ of the land. The

learned District Judge has therefore erred in concluding that the

Plaintiff was entitled to the remaining 1/2 share without

supporting any documentary evidence. Consequently, the finding

that Mariyanu was the owner of the entire land is erroneous, and

the learned Judges of the Civil Appellate High Court have also

erred in affirming such a conclusion.

28. Furthermore, in relation to house bearing assessment No.7, upon

consideration of the evidence contained in page 230 of the brief,

it is vital to note that Maria, the predecessor in title to the plaintiff,

testified that the 4th defendant had in fact been residing in the

house situated on the western portion of the land from her early

years, and even prior to the acquisition of the said land for railway

purposes.

! : 4 වැ$ %&'කා*ය ඇෙ. ද0ව1 සමග අංක 7 7යන $වෙස් ඉ1නවා?

17

උ : ඔ=

! :ඔය ක>?ය ඔය $වෙස් තමා ෙපාB කාලෙD Eට ඉ1නවා?

උ :ඔ=

! : තමාට මතක ඇ' කාලෙD Eට ඒ අය ඉ1නවා?

උ :ඔ=

! : ඔය ඉඩෙම1 ෙකාටසI ෙJKLවට අ&ප& කර ග&තා ෙ1ද?

උ :ඔ=

! : ඒ අ&ප& කර ග1න කN1 Eට ඒ අය ඉ1නවද?

උ : ඔ=. ෙජාෙරP$ස් අJසQලර&න. ඒ Rයා

29. As evidenced in page 363 of the brief, the 1st defendant has given

evidence to the effect that the survey for the railway track was

conducted in the year 1889, and that Joronis had entered into

possession of the land prior to that time and asserts that of the

two brothers, it was Joronis, and not Mariyanu, who first

occupied the land.

! - ඔය ST*ය මාJගය තU1 අහල 'ෙබනවද ෙකාX කාලෙDද ආෙ= 7යා?

උ : ST*ය මාJගය මැZT කෙK 1889 වJෂෙD\

! - තU1 ද1නා හැ?යට ඔය ෙජාරා$ස් ෙබ\මට ෙයP]ත ඉඩමට පැ^$ෙD ඔය ෙJK

පාර දා1න ෙපරද, ප_වද ?

උ : මෙ. තා&තා 7යා 'ෙබනවා ඊට ෙපර බව

! - තා&තා අX'කT ග1න %ට ෙජාෙරා$ස් E?ෙD ෙකාෙහද ?

උ : ෙජාෙරP$ස් ඊට බටaර පැ&ෙ& ෙගයI සාදාෙගන E?යා.

! - ඒක තU1 අහල 'ෙබනවා?

18

උ : ඔ=

! - ම*යාZට කN1 Eට ෙජාෙරP$ස් Eට 'ෙබනවා?

උ : ඔ=

30. In the above premise, it is clear that the learned Judges of the

Civil appellate High Court have correctly evaluated the evidence

and concluded that the 4A defendant is the rightful owner of the

House Bearing assessment No. 7.

31. With regard to the house bearing Assessment No. 9, it is observed

that the entitlement of the 2nd, 3rd, and 5th Defendants to an

undivided half share of the land and the house thereon is not in

dispute, either by the Plaintiff or by the 4A Defendant. In respect

of the remaining ½ share of the said house, when perusing the

evidence in pages 257, 263 and 277 of the brief and Deed No. 528

(P14) it is clear the plaintiff has purchased half a share of the

house bearing assessment No. 9. In the Surveyor's Report of D.

Ravi Kumarage Licensed surveyor dated 25th April 1997, (page

140 of the brief), it is stated that, “රb අංක bන ෙලස ස1ඳහ1

ෙගාඩ1නැdKෙK ෙකාටසක පැ^$Nක0 වන ෙබනරගම %දානලෙ. QමාරE*

ෙeමලාK පfංg h E?ය අතර අෙනI ෙකාටෙස් බJනi1 ෙරjෙනාKk

අJසQලර&න %E1 lIm %1fZ ලබX.” Further, according to the

Surveyor’s Report of B.K.P.W Gunawardena Licensed surveyor

dated 3rd April 1998, marked 1V10 (page 148 of the brief), it is

recorded that rooms No. C, D, I, and J are presently in the

occupation of the Plaintiff, while the remaining rooms A,B,E,F,G

and H belonging to 2nd, 3rd, and 5th Defendants have been

rented out. “This entire House had been in use as ONE UNIT until

the Plaintiff came into occupation. At present Room Nos.C, D, I & J

are been used aná occupied by Plaintiff as a seperate unit. Doors

19

marked D3, D5 & D9 are presently closed. Entrance to the section

occupied by Plaintiff is through D2.”. In view of the foregoing, it

appears that the learned District Judge has rightly concluded that

ownership of the house bearing Assessment No. 9 stands divided

equally, with 1/2 belonging to the Plaintiff and the other half to

the 2nd, 3rd, and 5th Defendants.

32. Upon consideration of the entirety of the evidence adduced above,

it is evident that Joronis had been in possession of, and had

entered upon, the land in dispute prior to Mariyanu

Arsekularatne. The evidence thus supports the claim that Joronis

Arsekularatne has lawfully established his claim to the remaining

½ share of the said land in dispute.

33. Having duly considered the submissions advanced by the learned

Counsel for the respective parties and upon careful examination

of the materials placed on record, I arrive at the following findings:

The 2nd, 3rd, and 5th Defendants are held entitled to an

undivided one-half (½) share in the corpus situated on the

Eastern portion of the property. I hold that the 4A Defendant is

entitled to the remaining one-half (½) share of the corpus situated

on the Western portion of the property, together with the house

bearing Assessment No. 7. I further hold that the ownership of

the house bearing Assessment No. 9, together with the plantation,

shall be divided equally, with one-half (½) share vesting in the

Plaintiff and the remaining one-half (½) share vesting jointly on

the 2nd, 3rd, and 5th Defendants.

34. Consequently, the judgments of the learned Judges of the District

Court and the Civil Appellate High Court, insofar as they relate to

the one-half (½) share previously allotted to the Plaintiff, are

20

hereby set aside. The question of law is answered in the

affirmative.

35. The appeal is accordingly allowed, and the learned District Judge

is directed to enter the interlocutory decree in conformity with this

judgment.

Appeal is allowed

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

JUSTICE MAHINDA SAMAYAWARDHENA

I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

JUSTICE MENAKA WIJESUNDERA

I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT