==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal under and in terms of

section 5 of the High Court of the Provinces

(Special Provisions) Act No. 10 of 1996 read

with Chapter LVIII of the Civil Procedure Code,

against the Judgment/Order of the High Court in

the Exercise of its Civil Jurisdiction.

SC/CHC/Appeal/26/2015 CEYLINCO INSURANCE PLC

HC (Civil) 60/2014/CO “Ceylinco House”,

No. 69, Janadhipathi Mawatha,

Colombo 01.

PETITIONER

vs

1. CEYLINCO LIFE INSURANCE LIMITED

106, Havelock Road’ Colombo 05. 2. CEYLINCO GENERAL INSURANCE LIMITED “Ceylinco House”, 3rd Floor, No. 69, Janadhipathi Mawatha, Colombo 01. RESPONDENTS AND THEN CEYLINCO INSURANCE PLC

2

“Ceylinco House”, No. 69, Janadhipathi Mawatha, Colombo 01. PETITIONER

vs

1. CEYLINCO LIFE INSURANCE LIMITED

106, Havelock Road, Colombo 05. 2. CEYLINCO GENERAL INSURANCE LIMITED “Ceylinco House”, 3rd Floor, No. 69, Janadhipathi Mawatha, Colombo 01.

RESPONDENTS

AND

GLOBAL RUBBER INDUSTRIES (PVT)

LTD

No. 28, Joseph’s Lane,

Colombo 04.

SHAREHOLDER-RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

GLOBAL RUBBER INDUSTRIES (PVT)

LTD

No. 28, Joseph’s Lane,

Colombo 04.

3

SHAREHOLDER-RESPONDENT-

APPELLANT

vs

CEYLINCO INSURANCE PLC “Ceylinco House”, No. 69, Janadhipathi Mawatha, Colombo 01.

PETITIONER-RESPONDENT

1. CEYLINCO LIFE INSURANCE LIMITED

106, Havelock Road, Colombo 05. 1st RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT 2. CEYLINCO GENERAL INSURANCE LIMITED “Ceylinco House”, 3rd Floor, No. 69, Janadhipathi Mawatha, Colombo 01. 2nd RESPONDENT- RESPONDENT

BEFORE : Yasantha Kodagoda, P.C., J. Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J. M. Sampath K. B. Wijeratne J. COUNSEL : Akile Deen with Hasith Samayawardhene Instructed by Sinnadurai Sundaralingam and Balendra for the Added-Respondent-Appellant.

4

Dr. Romesh De Silva, P.C., for the Petitioner- Respondent. Palitha Kumarasinghe, P.C., with Asanka Ranwala instructed by Abdeen Associates for the 1st Respondent-Respondent. Chandaka Jayasundera, P.C., with Ruwantha Cooray and Rukmal Cooray instructed by Sanath Wijewardane for the 2nd Respondent-Respondent. ARGUED ON : 16.09.2025 DECIDED ON : 20.02.2026

M. Sampath K. B. Wijeratne J.

Introduction

The Petitioner-Respondent Company (hereinafter referred to as the ‘original

Petitioner’) is a limited liability company duly incorporated in Sri Lanka carrying

on both long term and general insurance business. Section 53 of the Regulation of

Insurance Industry (Amendment) Act, No. 03 of 2011 enacted on February 07, 2011

required composite insurance companies like the Petitioner who is carrying on both

long term and general insurance business to segregate the two classes of insurance

business into two separate companies. Thereafter, the Insurance Board of Sri Lanka

as the regulator of the insurance industry issued a guideline for the proposed

segregation on August 30, 2013 which was later amended on the 21st August 2014.

The said guidelines required every composite insurance company to identify a

model to segregate the two classes of business and submit a proposal to the

Insurance Board of Sri Lanka (hereinafter ‘IBSL’).

5

Accordingly, the original Petitioner company incorporated the 1st and 2nd

Respondent-Respondent Companies (hereinafter referred to as the ‘1st and 2nd

Respondents’) as wholly owned subsidiaries of the Petitioner company to facilitate

the above requirement. The original Petitioner company, thereafter, submitted its

proposal for segregation and requested IBSL to provide its observations, which

IBSL had no objections to, subject to certain conditions to be fulfilled.

Having satisfied the regulatory requirements of the IBSL, the original Petitioner

Company made an application to the District Court in terms of Section 102 of the

Regulation of Insurance Industry (Amendment) Act. The District Court of Colombo

after considering the application of the original Petitioner company, gave the

approval under the aforesaid section, by order dated October 10, 2014.

After final order approving segregation on October 10, 2014, a shareholder of the

Petitioner company sought to intervene in the concluded action to which the original

Petitioner and 1st and 2nd Respondents took up the preliminary objection that no

intervention is possible after the final order. Having recorded the preliminary

objection, the District Court fixed for written submissions on the preliminary

objection.

However, the learned District Judge, without ruling on the preliminary objection, by

order dated November 20, 2014 held that the order dated October 10, 2014 was

decided per incuriam as section 102 of the Regulation of the Insurance Industry Act

(as amended) has no application to the segregation and therefore, provisions in the

Companies Act need to be complied with, particularly section 185 of the Companies

Act which the original Petitioner has failed to do. Accordingly, the intervenient

Petitioner had been allowed to intervene and file objections in respect of the main

application.

6

Thereafter, when the matter came up again in the District Court on November 27,

2014, parties made submissions and inter alia, brought it to the notice of the Court

that since the Court has not set aside its original order approving the segregation,

there is no need to proceed with the application any further before the District Court

as section 185 of the Companies Act is not a matter for the District Court. Since the

learned Judge has already held that the order was per incuriam and allowed the

intervention, paving the way to make a fresh order, it could be considered that the

original order has been set aside.

Whilst matter remain as such, on or about the December 18, 2014, the original

Petitioner company instituted an application before the High Court of the Western

Province (Exercising Civil Jurisdiction), Holden in Colombo (commonly known as

Commercial High Court) in terms of Section 256 and 257 of the Companies Act

No. 7 of 2007 in the case bearing No. HC/Civil/60/2014/CO seeking transfer of

long-term insurance policies to 1st Respondent and general insurance policies to 2nd

Respondent among others.

Having been made aware of the application, the Appellant filed a motion in the

Commercial High Court, and subsequently made submissions in support of such

motion against the granting of orders sought by the original Petitioner company.

Consequent to such submissions, the Learned Commercial High Court Judge

deferred making any orders in the Application, and allowed the Appellant and other

shareholders of the original Petitioner Company to file objections and written

submissions to the application. Learned High Court Judge made an order in favour

of the original Petitioner company on January 19, 2015, granting relief as prayed

for by the original Petitioner company. It is against such impugned order that the

Appellant has preferred a notice of appeal dated February 15, 2015 and a petition of

appeal dated March 19, 2015.

7

The District Court made an order on March 26, 2015 dismissing the objection of the

intervenient Petitioner and allowing the reliefs prayed by the original Petitioner

company.

This appeal arises from the order dated January 19, 2015 of the High Court of the

Western Province, which was held in favour of the original Petitioner.

As the arguments in this Court have developed, the principal outstanding questions

can, I think, now be conveniently summarized as follows, which I would be dealing

separately under different headings.

a. Whether the right to appeal is available for an order issued in terms of

sections 256 and 257 of the Companies Act No 07 of 2007?

b. Whether the learned Commercial High Court Judge erred in issuing the

impugned order?

c. Whether the Petitioner Company has acted in accordance with the law in

effecting the purported segregation?

Whether Segregation was a Major Transaction Which Requires the Approval

at a Shareholders’ Meeting

Management and control of affairs of the company are entrusted to the Board of

Directors under the Companies Act No 07 of 2007. However, shareholders are

involved in the decision making process in instances where their proprietary rights

are affected. Shareholders can exercise their rights specifically provided under the

Act or permitted by the articles. Such powers can be exercised by shareholders at a

shareholders meeting or by resolution in lieu of meeting under section 144 of the

Act.

8

Requirement of approval by shareholders in case of a major transaction is one such

instance where shareholders can exercise their rights to be involved in decision

making process, particularly when the company makes fundamental changes to its

structure.

It is the main contention of the Appellant in this case that despite the segregation

process involves a drastic change of business and transfer of assets, the original

Petitioner company has failed to obtain necessary approval from the shareholders

as required by section 185 of the Companies Act.

Section 185 of the Companies Act reads as follows;

Section 185- (1) A company shall not enter into any major transaction, unless

such transaction is-

(a) approved by special resolution;

(b) contingent on approval by special resolution;

(c) consented to in writing by all the shareholders of the company; or

(d) a transaction which the company is expressly authorised to enter

into by a provision in its articles, which was included in it at the time

the company was incorporated.

(2) In this section the reference to-

'assets' includes property of any kind, whether corporal or incorporeal;

'major transaction', means-

(a) the acquisition of or an agreement to acquire whether contingent

or not, assets of a value which is greater than half the value of the assets of

the company before the acquisition;

9

(b) the disposition of an agreement to dispose of, whether contingent

or not, the whole or more than half by value of the assets of the company;

(c) a transaction which has or is likely to have the effect of the

company acquiring rights or interests or incurring obligations or liabilities

of a value which is greater than half the value of the assets before the

acquisition; or

(d) a transaction or series of related transactions which have the

purpose or effect of substantially altering the nature of the business carried

on by the company.

(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to-

(a) a transaction under which a company gives or agrees to give a

floating charge over all or any part of the property of the company;

(b) a transaction entered into by a receiver appointed pursuant to an

instrument creating a floating charge over all or any part of the

property of a company;

(c) a transaction entered into by an administrator or liquidator of a

company.

It is the argument of the learned President Counsel for the original Petitioner

company that the application made to the Commercial High Court of Colombo

under sections 256 and 257 of the Companies Act was done not pursuant to a

voluntary act of the original Petitioner but was done in order to comply with a

mandatory statutory requirement.

10

Regulation of Insurance Industry (Amendment) Act, No. 3 of 2011, mandated all

the composite insurance companies to segregate two classes of insurance business

into two separate companies.

Section 53 of Regulation of Insurance Industry (Amendment) Act, No. 3 of 2011

provided that;

Section 53 - Where on the date of the coming into operation of this

Act, an insurer is engaged in carrying on both long term insurance

business and general insurance business in terms of a valid licence

issued by the Insurance Board of Sri Lanka under the principal

enactment, such insurer shall be required within four years from the

date of the coming into operation of this Act, to segregate the long

term insurance business and the general insurance business being

carried on by it, into two separate companies.

[Emphasis added]

The IBSL on August 30, 2013, issued a set of Guidelines pertaining to the proposed

segregation. An important item in these Guidelines was that each composite

insurance company could identify the most appropriate model for segregation and

submit its proposal to IBSL for approval.

Accordingly, the original Petitioner after submitting its proposal for segregation and

obtaining observations of the Board of the IBSL, proceeded to incorporate the 1st

and 2nd Respondent Companies to transfer long term Insurance and General

Insurance business respectively with the undertaking to fulfill certain requirements

specified and obtaining the approval of the District Court under section 102 of the

Insurance Industry Act No 43 of 2000.

Thereafter, Petitioner company filed an application in the Commercial High Court

which is the subject matter in the dispute to transfer of assets, liabilities, employees

11

and for the novation of the several hundred short-term and long-term insurance

policies in favour of the two fully owned subsidiaries.

As dissent of shareholders cannot give effect to an act which is forbidden by law, in

the said circumstances, getting approval for the segregation in question at a

shareholders’ meeting would be futile. Moreover, irrespective of the position of the

shareholders, the Petitioner company is legally bound to give effect to the statutory

requirement.

In the case of Joint Liquidators of Bontex Lanka (private) Limited vs Registrar

General of Companies and Another1 Wengappuli, J. observed,

“The impugned actions, upon which the Petitioners have sought Writs

of Certiorari, that the 1st Respondent's causing the publication of the

names of the two Companies in the daily newspapers, are clearly

functions mandated by law since there was no discretion was left on

the 1st Respondent, when a Company failed to apply for re-

registration within the stipulated period of time, not to publish the

name of such a Company.”

[Emphasis added]

In the present case, it is undisputed that segregation of companies carrying out both

long term insurance business and general insurance business into two companies is

mandated by law. Nonetheless, it still leaves the specific method of giving effect to

such segregation to the discretion of the Company. In such circumstances, the

chosen method of segregation needs to be approved at a shareholders’ meeting, as

such an arrangement would inevitably affect the rights of the Appellant, who is a

major shareholder of the company.

1 C.A.(Writ)Application No. 358/2010, C.A.M. dated 04.09.2020.

12

Scope of Sections 256 and 257 of the Companies Act under which the

impugned order was issued

Section 256 reads as follows;

Section 256.(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of this Act or the

provisions contained in the articles of a company, the court may on

the application of - (a) a company; (b) an administrator appointed

under Part XIII; or (c) with the leave of the court, any shareholder or

creditor of a company, order that an arrangement or amalgamation

or compromise shall be binding on the company and on such other

persons or classes of persons as the court may specify. Any such order

may be made on such terms and conditions as the court thinks fit.

Accordingly, under the said section, the Court may, on the application of a company,

an administrator appointed under Part XIII, or, with the leave of court any

shareholder or creditor, order that an arrangement or amalgamation or compromise

shall be binding on the company or on such other person or classes of persons as the

Court may specify, on terms it thinks fit.

Section 257 gives the Court additional powers than those given under section 256.

‘Section 257 -(1) Without limiting the powers conferred under section

256, the court may for the purpose of giving effect to any arrangement

or amalgamation or compromise approved under that section, either

by the order approving the arrangement or amalgamation or

compromise or by any subsequent order, provide for and prescribe

terms and conditions relating to –

(a) the transfer or vesting of movable or immovable property, assets,

rights, powers, interests, liabilities, contracts and engagements;

13

(b) the issue of shares, securities or policies of any kind;

(c) the continuation of legal proceedings;

(d) the liquidation or the removal from the Register without

liquidation, name and particulars of any company;

(e) the provision to be made for persons who voted against the

arrangement or amalgamation or compromise at any meeting called

in accordance with an order made under paragraph (b) of subsection

(2) of section 256, or who appeared before the court in opposition to

the application, to approve the arrangement or amalgamation or

compromise;

(f) such other matters as are necessary or desirable to give effect to

the arrangement or amalgamation or compromise.

(2) […]’

An order made under section 256 and/ or section 257 does not require the company

to discuss the issue with shareholders or creditors before making an application

under said section. Nonetheless, the Court should be guided by some fundamental

principles in granting such an order in exercising such discretion. An inference to

such principles can be drawn from the New Zealand case Re CM Banks Ltd2 which

the leaned Counsel for Appellant also has drawn our attention to. Therein, it was

observed that,

“The duty of the Court is to see (1) that there has been compliance

with the statutory provisions as to meetings, resolutions, the

application to the Court, and the like; (2) that the scheme has been

2 (1944) NZLR 248.

14

fairly put before the class or classes concerned; and that if a circular

or circulars have been sent out, as is usual, whether before or after

the making of the application to the Court, they give all the

information reasonably necessary to enable the recipients to judge

and vote upon the proposals; (3) that the class is fairly represented by

those who attended the meeting and that the statutory majority are

acting bona fide and are not coercing the minority in order to promote

interests adverse to those of the class they purport to represent; and

(4) that the scheme is such that an intelligent and honest man of

business, a member of the class concerned and acting in respect of his

interest, might reasonably approve.”

I am of the view that learned Commercial High Court judge has delivered the

judgment inadvertence of the fact that, though law mandated ‘to segregate the long-

term insurance business and the general insurance business being carried on by

it, into two separate companies’, the decision of specific method of implementing

it is left to the company which requires an approval by a special resolution.

Preliminary Objection: Non- Availability of Right of Appeal

In this application the original Petitioner company raised a preliminary objection

that no direct right of appeal has been given to the Appellant by the Companies Act

No. 7 of 2007 (Companies Act 2007) to appeal against an order made under sections

256 and 257 of the Companies Act.

Here it is noteworthy that the instant application filed under the Companies Act is

quite different from the application filed before the District Court under section 102

of the Insurance Industry Act No 43 of 2000.

The Petitioner submits as follows;

“When the leave application (SC/HC/LA/06/2015) was taken up on 6th

September 2016, to the best of the Appellant's recollection, the

15

Respondent Company itself raised a preliminary objection taking up

the position that the correct procedure for contesting the impugned

order should be through a final appeal; thereafter, as per the

information available to the Appellant, this SC leave application was

withdrawn on 13th November 2017.”3

However, during the arguments, it was submitted on behalf of the original Petitioner

Company that this appeal of the Petitioner from the order of the Commercial High

should have come before this Court not by way of a final appeal made under section

754(1) read with section 754(5) of the Civil Procedure Code and sections 5 and 6 of

the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No. 10 of 1996, but with

the leave of this Court having first obtained.

Thus, it is the duty of this Court to determine whether the appropriate procedure is

leave to appeal or a final appeal.

The Commercial High Court from which this appeal stems is a Court established

under the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 10 of 1996.

Section 5(2) of the said Act emphasises, that a party may appeal to the Supreme

Court with leave to appeal being provided on any order of the High Court against

an error of law or fact. Section 5 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special

Provisions) Act No. 10 of 1996, reads as follows,

Section 5 (1)-Any person who is dissatisfied with any judgement

pronounced by a High Court established by Article 154P of the

Constitution, in the exercise of its jurisdiction under section 2, in any

action, proceeding or matter to which such person is a party may

prefer an appeal to the Supreme Court against such judgement, for

any error in fact or in law.

3 Post hearing Written submission on behalf of Appellant dated 18.11.2025.

16

(2) Any person who is dissatisfied with any order made by a High

Court established by Article 154P of the Constitution, in the exercise

of its jurisdiction under section 2, in the course of any action,

proceeding or matter to which such person is, or seeks to be, a party,

may prefer an appeal to the Supreme Court against such order for the

correction of any error in fact or in law, with the leave of the Supreme

Court first had and obtained.

(3) In this section, the expressions “judgement” and “order” shall

have the same meanings respectively, as in section 754(5) of the Civil

Procedure Code (Chapter 101)

[…]

The approach adopted in determining the question whether an order has the effect

of a final judgment or not is now settled with the Seven Bench decision in the case

of Dona Padma Priyanthi Senanayake vs H.G. Chamika Jayantha and two

Others.4

In the said case, it was held that the proper approach to decide whether an order

given by the court has the effect of a final judgment or not, is the approach adopted

by Lord Esher in Salaman vs Warner.5

4 [2017] BLR 74. 5 [1891] 1 QBD 734.

17

In Salaman vs Warner (supra), Lord Esher thus held:

“The question must depend on what would be the result of the decision

of the Divisional Court, assuming it to be given in favour of either of

the parties. If their decision, whichever way it is given, will, if it stands

finally disposed of the matter in dispute, I think that for the purpose

of these rules, it is final. On the other hand, if their decision, if given

in one way, will finally dispose of the matter in dispute, but if given in

the other, will allow the action to go on, then I think it is not final but

interlocutory.”

In the instant case, the order of the Commercial High Court is a prima facie final

judgment, not an interlocutory order as it finally dispose the matters in the

application.

Conclusion

Considering the fact that this segregation has taken place over a decade ago,

reversing the segregation would give rise to unprecedented consequences. The

Appellant has also informed that he does not intend this Court to reverse the

segregation or events flowing therefrom. Moreover, it must be noted that the instant

appeal only challenges the order made under section 256 and/ or section 257 of the

Companies Act, but not the order made by the District Court approving the

segregation.

For the foregoing, I would proceed to set aside the order of the learned Commercial

High Court dated January 19, 2015, in the case bearing No HC/Civil/60/2014/CO

18

as it is ex facie erroneous. But this decision in no way affects the segregation already

approved by the District Court or any consequences flowing therefrom.

Appellant is entitled to taxed costs of both this Court and the Commercial High

Court.

Appeal is allowed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Yasantha Kodagoda, P.C., J.

I Agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J. I Agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT