1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

S.C. Appeal 43/2016

S.C. Leave to Appeal Application

No. SC (HC) CALA 312/2010

High Court Case No.

WP/HCCA/GPH/20/2003

Final

D.C. Gampaha Case

No. 25792/L

1. Hewa Dewage Josalin.

2. Suduwa Dewage Jamis Somadasa

alias Somadasa Gamage

both of

Pahala Karagahamuna,

Kadawatha.

PLAINTIFFS

- VS -

1. Nawalage Winson Cooray,

No. 279/2/A,

Pahala Karagahamuna,

Kadawatha.

2. Nawalage Mallika Cooray,

No. 369, Neligama,

Ragama.

3. Somadasa Silva,

No. 276/1, Pahala Karagahamuna,

Kadawatha.

4. K. K. Seelawathie,

No. 276/2, Pahala Karagahamuna,

Kadawatha.

2

5. Mervin Mendis,

No. 276/2/B,

Pahala Karagahamuna,

Kadawatha.

6. D.A. Hewage,

No. 276,

Pahala Karagahamuna,

Kadawatha.

7. G. A. Evgin Perera,

No. 276/1,

Pahala Karagahamuna,

Kadawatha.

8. Nawalage Pabilis Cooray,

No. 308, Neligama,

Ragama.

(N.E. Cooray)

DEFENDANTS

AND

1. Nawalage Winson Cooray,

No. 279/2/A,

Pahala Karagahamuna,

Kadawatha.

2. Nawalage Mallika Cooray,

No. 369, Neligama,

Ragama.

3

3. Somadasa Silva,

No. 276/1, Pahala Karagahamuna,

Kadawatha.

4. K. K. Seelawathie,

No. 276/2, Pahala Karagahamuna,

Kadawatha.

5. Mervin Mendis,

No. 276/2/B,

Pahala Karagahamuna,

Kadawatha.

6. D.A. Hewage,

No. 276,

Pahala Karagahamuna,

Kadawatha.

7. G. A. Evgin Perera,

No. 276/1,

Pahala Karagahamuna,

Kadawatha.

8. Nawalage Pabilis Cooray,

No. 308, Neligama,

Ragama.

DEFENDANT APPELLANTS

- VS -

1. Hewa Dewage Josalin.

4

2. Suduwa Dewage Jamis Somadasa

alias Somadasa Gamage

both of

Pahala Karagahamuna,

Kadawatha.

PLAINTIFF RESPONDENTS

AND NOW BETWEEN

- VS

1. Hewa Dewage Josalin. (died)

2. Suduwa Dewage Jamis Somadasa

alias Somadasa Gamage (died)

2a Kalanchige Sisilin

2b Sudu Dewage Shiroma Nishanthi

Gamage

2c Sudu Dewage Anoma Nilmini

Gamage

2d Sudu Dewage Champika Neel

Gamage

2e Sudu Dewage Anushka

Shayamali Gamage

All of No.275,

Pahala Karagahamuna,

Kadawatha.

SUBSTITUTED PLAINTIFF-

RESPONDENT-

APPELLANTS

5

-VS-

1. Nawalage Winson Cooray,

1a Nawalage Sunil Cooray

1b Nawalage Sarath Coorey

No.279/2/A,

Pahala Karagahamuna,

Kadawatha.

2. Nawalage Mallika Cooray,

No. 369, Neligama,

Ragama.

3. Somadasa Silva,

No. 276/1, Pahala Karagahamuna,

Kadawatha.

4. K. K. Seelawathie,

No. 276/2, Pahala Karagahamuna,

Kadawatha.

5. Mervin Mendis,

No. 276/2/B,

Pahala Karagahamuna,

Kadawatha.

6. D.A. Hewage,

No. 276,

Pahala Karagahamuna,

Kadawatha.

S.C. Appeal 43/2016

6

7. G.A. Evgin Perera,

No. 276/1,

Pahala Karagahamuna,

Kadawatha.

8. Nawalage Pabilis Cooray,

8a Nawalage Thamara Coorey

No. 308, Neligama,

Ragama.

DEFENDANT APPELLANT

RESPONDENTS

Before

:

E. A. G. R. Amarasekara, J.

Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J.

Achala Wengappuli, J.

Counsel

:

Chandana Liyanapatabendy, P.C instructed by Shamika Senevirathna for

the Plaintiff Respondent Appellants.

W. Dayaratne, P.C with Ms. R. Jayawardena for the Defendant

Appellant Respondents.

Argued on

:

17.06.2022

Delivered on

:

23.05.2025

E A G R Amarasekara, J.

Original 1st Plaintiff was the mother of the 2nd Plaintiff who had conveyed the subject matter

of the Plaint to the 2nd Plaintiff subject to her life interest and after their demise 2a to 2e

S.C. Appeal 43/2016

7

substituted Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellants were substituted in their place. This is an appeal

filed by the original Plaintiff Respondent Appellants against the Judgement of the Civil

Appellate High Court of the Western Province at Gampaha delivered in Case No.

WP/HCCA/GPH/20/2003 (Final) dated 26.03.2010 allowing the appeal of the Defendant

Appellant Respondents by which the said Civil Appellate High Court held in favour of the

Defendant Appellant - Respondents and set aside the Judgement of the District Court of

Gampaha dated 21.03.2003.

The original Plaintiffs (hereinafter the Plaintiffs) instituted this action on or around

06.07.1983 against the 1st to 8th Defendants (hereinafter the Defendants) seeking a

declaration that the said Defendants have no right of servitude over their land which was

morefully described in the schedule to the Plaint and a permanent injunction restraining the

Defendants from entering the said land and or constructing a roadway over the said land. In the

Plaint, the Plaintiffs described how the title to the said land devolved upon them. The allegation

in the Plaint was that the Defendants were trying to construct a cart road over the said land

belonging to them on an alleged claim of an existing servitude. It was also stated in the Plaint

that the Plaintiffs made a complaint to the police and the Police filed an action in the Magistrate

Court and the parties agreed to get the dispute resolved through a civil action. The land referred

to in the schedule was a land named Millagahawatte of 13 perches.

The Defendants filed a joint Answer and denied they tried to construct a roadway across the

Plaintiffs land but stated that the Plaintiffs had obstructed the roadway they used to go to their

houses from Ragama Kadawaha road over the said land belonging to the Plaintiffs. The position

of the Defendants was that they used a 12 feet wide cart road to go to their lands depicted in

plan no. 23101 of D.S.J Perera L.S as Lots 1, 2, 3, 4 and 7 to 12 for over 50 years. They further

took up the position that the said right of way was confirmed by the final decree of the partition

action No.12229 of Gampaha District Court and they are entitled to this servitude by

prescription due to long and uninterrupted user over 50 years. They also had averred that the

said roadway is depicted in plan No. 810/1956 of Croos Dabarera L.S dated 02.12.65 and part

of it is shown in plan No..2022 of M.D.J.V Perera L.S dated 30.10.71. Alternatively, they had

stated that this is the shortest and most convenient roadway and is the only roadway. As such

they are entitled to the same as a way of necessity. The Defendants in their joint Answer had

referred to their title deeds and stated that on the strength of them they are entitled to the

respective lands described in the schedules to the Answer. Even though, the Defendants had

S.C. Appeal 43/2016

8

averred that they have a right of way over the Plaintiffs land, they have not prayed for a

servitude of right of way in their Answer and prayed mainly for the dismissal of the Plaint and

costs of the action. It is clear, as per the averments in the Answer, what is stated in defense by

the Defendants is the existence of a servitudinal right of way over the Plaintiffs property by

prescription or in the alternative by way of necessity. Neither in the answer nor through issues

raised at the trial, it had been contended that the purported roadway is a public road that belongs

to the local authority or a public servitude that came into existence by Vetustas, in other words

by immemorial user which is different from acquisitive prescription. It must be also noted that,

even though the position of the Defendants prayer for the dismissal of the plaint is based on

their purported entitlement to a servitude of a right of way as aforesaid, no servient tenement

or servient tenements, if the servitude exists over many lands, is/are described in their Answer.

Anyway, as the Plaintiff has described his land in his Plaint and the Answer was filed in reply

to the said Plaint, one may be able to identify the land described in the Plaint as a servient

tenement, but it appears that it is not the only servient tenement over which the alleged

servitude exists. Other servient lands had not been revealed in the Answer, nor had there been

any request for bring the owners of those servient tenements to be made parties to the action.

In Fernando v Dona Maria 32 N L R 166, it was held that, to establish a right of way over

one servient tenement, when there are intervening properties, it is necessary to prove the

existence of the servitude over the said intervening properties and for that purpose it is

necessary to bring the owners of those properties as parties to the action. However, in De Silva

v Nonohamy 34 N L R 113, the majority was of the view that it is not necessary to bring the

owners of the other servient tenements as parties. Anyhow, it appears, that the need to prove

the existence of the servitude over the other servient tenements over which the right of way

passes over is necessary due to the indivisibility of praedial servitudes.

It has to be assumed that each separate lot allegedly owned by each Defendant is the dominant

tenement for the purpose of each of the Defendants claim that there is a right of way over the

property. It must be noted that in Fernando V De Silva 30 N L R 56, where the plaintiffs who

owned distinct allotments of lands sued the defendant claiming a cartway of necessity over the

defendants land, it was held that the action was bad for misjoinder of parties and causes action.

In the matter at hand, the Defendants have listed their separate lots in the schedules to the

Answer. How each of them has a right of way by prescription or how and to what extent

necessity arises depends on the facts relating to each Defendant. As no objection has been taken

for misjoinder before the trial commences, it should not be considered now, but this will not

S.C. Appeal 43/2016

9

release each Defendant from establishing how each of them acquired a right of way by

prescription or how a way of necessity has arisen to each of them and to what extent. (For e.g.

Whether the need is for a footpath or a cart road etc.).

The Plaintiffs action can be identified as an actio negatoria while Defendants position, even

though they had not prayed for a declaration of it, is based on a claim of a right of way making

it similar to actio confessoria. In Roman Dutch Law actio negatoria permits an owner to deny

the existence of an alleged servitude or other rights entitling the Defendant to cause physical

disturbance to his land. Thus, what the Plaintiffs have to prove is the ownership and existence

of an identifiable property and the conduct of the Defendants that infringes his rights, either

because it amounts to an excessive exercise of an acknowledged limited real right or because

the Defendant is exercising a non-existing limited real right.

The Plaintiffs, at the re-trial before the learned District Judge (there had been a previous trial

where re-trial was ordered in Appeal) had marked their title deeds as P5 and P6 and it is

common ground that the Plaintiffs are the owners of the land in the schedule to the Plaint. On

the other hand, Defendants impliedly had accepted the title of the Plaintiffs to the land as they

claim a servitudinal right of way as such right is one that is claimed over the servient tenement

belongs to the owner of that servient land. Further the 2nd Plaintiff have stated in evidence

regarding an attempt to construct a road way across their land, the police complaints made, the

magistrate Court case instituted by the Police and thereafter filing of this civil action to resolve

the matter. Even the Grama Niladari who gave evidence on behalf of the Defendants have

stated about complaints received regarding the dispute over the alleged obstructions caused by

the Plaintiffs. Even though the Defendants deny that they attempted to construct a roadway, it

is clear that they rely on an existence of a right of way. It appears that there were occasions

that where the Defendant attempted to clear and use the road way and the Plaintiffs obstructed

the using of the road way. Thus, in my view there were sufficient grounds for the Plaintiffs to

institute an action in the nature of actio negatoria as the Defendants claim a right of way over

their land.

The learned High Court Judges in their Judgment dated 26.03.2010 have stated as below;

The learned District Judge identified the Plaintiffs land as the Lot E in preliminary plan V2

and the learned Counsel for the defendants argued that the defendant(sic) had not prayed for

S.C. Appeal 43/2016

10

a declaration of title to the Lot E in the said Plan. The, learned District Judge, as I observed,

has not paid his attention to this aspect of the case.

It appears there is a typographical error in what is quoted above, as what would have been

meant was that the Plaintiffs had not prayed for a declaration of title and the learned District

Judge has not paid his attention to it. On the other hand, Defendants had not claimed title to the

Plaintiffs land. While claiming a servitude of right of way, they cannot claim title to it.

However, in an actio negatoria filed to deny a servitude, in my view, the Plaintiff, the owner

need not pray for a declaration of title to his land, but he has to prove his title to obtain a

declaration that there is no servitude over his property. As said before, it was common ground

at the trial that the ownership of the land in the schedule to the Plaint was with the Plaintiffs.

Hence, it appears that the learned High Court Judges misconceived that there should be a prayer

for declaration of title by the Plaintiff.

Again, in the Judgment of the High Court, the learned High Court Judges have stated as

follows;

The main argument of the Defendant in this case raised before this Court as well as in the

District Court was that the Plaintiff has not proved servitude rights over the land described in

the schedule to the Plaint.

Here also it is apparent that the learned High Court Judges either misconceived the nature of

the case or facts relating to it, since the Plaintiffs prayer is to declare that there is no servitude

over his land. It appears to be the argument of the Plaintiffs that the Defendants did not prove

servitudinal rights over his land.

As explained above, the Plaintiffs title to the land in the schedule to the Plaint was established

and, on the other hand, a claim of right of way over it which affects the free enjoyment of

Plaintiffs ownership rights were also present. Then what had to be looked into by the learned

District Judge was whether in fact, such a right of way existed or not.

C.G. van der Merwe, M.J.de Waal in The Law of things & Servitudes, Butterworths at page

200, referring to Voet and other authorities state as follows;

S.C. Appeal 43/2016

11

There is a rebuttable presumption that the ownership of a thing is unencumbered and free of

servitudes. A servitude must therefore be strictly construed, that is, it must be given the

construction which is the least cumbersome.

G.L Peiris in his book titled The Law of Property in Sri Lanka- Volume.3 Servitudes

and Partition at page 17 and 18 states as follows;

It must be noted that a presumption against the existence of a servitude is made by law. As

Basnayake J, put in Adonis Fernando v Livera1 A matter that should always be borne in mind

when considering a claim for servitude is that our law does not favour anything in the nature

of servitude.

A similar attitude has been adopted by the courts of South Africa. In Van Heerden v Pretorius2

Lord de Villiers C.J said It is settled rule that a person claiming a servitude over the land of

another should give clear and convincing proof of the existence of such right.

The above clearly indicates that in an action in the nature of actio negatoria, once the Plaintiff

proves that he is the owner of the land and that there is a threat of claiming a servitude, the

party claiming the servitude has to prove the existence of a servitude. Thus, in the case at hand,

the Defendants have to prove their stance of having a servitude by prescription or in the

alternative, by way of necessity, a right of way over the land of the Plaintiffs described in the

schedule to the Plaint.

Before proceeding further, it is necessary to state this Courts observations regarding certain

documents and facts emanating from or related to them which are relevant to this Judgment.

1. Plan No.4401 marked V1: -

This is the plan which shows lots of land where the Defendants reside. The roads shown

in the said plan indicates that those lots have access from a cart road situated towards

the East that leads to Kadawatha Ragama Road as well as from a cart road situated

towards the North. It appears from the evidence that the right of way they claim is

connected to one of these access roads. However, no plan or sketch is produced in

evidence to show how it connects with the purported right of way over the Plaintiffs

land and it is also not shown how many lands belongs to other people situate in between

1 49 N L R 350 at 352 2 1914 A.D. 69

S.C. Appeal 43/2016

12

with the lots shown in this plan marked V1 and the land in the scheduled to the Plant

other than the lots found in plan marked V2.

2. Plan No. 810/1965, marked V2, made by Croos de Dabarera L.S which is the

preliminary plan in the partition case No. DC Gampaha No.12229/P which shows Lots

A to E: -

It is common ground that Lots A and E in this plan were excluded from the final

partition. It is this Lot E which the learned High Court Judge has referred to as the land

identified by the learned District judge as the Plaintiffs land relating to this case at

hand. There is no dispute as to this identification of the Plaintiff land. In fact, the land

in the schedule to the plaint is 13 perches while the land Lot E 13.9 perches. A road

is shown as Lot F in this plan running from the Ragama Kadawatha Road on the East

towards West across Lot E, B and A. Lot F is around 16 perches. As per the drawing of

the plan this road runs beyond Lot A. It must be noted that if this portion of the road

(of Lot F) going over Lot E is considered as a separate lot that does not belong to the

Plaintiffs, the Defendants case must fail as a servitude is a claim over anothers land

and then the Defendants should reveal the soil ownership of that Part of lot F going

over the Lot E to claim a servitude over it. In fact, it has to be noted Lot A, B, C, D, E

and F were shown as one land in the preliminary plan for the purpose of Partition, and

it is for the purpose of identification of various areas within that corpus those lots are

separately shown. Thus, Lot F has to be a depiction of a road running over the said main

corpus shown in the preliminary plan unless it was identified as a public road running

across the said land. As described above, no one has taken up the position that it is a

public road. Thus, the part of said Lot F running over Lot E of said V2 Plan has to be

identified as one running over Lot E as part of Lot E even though there may be a

difference of extent with the addition of this portion to Lot E from the extent mentioned

in the Schedule to the Plaint. The two stances taken by the Plaintiffs and the Defendants

(denying of a servitude as the owner and claiming of a servitude over plaintiffs land)

make it clear that both parties consider this as part of Plaintiffs land described in the

schedule to the plaint. Plaintiffs position is that this is a road shown for their use to go

from Lot E to Lot A which are excluded from the final partition. This exclusion of Lot

E and A from partition is also not in dispute. The Defendants position is that Lot F was

a road used by them to access their lots in V1. On the other hand, merely because a

surveyor had shown this as a road on a plan like V2, it does not establish a right of way

S.C. Appeal 43/2016

13

on behalf of the Defendants as signs of a roadway may be found on a land even when

the owners himself use it for such purpose or may have given permission for some

others to use it as an access. As said before, a right of way has to be proved by the

person who claim it. However, this is evidence for that the surveyor who did the said

survey for the preliminary plan observed a track of a roadway across the land he

surveyed during the preliminary survey for the said partition action. However, it must

be said that to claim a servitude along the part of Lot F that runs over Lot E in this plan

successfully, the Defendants must prove that the servitude that they claim exists over

Lot B and A of this Plan and any other intervening lands, if any, as their lands are

situated beyond Lot A. As said before, no other servient tenement had been included in

their Answer nor has they shown the entire servitude that commences from their lands

(dominant tenements) till the Ragama Kadawatha Road either through a plan or sketch.

3. A settlement entered between the Plaintiffs in this case and one Seelawathie who

appears to be the sister of the 2nd Plaintiff of this case in District Court Gampaha Case

No. 21255/L, marked V4: -

Through this settlement, it was decreed that the portion of land south to the said road

depicted in Lot A of aforesaid V2 which was excluded from the final partition in the

aforesaid partition action to be given to Seelawathie and the portion of land North to

the said road to be given to the Plaintiffs. However, the Plaintiffs position is that this

road (Lot F) in V2 is for their use including the said sister of the 2nd Plaintiff,

Seelawathie and not for others. It appears that a part of the Seelawathies portion is now

occupied by one Ahamed. However, said V4 decree is also of evidence of a road but

merely the existence of a road does not give Defendants a right of way by Prescription

or as a way of necessity as it can be for a private access. The burden is on the Defendants

to establish there is a right of way over the Plaintiffs land.

4. Plan No. 1379/1968 dated 17.11.1968 in the aforesaid partition action No. 12229/P

made by Croos Dabarera L.S marked as V5 and V6 at the trial of the case at hand: -

This is the final partition plan of the aforesaid partition case after the exclusion of Lot

A and E in preliminary plan marked V2 above. This plan indicates a road over Lot 1 as

Lot 6 and as per the diagram it extends over the boundary of the Lot 1 to the East into

the Lot E which was excluded from the final partition and on the other side it extends

over the boundary to the West of the Lot 1 into the Lot A which was excluded as

S.C. Appeal 43/2016

14

aforesaid from the final partition. The part of the road that runs over Lot 1 has been

shown as Lot 6. It is not in dispute that the said Lot 6 is part of Lot F (road) shown in

plan V2 mentioned above. The Plaintiffs attempt to argue, as the boundaries to Lot 6

(road over lot 1 in V5) on the East and West have been described as Lot E and Lot A

respectively, that the said road is only between Lot E and A. However, as said before

the diagram shows that the road extends beyond the boundaries of Lot 1. Lot 6 is the

identifier given to the part of that falls within the Corpus of the partition action. The

Defendants in their Answer had taken the position that the Partition Decree confirmed

their right of way. However, it is important observe the final decree marked as V7,

observations on which is mentioned below.

5. The Final Decree in the said Partition action No.12229/P marked V7 at the trial: -

As per this final decree, Lot 6 of the plan marked V5 mentioned above has been named

as a road reservation but has not been stated on whose behalf it is kept as a road

reservation. It is not identified as a public road. As it is not stated that it is kept as a

road reservation for Lot E and A or on behalf of the 4th and 5th Defendants who are the

Plaintiffs in this case, the Plaintiff cannot say that it is allocated for them as a road

reservation for them in that partition action. At the same time, the Defendants in the

present action appear to have not intervened in that partition action to claim a right of

way over the land sought to be partitioned in that action and the final decree had not

kept the said Lot 6 reserved for them. What appears is that the learned District Judge

appears to have found a possible roadway over the land to be partitioned and kept it

reserved for people who has right over it to prove and claim it later on in a similar

manner certain portions of lands are kept unallotted in a final decree. However, the

Defendant has not taken any interest to get the owner of Lot 1 in P5 plan made a party

to this action and establish a right of way over said lot 1 through said lot 6 or to claim

a right of way over said lot 6 some other manner. As said before, even though it may

not be necessary to made the owners of all other intervening lands parties to the action

it is necessary to prove the existence of the servitude in favour of the Defendants over

the intervening lands as the servitude is indivisible. As explained later on in this

judgment, without establishing the existence of a right of way over Lot 1 in V5 plan

and over Lot A in V2 plan and over other lands in between Lot A in V2 plan and the

Defendants Lots in V1, the Defendants cannot establish a right of way over Lot E which

S.C. Appeal 43/2016

15

is the last piece of land on the said purported right of way as there cannot be a right of

way without a right of way over those lands.

6. Proceedings dated 25.03.73 of the case No.16262/L Gampaha District Court marked as

V9:-

This document shows that there had been another case between the 2nd Plaintiff and the

1st Defendant and some others regarding a land named Millagahawatta Idam Kebella

(Portion of Millagahawatta). The 2nd Plaintiff was the plaintiff in that matter and it

appears that there were five defendants and the 1st Defendant of this case was the 1st

Defendant in that matter too. As per evidence, it appears it was regarding the same

roadway. As per the issues raised in that case, the Plaintiff in that matter had alleged a

construction of roadway of 12 feet by force and unlawfully by the Defendants in that

case, and the Defendants in that case had taken up the position that it was road used by

villagers to go to the village. Thus, the first Defendants and others claim in that case

was not based on prescription or necessity but rather as a road used by the public to go

to the village for a long period. Thus, it appears that the position taken in that case was

rather based on vestustas or it was via vicinalis, a road existed from time immemorial

via usage by members of the public. This is different from a person claiming a right of

way by prescription by adverse user for ten years or more. However, it should be noted

in the present case, the Defendants including the 1st Defendant who was a party to the

case No.16262/L, for some reason had not taken such a position through their Answer

or issues in the present action to say that the road they claim and now in issue is a public

road by proclamation by a local authority or by Vestustas or it is a via vicinalis. A Court

cannot go on a voyage of discovery and come to a conclusion beyond the case presented

to it by parties vide Pathmawathie v Jayasekara (1997) 1 Sri L R 248. The aforesaid

case No. 16262/L had been withdrawn reserving the right to file a new case by the

Plaintiff in that case who is the 2nd Plaintiff in this case. The learned High Court Judges

in their Judgment have taken the view that the Defendants were using the said road

from that time and therefore entitled to the roadway as the 2nd issue in that case was

whether the Defendants in that case constructed a road and used it in the month of

March in 1970. Further, the learned High Court Judges have observed that the witness

of the Plaintiff at one occasion has admitted that the Defendants use this road. But the

learned District Court Judge had taken the view that there is no sufficient evidence to

hold that the said road was used continuously by the Defendant after the withdrawal of

S.C. Appeal 43/2016

16

the said case. Prescription has to be proved in terms of Section 3 of the Prescription

Ordinance and a servitude must be proved according to the law regarding servitudes.

Those will be considered below in this judgment. However, merely there was a case

filed for damages (as per the issues raised in that action) over an attempt to construct

road and withdrawal of it cannot itself say that the Defendants of this case used the road

way thereafter. On the other hand, if there was such a regular use of the purported right

of way, it is not probable that the Plaintiffs would wait till 1983 to file another action.

Such use must be proved by leading necessary evidence. It is also stated in evidence by

the witness Ariyarathne called by the Plaintiffs that there exists a part of the house (a

hood), where the Defendants claim the roadway, which has to be demolished to give a

roadway. He also had spoken about the attempt by the Defendants to make the road

which made the Plaintiff to make the police complaint. As per the Defendants witness

said part of the house (hood) was not there and later on, came in to existence. However,

if this roadway was used regularly, it is difficult to think the said structure would come

in to existence without objection and litigation in that regard. The evidence indicates

attempts to use the roadway as well as occasions of putting up obstacles to such use and

litigations or going to police on such occasions.

As said before, mere showing of a track of a road through plans does not establish a right

of way as it may be an access used by the owners itself or by some with the permission of

the owners or a right of way limited to some other persons for their dominant tenements

etc. It is also stated above in this judgment that the burden of proving the existence of a

right of way is on the person who claim the existence of such right of way. As per what is

discussed above, it is this Courts view that there was a track that can be identified as an

access road as shown by the plans even from the time of said partition case. Whether the

Defendants have a right of way over the land of the Plaintiffs to use that track of road has

to be proved by the Defendants. Even though this Court observes that the plans marked in

this action show a track of a road that commences from the Kadawatha Ragama road

running across the land shown in Plan marked V2 (preliminary plan of the aforesaid

partition action) including Lot E which is the Plaintiffs land in the schedule to the plaint,

for the reasons mentioned below, this Court has to decide that the Defendants failed to

prove a right of way to use that track as a right of way by prescription or as a way of

necessity.

S.C. Appeal 43/2016

17

1. The position of the Defendants is that they have a right of way by prescription or as a

way of necessity which falls within the category of praedial or real servitude which

belongs to a person as an owner of a certain house or land (in the matter in hand on the

basis of their purported ownership to the lands described in schedule to the Answer or

to the lots in plan marked V1). Thus, when a right of way is established, it has to be

established in relation to an ownership of a dominant land over the servient land.

While the praedial servitude is an encumbrance over the servient land, the benefit to

and the burden of a praedial servitude are inseparable from the land to which they are

attached; They pass with the land to every succeeding owner. The right to the servitude

cannot be separated even temporarily from the right to the land.3

At the re-trial, four witnesses had given evidence on behalf of the Defendants. They are

Dayasoma Siriwardane (Gramaseva Niladari), A.M. Piyatissa, K.A.D Philip and

Mallika Coorey (Substituted 2nd Defendant). Thus, only the substituted 2nd Defendant

was the only party Defendant who gave evidence for the Defendants. The aforesaid

Mallika Coorey, even though had stated that the Defendants are residents of lots in said

Plan marked V1, no deed had been marked to prove the ownership of the purported

dominant lands stated in the schedule to the Answer. It must be noted that no admissions

had been recorded as to the ownership of purported dominant lands. Although the

witness A. M. Piyatissa had also stated that certain lots in plan marked V1 belonged to

certain Defendants but without marking the relevant deeds. As he is not a Defendant

himself, if he says that certain lots in V1 belongs to certain Defendants it must be due

to the fact that he came to know that fact from some other source which is not produced

before Court, thus hearsay. Even the Mallika Cooreys evidence as to the ownership of

other Defendants has to be considered as hearsay on the same footing. Her evidence as

to the Lot that belonged to her father, the original 2nd Defendant was too without

marking the relevant deed in evidence, and one cannot be allowed to speak to the facts,

and lead secondary evidence to prove a fact that contain in a deed unless it is shown

that circumstances fall within the ambit of section 65 of the Evidence Ordinance - vide

Sections 91 and 65 of the Evidence Ordinance. The position of the Answer and the issue

No.7 raised at the re-trial indicates that the Defendants state their entitlement to the

3 G. L. Peiris, The Law of Property Vol.3, p.27 referring to The South African Law of Property, Family Relations and succession, p4 by Lee and Honore

S.C. Appeal 43/2016

18

right of way based on the ownership to the lands described in the Answer. As per the

evidence led at the trial, it appears that the Defendants came to the said lots in V1 after

an auction took place relating to them, but whether they bought them directly from the

auction or from a party who bought them from the auction is not clear. As the deeds are

not marked, the Defendants have failed to prove their entitlement to the purported

separate dominant lands described in the Answer. Even though the learned District

Judge answered the said issue No.7 as not proved, the learned High Court Judges

have failed to observe that fact that they have not proved their title to the dominant

lands, which they say they are the owners and which is the basis of their claim.

2. This is not a claim of a right of way over the adjoining land to the Defendants purported

dominant lands. As per the documents already marked the Plaintiffs land, Lot E is at

the end on the east of the right of way they claim. Before reaching Lot E, as per the

plans tendered in evidence, it has to run through intervening lands between Defendants

lands in V1 and Lot E in plan marked V2, which are lands between Defendants land

in V1 and Lot A in plan marked V2, Lot A in Plan marked V2 and Lot 1 in the plan

marked V5. It is also not revealed how many lands are there in between said Lot A in

plan marked V2 and the Defendants Lots in plan marked V1. It must be noted that

basic rule is that all praedial servitudes are in their nature indivisible, so that they can

neither be created or acquired, nor taken away in part.4 Hence, to claim a servitude over

said Lot E, it is necessary to prove the existence of the same right of way over the other

lands in between Lot E and the Defendants lands in plan marked V1. Neither a plan

nor a sketch showing the road from Lot A (or Lot F in V2) to Defendants Lots in V1

or connecting the disputed road to roads shown in V1 had been marked in evidence. If

the servitude had been extinguished at one point over such lands the whole servitudes

extinguish. Thus, without proving the existence of the same servitude over other

intervening lands the Defendants cannot be successful in their claim of right of way

over Plaintiffs land against the Plaintiffs. To prove such a right of way over intervening

lands, those must be shown and described. In this regard this Court will quote the

following from The Law of Property in Sri Lanka, Volume 3, By G. L. Peiris at

pages 3 and 4.

4 See G. L. Peiris, The law of Property in Sri Lanka, Volume Three. At page 2 with a foot note reference to C. G Hall and E.A. Kellaway, servitudes 3rd Edition.

S.C. Appeal 43/2016

19

The principle pertaining to the indivisibility of servitudes has been given expression

in another context.

Where a servitude is claimed over a servient tenement not adjacent to the dominant

tenement, it must be shown that the intervening tenements are subject to the same

servitude (Voet 8.4.19). Once a servitude has been acquired, there really comes into

existence one servitude over several servient tenements. That servitude is one and

indivisible. Where the servitude is extinguished with regard to one of the intervenient

tenements, the whole servitude is generally extinguished.

In de Silva v Nonohamy 34 N L R 113, it was stated Servitude is one and indivisible,

in the sense that it must be shown legally to exist at each and every point on the strip

of land over which it is claimed and, if the claimant fails to prove its existence at any

one of such points, the servitude disappears not at the point only but at every other

point

In Fernando v Dona maria 32 N L R 166 it was held that If the plaintiffs wish to

establish that they are entitled to the declaration of right they claim, they must establish

their contention that all the intervening lots are subject to the right of way. For that

purpose, it seems to me the owners of the intervening properties must necessarily be

heard, and the plaintiffs bring them before the Court. The Plaintiffs have not shown

they are entitled to a right of way over the intervening lots, and I have come to the

conclusion that they cannot maintain the action

However, it appears that the need to add owners of the intervening lands is not necessary

due to the majority decision of afore-mentioned de Silva v Nonohamy. However, the

existence of the purported servitude in between the Defendants land and the Lot A in

Plan marked V2 has not been Proved by submitting a plan or a sketch in that regard.

Further without proving the existence of the same servitude over the said intervening

lands the Defendants cannot prove the existence of the right of way over the Plaintiffs

land as the servitude is indivisible.

3. On the other hand, Lot 1 in the final plan of the partition action marked V5 was allocated

to party in that action as per the final partition decree marked V7, and lot 6 over it has

been reserved for a road reservation without allocating it to anybody. Which means that

S.C. Appeal 43/2016

20

until it is proved that there is a right of way that belongs to the Defendants through said

lot 6, it is only a reservation for a road. If there was any right over it prior to the final

decree to any person, until it is proved and claimed that right has to be considered as

not established after the partition decree, as it is kept as a road reservation for the people

who are entitled to it to be claimed. It appears that no step had been taken after the

partition decree to establish the Defendants right of way over said lot 6 and the owner

of it has not been made party at least to establish that in this case, as reservation of a

roadway in the partition action has to be considered as one unallotted till the right to it

is proved. Thus, indivisibility of the servitude is broken until the entitlement of the

Defendants to Lot 6 is proved.

4. On the other hand, if one claims a right of way by prescription, he has to prove

prescription over a well-defined and identifiable track which was used adversely over

a period of ten years. See Kandaiah v Seenithamby 17 N L R 29, Fernando v

Fernando 31 N L R 126. As servitude is indivisible. The Defendants should have

proved this definite track that existed as a right of way which they acquired by

prescriptive user. Nothing was placed before the District Court to show the part of the

right of way that existed between the Defendants lots in V1 and Lot A in plan marked

V2. As the servitude claimed is a praedial servitude which is indivisible, it is not

sufficient to show only a part of the said servitude to prove prescriptive entitlement.

5. On the other hand, the Defendants have to prove prescription in accordance with

Section 3 of the Prescription Act. They must prove adverse user of the right of way and

they can tag on to the adverse user of the predecessors in title to them, but not anyone

else. Out of the Defendants, only substituted 2nd Defendant had given evidence. No

other Defendant had given evidence to prove their adverse user in terms of section 3 of

the Prescription Ordinance. Even though the Plaintiffs witness Rajaneththi Devage

Ariyaratne had stated that the Defendants attempted to construct a roadway, at one place

in his evidence, had admitted that the road was shown by the surveyor (may be in the

partition action) and now the Defendant uses the roadway. The Grama Niladari who

gave evidence for the Defendants had also stated that he observed the Defendants using

the roadway in issue, but he had come to the area as Grama Niladari only after the filing

of the case. A. M. Piyatissa appears to be the Plaintiff in case No.25163 filed against

the 2nd Plaintiff in this case who was the Defendant in that case, alleging that the

S.C. Appeal 43/2016

21

Plaintiff in this case obstructed the road way. This witness Piyatissa had bought the

land in 1976. He too has stated that he saw the Defendants using this road. He has also

spoken of an obstruction caused by the Plaintiff. As this case was filed in 1983, the

witnesses mentioned above does not place sufficient material to prove uninterrupted

user for 10 years of the road way. K.A.D Philip who gave evidence for the Defendants

had stated that it was his father who sold the land to the father of the 2nd Plaintiff in or

around 1940 and it seems that he was about 10 years old at that time. He had spoken

about using this road to come home during school days. If it was his fathers land at

that time, it is not definite evidence to show it was a road for others too. His evidence

does not establish sufficient facts to hold that the Defendants had acquired right of way

by prescription over what the Defendants now claim as a right of way. On the other

hand, the use of this witness of a road access in his fathers land as far back as 1940 or

later to visit someone very infrequently, as stated in his evidence, is not a user that the

Defendants can tag on to in terms of Section 3 of the Prescription ordinance as they did

not obtained title from him. It appears that it is the position of the Defendants that all

the Defendants obtained title as per an auction plan found on the auction notice marked

P15. Even if it is not so, it is clear they claim that they are the owners of various lots in

plan marked V1 and it is their own averment in the Answer which says that they became

owners to their lots by deeds referred to in the answer. In fact, as the deeds of the

Defendants had not been produced, it is difficult find whose adverse user can be tagged

on to by the Defendants as there is nothing to prove who the predecessors in title to the

dominant land or lands were. On the other hand, if their right of way was given through

another access road by those deeds, it may affect their claim for a way of necessity.

Thus, not presenting the title deeds to their lots (to purported dominant lands) in

evidence by the Defendants affect their claim in two ways, firstly, there is no proof to

say that they are the owners of the dominant lands which is the base of their claim, and

they cannot tag on to the user of the predecessor in title without proving who he/she is.

On the other hand, producing it may affect their claims in this case if there is anything

contrary to their claim included in the deed.

The last witness for the Defendants was the substituted 2nd Defendant, Mallika Coorey.

She in her evidence-in-chief, while admitting that she occupies the Lot 12 in V1 which

was the property of the original 2nd Defendant, has attempted to say that the other

Defendants bought their lots from her father, the original 2nd Defendant. This may be

an attempt to tag her fathers alleged user of the purported road way to the benefit of

S.C. Appeal 43/2016

22

other Defendants but as said before the other Defendants have not marked their title

deeds to show that they are the owners of the purported dominant land as well as to

show their predecessor in title. On the other hand, as per the Answer filed by the

Defendants, even the original 2nd Defendant had obtained title through a deed to a

separate lot in 1967 as other Defendants did in different years. Thus, the position of this

substituted 2nd Defendant that her father sold the relevant lots to the other Defendants

cannot be relied upon. During her cross examination she admits that there was an

auction and P15 was the auction notice. As per the said notice the auction date was

19.04 1966. In view of the averments in the Answer, the Defendants have become the

owners of the relevant lots in view of the deeds mentioned therein. None of the

defendants, other than the substituted 2nd Defendant has given evidence to substantiate

their prescriptive user of the purported right of way. None of the Defendants have

marked their title deed to prove their ownership of the dominant land and show who is

their predecessor in title of whose user they can tag on to prove right of way by

prescription. Even if it is accepted that the 2nd substituted Defendants evidence that

the Defendants used the purported road, without establishing the ownership to the

dominant tenement, right of way over the intervening lands, and the definite track they

used as the right of way beginning from their lots to the plaintiffs land described in the

schedule to the plaint as described above in immediately preceding item 1 to 3, the

Defendants cannot successfully prove a servitudinal right over the Plaintiffs land found

in the schedule to the Plaint by showing prescriptive user only to a part of the servitude

which is indivisible. As the Defendants have separate lots for their ownership as per

the Answer, each of them must prove the commencement of ten years period of user

relating to those separate lots but, except the substituted 2nd Defendant, have not given

evidence to prove that. If they rely on the commencement of the prescriptive user by a

predecessor prior to the auction at a time when all those lots formed a single

landholding. Then they must mark the deeds and prove who the predecessor in title was

and his commencement of the use of this purported road way adverse to the Plaintiffs

rights and their entitlement to tag on to that adverse user of the predecessor in title.

When it was suggested to the substituted 2nd Defendant that the original owners were

Elaris Coorey and Luis Coorey she has clearly said that she does not know. Thus, who

the predecessor in title when the separate lots were one land is not revealed and

therefore each Defendant has to prove his or her entitlement to the right of way by

S.C. Appeal 43/2016

23

proving his or her adverse user for uninterrupted 10-year period, which has not been

done.

6. Plan marked V1 shows the existence of an alternative road. Even the witnesses called

by the Defendants have not stated that right of way claimed in this action is the only

road available for them. Especially, the substituted 2nd Defendant in her evidence had

admitted that there is an alternative road. This shows that their averment in the Answer

that there is no other road way is a lie made knowingly. The fact that the right of way

claimed in this action is more convenient is not a ground to grant a way of necessity.

The availability of an alternative road prevents the granting of a right of way as a way

of necessity.

There is no doubt about the correctness of the principle that a right of way of necessity

cannot be granted if there is another- although less convenient- path along which

access can be had to the public road vide G L Peiris, The Law of Property Vol. 3 p

125.

For the reasons discussed above, this Court is of the view that the Defendants who claimed that

there is a right of way over the property of the Plaintiffs failed in proving such right that exists

over the Plaintiffs property. As there is a presumption against the existence of a servitude and

it is the burden on the party who claims the existence of a servitude to prove such existence of

a servitude, even though there may be minor errors in the reasoning of the learned District

Judge, the learned District Judges final conclusion to grant relief as prayed for by the Plaintiffs

is correct and must stand. Thus, learned High Court Judges erred in granting relief to the

Defendants and dismissing the Plaint when the Defendants have not proved the servitude in the

manner they should have proved it.

As per the minutes dated 24.02.2016, certain questions of law have been allowed and they are

quoted below with the answers.

Q. 1) Whether the learned judges of the High Court of the Civil Appeal have erred and

misdirected himself in law and in fact, when failing to take into judicial consideration that:

ii. the Respondents have caused hindrance to the enjoyment of the said land by the Petitioners,

S.C. Appeal 43/2016

24

iii. there was no right of way over the said land belongs to the Petitioners accrued to and

enjoyed by the Respondents,

iv. upon the entering of the final decree in the partition case bearing No. 12229/P, the

Respondents or their predecessors have not acquired any right of way as a servitude over the

said land described in the Schedule to the Plaint dated 06.07.1983, until the present action was

instituted in June 1983.?

A. Answered in the affirmative.

Q. 2) Whether the Defendant is entitled only to the reliefs prayed for in the answer dated

06/03/1984?

A. In the Negative as the Defendant is not entitled to the reliefs prayed for.

Q. 3) Have the Defendants raised issue No. 12 with regard to prescriptive title to the right of

way over the Plaintiff's land?

A. Answered in the affirmative.

Q. 4) Have the Learned Judges of the High Court of Civil Appeal considered the said issue and

come to the conclusion that the Defendants have prescribed to the right of way which is

depicted as Lot 6 of the final plan of the Partition Case No. 15229/P?

A. Answered in the affirmative but the learned High Court Judges erred in deciding that there

is a right of way acquired by prescription.

Thus, this appeal is allowed and the Judgment of the learned High Court Judge is set aside and

the final conclusion of the learned District Judge to grant relief as prayed for by the Plaint is

restored.

Appeal Allowed.

Judge of the Supreme Court

S.C. Appeal 43/2016

25

Hon. Kumudini Wickramasinghe, J. I agree. .. Judge of the Supreme Court Hon. Achala Wengappuli, J. I agree. .. Judge of the Supreme Court