==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 11

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal under and in

terms of Article 128 of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

SC Appeal No: 1. Abdul Hasan Mohamed Ameen,

197/2017 2. Abdul Hasan Mohamed Sharook,

Both of:

S.C. (Spl) L.A. Application No: No. 142, Molagoda.

172/2014 PLAINTIFFS

Vs.

C.A. 1078/99(F)

H.A.D. Samson Arthur

D.C. Kegalle Case No: Dharmawardena,

4281/L Molagoda.

DEFENDANT

AND BETWEEN

H.A.D. Samson Arthur

Dharmawardena,

Molagoda.

DEFENDANT-APPELLANT

Vs.

Page 2 of 11

1. Abdul Hasan Mohamed Ameen,

2. Abdul Hasan Mohamed Sharook,

Both of :

No. 142, Molagoda.

PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENTS

AND NOW BETWEEN

H.A.D. Samson Arthur

Dharmawardena, (deceased)

Molagoda.

DEFENDANT-APPELLANT-

APPELLANT

1A. Kusuma Welgama

1B. Buddhika Sampath

1C. Chandani Indika

1D. Chamila Buddhika

Dharmawardena.

All of:

No. 192, Sampath Bakery,

Molagoda, Kegalle.

SUBSTITUTED DEFENDANT-

APPELLANT-APPELLANTS

Vs.

Page 3 of 11

1. Abdul Hasan Mohamed Ameen,

2. Abdul Hasan Mohamed Sharook,

Both of :

No. 142, Molagoda.

PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT-

RESPONDENTS

Before : Mahinda Samayawardhena J.

: K. Priyantha Fernando, J.

: Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

Counsel : Manohara de Silva, P.C. with Nadeeshani

Lankatilleka instructed by Anusha Perusinghe for

the Defendant-Appellant-Appellant.

: Keerthi Thilekerathne with Bishran Iqbal

instructed by Sanjeewa Kaluarachchi for the

Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondents.

Argued on : 16-09-2025

Written Submissions : 15-09-2022 (By the Plaintiff-Respondent-

Respondents)

: 19-09-2018 (By the Substituted Defendant-

Appellant-Appellant)

Decided on : 26-02-2026

Page 4 of 11

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

This is an appeal preferred by the substituted defendant-appellant-appellants

(hereinafter referred to as the defendant) of being aggrieved of the judgment

dated 06-08-2014 by the Court of Appeal, where the appeal preferred by them

was dismissed.

From the said impugned judgment, the Court of Appeal affirmed the judgment

pronounced on 03-11-1999 by the learned District Judge of Kegalle in District

Court of Kegalle Case No. 48/21/L, which was decided in favour of the

plaintiff of the said action.

When this matter was considered for the granting of special leave to appeal

on 11-10-2017, this Court granted leave on the questions of law as set out in

paragraph 12 (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f) of the petition dated 16-04-2014.

However, when the matter was taken up before this Court for argument, the

learned President’s Counsel who represented the defendant informed the

Court that it would suffice if the Court considered the question of law set out

in paragraph 12 (b) of the petition for the purposes of determining this appeal.

The said question of law that needs determination before this Court reads as

follows-

12(b) The Court of Appeal erred in holding that there was no trust and

has failed to consider the existence of attendant circumstances which

warrants the inference that the Defendant did not intend to dispose of

the beneficial interest of the lands to the Plaintiff and therefore the

Plaintiff held the land in trust for the Defendant, in particular that:

i. The Defendant continued in possession of the land after

the execution of the impugned Deed and up to date;

ii. The reason as to why the Plaintiffs waited for a period of

three years to take legal action to obtain possession of the

premises if they were rightly entitled to the property by

virtue of the said Deed;

Page 5 of 11

iii. The purchase price specified in the Deed is utterly

inadequate and is less than half the market price at the

time.

At the hearing of this application, this Court heard the submissions of the

learned President’s Counsel for the defendant as well as the submissions of

the learned Counsel for the plaintiff-respondent-respondents (hereinafter

referred to as the plaintiffs). This Court also had the benefit of considering the

written submissions of the parties in determining this appeal.

The facts of the matter upon which the impugned judgment was pronounced

can be summarized in the following manner.

The plaintiffs instituted action before the District Court of Kegalle, by their

plaint dated 11-07-1989, against the defendant for a declaration of title for

the lands morefully described in the schedule of the plaint, for the ejectment

of the defendant from the said lands and the building standing thereon, and

for other incidental reliefs.

In their plaint, the plaintiffs have pleaded their title claiming that the

defendant sold the lands depicted in the plaint by deed No. 2514 dated 16-

06-1986, however, refused to leave the land and handover possession to them

despite repeated requests. It has been averred that the defendant is also

attempting to lease the building standing on the land, which may cause

irreparable damage to their rights.

The defendant, of his answer dated 26-10-1990, has denied the title of the

plaintiff. However, he has admitted that he transferred the rights of the three

lands mentioned in the schedule to the plaint as stated by the plaintiff.

However, it was his position that he transferred the said rights because of his

economic difficulties, and he needed money at the time he executed the deed

in favour of the plaintiffs.

He has claimed that he had no intention of transferring the beneficial interest

of the properties, and therefore, his transfer amounts to creating of a

constructive trust.

Page 6 of 11

Apart from his claim of a constructive trust, he has also pleaded reliefs under

the concept of laesio enormis claiming that the land was sold for less than half

of its value.

The case has gone for trial before the District Court based on 6 issues raised

by the plaintiffs and the 7th to 13th issues raised by the defendant. It appears

that due to an inadvertence in numbering the issues, no issue has been

recorded as number 8 after the recording of issue number 7. It is clear from

the issues under which the evidence was led before the District Court that the

defendant’s issues No. 7 to 10 have been based on a trust, although he has

not raised an issue as to a constructive trust. The issues No. 11 to 13 have

apparently been raised under the concept of laesio enormis.

It is clear from the trial Court judgment that the learned District Judge has

considered all the issues raised before the Court on the basis of whether the

defendant has established a constructive trust in favour of him although he

has not raised an issue as such, and under laesio enormis as well in reaching

her judgment, although the two causes of action cannot be maintained in the

same action.

However, that the appeal has been argued before the Court of Appeal on the

premise whether there was sufficient evidence placed before the trial Court

for the learned District Judge to come to a conclusion that the admitted

transfer of rights of the lands mentioned in the schedule of the plaint should

constitute a constructive trust in favour of the defendant. It has been on that

basis, the Court of Appeal has decided to dismiss the appeal preferred by the

defendant after having considered the relevant facts and circumstances, and

the established law in that regard.

It is clear from the evidence placed before the Court that the deed upon which

the plaintiffs claim title to the property, namely deed No. 2514 dated 16-06-

1986 attested by U.H. Wickramarachchi, Notary Public, is an unconditional

deed of transfer with no conditions attached to it.

Page 7 of 11

Therefore, for the defendant to claim that it has only created a constructive

trust, the defendant must establish that although he transferred his rights to

the property by way of a deed of transfer, he never intended to dispose the

beneficial interest therein, by bringing before the trial Court the necessary

evidence, the facts and circumstances he claims that amount to a creation of

constructive trust in favour of him.

The relevant section 83 of the Trust Ordinance reads as follows-

83. Where the owner of property transfers or bequeaths it, and it

cannot reasonably be inferred consistently with the attendant

circumstances that he intended to dispose of the beneficial

interest therein, the transferee or legatee must hold such property

for the benefit of the owner or his legal representative.

In the case of Thisa Nona and Three Others Vs. Premadasa (1997) 1 SLR

169;

The District Court refused the claim of the 1st defendant-appellant that P-

16 created a constructive trust.

On appeal – Held:

1. The fact that document 1V2 was admitted by the plaintiff-

respondent, the fact that the 1st defendant-appellant paid the

stamp and notary’s charges, the fact that P-16 was a document

which came into existence in the course of series of transactions

between the plaintiff-respondent and the fact that 1st

defendant-appellant continued to possess the premises in suit

just the way she did before P-16 was executed all goes to show

that the transaction was a loan transaction and not an outright

transfer.

2. The attendant circumstances show that the 1st defendant-

appellant did not intend to dispose the beneficial interest in the

property transferred. Law therefore declares under such

circumstances that the plaintiff-respondent would hold such

property for the benefit of the 1st defendant-appellant.

Page 8 of 11

In the case of Ehiya Lebbe Vs. A. Majeed 48 NLR 357 at 359, which was a

case where the creation of a constructive trust was considered, it was

observed-

“There are certain tests for ascertaining into which category a case fall.

Thus, if the transferor continued to remain in possession after the

conveyance, or if the transferor paid the whole cost of the conveyance, or

if the consideration expressed on the deed is utterly inadequate to what

would be the fair purchase money for the property conveyed – all these

are circumstances which would show whether the transaction was a

genuine sale for valuable consideration, or something else.”

The above line of authorities clearly establish the question whether a

constructive trust had been created is a fact that should be ascertained based

on the evidence placed before the Court and having considered the relevant

attendant circumstances unique to each situation.

As I have stated earlier, the plaintiffs have claimed their rights based on the

admitted deed of transfer by the defendant to them. The consideration

mentioned in the deed is Rs. 100,000/-. It is an admitted fact that the

defendant is in possession of the land, which is the subject matter of this

action. It is quite apparent from the answer filed by the defendant, the position

he had taken is that he executed this deed of transfer due to the economic

difficulties he was facing during the period where the deed was executed. It

was on that basis he has claimed that he had no intention to transfer the

land, and the transfer amounts to a creation of a constructive trust.

In framing issues, though the defendant has not raised a direct issue claiming

that the transaction between the plaintiffs and him creates a constructive

trust, his issues No. 8, 9, and 10 impliedly suggest that the purpose of raising

such issues has been to establish a constructive trust in favour of him.

I find that, admittedly, the defendant’s position had been that he had to sell

this property due to the economic difficulties he was facing at that time, which

in my view does not constitute a creation of a constructive trust in itself. It is

normal for a person to sell a property due to economic difficulties faced by

Page 9 of 11

such a person or due to the necessity for him to raise money for his needs,

which always happen in property transactions. In such circumstances, there

must be clear evidence before the trial Court for the person who claims that

he never intended to pass the beneficial interest in the property to

substantiate such a fact.

It is an undisputed fact that the 1st plaintiff and the defendant are persons

well known to each other over a long period of time and had been engaged in

business activities in buildings situated next to each other. There had been

various loan transactions between the parties from time to time as a result of

their close business connections. At the time of this transaction, it was the 1st

plaintiff who has been instrumental in buying the property since the 2nd

plaintiff was admittedly overseas at that time.

The Notary who executed the deed of transfer has given evidence and has

testified that Rs. 100,000/- stated in the deed as the consideration was

passed before him, which means that the plaintiffs have paid the full

consideration mentioned in the deed to the defendant. Although the defendant

has taken up the position that he actually received Rs. 50,000/-, since the

balance was given back to the plaintiff to settle a previous loan, it is not a

matter that can be brought up to hold that the mentioned consideration was

not passed. The admitted fact that the defendant paid Rs. 36,000/- out of the

money received to settle a mortgage transaction he had with another person

in relation to the property, is also not a matter that can be held against the

plaintiffs.

The defendant has taken up the position that the amount he received as

consideration for the property was wholly inadequate, which may be a

position taken up to show that he had no intention to sell the property.

However, nowhere in evidence the defendant has taken up the position that

the deed of transfer executed by him was only as a security for a loan obtained

by him from the plaintiffs. He has failed to disclose details of any such

transactions for the Court to come to a finding that he had no intention of

passing the beneficial interest in the property to the purchasers, which

amounts to a creation of a constructive trust.

Page 10 of 11

When considering the value of the property, although the defendant had

claimed that it was worth about Rs. 300,000/-, when considering the evidence

placed before the trial Court as to the property transfers relating to some of

the nearby lands, there is no basis to conclude that Rs. 100,000/- paid as

consideration for the property was not an adequate sum. It may quite well be

that the defendant was in need of money, and it was his friend, the 1st plaintiff

who agreed to buy it since the property was next to his own property. Under

the circumstances, I do not find a basis to consider the amount paid for the

property by the plaintiffs was an inadequate sum.

The next matter that needs consideration is the fact that the defendant being

in possession of the property even after 3 years from the purchase of it by the

plaintiffs and whether it would amount to an inference that the defendant had

no intention of transferring the beneficial interest of the property to the

plaintiffs.

Admittedly, the plaintiffs and the defendant were friends and business

partners at the time this transaction took place. It has been the position of

the 1st plaintiff that since the defendant promised to purchase another land

and move away, he did not insist the defendant to handover possession of the

property immediately after the transaction. He has taken up the position that

although he continued to ask the defendant to vacate and handover

possession, he did not do so under various pretexts. It has been his

explanation that since his other brother, the 2nd plaintiff, wanted to return to

the island from overseas employment and establish his own business, he

demanded the property from the defendant, and as the defendant failed to

hand over the property, he had to institute an action to recover. In my view,

the evidence led before the Court in this regard clearly favours the position

taken up by the plaintiffs as to the reasons why the defendant continued to

be in possession of the land.

I find that these attendant circumstances taken together cannot form a basis

for the trial Court to conclude that the transfer of the property by the

defendant to the plaintiffs should form a transaction in the form of a

constructive trust as envisaged under section 83 of the Trust Ordinance.

Page 11 of 11

For the reasons as considered above, I find no basis to interfere with the

judgment of the Court of Appeal.

Accordingly, I answer the question of law under which this appeal was

considered in the negative. Hence, the appeal is dismissed for want of merit.

There will be no costs of this appeal.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

K. Priyantha Fernando, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court