DRAFT

SC Appeal 36/2015 JUDGMENT Page 1 of 12

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for

Leave to Appeal to the Supreme Court

from an order of the Provincial High

Court under and in terms of Section

31DD of the Industrial Disputes Act

No. 43 of 1950, as amended.

Dassanayake Mudiyanselage Ranbanda,

“Dharshana”, Narammala Road,

Wadhakada.

APPLICANT

VS.

People’s Bank,

P.O Box 728,

Colombo 02.

RESPONDENT

AND BETWEEN,

People’s Bank,

P.O Box 728,

Colombo 02.

RESPONDENT -APPELLANT

VS.

Dassanayake Mudiyanselage Ranbanda,

“Dharshana”, Narammala Road,

Wadhakada.

APPLICANT –RESPONDENT

LT CASE NO. 23/KU/7850/2002.

NWP/HCCA/KUR No. LT Appeal 37/2010.

SC APPEAL NO. 36/2015.

DRAFT

SC Appeal 36/2015 JUDGMENT Page 2 of 12

AND NOW BETWEEN,

Dassanayake Mudiyanselage Ranbanda,

“Dharshana”, Narammala Road,

Wadhakada.

APPLICANTNT –RESPONDENT –

APPELLANT

VS.

People’s Bank,

P.O Box 728,

Colombo 02.

RESPONDENT –APPELLANT –

RESPONDENT

BEFORE : PRIYANTHA JAYAWARDENA, PC, J. S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J. AND E.A.G.R. AMARASEKARA,J. COUNSEL : Mr. Geoffrey Alagaratnam PC with Ayesha Goonesekera for the Applicant –Respondent-Appellant.

Mrs. Manoli Jinadasa with Ms. Shehara Karunaratne for the Respondent –Appellant –Respondent. ARGUED ON : 22nd July 2019. WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS : Respondent –Appellant- Respondent on 6th May 2015.

Applicant –Respondent-Appellant on 8th April 2015. DECIDED ON : 10th December 2019.

DRAFT

SC Appeal 36/2015 JUDGMENT Page 3 of 12

S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

The Employee Applicant-Respondent-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the

“Employee Appellant”) filed an application in the Labour Tribunal of Kurunegala

(hereinafter referred to as the “Labour Tribunal”) against the Employer Respondent-

Appellant-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the “Employer Respondent”) for

unlawful termination of his services. After an Inquiry, the Learned President of the

Labour Tribunal held that, the termination of the services of the Appellant was unjust

and inequitable and awarded the retirement benefits to the Appellant.

Being aggrieved by the order of the Labour Tribunal, the Employer Respondent

appealed to the Provincial High Court of the North Western Province (hereinafter

referred to as the ‘High Court’) seeking inter alia, to set aside the order of the Labour

Tribunal. The Learned High Court Judge by his judgment had set aside the order of

the Labour Tribunal.

Being aggrieved with the said order, the Appellant had preferred this appeal

before us, special leave to appeal was granted on 25.02.2015, on the issues set out in

paragraph ‘8 (g)’ of the petition dated 23.12.2011 reads as follows:

“Did the High Court err in holding that in the light of the facts before the Labour

Tribunal, it was not just and equitable to award pension rights to the

petitioner? “

Both parties have filed their written submissions and have advanced their oral

arguments. I find it pertinent to set out the material facts of the case prior to

addressing the question of law before us.

The workman, Dassanayake Mudiyanselage Ranbanda, the Employee

Appellant was an employee of the People’s Bank, the Employer Respondent from

16.10.1972 as a clerk. The Employee Appellant gradually rose in rank and was

appointed as Manager of Grade 3(1) of Thambuththegama Branch of the

Respondent Bank on 01/06/1996. In the material time relevant to this application,

DRAFT

SC Appeal 36/2015 JUDGMENT Page 4 of 12

Applicant worked as the Manager of the Thambuththegama Branch of the

Respondent Bank and is charged for violating instructions of Circular No.388/84 with

regard to granting of TODs (Temporary Over Drafts) and several other charges as

demonstrated below (Charge sheet marked as R1 at Page 530 of the brief).

Charge 1: Risking of the Bank Funds by granting TODs in excess of his authorized

limit of Rs. 100,000/- and failing to obtain covering approval for the said

overdrafts in violation of Circular Instructions 491/96 and 388/84;

Charge 2: Granting TODs to G.B. Dissanayake and H.M. Samanthilaka in excess of the

Applicant’s authorized limit, failing to obtain covering approval and

continued granting of overdrafts when there were defaults in repayments

by the said customers in violation of Circular 388/44.

Charge 3: Granting of TODs to specified customers before completing one year from

the opening of accounts in violation of Paragraph 2.1 Section 5 of the

Circular No.388/44.

Charge 4: Failing to report to the regional head office details pertaining to granted

TODs by sending “form 593s” within 30 days in violation of Circular

Instructions contained in Circular No.388/84.

Charge 5: Risking Bank Funds by granting parallel TODs to specified customers in

excess of powers and in violation of Paragraph 3.1 and 3.2 of C Circular

No.388/84.

Charges 6-9: Charges 6-9 were ancillary charges related to the above five charges.

The Appellant is charged with (a) risking finance of the bank; (b) causing

loss to the bank; and (c) causing a loss of confidence in the Appellant.

The Employee Appellant was served with a charge sheet dated 20/09/2001

Marked as ‘X 10’. Consequently, a domestic inquiry was conducted by the

Respondent Bank against the Employee Appellant and was found guilty of

misconduct for all the charges. Thereafter, Employee Appellant was dismissed from

DRAFT

SC Appeal 36/2015 JUDGMENT Page 5 of 12

his service on 20.06.2002. Employee Appellant filed an application on 30/11/2002

before the Labour Tribunal against the Employer Respondent for unlawful

termination of his services seeking, inter alia, re-instatement in his service and/ or

reasonable compensation and costs and for such other relief as the Labour Tribunal

shall seem fit and proper. The Employee Appellant did not specifically seek the relief

of Pension benefits in his application because, the Employee Appellant was 52 years

and 09 months on the day he filed his application. The Employee Appellant was

entitled to seek the pension relief only upon the completion of 55 years and

thereafter at the age of 60 if annual extensions were allowed to the Employee

Appellant. The Employer Respondent stated that, the Employee Appellant’s service

was terminated on lawful grounds.

In the Employee Appellant’s evidence, the Employee Appellant admits that, he

has powers only to grant TODs for Rs.100, 000/- for 30 days (page 231 and 235 of

the brief). Further the Employee Appellant admitted that, he exceeded the authority

and granted TODs 42 accounts with an aggregate value of Rs. 5.4 Million of which he

brought down the outstanding to Rs. 4.25 Million when sufficient time granted to

him.

Employee Appellant led the evidence of T.A. Ariyapala (Assistant Regional

Manager) and Priyangika Hettiarachchi (Staff Assistant) on his behalf and submitted

documents marked R1-R51. Employer Respondent led the evidence of D.M.

Ranbanda (the Employee Appellant) and Amarawansa Wijesekara (Retired Assistant

Manager) and submitted the documents marked A.01-A.09.

As per the Circular No.388/84 (marked as ‘R3’ at page 549 of the brief) clause

9.3 stated that, 593 forms have to be sent on the same day for covering approval to

the Regional Office for TODs over and above the authorized limit. The Bank clerk;

Priyangika Hettiarachchi, during her cross examination admitted that, she sends Form

593 only when the Manager instructs her to do so (page 179 and 219 of the brief).

DRAFT

SC Appeal 36/2015 JUDGMENT Page 6 of 12

The Employee Appellant in his defence took up the position that, circulars are

merely guidelines issued to the managers. However, the Respondent Bank

demonstrated that, the Circular instructions are not mere guidelines, but clear limits

have been imposed on the grant of TODs by the Bank Circulars. Further, it was stated

by the fact that, the Bank uniformly and consistently took severe disciplinary action

against those who violated circular instructions of the Bank. The evidence reveals

that, even other managers who have committed similar misconduct of acting

contrary to circular instructions especially when granting TODs have been terminated

(Pages 170-171 of the Brief).

This position was not disputed by the Employee Appellant. It is not revealed

that, he was victimized whilst others were favoured. Therefore, it is evident that, the

Respondent Bank has uniformly and consistently dismissed employees who have

flouted the financial regulations of the Bank. Therefore, I found that, this is not a case

where only the Employee Appellant has been treated discriminatively or unjustly was

given the same punishment that was meted out to others who had committed similar

misconduct.

Accordingly, the Employee Appellant was found guilty of the charges of

misconduct complained against him by the Labour Tribunal. On 28/10/2010,

Learned President of the Labour Tribunal decided that, the termination of the

services of the Employee Appellant is an excessive punishment because; by acting in

violation of the circular instruction he had not gained any personal benefits. Further,

ordered that, the Employee Appellant to be considered as having served to the

Respondent Bank without break his service until he reached 55 years and granted

him all pension rights on the premise that, he is a retired employee.

Being aggrieved with the order of the Labour Tribunal, the Employer

Respondent appealed to the High Court to set aside the order of the Learned

President of the Labour Tribunal. The Learned Judge of the High Court held,

DRAFT

SC Appeal 36/2015 JUDGMENT Page 7 of 12

“The alleged acts of misconduct have sufficiently been established by the

Respondent-Appellant and as I have already stated above the Applicant-

Respondent did not seek to challenge the proprietary of the said findings of the

Learned President. If the Applicant-Appellant was allowed to continue to grant

temporary overdrafts arbitrarily without having any disregard to circular

instructions, it would no doubt result in a huge financial loss to the bank.

The Learned Counsel submitted that the Respondent- Appellant Bank being a

financial institution the strict compliance of circular instructions is of absolute

importance and failure to follow such instructions by an employee who is

holding the position of manager of a Branch amounts to a gross act of

misconduct which entails a severe punishment. I am in agreement with the

submission of the Counsel.

This is a case where the public should be taken into consideration for the reason

that, the respondent-appellant bank is an institution that deals with money

deposited by the public with very high expectation of safety of their money and

higher benefits.

In view of the aforesaid I hold that the Learned President of the Labour Tribunal

erred in awarding the applicant-respondent pension benefits as if his service

was not terminated. The appeal is accordingly allowed and the application of

the applicant-respondent is dismissed.”

(Page 3-6 of the High Court Order dated 15/11/2011 marked as ‘X4’)

Being aggrieved with the said order, the Employee-Appellant had preferred

this appeal before us, in terms of Section 31DD of the Industrial Disputes Act, No. 43

of 1950, as amended and special leave to appeal was granted on 25.02.2015, on the

issues set out in paragraph ‘8 (g)’ of the petition dated 23.12.2011.

In “The Legal Framework of Industrial Relations in Ceylon” by S.R. De Silva

at Page 546 the following is stated in this regard.

DRAFT

SC Appeal 36/2015 JUDGMENT Page 8 of 12

“As a general rule, refusal to obey reasonable orders justifies dismissal”

“A single act of disobedience may justify dismissal if sufficient grave.”

I am of the view that, Employee Appellant, as the Branch Manager of a Bank is

responsible for the discipline and management of the entire branch of the

Respondent Bank. The Employee Appellant is the enforcer of discipline and the

supervising authority of the activities within the branch to ensure the compliance

with the rules and regulations. If he is blatantly disregarding strict circular

instructions in favour of third parties and grant TODs at his will over and above the

authorized limits is a breach of trust and confidence placed on him by the Bank. It is

observed that, the irresponsible conduct of the Employee Appellant exposed the

Bank to very heavy losses. The TODs facility given for a very limited period and the

customer is required to settle TODs within that time, which is generally 30 days. If

TODs are long outstanding without payment, it is a loss to the Respondent Bank.

In Adami v. Maison de Luxe Limited (1924) Comm. LR 145, stated that,

“where it is a condition that, the servant shall obey all lawful orders of the

master, then a willful and deliberate and intentional disobedience of any of

those orders is tantamount to a refusal to be bound by the terms of the

Contract, entitling the other party to treat it as an end, and to dismiss the

servant….and his failure to obey instructions was such as to go to the foundation

and root of the whole contract between the parties.”

In this case due to the conduct of the Employee Appellant, the bank has been

exposed to a loss of Rs. 19,686,889.22 and an actual loss of Rs. 4, 373,687.21 has

been caused to the Respondent Bank. Thus, as mentioned above, the strict

adherence to circular instructions is mandatory to the Bank and on many occasions,

branch managers who have granted TODs in a manner caused a loss to the Bank

have been terminated as a deterrent against such practice and the Employee

Appellant is one of such a manager.

DRAFT

SC Appeal 36/2015 JUDGMENT Page 9 of 12

As observed by Siva Selliah, J, in Sithamparanathan v. People’s Bank [1986]

1 Sri LR 411 at page 414-415,

“It is needless to emphasize that the utmost confidence is expected of any officer

employed in a Bank. He owes a duty both to the Bank to preserve its fair name

and integrity and to the customer whose money lies in deposit with the Bank.

Integrity and confidence thus are indispensable and where an officer has

forfeited such confidence has been shown up as being shown up as being

involved in any fraudulent or questionable transaction, both public interest and

the interest of the Bank demands that he should be removed from such

confidence.”

In Manager vs. Nakiadeniya Group vs. The Lanka Estate Workers Union

[1969 77 CLW 52] at page 54de Krester J. said,

“In the making of a just and equitable order one must consider not only the

interests of the employees but also the interests of the employers and the wider

interest of the country for the object of social legislation is to have not only

contended employees but also contended employers.”

The public interest was also recognized as a relevant factor for the courts,

when they made just and equitable order. In Ceylon Transport Board vs. Julian [SC

54/71 decided on 16/06/1972] where this Court stated that,

“In the particular circumstances of this case where the public interest must be a

factor to be considered the President should have also directed his mind as to

what was just and equitable in the context of the public interest. A just and

equitable order must be made after considering all the circumstances and not

only the interests of the applicant.”

This is the fact that, the Learned President of the Labour Tribual has failed to

do in the present case. I therefore find myself unable to agree with the view of the

Learned President of the Labour Tribual.

DRAFT

SC Appeal 36/2015 JUDGMENT Page 10 of 12

In cases involving an employer-employee relationship, founded on the

principles of trust and discipline. As a result, any breach of these principles will affect,

not only the relationship between the employer and the employee but also the

quality of the services provided by the employer along with the reputation of his

establishment. In the case of Bank of Ceylon vs. Manivasagasivam, [(1995) 2 SLR

79], it was observed that:

“Utmost confidence is expected from any officer employed in the bank. There is

a duty, both to the bank to preserve its fair name and integrity and to the

customer whose money lies in deposit with the bank”

In the above circumstances, I am of the view that, the termination of the

Employee Appellant’s services was just and proper in law and the Learned President

of the Labour Tribunal has erred in law in considering the termination to be unjust

and inequitable on the premise of excessive punishment.

It is submitted that, the Pension Fund administered by a Trust and only those

who fulfill the eligibility criteria is entitled to the Pension, in addition to their other

terminal benefits. As I stated above, an employee who ceases to be in service prior to

reaching 55 years as a result of his services been terminated by the Bank, is not

entitled for pension.

In Abysundera vs. Samuel SC 13-123/67 decided on 16/06/1968 and

Martin Singho vs. Kularatna and others (CA Appeal No. 248/95) Court held that,

“it appears to this Court that Labour Tribunal has granted the pension rights to

the Applicant purely on sympathetic grounds. The Labour Tribunal should act in

a just and equitable manner to both parties and not award any relief on the

basis of sympathy. Just and equitable order must be fair to all parties. It never

means the means the safeguarding of the interest of the workman alone.

Legislature has not given a free license to a President of a Labour Tribunal to

DRAFT

SC Appeal 36/2015 JUDGMENT Page 11 of 12

make award as he my please. In the above circumstances we hold that, granting

of a pension to respondent is totally wrong and contrary to law.”

The Court also held:

“There are specific criteria to be fulfilled for an employee to qualify for a

pension. According to the Peoples’ Bank Pension Scheme, pension is granted

only if an employee is in service and at the age of 55 years. Pension will not be

granted to an employee who is under the age of 55 years except on the

recommendation of a Medical Board and approved by the General Manager.

Employees who leave the Bank before reaching 55 years and those and those

who are dismissed from service are not entitled to pension under the pension

rules that exist in the Bank.”

The Employer Respondent has filed the requisite proof to establish that, the

Employee Appellant had indeed been paid his terminal benefits of EPF, ETF and

Gratuity. The said statement of account depicts the deposit of a sum of Rs.

464,257.37 and a sum of Rs. 336,253.73 which consists of the EPF and gratuity paid to

the Employee Appellant.

As enumerated above, I am of the view that the Employee Appellant is not

entitled for the pension benefits.

With the aforementioned circumstances, I answer the question of law raised

by the Employee Appellant negatively.

On carefully analyzing the materials that was produced before the President of

the Labour Tribunal of Kurunegala and the material submitted before the learned

High Court Judge, I am of the view that the finding of the President of the Labour

Tribunal is incorrect. Accordingly, I find that, the findings of the learned High Court

Judge are correct in setting aside the order of the Learned President of the Labour

Tribunal dated 28/10/2010, Therefore, I affirm the findings of the Learned Judge of

DRAFT

SC Appeal 36/2015 JUDGMENT Page 12 of 12

the High Court in order dated 15.11.2011, in case no. NWP/HCCA/KUR/37/2010(L.T).

Appeal Dismissed and I order no cost.

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

PRIYANTHA JAYAWARDENA, PC, J. I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

E.A.G.R. AMARASEKARA, J. I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT