IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

W.M. Dhanapala Menike,

Galkorutuwa, Udahavupe,

Kahawatte.

Petitioner

SC APPEAL NO: SC/APPEAL/166/2017

SC LA NO: SC/SPL/LA/258/2016

CA NO: CA/WRIT/26/2014

Vs.

1. Dayananda Colombage,

Divisional Secretary,

Divisional Secretariat,

Kahawatte.

1A. Gayani I. Karunarathna,

Divisional Secretary,

Divisional Secretariat,

Kahawatte.

2. R.P.R. Rajapakse,

Commissioner General of Land,

Land Commissioner Generals

Department, No. 1200/6,

Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

3. P. Wasantha,

2

SC/APPEAL/166/2017

Assistant Land Commissioner,

Land Commissioner Generals

Department,

No. 1200/6, Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

4. Provincial Commissioner General

of Land,

Sabaragamuwa Province,

Office of Provincial Commissioner

of Land, Provincial Council

Building, New Town, Ratnapura.

5. Ven. Palmadulla Dhammagaweshi

Thero, Athugalkanda Aaranya

Senanasanaya, Lellopitiya Wehera,

Godakawela.

6. Wellakkutti Mudiyanselage

Wasantha Kumara,

Welihindawatte, Indiketiya Road,

Pelmadulla.

7. Registrar of Lands,

Land Registry, Ratnapura.

Respondents

AND BETWEEN

W. M. Dhanapala Menike,

Galkorutuwa, Udahavupe,

Kahawatte.

Petitioner-Appellant

Vs.

3

SC/APPEAL/166/2017

1. Dayananda Colombage,

Divisional Secretary,

Divisional Secretariat,

Kahawatte.

1A. Gayani I. Karunarathna,

Divisional Secretary,

Divisional Secretariat,

Kahawatte.

2. R. P. R. Rajapakse,

Commissioner General of Land,

Land Commissioner Generals

Department, No. 1200/6,

Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

3. P. Wasantha,

Assistant Land Commissioner,

Land Commissioner Generals

Department,

No. 1200/6,

Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

4. Provincial Commissioner General

of Land, Sabaragamuwa Province,

Office of Provincial Commissioner

of Land, Provincial Council

Building, New Town,

Ratnapura.

5. Ven. Palmadulla Dhammagaweshi

Thero, Athugalkanda Aaranya

Senanasanaya,

Lellopitiya Wehera, Godakawela.

4

SC/APPEAL/166/2017

6. Wellakkutti Mudiyanselage

Wasantha Kumara,

Welihindawatte,

Indiketiya Road,

Pelmadulla.

7. Registrar of Lands,

Land Registry,

Ratnapura.

Respondent-Respondents

Before: Buwaneka Aluwihare, P.C., J.

Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Ranjan Suwandaratne, P.C., with Dulna de Alwis for the

Petitioner-Appellant.

Manohara Jayasinghe, D.S.G., for the 1st to 4th and 7th

Respondent-Respondents.

H. Withanachchi with Shantha Karunadhara and Pasindu

Widyananda for the 6th Respondent-Respondent.

Argued on: 16.01.2023

Written Submissions:

By the Petitioner-Appellant on 20.01.2021

By the 1st to 4th and 7th Respondent-Respondents on

27.01.2023

By the 6th Respondent-Respondent on 15.02.2023

Decided on: 09.11.2023

5

SC/APPEAL/166/2017

Samayawardhena, J.

Background facts

The father of the Petitioner-Appellant, namely Podi Bandara, was issued

two grants in respect of two parcels of land in terms of the Land

Development Ordinance, No. 19 of 1935, as amended. His wife

predeceased him. They had five children. The first two are sons and the

other three are daughters. The eldest son is the 5th Respondent. The

second son, namely Wickramasekara Bandara, was not a party to this

case. The Petitioner is the eldest daughter.

There is a difference between a permit and a grant.

In terms of section 2 of the Land Development Ordinance, land alienated

by grant under the Land Development Ordinance is known as a holding.

The owner means the owner of a holding whose title thereto is derived

from a grant issued in terms of the Ordinance and includes a permit-

holder who has paid all sums which he is required to pay under section

19(2) and has complied with all the other conditions specified in the

permit.

Section 19(6)(b) enacts that the owner of a holding shall not dispose of

such holding except with the prior approval of the Government Agent.

However, section 19(7) recognises that the approval of the Divisional

Secretary is not required when mortgaging such holding to some

institutions including licensed commercial banks. According to section

46, a permit-holder cannot dispose of the land alienated to him on the

permit without the written consent of the Government Agent. As section

2 defines, disposition means any transaction of whatever nature

affecting land or the title thereto, and title means right, title, or interest

to or in the land or holding.

6

SC/APPEAL/166/2017

Nomination of successors

A permit-holder or an owner of a holding can nominate a successor to

the land or holding under the provisions of the Land Development

Ordinance.

Section 49 states:

Upon the death of a permit-holder who at the time of his or her death

was paying an annual instalment by virtue of the provisions of

section 19, or of an owner of a holding, without leaving behind his

or her spouse, or, where such permit-holder or owner died leaving

behind his or her spouse, upon the failure of such spouse to succeed

to the land alienated to that permit-holder on the permit or holding

or upon the death of such spouse, a person nominated as successor

by such permit-holder or owner shall succeed to that land or holding.

While this section does not specify any condition precedent for

succeeding to a parcel of land alienated on a permit, other than the

entitlement of the spouse to succeed, section 84 appears to impose an

additional requirement. It requires that the successor should obtain a

permit from the Government Agent to occupy the land.

Section 84 states:

Upon the death of a permit-holder who at the time of his or her death

was paying annual instalments under section 19 for the land

alienated to him or her on the permit, then-

(a) if that permit-holder is survived by his or her spouse, the spouse

shall be entitled to succeed to that land;

(b) if that permit-holder is not survived by his or her spouse or if the

spouse does not succeed to the land, any other person who is a duly

7

SC/APPEAL/166/2017

nominated successor of the deceased permit-holder shall be entitled

to succeed to that land on such person obtaining a permit from the

Government Agent under the provisions of this Ordinance to occupy

that land.

According to section 51, a permit-holder or owner of a holding cannot

nominate any person at his will. He needs to nominate a person who

belongs to one of the groups of relatives enumerated in Rule 1 of the Third

Schedule of the Ordinance. Section 51 reads as follows:

No person shall be nominated by the owner of a holding or a permit-

holder as his successor unless that person is the spouse of such

owner or permit-holder, or belongs to one of the groups of relatives

enumerated in rule 1 of the Third Schedule.

The procedural provisions in relation to, inter alia, nomination of a

successor, cancellation of a nomination, and registration thereof are set

out in sections 52-67 of the Land Development Ordinance. In addition,

there are a number of provisions in the Ordinance regulating the

procedure.

Right to succession by the spouse

However, in terms of sections 48A and 48B, the spouse of a permit-holder

or an owner of a holding is entitled to succeed to the land or holding

solely by virtue of being the spouse, regardless of whether such spouse

is nominated as a successor.

48A(1). Upon the death of a permit-holder who at the time of his or

her death was required to pay any annual instalments by virtue of

the provisions of subsection (2) of section 19, notwithstanding

default in the payment of such instalments, the spouse of that

permit-holder, whether he or she has or has not been nominated as

8

SC/APPEAL/166/2017

successor by that permit-holder, shall be entitled to succeed to the

land alienated to that permit-holder on the permit and the terms and

conditions of that permit shall be applicable to that spouse.

(2) If, during the lifetime of the spouse of a deceased permit-holder

who has succeeded under subsection (1) to the land alienated on the

permit, the terms and conditions of the permit are complied with by

such spouse, such spouse shall be entitled to a grant of that land

subject to the following conditions:-

(a) such spouse shall have no power to dispose of the land alienated

by the grant;

(b) such spouse shall have no power to nominate a successor to that

land;

(c) upon the death of such spouse, or upon his or her marriage, the

person, who was nominated as successor by the deceased permit-

holder or who would have been entitled to succeed as his successor,

shall succeed to that land:

Provided that the aforesaid conditions shall not apply to a grant of

any land to be made to a spouse who has been nominated by the

deceased permit-holder to succeed to the land alienated on the

permit.

(3) Any disposition or nomination made by a spouse in contravention

of the provisions of subsection (2) shall be invalid.

48B(1). Upon the death of the owner of a holding, the spouse of that

owner shall be entitled to succeed to that holding subject to the

following conditions:-

9

SC/APPEAL/166/2017

(a) upon the marriage of such spouse, title to the holding shall

devolve on the nominated successor of the deceased owner or, if

there was no such nomination, on the person who was entitled to

succeed under rule 1 of the Third Schedule;

(b) such spouse shall have no power to dispose of that holding;

(c) such spouse shall have no power to nominate a successor to that

holding:

Provided that the aforesaid conditions shall not apply to a spouse

who has been nominated by the deceased owner of the holding to

succeed to that holding.

(2) Any disposition or nomination made by a spouse in contravention

of the provisions of subsection (1) shall be invalid.

Succession by the nominated successor

If the spouse of the deceased permit-holder or owner of the holding is

among the living, the nominated successor cannot succeed to the land or

holding soon after the death of the permit-holder or owner of the holding.

In terms of section 49, the nominated successor can succeed to the land

if the spouse fails to succeed or upon the death of the spouse.

Failure to succeed by the spouse or nominated successor

What is meant by failure to succeed by the spouse or nominated

successor is stated in section 68. In short, if the spouse refuses to

succeed or does not enter into possession of the land or holding within

six months from the death of the permit-holder or owner, it constitutes

failure of succession.

10

SC/APPEAL/166/2017

68(1). The spouse of a deceased permit-holder, who at the time of

his or her death was paying an annual instalment by virtue of the

provisions of section 19, or the spouse of an owner, fails to succeed

to the land held by such permit-holder on the permit or to the holding

of such owner, as the case may be-

(a) if such spouse refuses to succeed to that land or holding, or

(b) if such spouse does not enter into possession of that land or

holding within a period of six months reckoned from the date of the

death of such permit-holder or owner.

(2) A nominated successor fails to succeed to the land held on a

permit by a permit-holder who at the time of his or her death was

paying an annual instalment by virtue of the provisions of section 19

or to the holding of an owner if he refuses to succeed to that land or

holding, or, if the nominated successor does not enter into

possession of that land or holding within a period of six months

reckoned-

(i) where such permit-holder or owner dies without leaving behind

his or her spouse, from the date of the death of such permit-holder

or owner; or

(ii) where such permit-holder or owner dies leaving behind his or her

spouse, from the date of the failure of such spouse to succeed, such

date being reckoned according to the provisions of paragraph (b) of

subsection (1), or of the death of such spouse, as the case may be.

Succession by operation of law

If no successor has been nominated or if the nominated successor fails

to succeed or if the nomination of a successor contravenes the provisions

of the Ordinance, subject to the spouse being succeeded to the land or

11

SC/APPEAL/166/2017

holding, the land or holding shall devolve as prescribed in Rule 1 of the

Third Schedule read with section 72 of the Ordinance.

72. If no successor has been nominated, or if the nominated

successor fails to succeed, or if the nomination of a successor

contravenes the provisions of this Ordinance, the title to the land

alienated on a permit to a permit-holder who at the time of his or her

death was paying an annual instalment by virtue of the provisions

of section 19 or to the holding of an owner shall, upon the death of

such permit-holder or owner without leaving behind his or her

spouse, or, where such permit-holder or owner died leaving behind

his or her spouse, upon the failure of such spouse to succeed to that

land or holding, or upon the death of such spouse, devolve as

prescribed in rule 1 of the Third Schedule.

The order of succession

Prior to the amendment brought in by Act No. 11 of 2022, the devolution

of succession was in the following order of priority.

(a) Sons

(b) Daughters

(c) Grandsons

(d) Granddaughters

(e) Father

(f) Mother

(g) Brothers

(h) Sisters

(i) Uncles

(j) Aunts

(k) Nephews

(l) Nieces

12

SC/APPEAL/166/2017

Act No. 11 of 2022 eliminated gender-based discrimination in favor of

males over females. Following this amendment, devolution in terms of

Rule 1 of the Third Schedule shall take place in the following order, the

older being preferred to the younger where there are more relatives than

one in any group.

(a) Children

(b) Grand children

(c) Parents

(d) Siblings

(e) Uncles and aunts

(f) Nephews and nieces

However, according to Rule 1(d), where any person in the order of priority

has developed such land, the title to the holding or the land shall not

devolve on the older person but on the person who developed such land.

In terms of section 170, no other law relating to succession of land is

applicable in respect of land alienated under the Land Development

Ordinance.

Failure to succeed by a statutory nominee

Although section 68 of the Land Development Ordinance provides for the

failure to succeed by the spouse or nominated successor, it is silent on

the failure to succeed by a relative who is entitled to succeed in terms of

Rule 1 of the Third Schedule.

What happens if the successor in terms of Rule 1 of the Third Schedule

fails to succeed? Rule 2 of the Third Schedule provides the answer:

If any relative on whom the title to a holding or land devolves under

the provisions of these rules is unwilling to succeed to such holding

13

SC/APPEAL/166/2017

or land, the title thereto shall devolve upon the relative who is next

entitled to succeed subject to the provisions of rule 1.

Rule 2 provides for a situation where a relative is unwilling to succeed.

This can be distinguished from failure to succeed. Unwilling to

succeed implies a conscious decision to avoid succession, while failure

to succeed can occur without deliberate intent and may result from

various factors. Nevertheless, according to section 68(1)(a), failure to

succeed includes refusal to succeed. Unwilling to succeed and

refusal to succeed connote similar meaning. In summary, failure ()

to succeed, refusal () to succeed and unwilling () to succeed

are not contradictory but complimentary to each other.

There is no indication in Rule 2 for how long the next in line needs to wait

to assume that the first in line is unwilling to succeed when it is not

manifested by a positive act. It cannot be for an unlimited time or until

the death of the first person.

In my view, the law applicable to failure to succeed by a spouse or a

nominated successor as stated in section 68 shall be applicable when a

relative who is entitled to succeed in terms of Rule 1 of the Third Schedule

is unwilling to succeed. In the result, if such relative refuses to succeed

or does not enter into possession of the land or holding within a period

of six months reckoned from the date of the death of the permit holder or

owner, it should be regarded as failure to succeed or unwilling to succeed.

Failure to succeed by the 5th Respondent

In the instant case, Podi Bandara died without nominating a successor

to the holding. In that eventuality, the succession should take place in

terms of section 72 read with Rule 1 of the Third Schedule of the Land

Development Ordinance. Accordingly, the 5th Respondent, being the

eldest son of Podi Bandara was to succeed to the holding by operation of

14

SC/APPEAL/166/2017

law. However, he did not succeed within six months from the date of the

death of Podi Bandara (his father). Wickramasekara Bandara (his

younger brother and the second in the family) had been in possession of

the holding.

Thereafter, the 5th Respondent, nearly one year after the death of his

father executed a Deed of Renunciation with the written sanction of the

1st Respondent Divisional Secretary manifesting his unwillingness to

succeed to the holding. By this Deed the 5th Respondent renounced his

rights and interests in the holding in favour of Wickramasekara Bandara.

Wickramasekara Bandara had also executed a Deed of Declaration (P6)

with the written sanction of the 1st Respondent Divisional Secretary

pursuant to the execution of P5. All these deeds were registered in the

Register maintained under the Land Development Ordinance at the Land

Registry (P7).

In my view, P5-P7 are all redundant and unnecessary. If the 5th

Respondent did not succeed within six months of the death of Podi

Bandara, Wickramasekara Bandara was entitled to succeed to the

holding by operation of law.

However, I will refer to P5. P5 inter alia states as follows:

.

162(1)

//700 //4318

.

,

.

15

SC/APPEAL/166/2017

As seen from P11 and P12, the ownership of the holding had thereafter

been transferred in the name of Wickramasekara Bandara.

The 5th Respondent then entered into monastic life and was ordained as

a Bhikkhu.

Wickramasekara Bandara later died unmarried and issueless.

Thereafter, as seen from 1R3(a) and 1R3(c), the Petitioner (the eldest

daughter of Podi Bandara and the third in the family) on the one hand

and the 5th Respondent Bhikkhu (the eldest son of Podi Bandara) on the

other, made separate applications to the 1st Respondent Divisional

Secretary to transfer the holding to them.

The decision of the Deputy Land Commissioner

As a result, the 3rd defendant Deputy Land Commissioner has informed

the Petitioner by P10 that alienations without the approval of the

Divisional Secretary are void; deeds of declarations are unknown to the

Land Development Ordinance; Wickramasekara Bandara had not

acquired rights to the holdings; and therefore ownership should devolve

on the 5th Respondent in his lay name as the eldest son of the grantee.

P10 reads as follows:

. .

.

.

.

Thereafter the 1st Respondent by P11 and P12 has informed the Land

Registrar to register the Certificates of Confirmation of Original

Ownership in the lay name of the 5th Respondent.

16

SC/APPEAL/166/2017

It appears that the 3rd Respondent had been under the impression that

alienations were effected without the consent of the Divisional Secretary

but it was not correct. The 3rd Respondent has highlighted only the Deed

of Declaration but not the Deed of Renunciation, which preceded it. Even

if both the Deed of Renunciation and the Deed of Declaration were

declared null and void, it is not correct to say that the second son did not

succeed to the holding. When the eldest son failed to succeed or

manifested his unwillingness to succeed, the second son became entitled

to succession by operation of law.

All in all, the contents/findings/final decision in P10 are inaccurate,

misleading and unsustainable in law.

Writ application in the Court of Appeal and its decision

The Petitioner filed a writ application in the Court of Appeal seeking to

quash inter alia P10-P12 by certiorari. The Court of Appeal held that the

Land Development Ordinance does not prohibit the execution of Deeds of

Renunciation. It further held that the 5th Respondent did not renounce

his rights absolutely but did so only in favour of Wickremasekara

Bandara, and therefore upon the death of Wickremasekara Bandara, the

5th Respondent shall succeed to the holding.

Questions of law

This Court had on 06.02.2017 granted leave to appeal on five questions

of law but thereafter on 12.03.2021 has narrowed down the argument to

two questions of law in the presence of counsel for all the parties:

(a) Has the 5th Respondent validly renounced his right to succession

to the holding in favour of his brother Wickramasekara Bandara

by the Deed of Renunciation?

17

SC/APPEAL/166/2017

(b) Does the said renunciation prevent the 5th Respondent from

making any claim in relation to succession of the holding?

Renunciation of rights

I have already stated that when the 5th Respondent did not succeed

within six months from the death of his father Podi Bandara, in the order

of priority, the second son Wickramasekara Bandara should succeed to

the holding.

The Land Development Ordinance does not provide for renunciation of

right to succession. Significantly, as the Court of Appeal has pointed out,

nor does the Land Development Ordinance prohibit it. In Hevavitharana

v. Themis De Silva (1961) 63 NLR 68 it was stated that Courts are not to

act upon the principle that every procedure is to be taken as prohibited

unless it is expressly provided for by law, but on the converse principle

that every procedure is to be understood as permissible till it is shown to

be prohibited by the law. As a matter of general principle, prohibitions

cannot be presumed.

The renunciation of right to succession by the 5th Respondent by P5,

albeit redundant, is valid in law. Such conduct or manifestation can

easily be accommodated under unwilling to succeed.

Estoppel or waiver

The next question is, can the 5th Respondent make a claim for succession

again after renouncing his right to it? In my view, he cannot. The doctrine

of estoppel and/or doctrine of waiver prevents him from doing so. Of

these two doctrines, the former has been the subject of more intense

discussion than the latter.

18

SC/APPEAL/166/2017

The doctrine of waiver is a legal principle that allows an individual to

voluntarily relinquish or abandon a right or benefit that is otherwise

available to him.

The doctrine of estoppel stems from the maxim allegans contraria non est

audiendus, which means a person establishing contradictory facts shall

not be heard. It is evident that this doctrine finds its foundation in equity

and justice in that a man should not be allowed to blow hot and cold,

approbate and reprobate, and affirm and disaffirm the same to suit the

occasion. The doctrine of estoppel is also connected to the doctrine of

legitimate expectation, which is primarily a concept within administrative

and constitutional law.

For the purpose of this appeal, I will only consider the applicability of

doctrine of estoppel.

Spencer Bower and Turner, The Law Relating to Estoppel by

Representation (3rd edn, London Butterworths, 1977) page 4, defines

estoppel as follows:

Where one person (the representor) has made representations to

another person (the representee) in words or by acts or conduct, or

(being under a duty to speak to the representee) by silence or

inaction, with the intention (actual or presumed) and with the result,

of inducing the representee on the faith to alter his position to his

detriment, the representator, in any litigation which may come

afterwards, is estopped from making or attempting to establish by

evidence, any averment substantially at variance with his former

representation, if the representee at the proper time and in the proper

manner, objects thereto.

Section 115 of the Evidence Ordinance reads as follows:

19

SC/APPEAL/166/2017

When one person has by his declaration, act, or omission

intentionally caused or permitted another person to believe a thing

to be true and to act upon such belief, neither he nor his

representative shall be allowed in any suit or proceeding between

himself and such person or his representative to deny the truth of

that thing.

E.R.S.R. Coomaraswamy, The Law of Evidence, Volume I (2nd edn, Lake

House Investments Ltd Book Publishers, 1989) page 184, sets out the

following essential elements for a plea of estoppel to succeed under

section 115 of the Evidence Ordinance:

(a) A representation made by a person by means of a declaration, act

or omission (the omission being to act or speak when there was a

duty to act or speak)

(b) The representation must have been made with the intention that it

should be acted upon

(c) Discrepancies between representation then made and the assertion

now sought to be made

(d) The effect of the representation must be to cause or permit the

other person to believe the thing to be true

(e) The effect of the representation must also be that the other person

has acted upon such belief (to his detriment or damage)

(f) The question must arise in the suit or proceeding between the same

persons or their respective representatives (privies)

If these six elements are met, Coomaraswamy states, the first person or

their representative will be barred from contradicting the veracity of the

matter that forms the representation.

In the facts of this case, the argument that the 5th Respondent made a

qualified renunciation only in favour of his brother is an afterthought.

20

SC/APPEAL/166/2017

The fallacy of this argument is made clear when the learned Deputy

Solicitor General for the Respondent state officials and the learned

counsel for the 6th Respondent admit that, if the said brother of the 5th

Respondent, namely Wickremasekara Bandara, nominated a successor,

the 5th Respondent or his son the 6th Respondent could not have

reclaimed succession to the holding.

I am unable to agree with the finding of the Court of Appeal that, since

Wickremasekara Bandara died without nominating a successor, the 5th

Respondent becomes entitled to succession of the holding by operation

of Rule 1 of the Third Schedule of the Ordinance. This finding of the Court

of Appeal is contradictory to its earlier findings that (a) since the 5th

Respondent did not succeed to the holding, Wickremasekara Bandara

succeeded to it by operation of law, and (b) the Land Development

Ordinance does not prohibit renunciation of rights.

All the six elements necessary for a successful plea of estoppel do exist

in this case.

In the course of the argument, it was also asserted that even if the 5th

Respondent renounced his rights and interests in the holding, the 6th

Respondent, who is the son of the 5th Respondent, is not bound by such

renunciation. This is covered under the last element of section 115 of the

Evidence Ordinance mentioned above, i.e. the question must arise in the

suit or proceeding between the same persons or their representatives

(privies). In elaborating the last element, Coomaraswamy at page 192

states, this means that estoppels are usually binding upon parties and

their privies. It is further stated that privies can be privies in blood such

as heirs, privies by estate such as lessees and assignees, and privies in

law such as executors and administrators.

21

SC/APPEAL/166/2017

According to Spencer Bower and Turner (op. cit.) at page 116

representee is not limited to parties directly involved but includes any

party to whose notice the representation should reach as per the

intention of the representor; this intention may be inferred if the

representor had knowledge that such representation would reach the

third party in the ordinary course of business.

The 5th Respondent made the representation directly to Wickramasekara

Bandara. Yet it is reasonable to assume that the act of renouncing

interest in the holding is one which would reach the other heirs in the

line of succession within his family.

After the renunciation of the right to succession by the 5th Respondent in

favour of Wickramasekara Bandara and after the death of

Wickramasekara Bandara, the Petitioner had a legitimate expectation

that she should succeed to the holding according to Rule 1 of the Third

Schedule.

If the 5th Respondent failed/showed unwillingness/renounced his right

to succeed, the 6th Respondent being the son of the 5th Respondent

cannot claim right to succeed in terms of Rule 1 of the Third Schedule of

the Land Development Ordinance since inter alia (a) the chain of

succession had been severed, and (b) by operation of the doctrine of

estoppel.

The 6th Respondent who is the son of the 5th Respondent is bound by the

representation made by his father.

Conclusion

For the aforesaid reasons, I answer both questions of law in the

affirmative and set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

22

SC/APPEAL/166/2017

I quash P10, P11 and P12 by writ of certiorari. The subsequent

documents prepared based on them and mentioned in the petition have

no force or avail in law.

As the 5th Respondent renounced his right to succession, after the death

of Wickramasekara Bandara, the Petitioner being the eldest daughter and

third child of Podi Bandara, shall succeed to the holding by operation of

Rule 1 of the Third Schedule of the Land Development Ordinance.

The appeal is accordingly allowed but without costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Buwaneka Aluwihare, P.C., J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court