1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

SC (HC) CALA / 187 / 2016 WP/HCCA/MT 53/03 (F) D.C. Mt. Lavinia Case No. 40/93/P

1. Vithanage Kusumawathie Perera

No. 492/A, Welipara, Thalawathugoda 2. Vithanage Alice Perera (Deceased)

No. 97/16, Railway Mawatha, Maharagama

2a. Meemanage Leelawathie No. 97/16, Railway Mawatha, Maharagama

3. H.D. Asilin

No. 352, Pannipitiya Road, Thalawathugoda 4. P.G. Somapala Perera

No. 125, Hiripitiya Pannipitiya 5. Meemanage Simon Perera

No. 383/15, Temple Road, Thalapathipitiya, Nugegoda.

PLAINTIFFS Vs. 1. Bethmage Marynona

No. 20/14, Wetakeiyyawala Road, Thalapathiptiya, Udahamulla Nugegoda 2. Vithanage Jayasiri Perera,

No.20/14, Wetakeiyyawala Road, Thalapathpitiya, Udahamulla Nugegoda 3. Vithanage Asilin Perera

No. 20/25, Wetakeiyyawala Road, Thalapathiptiya, Udahamulla, Nugegoda 4. Vithanage Luis alias Brampy Perera

No. 171 Madiwela, Kotte (Deceased)

2

4a. Vithanage Piyasena Perera 5. Kurupugge Magilin Perera

6. Vithanage Premawathie Perera

7. Vithanage Gunapala Perera

8. Vithanage Nandawathie Perera

9. Vithanage Kanthilatha Perera

All of No. 492/A Welipara, Thalawathugoda 10. Rupasinghe Arachchige Janenona

11. Vithanage Saranapala Perera

12. Vithanage Sugathapala Perera

All of No. 293/20, Thalapathpitiya, Nugegoda 13. H.D. Premadasa Perera

No. 352, Pannipitiya Road, Thalawathugoda 14. Vithanage Thigiris Perera,

No. 38, Pamunuwa, Maharagama 14a.Vithanage Premawathie Perera, No. 38, Pamunuwa, Maharagama

15. Meemanage Siripala Perera

16. Memanage Piyadasa Perera

17. Meemanage Kusumawathie Perera

18. Meemanage Sirimawathie Perera

19. Meemanage Nandawathie Perera

20. Meemanage Gunawathie Perera,

All of, No. 383/15 Temple Road, Thapalathpitiya 21. P.G. Thomas Perera,

3

No. 76/1, Mambulgoda, Pannipitiya 21a. Galagedarage Lili Nona, No.37, Mambulgoda, Pannipitiya

22. P.P. Karolis Perera

890, Rukmale Road, Kottawa 23. P.P. Podinona Perera,

76/1, Mabulgoda, Pannipitiya 23a. Maddumage Indra Jayanthi, 76/1, Mabulgoda, Pannipitiya 24. P.D. Premawathie Perera,

No. 1, Gajaba Place, Colombo 6 25. Vithanage Charlis Perera,

No. 38, Pamunuwa Road, Maharagama 25a. W. Babanona, No. 38, Pamunuwa Road, Maharagama

26. S.L. Podinona

27. Vithanage Seelani Perera

28. Vithanage Swarna Malanie Perera

29. Vithanage Sriyalatha Perera

30. Vithanage Jayasiri Perera

31. Vithanage Sivantha Perera

32. Vithanage Deepika Chandanie Perera

33. Vithanage Rupamala Perera

All of No. 38/1, New Hospital Road, Pamunuwa, Maharagama 34. Vithanage Sayaneris Perera,

4

No. 38/2, Pamunuwa, Maharagama 34a. Amarathunga Aarachchige Leelawathie Perera, No. 38/2, Pamunuwa, Maharagama

35. Naranpitage Karunawathie

36. Vithanage Wimalawathie Perera

37. Vithanage Pathmawathie Perera

38. Vithanage Kusumawathie Perera

39. Vithanage Chandrawathie Perera

40. Vithanage Anulawathie Perera

41. Vithanage Jagath Sri Lal Perera

42. Vithanage Nihal Perera

43. Vithanage Sunil Perera

44. Vithanage Raja Perera

All of, No. 38/3, Pamunuwa, Maharagama 45. Vithanage Piyasena Perera

No.39, New Hospital Road, Pamunuwa, Maharagama 46. Vithanage Nihal Perera

No. 38/4, New Hospital Road, Pamunuwa, Maharagama.

DEFENDANTS AND BETWEEN 1. Vithanage Kusumawathie Perera

No. 492/A, Welipara, Thalawathugoda (Deceased) 2. Vithanage Alice Perera

No. 97/16, Railway Mawatha, Maharagama

5

2a. Meemanage Leelawathie No. 97/16, Railway Mawatha, Maharagama 3. H.D. Asilin

No. 352, Pannipitiya Road, Thalawathugoda 4. P.G. Somapala Perera

No. 125, Hiripitiya, Pannipitiya

4a. Pattini Gamage Thilakarathna Perera No.11/24, Hiripitiya, Pannipitiya 5. Meemanage Simon Perera

No. 383/15, Temple Road, Thalapathipitiya, Nugegoda. PLAINTIFF APPELLANTS Vs. 1. Bethmage Marynona,

No. 20/14, Wetakeiyyawala Road, Thalapathiptiya, Udahamulla Nugegoda 2. Vithanage Jayasiri Perera

No. 20/14, Wetakeiyayawala Road, Thalapathpitiya, Udahamulla Nugegoda 3. Vithanage Asilin Perera

No. 20/25, Wetakeiyyawala Road, Thalapathiptiya, Udahamulla, Nugegoda 4. Vithanage Luis alias Brampy Perera

No. 171 Madiwela, Kotte (Deceased) 4a. Vithanage Piyasena Perera

5. Kuruppuge Magilin Perera

6. Vithanage Premawathie Perera

6

7. Vithanage Gunapala Perera

8. Vithanage Nandawathie Perera

9. Vithanage Kanthilatha Perera

All of, No. 492/A Welipara, Thalawathugoda 10. Rupasinghe Arachchige Janenona

11. Vithanage Saranapala Perera

12. Vithanage Sugathapala Perera

All of, No. 293/20, Thalapathpitiya Nugegoda 13. H.D. Premadasa Perera

No. 352, Pannipitiya Road, Thalawathugoda 14. Vithanage Thigiris Perera

No. 38, Pamunuwa, Maharagama 14a. Vithanage Premawathie Perera No. 38, Pamunuwa, Maharagama

15. Meemanage Siripala Perera

16. Memanage Piyadasa Perera

17. Meemanage Kusumawathie Perera

18. Meemanage Sirimawathie Perera

19. Meemanage Nandawathie Perera

20. Meemanage Gunawathie Perera

All of, No. 383/15, Temple Road, Thapalathpitiya

21. P.G. Thomas Perera,

No. 76/1, Mambulgoda, Pannipitiya 21a.Galagedarage Lili Nona No.37, Mambulgoda, Pannipitiya

7

22. P.P. Karolis Perera,

890, Rukmale Road, Kottawa 23. P.P. Podinona Perera,

76/1, Mabulgoda, Pannipitiya 23a.Maddumagelndra Jayanthi 76/1, Mabulgoda, Pannipitiya

24. P.D. Premawathie Perera

No. 1, Gajaba Place, Colombo 6 25. Vithanage Charlis Perera

No. 38, Pamunuwa Road, Maharagama 25a.W. Babanona, No. 38, Pamunuwa Road, Maharagama

26. S.L. Podinona

27. Vithanage Seelani Perera 28. Vithanage Swarna Malanie Perera

29. Vithanage Sriyalatha Perera

30. Vithanage Jayasiri Perera

31. Vithanage Sivantha Perera

32. Vithanage Deepika Chandanie Perera

33. Vithanage Rupamala Perera

All of, No. 38/1, New Hospital Road, Pamunuwa, Maharagama 34. Vithanage Sayaneris Perera,

No. 38/2, Pamunuwa, Maharagama 34a. Amarathunga Aarachchige Leelawathie Perera, No. 38/2, Pamunuwa, Maharagama

35. Naranpitage Karunawathie

8

36. Vithanage Wimalawathie Perera

37. Vithanage Pathmawathie Perera

38. Vithanage Kusumawathie perera

39. Vithanage Chandrawathie Perera

40. Vithanage Anulawathie Perera

41. Vithanage Jagath Sri Lal Perera

42. Vithanage Nihal Perera

43. Vithanage Sunil Perera

44. Vithanage Raja Perera

All of, No.38/3, Pamunuwa, Maharagama 45. Vithanage Piyasena Perera

No. 39, New Hospital Road, Pamunuwa, Maharagama

46. Vithanage Nihal Perera

No. 38/4, New Hospital Road, Pamunuwa, Maharagama. DEFENDANT RESPONDENTS AND NOW BETWEEN

27. Vithanage Seelani Perera No. 212, Horagala West, Padukka

28. Vithanage Swarna Malanie Perera No. 33, Bolawalana Mw, Negombo

29. Vithanage Sriyalatha Perera No.254, Daampe, Meegoda

32. Vithanage Deepika Chandanie Perera No. 89 G, Kumudu Mw, Naampamunuwa, Piliyandala.

9

33. Vithanage Rupamala Perera No. 9, Polwatte Road, Pamunuwa, Maharagama

46. Vithanage Nihal Perera No. 38/4, New Hospital Road, Pamunuwa, Maharagama.

DEFENDANT RESPONDENT PETITIONERS Vs.

1. Vithanage Kusumawathie Perera

No. 492/A, Welipara, Thalawathugoda

2a. Meemanage Leelawathie No. 97/16, Railway Mawatha, Maharagama

3. H.D. Asilin,

No. 352, Pannipitiya Road, Thalawathugoda 4. P.G. Somapala Perera

No. 125, Hiripitiya, Pannipitiya

4a. Pattini Gamage Thilakarathna Perera No.11/24, Hiripitiya, Pannipitiya (Deceased)

5. Meemanage Simon Perera

No. 383/15, Temple Road, Thalapathipitiya, Nugegoda

5. (A). Meemanage Piyadasa Perera,

5. (B). Meemanage Nandawathie Perera, 5. (C). Meemanage Gunawathi Perera All of, No. 383/15, Temple Road, Nugegoda.

10

PLAINTIFF APPELLANT RESPONDENTS

(Deceased)

1. Bethmage Marynona,

No. 20/14, Wetakeiyyawala Road, Thalapathiptiya, Udahamulla Nugegoda

1. (A) Elvitigalage Gunawathie

1. (B) Vithanage Manjula Priyangani Perera

1. (C) Vithanage Thisara Dinesh Perera

1. (D) Vithanage Damayanthi Perera

1. (E) Vithanage Dumith Priyankara Perera All of, No. 447, Werahera Road, Boralesgamuwa (Deceased)

2. Vithanage Jayasiri Perera,

20/14, Wetakeiyayawala Road, Thalapathpitiya, Udahamulla Nugegoda

2. (A) Alvitigalage Gunawathie

2. (B) Vithanage Manjula Priyangani Perera

2. (C) Vithanage Thisara Dinesh Perera

2. (D) Vithanage Damayanthi Perera

2. (E) Vithanage Dumith Priyankara Perera All of, No. 447, Werahera Road, Boralesgamuwa

3. Vithanage Asilin Perera

No. 20/25, Wetakeiyyawala Road, Thalapathiptiya, Udahamulla, Nugegoda 4. Vithanage Luis alias Brampy Perera

No. 171, Madiwela, Kotte (Deceased)

(Deceased) 4. (A). Vithanage Piyasena Perera

4. (AA). Dona Sopi Hami

4. (AB). Vithanage Hemapala Perera,

11

4. (AC). Vithanage Malani Pushpalatha Perera,

4. (AD). Vithanage Rani Pushpalatha Perera,

4. (AE). Vithanage Irangani Swarnalatha Perera

4. (AF). Vithanage Thilekaratna Perera,

4. (AG). Vithanage Senarath Perera All of, No. 39 New Hospital Road, Pamunuwa, Maharagama. (Deceased) 5. Kuruppuge Magilin Perera

5. (A). Withanage Premawathi Perera No. 39/1, New Hospital Road, Pamunuwa, Maharagama

5. (B). Withanage Kanthilatha Perera No.380/10, Bodiraja Mawatha, Habarakada, Homagama

5. (C). Withanage Nelum Priyankara Perera

5. (D). Withanage Ruwani Tharagani Perera Both of, No. 407/7, Pasal Mawatha, Thalawathugoda, Pannipitiya

5. (E). Kurupuge Pradeep Nishantha Perera

5. (F). Kuruppuge Dilan Rangana Perera

5. (G). Kuruppuge Uditha Priyanka Perera

5. (H). Kuruppuge Nayomi Hansika Perera All of, No. 492/A, Weli Para, Thalawathgoda

6. Vithanage Premawathie Perera

7. Vithanage Gunapala Perera

8. Vithanage Nandawathie Perera

9. Vithanage Kanthilatha Perera

12

All of, No. 492/A, Welipara, Thalawathugoda (Deceased) 10. Rupasinghe Arachchige Janenona 10. (A). Vithanage Saranapala Perera 10. (B). Vithanage Sugathapala Perera Both of, No. 293/20, Thalapathpitiya, Nugegoda.

11. Vithanage Saranapala Perera

12. Vithanage Sugathapala Perera

All of, No. 293/20, Thalapathpitiya Nugegoda 13. H.D. Premadasa Perera,

No. 352, Pannipitiya Road, Thalawathugoda (Deceased) 14. Vithanage Thigiris Perera,

No. 38, Pamunuwa, Maharagama (Deceased) 14a. Vithanage Premawathie Perera, No. 38, Pamunuwa, Maharagama

14. (A). Vithanage Premawathi Perera

14. (B). Vithanage Sugathapala Perera

14. (C). Vithanage Gunawathi Perera, All of, No. 393/15, Temple Road, Thalapathpitiya, Nugegoda.

15. Meemanage Siripala Perera

16. Memanage Piyadasa Perera

17. Meemanage Kusumawathie Perera

18. Meemanage Sirimawathie Perera

19. Meemanage Nandawathie Perera

20. Meemanage Gunawathie Perera

All of, No. 383/15 Temple Road, Thapalathpitiya

13

21. P.G. Thomas Perera,

No. 76/1, Mambulgoda, Pannipitiya

21a. Galagedarage Lili Nona No.37, Mambulgoda, Pannipitiya (Deceased) 22. P.P. Karolis Perera,

890, Rukmale Road, Kottawa

22. (A). Dodamgoda Arachchige Nandawathie

22. (B). Paththani Gamage Kamala Kanthi

22. (C). Paththani Gamage Dayani Perera All of, No. 890, Rukmale Road, Kottawa, Pannipitiya

23. P.P. Podinona Perera,

76/1, Mabulgoda, Pannipitiya

23a. Maddumage Indra Jayanthi 76/1, Mabulgoda, Pannipitiya 24. P.D. Premawathie Perera

No. 1, Gajaba Place, Colombo 6 (Deceased) 25. Vithanage Charlis Perera (Deceased),

No. 38, Pamunuwa Road, Maharagama (Deceased) 25a.W. Babanona No. 38, Pamunuwa Road, Maharagama 25. (A). Vithanage Nihal Perera,

25. (B). Vithanage Indrakanthi Perera,

25. (C). Vithanage Lalith Perera,

25. (D). Vithanage Nayana Kumudu Perera. All of No.38/4 New hospital Road,

14

Maharagama (Deceased) 26. S.L. Podinona

26. (A). Vithanage Seelani Perera

26. (B). Vithanage Swarna Malani Perera

26. (C). Vithanage Siriyalatha Perera

26. (D). Vithanage Sivantha Perera

26. (E). Vithanage Deepika Chandani Perera 26. (F). Vithanage Roopamala Perera All of No.9, Polwatta Road, Pamunuwa, Maharagama (Deceased) 30. Vithanage Jayasiri Perera

30. (A). Vithanage Seelani Perera

30. (B). Vithanage Swarna Malani Perera

30. (C). Vithanage Siriyalatha Perera

30. (D). Vithanage Sivantha Perera

30. (E). Vithanage Deepika Chandani Perera

30. (F). Vithanage Roopamala Perera All of, No.9, Polwatta Road, Pamunuwa, Maharagama

31. Vithanage Sivantha Perera

All of, No. 38/1, New Hospital Road, Pamunuwa, Maharagama 34. Vithanage Sayaneris Perera

No. 38/2, Pamunuwa, Maharagama

34a. Amarathunga Aarachchige Leelawathie Perera, No. 38/2, Pamunuwa, Maharagama (Deceased) 35. Naranpitage Karunawathie Perera

35. (A). Vithanage Wimalawathi Perera

15

35. (B). Vithanage Kusumawathi Perera

35. (C). Vithanage Chandralatha Perera

35. (D). Vithanage Dagasiri Perera

35. (E), Vithanage Nihal Perera

35. (F). Vithanage Raja Perera

35. (G). Vithanage Pathmawathi Perera,

35. (H). Vithanage Anulawathi

35. (1). Alawaththe Gamaralalage Sandya Kumari Abeyratna

35. (J). Vithanage Gayathri Madushika Perera

35. (K). Vithanage Himali Madushika Perera

35. (L). Vidanage Kavindi Madushika Perera All of No.38/2 New Hospital Road, Pamunuwa, Maharagama

36. Vithanage Wimalawathie Perera

37. Vithanage Pathmawathie Perera

38. Vithanage Kusumawathic perera

39. Vithanage Chandrawathie Perera

40. Vithanage Anulawathie Perera

41. Vithanage Jagath Sri Lal Perera

42. Vithanage Nihal Perera

43. Vithanage Sunil Perera

44. Vithanage Raja Perera

All of No.38/3, Pamunuwa, Maharagama (Deceased) 45. Vithanage Piyasena Perera

No. 39, New Hospital Road,

16

Pamunuwa, Maharagama

45. (A). Dona Sopi Hami

45. (B). Vithanage Hemapala Perera,

45. (C). Vithanage Malani Pushpalatha Perera,

45. (D). Vithanage Rani Pushpalatha Perera,

45. (E). Vithanage Irangani Swarnalatha Perera

45. (F). Vithanage Thilekaratna Perera,

45. (G). Vithanage Senarath Perera All of No. 39 New Hospital Road, Pamunuwa, Maharagama. DEFENDANT RESPONDENT RESPONDENTS Before

:

P. Padman Surasena, J. E.A.G.R. Amarasekara, J. Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J. Counsel : Ranjan Suwandarathne, PC. with Anil Rajakaruna and Ms.

Dulna De Alwis for the 27th, 28th, 29th, 32nd, 33rd, & 46th

Defendant Respondent Petitioners.

Ikram Mohamed, PC. with Lal Matarage instructed by S.B.

Dissanayake Associates for the 1st, 2A & 4A Plaintiff

Appellant Respondents.

Nayani P. Dayaratna for the 24th Defendant Respondent

Respondents.

17

Argued on : 27.01.2023

Decided on

:

23.05.2025

E. A. G. R. Amarasekara, J.

When this matter was taken up on 16/09/2022 before this Court, this Court made no order as

the Defendant-Respondent-Petitioners (hereinafter referred to as the Petitioners) were not

ready to support the case on that date. In fact, as per the minutes dated 26.05.22 and Journal

Entry dated 06.09.2022 (Hereinafter referred to as J.E), the Counsel for the Petitioners had

moved to file fresh substitution papers, and those papers appeared to have been filed. What was

due on said 16/09/2022 was to support those substitution papers. Further, it appears that the

said substitution was to be taken place in accordance with the application made on behalf of

the Petitioners on 12/03/2021 and the direction made on that date in that regard. On that date,

namely 12.03.2021, a junior counsel for the Petitioners had moved to file substitution papers

for the 3rd Plaintiff Appellant Respondent and 13th Defendant Respondent Respondent

who were dead. Thus, on this application, Court had given 6 weeks to file substitution papers

and to support those on 04/06/2021. As per the J.E. dated 15/10/2021 made by the Registry,

those substitution papers had not been tendered to Court even by that date. As per the minute

dated 31/01/2021, the Petitioners had moved for a further 4 weeks time. As per the J. Es dated

13/01/2022 and 18/01/2022, it appears some papers have been filed. However, when the matter

was mentioned on 21/01/2022, the Petitioners have moved to amend the said papers and Court

has directed to file them within one month. Anyhow, J.E. dated 04/03/2022 states that the said

amended papers were not filed within the given time. As per the minute dated 08.03.2022, the

Counsel for the Petitioners has moved for further time to file papers for substitution as they

had received the ID copies on a date close to that date. One week had been again given to the

Petitioners by the Court. As per the J.E. dated 29.04.2022, the Petitioners had moved for further

time, and 4 weeks had been given. When this matter was mentioned on 26.05.2022, Counsel

for the Petitioners had moved for further time to file fresh substitution papers along with

necessary documents. Again, 6 weeks had been granted by the Court. As per the J.E. dated

06.09.2022, it appears that the said substitution papers had been filed by that date, but as

indicated above, when it was to be supported on 16/09/2022, the Counsel was not ready to

support it which made the Court to make no order. The said decision to make no order itself

18

indicated the dissatisfaction of the Court towards the aforesaid conduct of the Petitioners in

regard to the way the Petitioners had been moving time to file and support said intended

substitutions. However, not making an order for dismissal indicates that the Court, at that

moment, did not wish to dismiss the application, per se, perhaps giving one more chance to

come fully ready within a reasonable time with a reasonable explanation and support the said

applications. However, since 16/09/2022, no application was made to relist and support the

said papers for substitution until the Petitioners filed two new sets of substitution papers on

17/01/2023 by way of a Petition and Affidavit along with a motion, which was 4 months after

the said date of making no order, requesting to substitute one, K.P Priyanthi, for the 3rd Plaintiff

Appellant- Respondent and 13th Defendant Respondent-Respondent.

The Attorney-at-law for the Plaintiff Appellant has also filed a motion dated 18/01/2021,

moving to vacate the no order made as aforesaid, and make an order dismissing the

application for leave to appeal on the ground of lack of showing due diligence to pursue the

application for leave to appeal, since 24/10/2016 several dates have been granted for

substitution.

When this matter was taken up on 27/01/2023, on behalf of the Plaintiff Respondents as well

as on behalf of the Petitioner Respondent, Counsel made their oral submissions, and the

Parties have thereafter filed their written submissions.

In response to the allegation of lack of due diligence, the Petitioners have stated that they took

steps to effect substitution of 15 deceased parties, some of whom were deceased even prior to

the delivery of judgement by the learned High Court Judges. In this regard, the Petitioners

further have stated that they took steps to serve notices on 72 parties that were substituted on

11.02.2019. Whether it is necessary to substitute 72 parties for the deceased 15 parties will be

discussed later in this order. It is true that many parties were substituted on 11.02.2019 (vide

minute dated 11.02.2019), but it shows that for a deceased one person several were substituted,

and it further shows that even when a substituted party was deceased instead of appointing a

person to represent the original party several were appointed as substituted parties. (For the

above observations, see the minute dated 11.02.2019 and the relevant directions made for the

substitution of various parties; especially substitution made for the deceased 4A Defendant

Respondent Respondent and 25A Defendant Respondent Respondent). Whether it is

needed to substitute several legal representatives for one party, when a party or substituted

19

party is deceased, will be discussed later. Above observations are important, since bringing in

unnecessary parties consumes time to collect information, make applications and to go through

the necessary papers and make orders. However, the J.E.s and minutes show that even during

that time, the Petitioners took considerable time to file papers for the substitutions done on

11.02.2019.

However, aforesaid making of no order and thereafter the application to dismiss the matter

for lack of due diligence happened due to not taking effective steps for a considerable period

to substitute for the deceased 3rd Plaintiff Appellant-Respondent and 13th Defendant

Respondent Respondent. In this regard, how the time was moved to take such steps from

12/03/2021 to the date this court made no order and taking further 4 months thereafter to file

papers for substitution had been already explained at the beginning of this order.

With regard to the substitution for the deceased 3rd Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent, what has

been stated in the written submissions of the Petitioners is that there were discrepancies

regarding the name of the 3rd Plaintiffs Appellant- Respondent and as for the directions made

by Court, the Petitioners had to take steps to file Affidavits etc. As per the minutes and/or J. Es

after 12/03/2021, I cannot find any direction given by Court regarding the substitution papers

other than on many applications the Court has granted time. Even if the Court found such

discrepancies and made directions, it shows the lackadaisical approach of the Petitioners and

their representatives had in preparing the substitution papers. This Court has a responsibility in

substituting persons in the place of deceased persons, and the identity of the person to be

substituted is one among other considerations that this Court should satisfy itself when

substituting for a deceased person. It is the duty of the person/s or their lawyers, who move for

substitution, to prepare necessary papers and present facts in a manner sufficient to satisfy

Court for the intended substitution. Their own fault cannot be used as a reason to show that

there was no lack of due diligence. As far as the application for substitution for the 3rd Plaintiff-

Appellant Respondent and the 13th Defendant Respondent Respondent are concerned

(irrespective of time taken and application made regarding the substitutions done previously),

I have no hesitation to say that the Petitioners and their lawyers before this Court have not

shown due diligence to take steps in pursuing their own applications for substitution. As

explained later, they have also not shown due regard to the applicable law relating to

substitution in partition cases. However, I observed that not only the Petitioners, but even the

Respondents, failed to bring to the notice of Court, the applicable law in relation to substitution

20

in partition actions. It is regrettable, even the Court, may be due to the lack of time when these

applications were made moving for further time in open courts, had not considered whether it

is necessary to grant time for such a long period without taking the main matter for support. In

this regard I would now refer to the applicable law in relation to the substitution in partition

actions.

Substitution in Partition Actions

Prior to the amendment made to the Partition Law by Act No. 17 of 1997, Section 81 of the

Act provided that when a party died after the institution of the action that a Court may on an

ex parte application of any other party, appoint a person to represent the estate of deceased for

the purpose of the action. It only required a person to be appointed as the legal representative

but not all the heirs or persons who may derive title through the deceased person. Such

appointment was to be made only if the court was satisfied that such appointment was necessary

or desirable for the purpose of enabling the Court to proceed with the action with a view to its

speedy determination. Thus, the law before the amendment made in 1997 expected only one

person to be appointed to represent the estate of the deceased party. The amendment brought

in by the Act No. 17 of 1997 made provisions for a party (the plaintiff, defendants, intervenient

or added parties etc.) to file memorandum nominating, in accordance with Section 81, a person

to be his legal representative for the purpose of the action, in the event that party dies pending

the final determination of the action vide Sections 4, 19 and 69 as amended by the said

amending Act. The new Section 81, which repealed the previous Section 81 which is quoted

below, provided that every party to a partition action shall file a memorandum at least

nominating one person, and not more than three persons, in order of preference, to be his legal

representative for the purpose of the action in the event of his death pending the final

determination of the action.

81. (1) Every party to a partition action or any other person required to file a memorandum

under this Law, (hereinafter referred to as "the nominator") shall file, or cause to be filed

in court, a memorandum, substantially in the form set out in the Second Schedule to this

Law, nominating at least one person, and not more than three persons, in order of

preference, to be his legal representative for the purposes of the action in the event of his

death pending the final determination of the action.

21

(2)(a) One of such nominees shall, in the order of preference in which their names are set

out in the memorandum, be deemed to be the legal representative of the nominator for the

purposes of the action, on the death of such nominator.

(b) In the event of the death or incapacity of any of the nominees whose names are set out

in the memorandum, the person next nominated in order of preference shall be deemed

to be the legal representative for the purposes of the action, in the event of the death of

the nominator.

(c) The person or persons so nominated shall subscribe his or their signatures to the

memorandum signifying consent to be so appointed as legal representative. The signatures

of the nominator and those of the nominee or nominees so consenting to be appointed shall

be witnessed by an Attorney-at-Law or Justice of the Peace or a Commissioner of Oaths:

Provided however, that failure to file such memorandum shall not by such failure alone

render the plaint, statement of claim, or application to be added as a party defective or,

notwithstanding anything in section 7, be a cause or ground for rejecting such plaint,

statement of claim or any application to be added as a party.

(3) The court may at any time before the final determination of the action, on its awn motion

or on the application of any party, require a party to the action or any person required to file

a memorandum under the provisions of this Law, to file such memorandum on or before a date

appointed for such purpose by court.

(4) A nominee may, at any time prior to the death of the nominator apply, with notice to the

nominator, to court by way of motion to withdraw his consent to be such nominee and in such

event the court shall make order that he ceases to be the nominee of the nominator and shall

cause the name of such nominee to be struck off the memorandum filed by the nominator.

(5) A nominator may, subject to the provisions of subsection (1) of this section, at any time

before the final determination of the action make application, with notice to the nominees, to

tender a fresh memorandum nominating one or more nominees. On the filing of such new

memorandum, the previous memorandum of such nominator shall stand revoked and the

nomination contained in such fresh memorandum shall forthwith take effect

22

(6) On the death of a nominator, the person first nominated in the memorandum filed by the

nominator in order of preference, shall be deemed to be the legal representative of such

nominator for the purposes of the action from the time of his death.

(7) A nominee deemed to be the legal representative of a deceased nominator shall be entitled

to take all such steps for the purposes of the action as the deceased nominator would have been

entitled to take had he been alive.

(8)(a) A nominee shall not decline to act as the legal representative of the deceased nominator.

He may however with the leave of the Court first had and obtained, by way of petition and after

notice to the other nominees if any, of such nominator, apply for permission from court to be

released from the office of legal representative of such nominator.

(b) In the event of the court granting such permission, the nominee who is next in order of

preference in the memorandum filed by the nominator shall be deemed to be the legal

representative of such deceased nominator, for the purposes of the action.

(c) Where an application under paragraph (a) of this subsection is made by a nominee who

was the sole nominee or sole remaining nominee of a deceased nominator, such nominee shall

notice the heirs of such deceased nominator regarding his application and in the event of the

court granting permission as aforesaid, such court shall appoint a consenting heir of such

deceased nominator to act as the legal representative of such deceased nominator for the

purposes of the action.

(9) Notwithstanding that a party or person has failed to file a memorandum under the

provisions of this section, and that there has been no appointment of a legal representative

to represent the estate of such deceased party or person, any judgment or decree entered in

the action or any order made, partition or sale effected or thing done in the action shall be

deemed to be valid and effective and in conformity with the provisions of this Law and shall

bind the legal heirs and representatives of such deceased party or person. Such failure to file

a memorandum shall also not be a ground for invalidating the proceedings in such action.

23

(10)(a) On the death of a party or person who had failed to file a memorandum as required

by this section, any party or person may apply to court by an exparte application, requesting

that a person be appointed as the legal representative of such deceased party or person and

the court may, on being satisfied after inquiry that such appointment is necessary, appoint a

suitable person to be the legal representative of such deceased party or person for the

purposes of the action. Such legal representative shall be bound by the proceedings had up

to the time of such appointment.

(b) Such application and appointment shall not be a ground for the postponement of the trial

or proceedings;

Provided that the court may, in its discretion, after recording reasons therefor and on the

prepayment of costs, allow a postponement of the trial if in the opinion of court, it is in the

interests of justice to do so

(c) In ordering pre-payment of costs, the court shall take into account the date of institution of

the action and the dates on which trial was held prior to such application and the stage at

which the action is and any other matters which the court considers relevant.

(11)(a) An heir of a deceased nominator may, at any time after the death of such nominator,

apply to court to have the legal representative of such deceased nominator removed and to

have another person named in such application or the person next named in order of preference

in the memorandum filed by the deceased nominator, appointed as such legal representative.

The person who for the time being is the legal representative of the deceased nominator shall

be made a respondent to such application.

(b) The court may, upon being satisfied that it is in the interests of the heirs of the deceased

nominator to do so, remove such legal representative and appoint the person next named in

order of preference in the memorandum filed by the deceased nominator or if there are

sufficient grounds for doing so, appoint the person named in the application, as the legal

representative of the deceased nominator.

24

(c) An application under this section shall he by way of petition and affidavit and the court may

in its discretion, issue notice of the application to the other heirs, if any, of the deceased

nominator,

(12) No proceeding under this Law shall be postponed or adjourned nor any step in the

action postponed by reason of the death of a party or person required to file a memorandum

under this Law.

(13) An application under subsections (4), (5), (8)(a), (10) or (11) shall not be aground for

the postponement of the trial. The court may however grant a postponement on the payment

of costs by the person making the application, if it is of the opinion that it is in the interests

of justice to allow such postponement.

(14) For the purposes of this section "legal representative" means, a person who represents the

estate of a deceased party or person, for the purposes of the action, by virtue of a nomination,

or of an appointment by court under this section. (highlighted by me to emphasize)

The above Section 81 brought in by the amending Act also shows that, at a given time the law

requires only one legal representative to represent the estate of the deceased party. The present

caption to this Court in contrast to the said requirement shows that several persons have been

appointed as legal representatives to some parties who are dead on the request of the Petitioners.

As said before the collection of material, presenting substitution papers and supporting such

substitutions consume considerable time.

(It must be noted that in a partition action, shares and rights are granted at the end to the original

party, and the legal representative, if any, gets it not for him/her personally but on behalf of all

the heirs of the deceased party or for the person/s entitled under the deceased party see Don

Alfred Weerasekara V Gonakoladeniya Gamage Pantis Appuhamy S.C. Appeal No.

172/2017 S C Minutes 30.01.2024. Thus, appointing one legal representative at a given time is

more than sufficient).

The said new Section 81 shows that;

Failure to file a memorandum nominating a legal representative does not invalidate any

judgement, sale, order or thing done in the action, and the legal heirs and representatives

25

of the deceased person are bound by them. Further such failure is not a ground to

invalidate the proceedings.

If there was a failure to file a memorandum by the deceased party, any party may apply

to court to appoint a legal representative for the deceased party, but with the

appointment, such legal representative shall be bound by the proceedings had up to the

time of such appointment.

It is only an heir of the deceased nominator who could apply to remove a nominee or

nominees named in the memorandum and move to appoint a new person.

Any application for appointment made under Section 81 shall not be a ground for

postponement and postponement of trial has to be made only on payment of costs and

sometimes only on the prepayment of payment of costs.

Even though, it is not mentioned in the said Section 81 of the Partition Law that the nomination

made through memorandum are relevant and applies to the appeals made after the District

Court proceedings, Samayawardhena J. in Subasinghe Mudiyanselage Rosalin Bertha of

Dummalasooriya v Maththumagala Kankanamlage Juwan Appu of Dummalasooriya SC

App. No. 160/2016 SC Minutes 02.12.2022 expressed the view that these provisions are

equally applicable in proceedings before the Court of Appeal or the Supreme Court. I also agree

that these provisions apply to the proceedings during an appeal for the reasons mentioned

below. However, I prefer to limit their applications to proceeding in appeal over the decisions

in the original court since revisions are distinct applications that originates not in the original

court but in the Court that has revisionary powers where exceptional circumstances to make

that application exists and miscarriage of justice has been occurred. Since the revision

application originates in a different court, in such applications the applicant may have to name

all the parties who may be affected by the said applications. In contrast, a direct appeal

originates in the original court by filing notice of appeal and petition of appeal and it is a

continuation of the same proceeding. On the other hand, a leave to appeal application is not

filed in the original court but when it is refused it confirms the decision in the first appeal and

if granted it will be a continuation of the appeal made in the original court making it a

continuation of the same appeal process. However, till the leave is granted, it is a new

26

application filed before the relevant Appellate Court. Thus, in the matter in hand, this leave to

appeal application is a new application before this this Court until leave is granted to continue

with the original appeal made. In such a situation, Supreme Court rules relating to such

applications also have to be considered.

Following are the reasons for me to state that the provisions relating to substitution in the

Partition Law as brought in by the amending Act are equally applicable to the proceedings

during appeal:

1. As per Section 4 and 81 of the Partition Law as amended, memorandum is filed

nominating legal representatives for one to be appointed in the event of the nominators

death pending the final determination of the action. If an appeal is filed, the judgement

or decree of the original court does not become final till the determination of the Appeal,

and the finality depends on the decision of the appeal. Thus, the word proceedings

found in Section 81(a), 10(a), (b), has to be interpreted to include the proceedings in

appeal.

2. If it is interpreted to say that the filing of memorandum and provisions relating to

nominations contained therein is applicable only till the delivery of the judgement by

the original court, any aggrieved party who intends to appeal against the judgement will

face an immense difficulty since the case record is not defective till the pronouncement

of judgement, but causing that party to find suitable legal representatives for the

deceased parties who have not filed their respective memorandums and get them

substituted and to serve notice of appeal within 14 days as per Section 755(2)(b) of the

Civil Procedure Code. Taking such steps within 14 days is impractical and may be

impossible unless details relating to such legal representatives are known to the said

aggrieved party. Law does not expect one to do impractical and impossible things. Final

determination of a Partition Action reaches only with the allocation of shares and giving

them to the relevant parties, but, if an appeal is pending, that is subject to the finality

reached through the decisions of the Courts with Appellate Powers.

Hence, as indicated above, I also hold the view that provisions related to substitution in

partition actions as amended by Act No. 17 of 1997 are applicable to proceedings in appeal.

Aforesaid amending Act No. 17 of 1997 was certified on 12/08/1997. This partition action was

27

pending before the District Court by that time and the trial commenced only after 23/04/1998.

The terminology in Section 81(1) brought in by the said amending Act does not exclude

pending action. Thus, the said provisions in said Section 81 also applies to the case at hand.

As explained above, provisions of Section 81 of the Partition Law as amended applies until the

decision of the first Appeal by the Civil Appellate Court, and since no leave has still been

granted in the matter in hand, there is no continuation of the first Appeal or the original action

until leave is granted. Hence, it is important to observe how the substitution has to be done if

it becomes necessary. It must be reiterated that if leave is granted, it will be the continuation of

the original action or the first appeal subject to the decision being given in the final appeal.

Thus, any substitution that is going to be taken until the leave is granted should not be in

conflict with original scheme contemplated by Section 81 of partition law as amended. For

example, if the deceased has nominated a person to be appointed as the legal representative in

a memorandum filed, if a new person is substituted, once the leave is granted, new substitution

will be in conflict with the nomination made through the memorandum and there will be issues

as to who has the right to represent the deceaseds interests.

The instant appeal is an appeal made in terms of section 5C introduced to High Court of The

Provinces Act No. 19 of 1990, by Section 2 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special

Provisions) (Amendment) Act, No54 or 2006.There is no specific Rules made by the Supreme

Court in this regard. Thus, it is the Part I sub part C relevant to Other Appeals (Rule 28) and

Part II (General Provisions Regarding Appeals and Applications) in the Supreme Court Rules

1990 that will be relevant to this leave to appeal application from the Civil Appeal High Court.

As per Rule 28 (5) found in said sub part C reads as follows;

In every such petition of appeal and notice of appeal, there shall be named as Respondents,

all parties in whose favour the judgment or order complained against was delivered, or

adversely to whom such appeal is preferred, or whose interest may be adversely affected by the

success of the appeal, and names and present addresses of the appellant and the respondents

shall be set out in full.

The above shows what is intended is to make the parties that may be affected by the Appeal to

be made respondents. Does this mean that the aggrieved party who intends to file a leave to

appeal application must find legal representatives for all the deceased parties? I think in finding

an answer one should not go against the scheme introduced by Section 81 as amended as the

28

ultimate goal is to continue the same action or first appeal if the leave is granted until a final

decision is given by this Court sitting in appeal. Thus, if a necessary Party as contemplated by

aforesaid Rule 28(5) is deceased prior to or after the High Court Judgment, what the aggrieved

party who intended to appeal against the judgment of the Civil Appeal High Court should do

is to bring the nominee in the memorandum as the legal representative. If there is no such

memorandum has been filed, it is true that the aggrieved party can make application to

substitute, but it cannot be said that the law expects that aggrieved party to go on a voyage of

discovery to find who the proper legal representative is as it is obnoxious to the intention of

the legislature not to delay partition actions on the ground of substitution. What the legislature

intended to avoid should not be allowed to be disturbed through a leave to appeal application

which is filed with the expectation of continuing the same appeal process. Thus, interpretation

and application of the Supreme Court Rules also has to be done in that background.

On the other hand, if the law has provided a mechanism for a party to safeguards his or his

legal representatives interest in a certain way, the disregard of such provision by that party

should not affect the rights of other parties to cause delay in enforcing or enjoying their rights.

Thus, what the Petitioners should have done in this application was to name the nominees in

the memorandums (if any) for the deceased parties and proceed to support the application for

leave. On the other hand, if no one has been nominated for deceased parties, if the petitioners

knew who should be the legal representatives, moved to substitute them without moving for

time and to support their application for leave. Instead, as explained above, time has taken to

substitute several legal representatives for the original Parties including substation for the

substituted parties. If there was any difficulty to find legal representatives, it was the duty of

the Petitioners to enlighten the Court as to the present state of law as to the substitution of

parties in partition cases and get the application fixed for support for leave. Instead, from 2016,

this application is still pending for owing to applications for substitution for deceased parties.

In a way it evinces showing lack of due diligence to the applicable law as well proper interest

to proceed with their application for leave.

Even if it is considered for the sake of argument that the Petitioners are bound to bring in legal

representatives for the deceased parties, irrespective of whether memorandums have been filed

in the original Court or not, following will establish the lack of due diligence in prosecuting

their applications for leave to proceed. (For this it is sufficient to consider what has happened

even after their application to substitute for the deceased 3rd Plaintiff -Appellant-Respondent

29

and 13th Defendant-Respondent -Respondent, from the date they moved to take such steps,

namely 12/03/2021 to the date they file last sets of papers for substitution after this court made

no order, even though the time taken for previous substitutions are also indicative of such

lack of due diligence).

On 12.03.2021 only 6weeks were given to file substitution papers but they have not

been tendered even until 15.10.2023- vide J.E dated 15.10.2021.

The Petitioners have not given proper instructions even till 21.10.2021 vide minutes

dated 21.10.2021.

Even though some papers have been filed by 10.01.2022 and 13.01.2022 and

18.01.2022 (vide J. Es dated 13.01.2022 and 18.01.2022), they seem to be not in order

as they wanted to amend it vide minutes dated 21.01.2022.

No such amended papers were filed within one month as per the directions given vide

J.E dated 04.03.2022

Further on week time given on an undertaking given by the Counsel vide minutes

dated 08.03.2022 but further time has been moved vide J.E dated 29 .04.2022 and

accordingly 4 weeks has been given, but further time has been moved to file fresh

papers vide minutes dated 26.05 2022 indicating their previous papers are insufficient

and inadequate or not in order.- Again 6 weeks have been given but papers were not

filed within 6 weeks but belatedly filed on 02.09.2022-vide J.E dated 06.09.2022 but

the Counsel was not ready to support it and no order was made - - vide minutes dated

16.09.2022

What the Petitioners should have done after the no order was to file a motion as soon

as possible and support the said papers but have taken four months and filed a motion

with new two sets of papers and moved to support them vide J.E dated 19.01.2023

indicating that moving on counsels ground on the previous occasion lacks clarity. It

appears that, in fact, they needed to file fresh papers again for some reason. If it was

the reason, on the day this Court make No Order, this Court would have dismissed

the application on that day itself. Just after the filing of this application to relist for

support for substitution based on those new papers, the Plaintiff Respondents has also

filed the application to dismiss the main application for not showing due diligence, and

the above facts speaks for itself to indicate the lack of due diligence on the part of the

30

Petitioners and their lawyers to support their application for leave to proceed

expeditiously.

What is discussed above indicate that the Petitioners failed to show due diligence to proceed

with their application for leave to proceed. Thus, this Court has to uphold the objections raised

by the Plaintiff- Appellant- Respondents.

Hence, this application for leave to proceed is dismissed for not showing due diligence to

support the main application.

Application Dismissed. No Costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court P. Padmen Surasena, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court