In the matter of an Appeal to the Supreme

Court from the judgement of the High

Court of Western Province (holden in

Colombo) exercising Civil/Commercial

jurisdiction dated 17/10/2013 in terms of

the provisions of the High Court of

Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 10

of 1996.

Eric Peiris,

No. 2A, Cemetery Road,

Minuwangoda.

PLAINTIFF

Vs

Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation Ltd,

No.21, Vauxhall Street,

Colombo 02.

DEFENDANT

AND NOW BETWEEN

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

SC/ CHC / APPEAL / 56 / 2014

Page 2 of 14

Eric Peiris,

No. 2A, Cemetery Road,

Minuwangoda.

PLAINTIFF - APPELLANT

Vs

Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation Ltd,

No.21, Vauxhall Street,

Colombo 02.

DEFENDANT - RESPONDENT

BEFORE : Vijith Malalgoda, PC. J

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J

Shiran Gooneratne, J

COUNSEL : Chathura Galhena with Manoja

Gunawardena and Namal Madhushanka

for the Plaintiff -Appellant.

Harsha Amarasekara, PC. with Shehan

Gunawardena and Nadun Dissanayake

for the Defendant-Respondent.

Page 3 of 14

ARGUED ON : 28.02.2022

DECIDED ON : 22.08.2024

A. H. M. D. Nawaz, J.

1. This appeal stems from an action instituted in the Commercial High

Court, despite the presence of an arbitration agreement within the

primary contract (Fire Insurance Policy) between the Plaintiff-Appellant

and the Defendant-Respondent. The central issue in this appeal is whether

a party to an arbitration agreement can establish an independent cause of

action based on the correspondence exchanged between the parties, as

argued by the Plaintiff-Appellant in this case.

2. In other words, the Plaintiff-Appellant, Eric Peiris, insisted that the

proceedings be entertained and continued in the Commercial High Court,

while the Defendant-Respondent, Sri Lanka Insurance Co. Ltd. (SLIC),

opposed the action, citing the arbitration agreement in the fire insurance

policy.

3. The learned Commercial High Court Judge after having taken evidence

upheld the objection raised by the Sri Lanka Insurance Cooperation and

concluded that there was no jurisdiction conferred on the court as a result

of the arbitration agreement.

Page 4 of 14

4. In essence, the arbitration agreement in the main contractthe fire

insurance policycompetes for recognition in this case against a separate

contract that the Plaintiff-Appellant claims emerged from the

correspondences, thereby providing the basis for a court action.

5. At the very outset, let me outline the basis of the Plaintiff's claim to a

separate contract that provides the cause of action. This separate contract

is claimed to be constituted by a letter marked 'P1,' dated March 18, 2008,

in which the Defendant-Respondent, Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation,

offered to pay a sum of Rs. 8,195,162 in full and final settlement of the

amount due under the fire insurance policy. I must observe that the

Plaintiff-Appellant assigns different classifications to the letter 'P1.' While

'P1' itself uses the term "offer to pay," the Plaintiff-Appellant characterizes

it as an agreement, asserting that a breach of this agreement constitutes

the cause of action.

6. At this stage, it is pertinent to refer to the facts of the case. The business

entity known as M/S Peiris Press, designated as the insured in the fire

insurance policy, entered into the contract of insurance for its industrial

business premises, which included the building, along with fixtures and

fittings, and two printing machines located in Minuwangoda.

7. The printing machinery had been mortgaged to Hatton National Bank

(HNB), Minuwangoda, and HNB's name appears in the Fire Insurance

Page 5 of 14

Policy as the mortgagee, likely due to the mortgage of the two printing

machines in exchange for some financial accommodations. This contract

of insurance was apparently entered into on September 18, 2007. This

insurance contract contains a separate and distinct arbitration agreement,

which reads as follows:

If any difference arises as to the amount of any loss or damage such difference

shall independently of all other questions be referred to the decision of an

arbitrator, to be appointed in writing by the parties in differences

8. Thus, it is evident that the parties have consensually agreed to refer any

differences regarding the amount of any loss or damage to arbitration. The

backdrop of the current dispute between the parties involves a fire

outbreak, which resulted in loss and damage to some of the Plaintiff's

machinery. In response, Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation, by a letter

marked 'P1' and dated March 18, 2008, offered M/S Peiris Press a sum of

Rs. 8,195,162 as compensation for the loss and damage incurred by the

partnership, of which the Plaintiff, Eric Peiris, was a partner.

9. In the following month, on April 21, 2008, events took a different turn. The

Defendant-Respondent, SLIC, sent a letter marked 'P2,' in which they

claimed that although the initial estimate of the loss was Rs. 8,495,162, it

later became apparent that the actual loss would have been significantly

lower. Specifically, they noted that the maximum value of the Heidelberg

Page 6 of 14

Printing machine damaged in the fire was only Rs. 1,100,000. In other

words, the letter 'P2' alleged that the value of the Heidelberg Printing

machine had been significantly overestimated at the time of taking the

insurance policy, suggesting an attempt to unjustly enrich the partnership.

This allegation was a central point in the letter dated April 21, 2008.

10. In the letter, Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation (SLIC) went on to state that

it was repudiating the Plaintiff-Appellant's claim and rejecting any

entitlement to compensation. SLIC justified this decision by asserting that

there had been a breach of uberrima fides, the doctrine of utmost good faith,

which is fundamental to the formation of any insurance contract.

11. The letter 'P2' further informed the Plaintiff that, due to the breach of good

faith, Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation was withdrawing the entire

amount previously offered in 'P1.'

12. This led to the issuance of a subsequent letter of demand, marked 'P13'

and dated February 5, 2010, which went unanswered by Sri Lanka

Insurance Corporation. The non-response was subsequently argued to be

an implied admission of liability, with reliance placed on the case of De

Mel v. P. Saravanamuttu v. R. A. De Mel 1, which has been followed by

1 49 N.L.R 529

Page 7 of 14

many precedents, including Seneviratne and Others v. Lanka Orix

Leasing Company Ltd.2

13. However, I would venture to state that a non-response to a letter of

demand, by itself, does not necessarily give rise to an inference of implied

acknowledgment of liability. When the rejection of a claim has been

explained with reasons in a prior correspondence, remaining silent in

response to a subsequent letter of demand cannot automatically be

interpreted as an admission of liability. Therefore, the inference of liability

is not automatic upon a non-response to a letter of demand.

14. In 'P13,' the letter of demand, the Plaintiff also sought a sum of Rs.

25,000,000 as damages within 14 days, in addition to the Rs. 8,495,162 that

had been rejected by Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation. This demand

ultimately led to the institution of legal action in the Commercial High

Court on February 22, 2010. The Plaintiff prayed for a declaration that the

Defendant should pay the agreed sum of Rs. 8,495,162, along with interest

from February 22, 2010, until full payment. Additionally, the Plaintiff

included a claim for the consequential loss of Rs. 25,000,000 in the prayer

to the plaint.

15. In their answer dated November 3, 2010, the SLIC raised a preliminary

objection, arguing that the court lacked jurisdiction to proceed with the

2 (2006) 1 Sri.LR 230.

Page 8 of 14

case due to the arbitration clause in the main contract (Fire Insurance

Policy). This objection was made pursuant to Section 5 of the Arbitration

Act No. 11 of 1995.

16. Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation raised the demur that the arbitration

clause deprived the Commercial High Court of jurisdiction and, therefore,

the action should be dismissed. It is important to note that while the

Plaintiff conceded that the insurance contract contained an arbitration

clause, he alleged that his cause of action arose independently of that

arbitration agreement. In fact, the plaint specifically stated that the

Plaintiffs present cause of action has not arisen out of the said clause.

17. Referring to 'P1' and 'P2,' the two letters sent by SLIC, the Plaintiff -

Appellant attributed the cause of action to these communications.

According to 'P1,' the Defendant had offered to pay a sum of Rs. 8,495,162 to the

Plaintiff in respect of the Plaintiffs claim. However, in 'P2,' dated April 21, 2008,

when the Defendant sought to obtain the said monies, the Plaintiff unilaterally

withdrew the payment."

18. The Plaintiff-Appellant argued that these letters, 'P1' and 'P2,' constituted

the cause of action, entirely independent of the arbitration agreement. In

other words, these two letters stood alone, unconnected to the arbitral

clause. Therefore, the arbitration agreement could not denude the court of

jurisdiction, as it was not triggered in this case. This was the argument

Page 9 of 14

raised by the Plaintiff-Appellant in the Commercial High Court and has

been consistently maintained even before this court.

19. The learned Judge of the Commercial High Court considered the evidence

before ruling on the preliminary objection. At the conclusion of the trial,

the learned Judge upheld the preliminary objection raised by SLIC and

dismissed the Plaintiff's action. In a judgment dated October 17, 2013, the

Commercial High Court Judge determined that he had no jurisdiction to

decide the disputed questions of fact in the case. There were 22 issues

raised by both the Appellant and SLIC, but according to the learned High

Court Judge, none of these issues could be adjudicated upon due to the

lack of jurisdiction in the High Court.

20. Thus, upon a perusal of the judgment, it would appear that party

autonomy inherent in an arbitration agreement was given pride of place

by the learned High Court Judge and it is implicit in the judgment that the

dispute between the parties is not capable of being adjudicated upon in

courts because the arbitral clause alone could govern the dispute between

the parties. This was the view of the learned High Court Judge which is

being impugned before this Court.

21. Given the specific arbitral clause which pertains to differences arising

between the parties as to the quantum of loss or damage, can it be argued

Page 10 of 14

that at the time of institution of the suit in the commercial High Court,

there was no difference between the parties?

22. The word "difference" is defined in The Readers Digest Great Encyclopedic

Dictionary to mean a disagreement in opinion, dispute or quarrel. 3 Similarly, The

Random House Dictionary of the English language4 defines "difference" to

include, among other things, a dispute or quarrel. Given that these

authoritative sources clearly outline the broad meaning of "difference" to

encompass disputes between parties, it is unsurprising that the word is

commonly used in the same sense within arbitration clauses.

23. In fact, Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration-an authoritative text on

International Commercial Arbitration quite clearly states the following:

Given words such as claims, differences, and disputes have been held by English

courts to encompass a wide jurisdiction in the context of the particular agreement

in question. In the United States, the words controversies or claims have

similarly been held to have a wide meaning, and if other words are used, it may be

considered that the parties intended some limitation on the kind of disputes

referred to arbitration.5

3 Volume I, 2nd Edition (1971). 4 the unabridged edition (Random House, New York, 1960). 5 See Ibid 7th Edition (2022) Nigel Blackaby KC, Constantine Partasides KC with Alan Redfern at para 2.75

Page 11 of 14

24. In using the word difference in the arbitration agreement, both parties

must be taken to have used it to denote a dispute that will arise or has

arisen as to quantum of loss or damage.

25. In its context, it is useful to refer to the preamble to the Arbitration Act,

No. 11 of 1995, which, inter alia, states that one of the main objects of the

enactment was to give effect to the Convention on the Recognition and

Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards (Done at New York, 10 June 1958;

Entered into force, 7 June 1959 330 U.N.T.S. 38 (1959) also known as the

"New York Convention") and to provide for matters connected therewith

or incidental thereto". In this connection, it is pertinent to look at Article

Il paragraph 1 of the said Convention, which provides that,

"Each Contracting State shall recognize an agreement in writing under which the

parties undertake to submit to arbitration all or any differences which have

arisen or which may arise between them in respect of a defined legal relationship,

whether contractual or not, concerning a subject matter capable of settlement by

arbitration". (Emphasis added).

26. Even the New York Convention, which the Arbitration Act, No. 11 of 1995

seeks to implement, uses the phrase "any differences" in the broadest sense

to signify a dispute between the parties. In this context, any "difference"

regarding the quantum of loss or damage in the relevant arbitration clause

Page 12 of 14

should indeed refer to any dispute that has arisen between the parties

concerning the quantum of loss or damage.

27. It is axiomatic that in interpreting the provisions of the Arbitration Act,

this Court has to bear in mind the obligation cast on Sri Lanka to interpret

it in consonance with the New York convention. The pertinent question,

therefore, is whether there was a dispute regarding the quantum of loss or

damage between the Appellant and SLIC at the time the suit was

instituted in court.

28. The dispute is evidenced by the letters 'P1' and 'P2.' While 'P1' offered a

payment of Rs. 8,495,162, 'P2' revoked that offer. It is as clear as day that a

dispute arose regarding the quantum. 'P2' explained that the offer was

being withdrawn due to a lack of utmost good faith, a principle that

underpins all insurance contracts. 'P1' and 'P2' constitute evidence of the

dispute that the parties consensually agreed to resolve through

arbitration. The learned High Court Judge did not err in holding that he

lacked jurisdiction to proceed with the case.

29. Indeed, Section 5 of the Arbitration Act dispensed with the distinction

which was drawn by Sharvananda CJ in Hotel Galaxy (Pvt) Ltd v

Mercantile Hotels Ltd6 between a bare arbitration agreement and a Scott

v Avery clause. Under a Scott v Avery clause, a court does not derive

6 (1987) 1 Sri LR 5.

Page 13 of 14

jurisdiction until an arbitration award has been made. An arbitration

followed by an award is a condition precedent to an action being

instituted. But today under the Arbitration Act No. 11 of 1995, there is no

bar to an action on the contract unless an objection is taken based on an

arbitration agreement.

30. Therefore, when the Defendant-Respondent, SLIC, raised an objection

pursuant to Section 5 of the Arbitration Act No. 11 of 1995, to the

maintainability of the action, it was incumbent upon the learned High

Court Judge to give effect to the parties' autonomous agreement to

arbitrate. This obligation stands unless the matter covered by the

arbitration agreement is contrary to public policy or is not capable of

determination by arbitration, as outlined in Section 4 of the Arbitration

Act, No. 11 of 1995.

31. The difference or dispute between the parties arose from a contract,

specifically the contract of insurance, and the merits of the dispute involve

a range of issues, such as whether there was a breach of uberrima fides,

justifying the subsequent repudiation of the Appellant's claim. This

dispute falls squarely within the scope of the arbitration agreement, which

is neither tainted by public policy nor incapable of determination by

arbitration.

32. Given the facts of the case and the nature of the dispute arising from the

contract, this Court must lean in favor of upholding the arbitration clause.

Page 14 of 14

Therefore, the determination made by the learned Judge of the

Commercial High Court to give effect to the arbitration agreement cannot

be faulted.

33. The dispute between the parties is inextricably interwoven with the

contract of insurance, the breach of whichor lack thereofhad to be

adjudicated through arbitration. Accordingly, I proceed to affirm the

judgment of the learned Judge of the Commercial High Court dated

October 17, 2013, and dismiss the appeal. The learned Judge of the

Commercial High Court is directed to enter judgment accordingly.

Judge of the Supreme Court

V. K. Malalgoda, PC. J

I agree, Judge of the Supreme Court

Shiran Gooneratne, J.

I agree, Judge of the Supreme Court