1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA NGA Wijenayake No. 4B, 57L Raddolugama. Applicant SC Appeal88/2010 SC HC L.A No.11/2009 HC.ALT.No.16/2008 LT Case No.2/326/2002 Vs

International Construction Consortium Ltd Bernards Building, First Floor, No.106/4, Kohuwala, Dehiwala Presently at No.70, S. de.SJayasinghaMawatha, Kohuwala, Dehiwala Respondent AND BETWEEN NGA Wijenayake No. 4B, 57L Raddolugama. Applicant-Appellant Vs

2

International Construction Consortium Ltd

Bernards Building, First Floor, No.106/4, Kohuwala, Dehiwala Presently at No.70, S. de.SJayasinghaMawatha, Kohuwala, Dehiwala Respondent-Respondent AND NOW BETWEEN

NGA Wijenayake No. 4B, 57L Raddolugama. Applicant-Appellant-Petitioner-Appellant Vs International Construction Consortium Ltd

Bernards Building, First Floor, No.106/4, Kohuwala, Dehiwala Presently at No.70, S. de.SJayasinghaMawatha, Kohuwala, Dehiwala Respondent-Respondent-Respondent-Respondent

3

Before : Sisira J De Abrew J UpalyAbeyratne J KT Chitrasiri J Counsel : MohamadAdamaly with J Abeysundera for the Applicant-Appellant-Petitioner-Appellant Manohara de Silva P C with J Abeysundera for the Respondent-Respondent-Respondent-Respondent Argued on : 18.1.2017 Written submission tendered on : 8.10.2010 by the Applicant-Appellant-Appellant 10.11.2010 by the Respondent-Respondent-Respondent Decided on : 1.3.2017 Sisira J De Abrew J. The Applicant-Appellant-Petitioner-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as

the Applicant-Appellant) filed an application in the Labour Tribunal alleging that

his services were unjustifiably and wrongfully terminated by the Respondent-

Respondent-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the Respondent-

Respondent). The learned President of the Labour Tribunal, after inquiry, ordered

compensation in a sum of Rs.648,000/- being the two years salary of the

Applicant-Appellant. Being aggrieved by the said order of the Labour Tribunal, the

Applicant-Appellant appealed to the High Court. The learned High Court Judge by

his order dated 2.4.2009, reduced the said amount to 12 months salary. Being

aggrieved by the said judgment of the High Court, the Applicant-Appellant has

appealed to this court. This Court by its order dated 30.8.2010, granted leave to

appeal on the questions of law set out in paragraph 11(i) and11(iii) of the petition

of appeal dated 14.10.2009 which are set out below.

4

1. Has the learned High Court Judge erred in law in reducing the quantum of

compensation awarded by the learned President of the Labour Tribunal in

circumstances where the Respondent had not preferred any Appeal?

2. Has the learned High Court judge erred in law in purporting to grant relief

that has not been prayed for in the pleadings?

This court by the said order allowed the following question of law raised by

learned counsel for the Respondent-Respondent.

“When the Appellant invokes the jurisdiction of the High Court under Section 31D

of the Industrial Disputes Act from an order of the Labour Tribunal under the

provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act as amended by Act No. 32 of 1990,

whether the power of the High Court is restricted to the relief sought by the

Appellant or whether it (the order of the Labour Tribunal) can be affirmed, varied

or reversed.”

Learned counsel for the Applicant-Appellant submitted that orders ofthe

Labour Tribunal are based on the principle of just and equitable and as such the

High Court Judge is also required to observe the same principle when hearing

appeals from the orders ofthe Labour Tribunal. Learned counsel contended that the

learned High Court Judge had not observed the said principle when he reduced the

quantum of damages ordered by the Labour Tribunal. I now advert to this

contention. Although learned counsel contended so, the learned High Court Judge,

in her judgment, has observed that the order of the Labour Tribunal was not a

reasonable one for both parties and that the order of the Labour Tribunal was not a

just and equitable order. It has to be noted here that when the Applicant-Appellant

joined the Respondent-Respondent he was 53 years old and worked in the

5

company of the Respondent-Respondent only for four (4) years. The learned High

Court Judge, in her order, further made the following observations.

1. The Applicant-Appellant had worked at several places for short periods

2. The Applicant-Appellant is a person who has the ability to find a job easily

irrespective of his age.

3. The Applicant-Appellant had given his services to the Respondent-

Respondent only for a period of 4 years and as such he had not given his

services to the Respondent-Respondent for a long period.

4. The Applicant-Appellant has joined the Respondent-Respondent only at the

age of 53.

5. The learned President of the Labour Tribunal had not considered the facts

which were in favour of the Respondent-Respondent when granting

compensation and that therefore the order of the learned President of the

Labour Tribunal could not be considered as a just and equitable order.

The learnedHigh Court Judge after considering the facts in favour of both parties

decided that compensation of 12 months salary would be just and equitable.

When I consider the above facts, I hold that thelearned High Court Judge

has considered the principle of „just and equitable‟ when she made the above order.

I therefore reject the above contention of learned counsel for the Applicant-

Appellant.

Learned Counsel for the Applicant-Appellant next contended that the

learned High Court Judge had erred in law when she reduced the compensation

awarded by the learned President of the Labour Tribunal. He further submitted that

the learned High Court Judge when considering an appeal filed by an employee

could not reduce compensation awarded by the learned President of the Labour

6

Tribunal especially when there is no appeal by the employer. To support this

contention, learned counsel cited Brohier Vs Munidasa 73 NLR 17 wherein

Sirimana J held as follows.

“Under Section 31C of the Industrial Disputes Act, a Labour Tribunal must

make its order on the evidence led and must not go beyond the evidence.

Accordingly, where a workman states in his evidence that his application is

for salary for a certain number of months for wrongful dismissal, there is no

justification for the tribunal to order the employer to pay salary for a certain

period of loss of career.”

The contention of learned counsel for the Applicant-Appellant in the present case

is that the reduction of compensation by the learned High Court Judge is wrong.

When I consider the said contention and the principle laid down in the above

judicial decision, I am of the opinion that the said judicial decision does not

support his contention.

Learned counsel for the Applicant-Appellant relied on the following judicial

decision.Upali Management Services Ltd Vs Ponnambalam [2004] 1SLR 331. The

Supreme Court in the above case observed the following facts.

“The High Court upheld the order of the Tribunal disallowing only the

petrol allowance and entertainment allowance. The High Court reduced the

compensation to Rs.4,243,378.00.”

The Supreme Court held:

1. “In terms of Section 31B(4) of the Industrial Disputes Act (The Act) the

Labour Tribunal had the power to grant equitable relief against harsh terms

7

imposed by the employer and the Labour Tribunal had the power to make

just and equitable orders. It does not have the freedom of wild ass.”

2. The order of the Tribunal regarding compensation was perverse.

3. There was no constructive termination of the workman‟s service by the

employer.”

Learned counsel for the Applicant-Appellant further relied on the following

passage at page 338 of the above judgment.

“In terms of the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act where Section 31(C)

provides the Tribunal to make „such order as may appear to the Tribunal to

be just and equitable‟ admittedly a Labour Tribunal has very wide powers.

However it is to be noted that the Tribunal does not possess an unfettered

authority. As observed by H.N.G. Fernando J (as he then was) in Walker

Sons &Co.LtdVs Fry 68 NLR 73, Labour Tribunal does not have the

„freedom of wild ass‟.” In my view, the judgment in the above case too does

not support the contention of learned counsel for the Applicant-Appellant.

The main question that must be considered in this case is whether the High

Court in the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction has the power, in an appeal filed

by the workman, to reduce compensation when there is no appeal by the employer.

Learned counsel for the Applicant-Appellant contended that the High Court could

not do so when there was no appeal by the employer. He further submitted that all

what High Court could do was either to enhance the compensation as sought bythe

Applicant-Appellant or to dismiss the appeal. I now advert to this contention. If the

contention of learned counsel for the Applicant-Appellant is correct, then it is

possible to contend that the Applicant-Appellant can impose conditions on the

High Court Judge when he considers an appeal of the Applicant-Appellant. Can an

8

Applicant-Appellant impose such conditions on the High Court Judge when he

exercises appellate jurisdiction in a case filed by the Applicant-Appellant? In

considering this question I would like to consider Section 31D(3) of the Industrial

Disputes Act which reads as follows:

“Where the workman who, or the trade union which, makes an application

to a Labour Tribunal, or the employer to whom that application relates is

dissatisfied with the order of the tribunal on that application , such

workman, trade union or employer may, by written petition in which the

other party is mentioned as the respondent, appeal from that order on a

question of law, to the High Court established under Article 154P of the

Constitution, for the Province within which such labour tribunal is

situated.”

Section 6(a) of High Court of the Provinces (Special Provinces) Act No. 19 of

1990 reads as follows.

“A High Court established by Article 154P of the Constitution may in the

exercise of any appellate jurisdiction vested in it by the Constitution or

section 3 or any other law, affirm, reverse, correct or modify any order,

judgment, decree or sentence according to law or may give directions to any

Court of First Instance, or tribunal or institution or order a new trial or

further hearing upon such terms as the court may think fit.”

According to Section 6(a) of High Court of the Provinces (Special Provinces) Act

No. 19 of 1990, the High Court in the exercise of its appellate powers has the

power to affirm, reverse, correct or modify any order or judgment of the Labour

Tribunal.This section does not contemplate on a separate procedure when the High

Court considers an appeal filed by a workman or a trade union. When I consider all

9

the above matters, I hold that no party can impose conditions on the High Court

when it exercises its appellate jurisdiction and the said power given to the High

Court cannot be curtailed by the parties to the case.

When I consider the above legal literature, I hold that when the High Court in the

exercise of its appellate jurisdiction considers an appeal filed against an order or

judgment of Labour Tribunal, it has the power to affirm, reverse, correct or modify

an order or the judgment of Labour Tribunal. I further hold that the High Court in

the exercise of its appellate powers has the right to reduce compensation awarded

by the Labour Tribunal when it considers an appeal filed by a workman or trade

union although there is no appeal by his employer and that the High Court also has

the power to enhance the compensation awarded by the Labour Tribunal when it

considers an appeal filed by the employer although there is no appeal by the

workman or the trade union.

The 1st and 2nd questions of law are reproduced below.

1. Has the learned High Court Judge erred in law in reducing the quantum of

compensation awarded by the learned President of the Labour Tribunal in

circumstances where the Respondent had not preferred any Appeal?

2. Has the learned High Court judge erred in law in purporting to grant relief

that has not been prayed for in the pleadings?

In view of the conclusion reached above, I answer the above questions of law in

the negative.

I reproduce below the question of law raised by the Respondent-Respondent.

“When the Appellant invokes the jurisdiction of the High Court under Section 31D

of the Industrial Disputes Act from an order of the Labour Tribunal under the

10

provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act as amended by Act No 32 of 1990,

whether the power of the High Court is restricted to the relief sought by the

Appellant or whether it (the order of the Labour Tribunal) can be affirmed, varied

or reversed.”

Considering the aforementioned matters, I answer the above question of law as

follows. When the Appellant invokes the jurisdiction of the High Court under

Section 31D of the Industrial Disputes Act from an orderof the Labour Tribunal,

the power of the High Court is not restricted to the relief sought by the Appellant

and the High Court has the power to affirm, very and reserve the order of the

Labour Tribunal.

For the above reasons, I affirm the judgment of the High Court and dismiss

the appeal of the Applicant-Appellant. However having considered the facts of this

case, I do not make an order for costs.

Appeal dismissed.

Judge of the Supreme Court.

UpalyAbeyratne J

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court.

KT Chitrasiri J

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court.

11