IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF

SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for

Leave to Appeal to the Supreme

Court against a Judgement delivered

on 01.06.2016 in appeal bearing

number SP/HCCA/GA/0054/2009

(F) in appeal from DC Galle Case No.

P 10014.

Walakada Gamage Munidasa,

No. 17/1,

Pepiliyana Mawatha,

Nugegoda.

Plaintiff

SC APPEAL No. 46/2018

SC/HCCA/LA No. 338/2016

SP/HCCA/GA/54/2009 (F) Vs.

DC GALLE NO: P/10014

1. Amarasena Amarasiri Jayasinghe, Rukattanagahawatte, Nagoda. 2. Wimalawathie Wijeratne, Rukattanagahawatte, Nagoda. 3. Tissa Amarasiri Jayasinghe, Mulana, Keppettiyagoda, Nagoda. 4. Dasan Amarasiri Jayasinghe, (Deceased) Vando Street, Fort, Galle.

2

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

4A. Gotabhaya Amarasiri Jayasinghe, Vando Street, Fort, Galle. 5. Theodora Grace Jayasinghe,(Deceased) Godewatte Walauwa, Nagoda. 5A. Sujatha Jayasinghe, Godewatte Walauwa, Nagoda. 6. Walakada Gamage Sirisena, Kanahenkanda, Kurupanawa, Nagoda. 7. Walakada Gamage Wimalasiri, (Deceased) Nagoda. 7A. Walakada Gamage Pathmasiri, Kurupanawa, Nagoda. 8. Walakada Gamage Isak alias Issac, (Deceased) “Aruna”, Nagoda. 8A. Walakada Gamage Aruna Deepal, “Aruna”, Nagoda. 9. Walakada Gamage Gunawathie, Uhanowita, Mattaka, Pitigala. 10. Walakada Gamage Karunawathie, Kurupanawa, Nagoda. 11. Sujatha Jayasinghe, Godewatte Walauwa, Nagoda. 12. H.G. Sirisena, Kurupanawa, Nagoda. 13. Victor Amarasiri Jayasinghe,

3

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

Mulanagoda, Keppittiyagoda, Nagoda.

14. Kumarasiri Amarasiri Jayasinghe, No. 44, Peralanda Road, Ragama. Defendants AND THEN BETWEEN

Sujatha Jayasinghe, Godewatte Walauwa, Nagoda. 5A/11th Defendant-Appellant

Vs. Walakada Gamage Munidasa, No. 17/1, Pepiliyana Mawatha, Nugegoda. Plaintiff-Respondent 1. Amarasena Amarasiri Jayasinghe,

Rukattanagahawatte, Nagoda. 2. Wimalawathie Wijeratne,

Rukattanagahawatte, Nagoda. 3. Tissa Amarasiri Jayasinghe, (Deceased)

Mulana, Keppettiyagoda, Nagoda. 3A. Victor Amarasiri Jayasinghe,

Mulanagoda, Keppettiyagoda, Nagoda. 4A. Gotabhaya Amarasiri Jayasinghe,

Vando Street, Fort, Galle. 6. Walakada Gamage Sirisena,

Kanahenkanda, Kurupanawa, Nagoda.

4

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

7A. Walakada Gamage Pathmasiri, Kurupanawa, Nagoda. 8A. Walakada Gamage Aruna Deepal,

“Aruna”, Nagoda. 9. Walakada Gamage Gunawathie,

(Deceased) Uhanowita, Mattaka, Pitigala. 9A. Janaka Athukorala, No. 19, Sawsiripaya, Heenatiyangala Road, Kalutara South. 10. Walakada Gamage Karunawathie,

Kurupanawa, Nagoda. 12. H.G. Sirisena, (Deceased)

Kurupanawa, Nagoda. 12A. Bovitantiri Nandawathie,

Kurupanawa, Nagoda. 13. Victor Amarasiri Jayasinghe,

Mulanagoda, Keppittiyagoda, Nagoda. 14. Kumarasiri Amarasiri Jayasinghe,

No. 44, Peralanda Road, Ragama. Defendant-Respondents

5

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

AND NOW BETWEEN Sujatha Jayasinghe, Godewatte Walauwa, Nagoda. 5A/11th Defendant-Appellant-Appellant

Vs. Walakada Gamage Munidasa, No. 17/1, Pepiliyana Mawatha, Nugegoda. Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent

1. Amarasena Amarasiri Jayasinghe,

Rukattanagahawatte, Nagoda. 2. Wimalawathie Wijeratne,

Rukattanagahawatte, Nagoda. 3A. Victor Amarasiri Jayasinghe,

Mulanagoda, Keppettiyagoda, Nagoda. 4A. Gotabhaya Amarasiri Jayasinghe,

Vando Street, Fort, Galle. 6. Walakada Gamage Sirisena,

Kanahenkanda, Kurupanawa, Nagoda. 7A. Walakada Gamage Pathmasiri, Kurupanawa, Nagoda. 8A. Walakada Gamage Aruna Deepal,

“Aruna”, Nagoda. 9A. Janaka Athukorala, No. 19, Sawsiripaya, Heenatiyangala Road, Kalutara South.

6

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

10. Walakada Gamage Karunawathie,

Kurupanawa, Nagoda. 12A. Bovitantiri Nandawathie,

Kurupanawa, Nagoda. 13. Victor Amarasiri Jayasinghe,

Mulanagoda, Keppittiyagoda, Nagoda. 14. Kumarasiri Amarasiri Jayasinghe,

No. 44, Peralanda Road, Ragama. Defendant-Respondent-Respondents

Before: Buwaneka Aluwihare, P.C., J.

E.A.G.R. Amarasekara, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: Dr. Sunil Cooray for the 5A/11th Defendant-Appellant-Appellant.

Anura Gunaratne for the Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent.

Written submissions: 5A/11th Defendant-Appellant-Appellant -on,

17.01.2019 and 19.05.2021.

Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent - on 12.03.2020.

Argued on : 17.08.2021

Decided on: 23 .03.2023

7

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

ALUWIHARE PC, J

I had the benefit of reading the judgements written by my brother judges, His

Lordship Justice Amarasekara and His Lordship Justice Samayawardhena. I

would like, however, to express my own view on this matter. As their

Lordships have succinctly dealt with the factual background to the case, I shall

be referring to the facts to the extent necessary to address the legal issues

involved.

The contesting defendants in this partition action were the 5th and the 11th

Defendants [mother and daughter respectively]. They sought a dismissal of the

Plaintiff’s action. The learned District Judge, however, accepted the pedigree

of the Plaintiff and rejected the pedigree put forward by the aforesaid

Defendants. Although the 5th and the 11th Defendants canvassed the legality

of the District Judge’s findings before the High Court of Civil Appeals, they

were not successful in their endeavour. The 5th Defendant passed away at a

point in the course of the proceedings and 11th Defendant was substituted in

her place as the ‘5a’ Defendant. As the learned District Judge had considered

the claim of the 5th Defendant in her judgment, for the purpose of clarity I

shall continue to refer to the 5th Defendant in this judgement.

It is the Appeal of the said Defendant’s [5th and the 11th] that this court

considered on the following questions of law.

1. Has the High Court and the District Court erred in law by failing to

appreciate that the pedigree of title put forward by the 5th and the 11th

defendants proved that they were the sole owners of the corpus for

partition?

2. In any event, whether the 5th and the 11th defendants and their

predecessors have acquired prescriptive title to the land sought to be

partitioned by long possession?

8

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

Although it may not be directly relevant to the issues at hand, it would be

pertinent to refer to the following facts;

The Plaint described the corpus a ‘Kahatagaha addara owita, alias Kahatagaha

liyadda also known as Bakmadala watte alias Bakmadala owita’ in extent of 8

Kurunis. The Preliminary Plan No.120 dated 01.01.1990 was prepared by

surveyor G.B.S Bandula De Silva, which was marked and produced as X. In

1996, the Plaintiff by an amended plaint changed the name of the land as

“bakmadala owita alias, Kahatagahaliyadda alias Kahatagaha addara Owita

which is a part of Bakmadala watte”. The boundaries, however, remained the

same.

I do not see any significance in changing the description of the corpus referred

to above, as the learned Counsel representing the 5th and the 11th defendants

had taken up the position that the question of the identity of the corpus will

not be challenged. Thus, the only issue that remains to be addressed is the

devolution of title.

Subsequent to the survey carried out by Surveyor Bandula De Silva on which

the Preliminary Plan No.120 [X] was prepared, another plan [No. 4131] was

also prepared on a commission [moved by the 5th and the 11th Defendants] by

licensed Surveyor Garvin De Silva, which was marked and produced as “Y”.

I wish to stress the fact that the District Courts should desist from the practice

of issuing an alternative commission to survey the corpus after the issuance of

a commission to survey the corpus for the purpose of preparing the

Preliminary plan. There are series of decisions by the appellate courts to the

effect that, after the preliminary survey is carried out, any further

commissions in terms of Section 16(2) of the Partition Law should be issued

to the same surveyor who did the original Commission in terms of Section

16(1) of the said Law. There appears to be a misapprehension that in certain

local jurisdictions that such a cursus curiae has been established. This belief

9

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

is contrary to the settled law. This is certainly not the case, and I am of the

view that it would be prudent on the part of the district judges to desist from

this practice unless the District Judge takes a considered view that such a step

is essential for the adjudication of the matter before the court. The exceptions

to the rule in my view would be in an instance where, either the Surveyor who

carried out the Preliminary Survey is dead or under the circumstances, his

services can no longer be obtained.

This principle is articulated in the case of Hettige Don Tudor and others v.

Hettige Don Ananda Chandrasiri SC Appeal 134 of 2016 [SC minutes of

19.02.2018] and also by Justice Salam in the case of Sumanasena v.

Premaratne CA/1336 and 1337 CA minutes 06.03.2014. In recent times,

Justice Laffar in the case of Premalal Vidana Arachchi v. T.A. Annie Nona

Siriwardena and others, CA /DFC/768/99 CA minutes 26.07.2021, had

made the same observation.

Coming back to the issues at hand, it should be noted that the case before the

District Court was prosecuted, not by the Plaintiff, but by the 6th and the 8th

Defendants. The 6th to the 10th Defendants happen to be the siblings of the

Plaintiff. The Plaintiff, however, gave evidence in the case.

The case for the 5th and the 11th Respondents

It was contended on behalf of the 5th and the 11th Defendants that both the

learned District Judge as well as the Hon. Judges of the Civil Appellate Court

failed to appreciate the pedigree of title put forward by the 5th and the 11th

defendants. Hence, it would be necessary to consider this aspect in order to

determine whether in fact, the District Court and/or the High Court of Civil

Appeals erred when considering this matter.

According to the 5th and the 11th Defendants, the original owner of the land

in question was Don Elias Amarasiri Jayasinghe [hereinafter Elias Jayasinghe].

10

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

Both, said Elias Jayasinghe and his wife Dona Francinahamy executed a joint

last will dated 06-02-1890. An English translation of the said will was marked

and produced as 5V14 and the inventory filed in the testamentary case was

filed as 5V13.

It is the position of the 5th and the 11th Defendant’s that the entire land in

question is item no. 27 in the inventory and the sole ownership of the land

was bequeathed to Munidasa Amrasiri Jayasinghe and he in turn by deed No.

32 dated 18-07-1912 [5V3] conveyed the land to Dharmadasa Amarasiri

Jayasinghe. After the demise of Dhrmadasa Amrasiri Jayasinghe, his intestate

estate was administered in DC Galle case No. T/7769 and the letters of

administration were issued to Mahaweera Jayasinghe [5V11] and it was the

position of the 5th and the 11th Defendants that the land in question was item

No 18 in the inventory [5V12] filed in that case. It was also the position of the

said Defendants that all the siblings of Mahaweera Jayasinghe, by deed No.

411 on 16-01-1941 [5V2] conveyed all their interest in the said land to

Mahaweera Jayasinghe, and he became the sole owner of the corpus.

Finally, the 5th and 11th Defendants take up the position that in the year 1941,

by deed No. 1045 [5V1] Mahaweera Jayasinghe conveyed the corpus to the

5th Defendant, and she became the sole owner of the land which was to be

partitioned.

From the foregoing it is clear that the 5th and the 11th Defendant’s pedigree

pivots on the joint last will purported to have been executed by Elias

Jayasinghe and his wife Francinahamy. As referred to by His Lordship Justice

Samayawardena, the 5th and 11th Defendant’s position was that, the joint last

will of the couple, dated 02.06.1980 was proved in the testamentary action

2970/T in the District Court of Galle, which was, however, not admitted by

the Plaintiff. Furthermore, the paragraph 1 of original last will which was in

11

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

Sinhala, [5V15] states that “the joint last will dated 06.02.1890 is hereby

revoked.”

One of the grounds for dismissing the appeal of the 5th and the 11th

Defendants by the High Court of civil Appeals was; that the last will in Sinhala

[5V15] and the English translation of the purported last will [5V14] contain

contradictory contents. It should be noted that the 5th and the 11th Defendants

in their original statement of claim, refer to a last will dated 02.10.1891 as

the last will by which Elias Jayasinghe and his wife Francinahamy devised the

property in question to one of their sons; Munidasa. The said Defendants,

however, when tendering the amended statement of claim [17.12.1996] had

relied on the testamentary case No. DC2970 but no reference was made to the

date of the last will they were relying on.

The learned district judge in considering the devolution of title put forward

by the 5th and the 11th Defendants had referred to the fact that the said

defendants had based their entitlement on the strength of the transfer deed

executed by Mahaweera Jayasinghe who had claimed that he derived title to

the corpus consequent to his father Dharmadasa Amarasinghe getting title

from the testamentary case No2970. The learned District Judge had observed

that, although it was claimed that Dharmadasa Amerasinghe derived title to

the impugned property consequent to the last will of Elias Amarasiri

Jayasinghe, no material had been placed [by the 5th and the 11th Defendants]

to establish that fact.[Pages 21 and 22 of the DC judgement].

Considering the material placed before the trial court and the applicable legal

principles, I cannot fault the learned District Judge regarding the observation

referred to above. The success of the claim of the 5th and the 11th Defendants

pivots on the last will of Elias Amarasiri Jayasinghe. What was produced is an

English translation of the will executed in 1890 and further, paragraph 1 of

12

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

the original will which was in Sinhala states that the joint last will executed

in 1890 is revoked.

It is trite law that, testamentary proceedings in the District Court do not

consider title to the property and only consider whether the testator has

executed the last will on his own free will and a suitable person has been

appointed to be granted letters of administration. The Indian Supreme Court

observed in the case of Krishna Kumar Birla v. Vijaya C. Gurshaney [2008] 4

SCC 300; “ a testamentary court is only concerned with finding out whether

or not the testator executed the testamentary instrument of his free will. It is

settled law that the grant of a probate or letters of administration does not

confer title to property. They merely enable administration of the estate of the

diseased”. Justice H.N.G. Fernando, in the case of Rosalin Nona v. Herat, 65

C.L.W 55 observed that; “the court does not in the Testamentary proceedings,

have jurisdiction to determine the dispute as to title in respect of such property

between the administrator and the third party”.

As far as the title to the corpus is concerned, the positions of the respective

parties can be summarised as follows; the 5th and the 11th Defendants, claim

that the entirety of the corpus at one point was owned by Don Elias Amarasiri

Jayasinghe and on the strength of his and his wife’s joint last will, subsequent

testamentary proceedings and Notarial conveyance, the title to the entire land

passed to Mahaweera Jayasinghe from whom the 5th Defendant asserts she

purchased the land. whereas the position of the Plaintiff is that Elias Amarasiri

Jayasinghe was entitled to only 2/3rd of the corpus, based on the two title deeds

produced as 8V1 and 8V2.

The learned District Judge having considered the evidence placed before

court, had come to a firm finding of fact that, both the Plaintiff as well as the

5th and the 11th Defendants have established that Elias Jayasinghe had title to

13

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

2/3 of the corpus, but the 5th and the 11th Defendants have failed to establish

that Elias Jayasinghe possessed the balance 1/3 of the corpus and had derived

title by prescription to the balance portion [ page 22 of the judgement]. This

is a finding of fact by the trial judge and I do not think this finding can be

upset unless there is clear material indicative of the fact learned District Judge

having misdirected herself. I do not find any such material and in the

circumstance, I answer both questions of law on which leave was granted in

the negative.

For the reasons set out above, I am of the view, the appeal should be dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

E.A.G.R. AMARASEKARA, J.

I had the privilege of reading the judgment written by my brother Judge

Honourable Justice Samayawardhena in its draft form. With all due respect to

the views expressed by His Lordship in coming to the conclusions he made, I

would prefer to dissent and express my views as elaborated below in this

separate judgment.

The Plaintiff – Respondent – Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the

Plaintiff) instituted this action in the District Court of Galle by plaint dated

18.11.1986 seeking to partition the land described in paragraph 2 thereof as

Kahata Addara Owita alias Kahawe Liyadda alias Bathmadala Watte alias

Bathmadala Owita in extent of about 8 kurunis of paddy sowing among the

Plaintiff and the 1st – 10th Defendants named therein the plaint. Thereafter,

the Plaintiff filed an amended plaint dated 14.08.1996 amending the original

plaint on the pretext that the devolution of the 3rd Defendant’s share had not

been properly pleaded – vide proceedings dated 13.05.1996. The 6th and 8th

14

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

Defendants filed their joint statement of claim dated 30.08.1995 and finally

amended it by joint amended statement of claim dated 01.10.1997. They

agreed with the amended plaint as to how the shares should be allocated for

partition. At the trial 6th and 8th Defendants prosecuted this action instead of

the Plaintiffs.

The 5th and 11th Defendants (mother and daughter respectively) filed their

joint statement of claim dated 11.01.1995 and thereafter filed an amended

joint statement of claim dated 17.12.1996. The 5th and 11th Defendants by

their statement of claim contested the identity of the land to be partitioned as

well as the pedigree of title set out by the Plaintiff. Accordingly, the 5th and

11th Defendants prayed for the dismissal of this action and for a declaration

that the corpus for partition belonged to the 5th Defendant and for the

recovery of damages caused by obtaining an enjoining order and an

injunction. During the course of the trial the 5th defendant died and the 11th

defendant was substituted in her place.

Subsequent to the trial Learned District Judge delivered the judgment dated

18.05.2009 and by the said judgment points of contest were answered in

favor of the 6th and 8th Defendants and against the 5A/11th Defendant. The

Learned District Judge decided to partition the subject matter of the action as

per the shares allocated in the judgment. Followings are among the reasons

given by the Learned District Judge in arriving at her conclusions.

• The 8th Defendant has given clear evidence as to the pedigree they

relied on and the original Plaintiff also has given evidence to

corroborate that without contradictions and thus have proved their

pedigree.

• 5A Defendant failed in proving that the last will was a last will of

Don Elias Amarasiri Jayasinghe and that he further failed in proving

15

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

that the whole land was possessed by the said Elias Amarasiri

Jayasinghe along with his wife Francina, even though the Plaintiff

has confirmed at one time that 2/3 was owned by the said Elias

Amarasiri Jayasinghe.

• There is no proof to indicate that the said Elias Amarasiri Jayasinghe

became the owner of balance 1/3 by prescription but it was proved

that the said 1/3 was in the possession of one Abraham who was the

father of the original Plaintiff, and the 8th Defendant. One

Hemasara, a retired officer of the Agrarian Department had given

evidence in support of the said possession and as per the said

evidence, the 8th Defendant and the Original Plaintiff had come to

the possession after the demise of said Abraham. According to the

evidence given by the said witness, nothing was revealed as to the

possession of the 5th Defendant. Even though the said witness

Hemasara is a relative of the original Plaintiff and the 8th

Defendant, he came on summons and his evidence can be relied

upon.

• Even though the original Plaintiff and the 8th Defendant admitted

in evidence that the aforesaid Elias Amarasiri Jayasinghe had

daughters other than the sons disclosed in their pedigree, and

Mahasena, one of the sons of said Elias, had 8 children where only

3 have been revealed in their pedigree, since no one has come

forward to intervene in the partition action, it cannot be decided

that there are parties not revealed by the Plaintiff. Contesting 5th

Defendant has not taken any attempt to add them if there are other

heirs.

16

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

• 5A and 11th Defendant failed in proving that the title to the whole

corpus devolved on the 5th Defendant.

Being aggrieved by the said judgment the 5A/11th Defendant appealed to the

Civil Appellate High Court of Galle. Subsequent to the arguments made by

both the parties learned Civil Appellate High Court Judges delivered its

judgment dated 01.06.2016 and by the said judgment learned High Court

Judges dismissed the appeal with costs. Among other things following reasons

have been expounded by the learned High Court Judges.

a) 5V 15 and 5V14, namely Sinhala copy of the last will and English

translation of the last will are two documents containing contradictory

contents.

b) 5th and 11th Defendants’ position is that said Elias and his wife devised

the subject matter to Munidasa by last will dated 06.02.1890 but item

1 of 5V 15 indicates that the last will dated 06.02.1890 was cancelled.

c) The 5th and 11th defendants failed to produce letters of probate of

T2970 as evidence at the trial.

d) Munidasa by executing 5V3, had transferred only what he has

inherited and not what he has got through a Last Will. As such, it

defeats the stance taken up by the 5th and 11th Defendants.

The 5A/11th Defendant sought leave to appeal from this court against the

said Judgment of the Civil Appellate High Court, and this court was inclined

to grant leave on the following questions of law as formulated by learned

counsel for the appellant at the stage of supporting for leave: (-Vide Journal

Entry dated 09.03.2018)

1. Have the High Court and the District Court erred in law by failing

to appreciate that the pedigree of title put forward by the 5th and

the 11th defendants proved that they were the sole owners of the

corpus for partition?

17

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

2. In any event, whether the 5th and the 11th defendants and their

predecessors have acquired prescriptive title to the land sought to

be partitioned by long possession?

Before the original court there had been a pedigree dispute as well as a dispute

relating to the identification of the corpus between the contesting parties.

The original plaintiff Walakadagamage Munidasa filed the partition action in

the District Court of Galle to get the land described in the original plaint which

was named as Kahataaddara Owita alias Bathmadalawaththa alias

Bathmadala Owita alias Kahaweliyadde partitioned. However, it can be

observed that some of the deeds found in original plaintiff’s pedigree that

describe the corpus also as Bathmadalawatta alias Bathmadala Owita were

executed very close to the filing of the partition action in the District Court on

18/11/1986- vide deeds no. 2276 and 2267 and 376. However, on

13.05.1996, on a request made by the plaintiff to amend the pedigree to show

the devolution of title downwards from one Tissa Jayasinghe named in the

Plaintiff’s pedigree, the District Court has granted permission to tender an

amended plaint but, it appears that the amended plaint dated 14.08.1996

tendered on this permission has changed the description of the land to indicate

that it is not Bathmadalawaththa or Bathmadala Owita but only as a portion

of said Bathmadalawaththa or Bathmadala Owita which is not even in

accordance with the description found in the aforesaid deeds executed close

to the filing of the partition action. Perhaps this might have happened due to

an afterthought since the plans made and available at the time of filing the

original plaint, old deeds as well as relevant old entries in the land registry do

not describe this land as Bathmadalawaththa or Bathmadalaowita.

Even though, the original Plaintiff did not prosecute the partition action, the

6th and 8th defendants who prosecuted the partition action have relied on the

same description of the land as per their statement of claim and the amended

statement of claim. The 5th and the 11th Defendants, who contested the

18

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

position taken by the original plaintiff as well as the position of the 6th and

8th defendants who prosecuted the partition action, in their statement of

claim as well as in the amended statement of claim have described the corpus

only as Kahataliyadde alias Kahataaddra Owita. Accuracy of such description

is confirmed by the old deeds, plans and old entries in the land registry, some

of which were marked or even relied on by the original Plaintiff and the 6th

and the 8th Defendants- vide 8v1,8v2,5v1,5v2,5v3,5v5,5v6,5v10.

Although the learned District Judge has expressed in her judgment that the

5A and 11th Defendant in her evidence in cross examination had admitted

that the land is also described as part of Bathmadala Owita, it appears that the

said Defendant in her evidence had not made such an admission but had

clearly said that there are no other names to this land other than Kahatagaha

Liyadde and Kahatagahaaddara Owita. What she had admitted in her

evidence is that in the plaint, the Plaintiff has described it as Bathmadalawatta

and Bathmadala Owita. She has clearly denied these additional names used by

the Plaintiff- vide pages 415,416,418. The Counsel for the 5A and 11th

Defendant Appellant has indicated in his written submissions that the

Appellant does not intend to pursue the question of the identity of the corpus

in this appeal anymore. If the corpus is identified as per the boundaries, it does

not matter even if some of the parties use additional names to describe the

land, but what is stated above indicates that the original Plaintiff as well as the

6th and 8th defendants were not even conversant with the name of the land.

Other than the names used by the 5th and 11th Defendants, they have, in

aforesaid recent deeds, used two other names, namely Bathmadalawatta and

Bathmadalaowita and during the pendency of the action have changed the

position to describe the corpus as part of Bathmadalawatta or

Bathmadalaowita. It also poses the question, if it is a part of a bigger land as

per their stance, whether one can maintain a partition action without

establishing that it became a separate land from the bigger land.

19

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

As far as the pedigree dispute is concerned, the Original Plaintiff and the 6th

and 8th Defendants in their amended pleadings relied on the same pedigree,

and the 13th and the 14th Defendants in their statement of claim have stated

that the share given to the 3rd Defendant as per the pedigree shown by the

6th and the 8th Defendants should devolve on them indicating that they also

rely on the pedigree shown by the 6th and the 8th Defendants. As per the said

pedigree, Corpus was originally owned by Karolis (1/3 of the corpus), K.G.

Punchihamy, W. Elias, W. Seetu, W. John, W. Dingo, W. Nero (1/3 of the

corpus) and Walakadagamage Abraham (1/3 of the Corpus). The said

pedigree further indicates that 1/3 of the aforesaid Walakadagamage

Abraham was devolved on the Plaintiff and the 6th to 10th Defendants and

the other 2/3 was sold to Don Elias Amarasiri Jayasinghe by the

aforementioned original owners by deeds no. 3565 and 2530 marked as 8v1

and 8v2 at the trial. It must be noted here that said Don Elias Amarasiri

Jayasinghe is one of the original owners referred to by the 5th and 11th

Defendants in their Pedigree. As per the pedigree relied by the Original

Plaintiff and 6th and 8th Defendants, 2/3 of said Don Elias Amarasiri

Jayasinghe had devolved on his sons Jinadasa, Mahasena, and Munidasa.

According to the position taken by the original Plaintiff and the 6th and 8th

Defendants in their pedigree, at the end, Jinadasa’s share has passed to

1st,2nd, 13th ,14th Defendants and the original Plaintiff; Mahasena’s share

has passed to the original Plaintiff and the 4th Defendant while Munidasa’s

share has passed to the 5th Defendant through the deeds No. 32, 411 and

1045 executed in the years 1912,1941 and 1941 respectively. It appears, as

mentioned before, the deeds written in favour of the original Plaintiff by the

descendants of Jinadasa and Mahasena were executed very close to the date

of filing the partition action, namely within 3 months prior to the filing of the

action.

The 5th and 11th Defendants claimed title to the whole land and their position

was that the land originally belonged to said Don Elias Amarasiri Jayasinghe

20

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

and his wife Nagoda Gamage Francinahamy, and as per the joint last will

proved in the case No. 2970 in the Galle District Court, it devolved on one of

the sons of the testators, namely Munidasa and further, through aforesaid

deeds No. 32,411 and 1045, 5th Defendant became the owner of the entire

land. Thus, they prayed for a dismissal of the partition action.

The learned District Judge has accepted the version of the original Plaintiff

and the 6th and the 8th Defendants with regard to the pedigree dispute, and

the learned High Court Judges in appeal have confirmed the findings of the

learned District Judge.

It appears, with regard to the pedigree dispute even the learned High Court

Judges have held that the 5th and 11th defendants failed to prove their

position with regard to the proof of the last will in DC case no. T 2970.

However, it appears that the learned High Court Judges failed to see whether

there was sufficient evidence to prove the pedigree relied on by the Plaintiff

and others. As per the evidence led, it is clear that there was no dispute that at

one time 2/3 was with the said Elias Amarasiri Jayasinghe. As such, one

dispute as to the pedigree would be whether the balance 1/3 was with

Abraham, the father of the original Plaintiff and of the 8th Defendant, or

whether that was also subject to the alleged testamentary case as one of the

properties included in the Last Will of said Elias and his wife. The other dispute

as to the pedigree was whether the said 2/3 owned by said Elias was devolved

upon the parties as per the pedigree of the original Plaintiff and the 6th and

8th Defendants or whether it along with balance 1/3 was subject to the

testamentary action no. DC2970 as one of the properties of said Elias and his

wife, and whether it devolved on the 5th Defendant as per the pedigree of the

5th and 11th Defendants. In other words, whether the whole corpus was

subject to the testamentary case or whether the pedigree of the original

Plaintiff is fully or partly relevant to the corpus.

21

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

Now I would prefer to see whether the findings with regard to the alleged Last

will and the Testamentary Action DC 2970 by the courts below were

satisfactory.

In the original statement of claim filed by the 5th and 11th Defendants, they

have mentioned the Last Will dated 02.10.1891 as the relevant Last Will by

which said Elias and his wife devised the property in question to one of their

sons, namely Munidasa- vide paragraph 5 of the said statement of claim.

However, when they tendered an amended statement of claim dated

17.12.1996 they have not referred to the date of the Last Will in the body of

the statement of claim but have referred to the testamentary case no. DC

2970- vide paragraph no.7 of the amended statement of claim of the 5th and

11th Defendants. However, in the pedigree attached to the said amended

statement of claim, the date of the Last Will is mentioned as 06.02.1890.

Anyhow, through the evidence led at the trial, the 5A and the 11th Defendant

have marked the purported last will proved in Testamentary case No. DC 2970

as 5V14 (see pages 406 and 407of the brief) and again it has been referred to

as the certified translation of the Last Will proved in Testamentary case no.

DC 2970 -vide page 413 of the brief. 5V15 has been marked as the document

in Sinhala relevant to 5V14 and further it has been referred as the Sinhala

copy of the original Last Will- vide page 413 of the brief. Neither of these

documents were objected or marked subject to proof when they were marked

in evidence, and no such objection was reiterated when the 5th and 11th

defendants closed their case. Thus, they became evidence for all purposes of

the case. Once documentary evidence is tendered, even if a lay witness

introduces and gives it a name as he understands it, it is the duty of the court

to see what it is and what it contains as evidence. The secretary of the District

Court of Galle has issued 5V14 on 10.04.48 certifying it as a true copy of the

translation of the Last Will in D.C.2970- vide 5V14A. It appears that up to

item 5 of the original document was considerably torn even at the time of it

was issued. 5V15 is also a certified copy issued by the secretary of District

22

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

Court of Galle and it appears to have been issued on 12.04.48 just two days

after the date of issue of 5V14. The secretary has certified 5V15 as a true

extract of the Last Will in D C 2970 indicating that it is not the complete

document but an extract. It contains only the introductory part and items 1 to

4 of the document. As up to item 5 was considerably torn as per the English

translation marked 5V14, 5v 15 might have been taken to complement the

missing parts in the 5V14. 5v14 as well as 5v15 have been issued in the

middle part of the 20th century, many years prior to the institution of the

partition action and filing of the statement of claims by the 5th and 11th

Defendants. These are certified copies issued by a court and they were not

marked subject to any objection and as said before, they are evidence for all

purposes of the case. Thus, no one can assume that they are fraudulent

documents prepared for the present case. Further, when section 61,

63,64,65(5),74(i)(ii),76 and 77 of the Evidence Ordinance read together, it

can be considered that 5V14 and 5 V15 were proved as part of the case record

in Testamentary case D C 2970. Under such circumstances a court cannot just

ignore such evidence. Following observations also indicate that these two

documents are not contradictory but complementary.

As per 5V15, it is a joint Last Will of Galaboda Liyanage Don Elias Amarasiri

Jayasinghe Mudiyanse and his wife Dona Francina Hamina. By that, it

appears,

1. They have revoked their previous Joint Will dated 06.02.1890

2. Have appointed the survivor (if one dies) as the executor of the Will.

3. Have given life interest to the survivor on the immovable and movable

property (It appears this is so given if there is no other direction in the will)

4. After the said life interest, certain properties were to be devolved on the

named 5 sons as explained in the item no. 4, namely the properties described

23

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

in items 5,6, -, -,9,10,11 and 20 (rest of the Sinhala copy is not available and

as explained above this is only an extract of the Last Will).

6. In the said 5v 14 purported translations of the Last Will, as said before,

from the introduction to item 1 to 4 seems to be considerably torn but what

remains corresponds with the Sinhala copy. For example,

a. In the introductory part, the words “Galaboda”, “Jayasinghe”,

“wife”, “Nagoda”, “Hamine” can be found in both copies.

b. Under item 1 “we do hereby” may relate to the revocation of

previous Will in Sinhala copy.

c. Under item 2, “we do hereby…… the survivor ………… of our

estate” can relate to the appointment of the survivor as the

executor in the Sinhala copy.

d. Under item 3, “the survivor…. Life time all” may relate to the

granting of life time interest to the survivor in the Sinhala copy.

e. Item 4 cannot be separately identified in the English copy. Maybe

it was torn when the certified copy of the translation was issued,

but parts of the names of the 5 sons are found in the English copy

along with the reference to item 11 and 20 of the Last Will which

correspond with the item 4 of the Sinhala copy.

f. Items 5,6,7,8,9,10,11 and 20 found in the English copy which is

not available in the Sinhala copy bequeath properties to the 5

sons in accordance with the item 4 of the Sinhala copy.

Thus, my view is that there was evidence before the learned District Judge to

indicate that,

• There was a joint last will of aforesaid Elias Amarasiri Jayasinghe

and his wife Francina which was the subject matter of D C Galle

2970.

24

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

• 5V15 is an extract of the Will which contained up to item 5 and

5v14 was the English translation of the said Last Will, of which up

to item 5 was considerably torn and 5v15 and 5v 14 are

complementary and not contradictory.

Now it is necessary to see whether this Will was proved in DC No. 2970 and

probate was issued,

i. Inventory marked 5V13 is a certified copy of the inventory in the said

case DC 2970, tendered to Court on 16.06.1892 by the surviving testator who

was the executor named in the joint Will; it has been explained to the executor

by the interpreter and countersigned by the District Judge. It has been issued

as a certified copy on 03.05.1949. Since the District Judge has counter-signed,

it cannot be an inventory tendered with the Petition but the inventory that had

to be filed by the executor after his appointment. Nowhere in the document it

is mentioned that it had been submitted by a temporary executor. Executor is

appointed when the Will is proved. Thus, 5V13 contains secondary evidence

to show that the Will was proved and probate was issued.

ii. 5V14, certified copy of the English translation of the Will, contains a

heading to say that it was a translation tendered for the purposes of

accounting. Accounting starts with the proof of Will and the issuance of

probate. So, this is also secondary evidence to show that the Will was proved

and the probate was issued in DC 2970.

I agree that the best proof of probate was the letters issued in that regard after

the proof of Will but the document marked 5V14 indicates that the case

record was in dilapidated condition even in 1948/1949. I think if the original

Court record is destroyed, one can prove the proof of Will and the probate

through secondary evidence. I would like to bring to the attention the meaning

of probate as per K.D.P. Wickremesinghe in ‘Civil Procedure in Ceylon’ at page

354 and 355.

25

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

““probate” is an English term signifying the proof of the Will of a deceased

person in a competent Court as required by Law. The term probate in its

strictest sense signifies the copy of the Will which is given to the executor,

together with a certificate granted under seal of the Court, and signed by the

secretary of the Court certifying that the Will has been proved, and this

probate constitutes the executor’s title to act. In a wider sense, the word

indicates the process and results of proving a Will.”

If we take the strict interpretation, there is only secondary evidence to say that

in DC 2970, the Will was proved, the executors were appointed and the letters

of probate were issued. On the other hand, if we take it in its wider sense, in

my view, there is material to show that a joint Will was proved in that case (of

course not the one executed on 06.02.1890 but the one dated 02.10.1891). It

must be kept in mind the original documents were made in the 19th century

and the certified copies were issued in the middle part of the 20th century,

many years prior to the institution of the partition action in the latter part of

the 20th Century. As pointed out above, certified copies can be used to prove

the contents of the case record DC 2970 Galle, and as mentioned before, these

documents were not objected or marked subject to proof. As per the items

marked as 5V 14 B and 5V14 C on the document marked 5V 14, the relevant

property had been bequeathed to Munidasa, one of the sons of said Don Elias

Amarasiri Jayasinghe.

As per the deed No.32 marked 5V3 and land registry extracts marked 5V6,

said Munidasa had transferred 8 Kuruni land known as Kahateliyadde to

Dharmadasa Amarasiri Jayasinghe. The said Munidasa in the said deed has

stated the property had been held, enjoyed and possessed by him by right of

inheritance. In my view, merely because he had used the term ‘by right of

inheritance’, one cannot come to the conclusion it was not his entitlement

gained through the last will as succession can be testate or intestate. If he had

only an undivided share coming through intestate succession, he could have

26

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

indicated a transfer of an undivided share in the schedule to the said deed but

he had mentioned transfer of whole 8 Kuruni Land in the schedule in the said

deed written in 1912. Said 5V3 supports the stance taken by the 5th and 11th

Defendants. Further, documents marked 5V11 and 5 V12 are the letters of

administration and the inventory respectively in the testamentary case

No.7769, filed with regard to the intestate estate of the said Dharmadasa

Amarasiri Jayasinghe vendee of said 5V3. Item No.18 of 5V12 has been

marked as 5V12A. 5V12A also indicates that even the administrator of said

Dharmadasa Amarasiri Jayasinghe included the whole land in the inventory

of the said Testamentary case as part of said Daramadasa Amarasiri

Jayasinghe’s estate. Thus, documents marked with regard to the testamentary

case relating to the joint last will of Elias Amarasiri Jayasinghe and

Francinahamy, 5V3 and documents relating to the testamentary case of

Dharamadasa Amarasiri Jayasinghe show that people belonging to 3

generations in the 5th and 11th Defendants’ pedigree from latter part of the

19th century to the middle part of the 20th century considered the whole

property as their property only.

I would also like to refer to page 460 of Laws of Ceylon, Walter Pereira to

indicate that with the death of the testator, property specifically devised vest

in the devisee immediately. But the title is imperfect as it is subject to

administration by the executor. In the case at hand, after the testamentary case

relating to the joint last will of Elias Amarasiri Jayasinghe and Francina, the

devisee named in the last will (see 5V14B and 5V14C) has dealt with the

property indicating that it was not sold otherwise for the administration of

that estate but it came to the hands of the named devisee.

A joint Will generally is considered as a separate Will of the relevant testators,

but if the Will disposes the property on the death of the survivor, or, as it is

sometimes expressed, that the property is consolidated into one mass for the

purpose of joint disposition or the survivor adiates what was given by the co-

27

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

testator, the survivor has to abide by the joint Last Will – see Walter Pereira’s

Laws of Ceylon page 401 and 405. In the case at hand it appears, after the

death of Francinahamy, the testamentary case was filed with regard to the

estate covered by the joint last will and the said Elias Amarasiri Jayasinghe, the

survivor accepted the executorship created by their joint last will and further

the devisee who was named for the subject matter had later dealt with the

subject matter by 5V3. This indicates that the said Elias abided by the joint last

will. Further, as indicated above life interest has been given to the survivor

indicating that the property was to be disposed to the named devisee only after

the death of the survivor.

No one has taken a position that, for the purpose of administration of the

intestate estate of the Vendee of 5V3 Dharmadasa Amarasiri Jayasinghe, the

subject matter was sold to other parties. 5A and 11th Defendant has stated in

evidence that after the demise of Dharmadasa Amarasiri Jayasinghe, subject

matter was devolved upon Alfred, Biatris, Chandrawathie, Victor, Cyril and

Mahaweera Amarasiri Jayasinghe. Said Alfred, Biatris, Chandrawathie, Victor

and Cyril by executing deed no.411 have conveyed the property to aforesaid

Amarasiri Jayasinghe who by executing deed no.1045, again conveyed it to

the 5th Defendant. Thus, there appears to be considerable evidence

supporting the version of 5th and 11th Defendants to indicate that;

• There was a joint last will by Elias Amarasiri Jayasinghe and his Wife,

Francina which was admitted to probate in the Testamentary Case No. DC

2970, Galle District Court.

• 5v15 was a certified extract of the Sinhala copy of the said Last Will

which contained up to item 5 of the Will, and 5V14 is the certified copy of the

English translation of the said Will, of which up to item 5 was considerably

torn.

• The corpus in the present action was included in the said Joint last will

and the devisee was one Munidasa Amarasiri Jayasinghe.

28

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

• Said Munidasa Amarasiri Jayasinghe transferred the corpus to

Dharmadasa Amarasiri Jayasinghe by executing 5V3.

• After Dharmadasa Amarasiri Jayasinghe, the corpus devolved upon

Alfred, Biatris, Chandrawathie, Victor, Cyril and Mahaweera Amarasiri

Jayasinghe, and due to the execution of deeds No. 411 (5V2) and 1045(5V1)

the corpus became the property of the 5th Defendant.

Only defect in the 5th and 11th Defendants’ position is that, though they

mentioned the date of the joint last will admitted to probate in D C 2970 as

06.02.1890 in their pedigree annexed to the amended statement of claim, in

fact, Last Will dated 06.02.1890 is the one cancelled by the joint last will dated

02.10.1891 which was admitted to probate in D C 2970. The stance of the

5th and 11th defendants was that the corpus was originally owned by

aforesaid Elias Amarasiri Jayasinghe and his wife, Francina and they executed

a joint last will which was admitted to probate in DC 2970 and then it came

to the ownership of the 5th Defendant as per the pedigree shown in her

statement of claim. When there is evidence to establish that stance, merely

because there is an error in mentioning the date of relevant joint last will, in

my view, a judge cannot ignore the rights of the party who made an error or

a mistake in mentioning the date of the last will. On the other hand, for the

sake of argument, even if one goes to the extreme and argues that change in

the date of the joint last will is a change of stance and the 5th and 11th

defendants cannot take up the position that their entitlement flows from the

last will marked in evidence, in my view, learned District Judge still could not

have approved the pedigree of the original Plaintiff or of the 6th and 8th

Defendants which does not flow from the said joint last will which as per the

evidence led was admitted to probate in DC 2970, as such evidence indicates

that there is a different pedigree involved as to the rights in the corpus, at least

in respect of the undisputed 2/3 share of Elias Amarasiri Jayasinghe, who was

one of the testators in the said joint last will. (Evidence with regard to the

29

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

balance 1/3 will be discussed later in this judgment). In this regard, I would

like to stress that, this is a partition action and the investigation of title is the

duty of the District Judge – vide Kularatne v Ariyasena (2001) B L R 6,

Chandrasena V Piyasena (1999) 3 Sri L R 201. By this I do not mean that the

judge should go on a voyage of discovery in investigating title. The judge may

have to do it within the limits of pleadings, admissions, points of contests,

evidence both oral and documentary – vide Thilagaratnam V Athpunathan

(1996) 2 Sri L R 66. It must also be noted that in Golagoda V Mohideen 40 N

L R 92 it was held that the court should not enter decree in a partition action

unless it is perfectly satisfied that the persons in whose favour it makes the

decree are entitled to the property. If the Learned Judges of the courts below

were vigilant enough, they could have observed the available evidence in

favour of the 5th and 11th defendants that I referred to above. In a partition

action, even if the pedigree or part of the pedigree proposed by a party is

wrong, if the evidence/documents led at the trial proves title through a

different pedigree, the judge has to consider the pedigree proved through

evidence. In my view, in a partition action, what is more important is not the

pedigree of which party is more acceptable on balance of probability, but as

per the evidence/documents led at the trial what is the acceptable pedigree

on balance of probability. Thus, in a partition action sometimes pedigree of

any of the party may not be totally correct, but the evidence and documents

tendered by all parties may establish a more probable pedigree when

compared to the pedigrees tendered by individual parties. This is further

established by certain decisions of the superior courts which indicate that in

investigating title, judge is not bound even by the points of contests raised by

the parties. Basically, the points of contests reflect the stances taken by parties

in contesting the case. The said cases are Peris V Perera 1 N L R 362, Nona

Baba V Namohamy 3 N L R 12, Weerappa Chettiar V Rambukpotha

Kumarihamy 45 N L R 332

30

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

As said before, it is apparent that the judges in the courts below failed to

appreciate the evidence available for the benefit of the 5th and 11th

Defendants or against the stance of the original Plaintiff and the 6th and the

8th Defendants in evaluating evidence.

The learned District Judge in holding in favour of the original Plaintiff’s

pedigree has indicated that there is clear evidence to establish that pedigree

as per the evidence given by the original Plaintiff and the 8th defendant. In

my view, the fallacy of this finding is evinced by what is mentioned below;

• Firstly, as explained before, the learned District Judge failed to appreciate

that undisputed 2/3 of Elias Amarasiri Jayasinghe could not have devolved

upon as per the pedigree of the Plaintiff due to the evidenced placed before

the District Court, since Elias Amarasiri Jayasinghe was one of the testators of

the joint will which was admitted to probate in DC 2970. Even if the date of

the Last Will was not 06.02.1890 but 02.10.1891, there was evidence to show

that the latter was admitted to probate in D C 2970 and for a pedigree to be

accepted it should have a link to those testamentary proceedings and the said

Last Will.

• Secondly, the 8th Defendant while giving evidence, in cross

examination, has admitted certain facts indicating that the pedigree presented

by them including the original Plaintiff is not correct. In relation to that he

has admitted that Elias Amarasiri Jayasinghe had daughters other than the

sons revealed in their pedigree and they should also inherit. This was done

only after denying that there were daughters, and later he admits that he knew

about the said daughters even at the time of the institution of the action -vide

pages 228 to 231 of the brief. Further, he has admitted that Mahasena

Amarasiri Jayasinghe who appears in their pedigree had eight children even

though they have shown only 3 children in their pedigree. He has even

revealed the names of some of the children not shown in their pedigree when

questioned in cross examination. However, again, in re-examination tries to

31

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

deny that he had any knowledge about the daughters of Elias. At one point, it

appears that he had the knowledge with regard to the testamentary

proceedings that existed at the time of the death of Elias Amarasiri Jayasinghe-

vide page 239 of the brief. If so, it appears that this witness has evaded

revealing such testamentary proceedings in their pedigree. Further, it can be

observed that he had evaded in answering some of the questions relating to

the pedigree. The learned District Judge should have observed the incoherent

and unreliable nature of the evidence given by this witness, namely the 8th

Defendant in relation to the pedigree they rely on. However, after observing

the said admissions made by the 8th defendant while giving evidence, the

learned District Judge has come to the conclusion that there cannot be other

parties who have not been revealed as no other party has intervened. Said

conclusion cannot be condoned since some of the names have been revealed

by the 8th defendant in his evidence. If what has been revealed by the 8th

defendant in cross examination is correct, share allocation could not have

been done according to the pedigree relied by the original Plaintiff and the

8th Defendant. Further, the Learned District Judge says, if there are others, the

5th and 11th Defendants could have taken steps to add them. 5th and 11th

Defendants’ position was that this action should be dismissed since the subject

matter belongs to them, I cannot understand this reasoning as to why the

learned District Judge find fault with parties, who do not seek to partition the

land but claim the land as a whole, for not taking steps to add others. They

need not even reveal any parties as per their stance.

• Thirdly, the original Plaintiff in his evidence has revealed certain facts

which are inimical to his as well as the 6th and 8th defendants’ stance, which

are highlighted below; Such statements also stand against the findings in their

favour by the learned District Judge.

o The original Plaintiff states that from 1960 he came to know that his

father Abraham had 1/3 of the corpus-vide page 313 of the brief.

32

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

However, in 1986 he has bought from one Gunasena Amarasiri

Jayasinghe 1/2 of the corpus or what belongs to said Gunasena

Amarasiri Jayasinghe- vide deed no. 2267 marked 8V4. If their version

of pedigree in the plaint is correct Gunasena Amarasiri Jayasinghe

could not have 1/2 of the corpus but only 2/27 since they admit that

only 2/3 was with Elias Amarasiri Jayasinghe. Further, if Mahasena

Amarasiri Jayasinghe had more than 3 children as stated by the 8th

Defendant, Gunasena Amarasiri Jayasinghe’s share has to be further

reduced. The Plaintiff tries to explain that it was so bought as 1/2 of the

corpus, as per his knowledge at the time 8V4 was executed. If 1/3 was

with Abraham and 2/3 was with said Elias, and he knew their pedigree

was correct, he should have known that said Gunasena Amarasiri

Jayasinghe could not have 1/2 of the corpus. This indicates that his

statement that Abraham had 1/3 and he came to know it in 1960

cannot be relied upon. To buy 1/2 of the corpus from said Gunasena,

he appears to have believed in 1986 that Gunasena’s predecessors had

more than he had shown in his pedigree in his plaint. At least this shows

he was not aware of the correct pedigree when he bought from

Gunasena Amarasiri Jayasinghe. Then his evidence in courts relating to

pedigree must be false or based on some knowledge he gained from

some unexplained sources after the execution of 8V4 which may

amount to hearsay.

o The original Plaintiff at page 343 and 345 of the brief attempts to state

that aforesaid Elias got his entitlement to the lands in the village

through his marriage and his wife Francina had 1/9 of the corpus. As

per their pedigree Elias has bought 2/3 from others. Thus, this

reference to entitlements of Elias through his marriage and Francina’s

entitlement for 1/9 is more in favour of the stance taken by the 5th and

11th defendants since, as per their version Elias and his wife Francina

were the original owners and as per the 6th,8th Defendants’ and the

33

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

original Plaintiff’s stances Francina did not have any rights to this land.

However, after referring to the entitlements of Elias that he got through

his marriage and Francina’s 1/9 share in the corpus, original Plaintiff

has expressed that his reference to Francina’s entitlement was a mistake

due to old age- vide pages 345,346 and 347. Anyhow, due to such

contradictory statements, his evidence cannot be considered as reliable,

since he might have tried to explain his reference to Francina’s

entitlement for 1/9 as a mistake as he suddenly realized such statement

is inimical to their stance. In fact, it appears that he himself has referred

2/9 entitlement that came from Francina to Elias prior to that. If there

were entitlements that came to Elias through his marriage or if 1/9 of

the corpus was with Francina, original Plaintiff’s or 6th and 8th

Defendants’ stance that Abraham had 1/3 of the corpus cannot be

correct as there was no dispute that Elias got 2/3 from other sources

through deeds marked 8V1 and 8V2. Further, this original Plaintiff has

stated that Abraham got his 1/3 from his father Walakada Gamage

Appune and Appune had another child, a daughter named Wilisina –

vide pages 348. If Appune had 1/3 and he had two children, Abraham

cannot have entitlement to 1/3 of the corpus, as Appune’s entitlement

should devolve on both of them. As per his evidence, he first has denied

his knowledge with regard to the children of Wilisina but later states

that she had 3 or 4 children and admits that if Appune had rights, it

should also devolve on Wilisina.

• Fourthly, the 8th Defendant in his evidence has tried to convince the

court that his father Walakadagamage Abraham was the owner of 1/3 of the

corpus and he possessed and cultivated sugar cane during his time and after

his demise his children are possessing the land and 1/2 of the extent is in their

possession – vide page 239 of the brief. No documentary evidence was

produced to show any dealing relating to cultivation of sugar cane. On the

other hand, if they are in possession of the land, the natural response during

34

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

the preliminary survey would be the showing of the area in their possession

to the surveyor to include that in the plan and the report. However,

preliminary plan and report marked X and X1 do not show any area in the

possession of the children of Abraham except for a cross claim made by the

original Plaintiff to 9 trees against the claim made by the 11th Defendant on

behalf of the 5th Defendant for all the trees and a tomb on the land. Anyhow,

as per the superimposition plan and report marked Y and Y1, no one has

claimed the trees other than the 5th and 11th defendants even though some

of the children of Abraham, namely the Plaintiff, 6th ,7th, 8th, and the10th

Defendants were present at that survey. Thus, the cross claim made on the

first instance of the survey is questionable since they did not claim when the

claim was made on behalf of the 5th Defendant while they were present when

it was surveyed again for the superimposition. Even though, as mentioned

before, it was said that after demise of Abraham they are in possession, no area

has been shown in the preliminary plan or in the superimposition plan where

they were in possession.

• Fifthly, it appears that the Learned District Judge heavily relied on the

evidence given by one of the witnesses for the original Plaintiff and the 6th

and 8th defendants, namely Walakada Gamage Hemasiri. It does not seem that

he has given evidence using official records as an ex-officer. The Learned

District Judge has accepted his evidence stating even though he is a relative of

the original Plaintiff and the 6th and 8th Defendants, he came to give evidence

on summons. The Learned District Judge has further stated that nothing has

come to light from this witness about the possession of the 5th Defendant, but

this witness had revealed that after Abraham, his children including original

Plaintiff and the 6th and 8th Defendants, came to the possession of the land.

However, when one goes through his evidence it can be observed that he is

not an impartial witness but one who tried to hide the possession of the 5th

and 11th Defendants at the early part of his evidence. In this regard following

would be relevant.

35

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

o As per his evidence, he resides close to the subject matter of this case

and it was Abraham who cultivated sugar cane and other crops in this

corpus who died about 25 years ago to the date he gave evidence. He

had never seen that 5th and 11th Defendants were in the possession of

the corpus-– vide evidence in chief of the said witness. He admits that

6th and 8th Defendants are his close relatives-vide cross examination at

page 265 of the brief. He has seen Abraham was in possession when he

was passing through the nearby road- vide page 268 of the brief. No

one other than Abraham and his sons possessed this corpus and 5th

Defendant never had the possession of this land – vide page 271 of the

brief. It is Abraham’s children who possess this corpus – vide re-

examination at page 270. However, this witness admits that he does not

know whether Abraham had any title to the corpus- vide page 270.

When questioned about the tea plants claimed on behalf of the 5th

Defendant as per the survey report, this witness first says that he did

not see such plants and changed his evidence to say that Abraham

possessed only a separated portion – vide pages 273 to 275. No such

separated portion in the possession of Abraham’s children is shown in

the preliminary survey.

o If this witness is a truthful witness, the portion enjoyed by Abraham or

his children must have been revealed in the preliminary plan. As said

before, survey reports marked at the trial clearly indicates that on

behalf of the 5th Defendant there was a claim to the whole plantation

and with a cross claim to some trees by the original Plaintiff which cross

claim was not made in the survey report for the superimposition plan.

Further, the original Plaintiff admits that he prayed for an injunction

when the 5th and 11th Defendants took steps to build for weekly fair

arranged by the Gramodaya Mandalaya. Moreover, the 5A and the

11th Defendant in her evidence has revealed that she removed the

plantation including the tea plants. In the circumstances, it is clear that,

36

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

being a person living close to the corpus, the said Hemasara had

attempted to hide the possession of the 5th and the 11th Defendants

and was a witness partial to the original Plaintiff and the 6th and the

8th Defendants. Whatever it is, his evidence at most can be considered

as evidence that speaks of cultivation of crops and sugar cane by

Abraham in the corpus but by his evidence it is clear that he cannot

vouch for that such cultivation was done as a co-owner who was

entitled to 1/3 of the corpus. The 5A and the 11th Defendant has clearly

stated in her evidence about her and her predecessor’s possession of the

corpus. The Learned District Judge has refused to accept that the

balance 1/3 was owned by Francina when, as mentioned before, from

the latter part of the 19th century 3 generations have dealt with the

corpus as their own as per the pedigree of the 5th and 11th Defendants,

but the Learned District Judge has accepted that 1/3 was owned by

Abraham when the evidence given on behalf of the original Plaintiff

and the 6th and the 8th Defendants lacks integrity and was not reliable

in that regard as indicated above. On the other hand, mere possession

or enjoyment of a portion of unknown extent of the land which is not

depicted on a plan cannot establish that Abraham was entitled to 1/3

of the corpus.

• Sixthly, the 8th Defendant has admitted that he was prosecuting the

action as per the amended Plaint tendered by his brother, the original Plaintiff

– vide page 197 of the brief. However, the original Plaintiff, when further

probed in cross-examination with regard to the contradictory facts revealed

through his evidence as to the pedigree, has stated that as per the advice given

by lawyers, he filed the action and the lawyers makes the case in a manner

feasible to prosecute.

Thus, as per the evidence led, I wonder how the Learned District Judge

allocated shares as per the shares allocated in the plaint. In my view the

Learned District Judge failed in properly appreciating the evidence placed

37

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

before the District Court. Since there was a testamentary case where a Last

Will was proved, 2/3 belonged to Elias could not have devolved as per the

pedigree relied upon by the original Plaintiff and the 6th and the 8th

Defendants. There was no clear evidence to show that 1/3 was owned by the

Abraham. In fact, the evidence placed by the party who prosecuted the plaint

and the original Plaintiff indicates that the pedigree they relied on was

incomplete. Further, certain statements made by the original Plaintiff support

the stance of the 5th and 11th Defendants that the other 1/3 also was with

Francina, the wife of Elias and also that, in any case, Abraham could not have

1/3 of the corpus. Hence, the original Plaintiff and the 6th and 11th

defendants failed in proving their case to get the corpus partitioned.

The Learned District Judge who wrote the Judgment heard only the latter part

of the evidence of 5A Defendant. Thus, she was not in a better position to

evaluate the rest of the evidence than a judge sitting in appeal as she also had

to rely on what was recorded and submitted as evidence.

As per the reasons given above, it is my view that on balance of probability,

the answer to question of law no.1 and 2 should be in the affirmative, and in

any event, even if the sole ownership of Elias and his wife is considered as not

proved, the original Plaintiff and or the 6th and the 8th Defendants who

prosecuted the partition case have failed to prove a reliable pedigree to get the

land partitioned. Thus, in my view, the partition action should have been

dismissed.

Thus, I allow the appeal with costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

38

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

MAHINDA SAMAYAWARDHENA, J

The plaintiff filed this action in the District Court of Galle to partition the land

depicted in the Preliminary Plan, among the plaintiff and the 1st-10th

defendants. The only contesting defendants were the 5th and 11th defendants,

mother and daughter respectively, who sought dismissal of the plaintiff’s

action on the basis that the 5th defendant was the sole owner of the land.

During the course of the trial the 5th defendant died and the 11th defendant

was substituted in her place. After trial the District Court accepted the

pedigree of the plaintiff and rejected the 5th and 11th defendants’ pedigree and

entered judgment accordingly. The appeal filed against this judgment by the

5A/11th defendant (appellant) was dismissed by the High Court of Civil

Appeal. Hence this appeal to this court. This court granted leave to appeal on

the following two questions of law as formulated by learned counsel for the

appellant at the stage of supporting for leave:

(i) Has the High Court and the District Court erred in law by failing to

appreciate that the pedigree of title put forward by the 5th and the

11th defendants proved that they were the sole owners of the corpus

for partition?

(ii) In any event, whether the 5th and the 11th defendants and their

predecessors have acquired prescriptive title to the land sought to be

partitioned by long possession?

What is the pedigree unfolded by the appellant? The acceptance or refusal of

the appellant’s pedigree depends on the acceptance or refusal of the alleged

joint last will executed by Elias Amarasiri Jayasinghe and his wife Francina

Hamine. In the pedigree attached to the statement of claim dated 17.12.1996

(submitted to the District Court) and paragraphs 9 (i)-(ii) of the written

submissions dated 17.01.2019 and paragraphs 10(i)-(ii) of the written

submissions dated 19.05.2021 (submitted to this court), the appellant states

39

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

that Elias Amarasiri Jayasinghe and his wife by their joint last will dated

06.02.1890 which was proved in DC Galle case No. 2970/T bequeathed the

entire land which is the subject matter of this partition action to their son

Munidasa Amarasiri Jayasinghe; and he by deed marked 5V3 of 1912

transferred it to Dharmadasa Amarasiri Jayasinghe; and after his death,

Mahaweera Amarasiri Jayasinghe became entitled to the land by deed marked

5V2 of 1941; and he transferred it to the appellant by deed marked 5V1 of

1941.

The plaintiff does not admit that there was a joint last will as alleged by the

appellant which was admitted to probate. According to the appellant the

original last will which is in Sinhala was marked 5V15 and the English

translation of it was marked 5V14.

However, as the High Court has observed, paragraph 1 of the original last will

states that the joint last will dated 06.02.1890 (which the appellant says was

admitted to probate) is thereby revoked. If the last will dated 06.02.1890 was

revoked, the appellant’s pedigree based on the said last will shall fail.

Having realised this predicament, the appellant in paragraph 36 of the written

submissions dated 19.05.2021 states “In the original Sinhala last will marked

5V15 paragraph 1 states that a previous last will of 06.02.1890 is being

revoked. Paragraph 1 in 5V15 appears to have revoked a last will of 1890

and not the last will which was proved in the testamentary action 2970/T and

which is dated 02.10.1891.” This is contradictory to the earlier position taken

up by the appellant from the District Court up to the Supreme Court that what

was proved in case 2970/T was the last will dated 06.02.1890. The appellant

cannot take up a new position before the Supreme Court for the first time on

a question of fact which goes to the root of the case. A partition case is no

exception.

40

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

There is no date of execution of the original last will 5V15. 5V14 dated

02.10.1891 is undoubtedly not the English translation of the original last will

5V15. Having realised this, the appellant in paragraph 35 of the written

submissions dated 19.05.2021 takes up the position that “Documents 5V14

and 5V15 complement each other and they must be read together.” I am

unable to agree. The original and its translation cannot complement each

other. The translation is not intended to supplement the original. There is no

last will acceptable to court. There is no probate before court. The appellant

argues that the inventory marked 5V13 proves that the last will was admitted

to probate. Which last will? On the other hand, an inventory tendered in a

testamentary case is not conclusive proof that the deceased testator was the

absolute owner of all the properties stated therein.

It is also relevant to note that after the above-mentioned testamentary

proceedings were over, when Munidasa Amarasiri Jayasinghe transferred the

land to Dharmadasa Amarasiri Jayasinghe by 5V3, he traces his title to the

property to “right of inheritance”. He makes no reference to the last will or

any executor conveyance. The appellant argues that the recital in 5V3 is

entirely correct. I have my reservations. When someone acquires property

by a last will admitted to probate, there is no reason for him not to refer to the

last will or the executor conveyance executed in terms of the last will as the

source of title in the recital of the subsequent deed.

The appellant then argues that whether it is by inheritance or last will, nothing

flows from it to the benefit of the plaintiff. This is not correct. Munidasa

Amarasiri Jayasinghe is also in the plaintiff’s pedigree. According to the

plaintiff’s pedigree, Munidasa Amarasiri Jayasinghe being one of the three

children of Eliyas Amarasiri Jayasinghe is only entitled to 2/3 x 1/3 = 2/9 or

24/108 share. But according to the appellant, Munidasa Amarasiri

Jayasinghe was entitled to the entire land on the strength of the last will.

41

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

The appellant admits in evidence that by deed 8V1 of 1865 and 8V2 of 1878

produced by the plaintiff, Elias Amarasiri Jayasinghe became entitled to only

2/3 of the land, not the entirety. This is prior to the alleged last will. How he

became entitled to the balance 1/3, the appellant does not know. She thinks

by prescription.

I am not satisfied, as the learned District Judge and the learned Judges of the

High Court were, that there was a last will admitted to probate by which Elias

Amarasiri Jayasinghe and his wife, being the lawful owners of the entire land

subject to partition, bequeathed it to Munidasa Amarasiri Jayasinghe. If this

is not proved, the subsequent deeds tendered on that assumption need not be

scrutinised since what could have been transferred by those deeds was only

what was entitled to the transferors and nothing more.

I answer the 1st question of law in the negative.

The next question relates to prescriptive possession. I do not think the

appellant vigorously pursued such claim in the District Court, the High Court

or before this court. In the District Court an incomplete issue (issue No.16)

has been raised on prescription. In the High Court, the appeal has not been

argued on prescription but only on identification of the corpus and devolution

of title based on the aforesaid last will. In that backdrop it is my considered

view that the appellant cannot try to establish a prescriptive claim as a main

ground of appeal in the Supreme Court because it is a mixed question of fact

and law if not a pure question of fact.

If there was no last will the appellant also becomes a co-owner of the land.

Proof of prescriptive title is difficult. Proof of prescriptive title among co-

owners is more difficult. Long possession of the co-owned land by one co-

owner does not establish prescriptive possession unless it is established by

cogent evidence that adverse possession commenced by way of an overt act

continued for over 10 years. In this case evidence has been led that, apart

42

SC/APPEAL/46/2018

from the appellant, others who come under the plaintiff’s pedigree also

possessed the land. There are no buildings or valuable plantation on the land.

No cogent evidence has been led to prove that the appellant is entitled to the

entire land by prescription based on adverse possession against the other co-

owners. This maybe because the appellant claimed the entire land on deed

5V1 based on the aforesaid last will. If a person claims title to a property as

the absolute owner on paper title, in my view, he cannot in the same breath

make a prescriptive claim to the same property because a prescriptive claim

is based upon adverse possession against the true owner of the property.

I answer the 2nd question of law also in the negative.

The appeal is dismissed but without costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT