==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

SC/CHC/Appeal No. 34/2017 DFCC Bank PLC, HC/CIVIL/134/2012/MR (Presently : DFCC Vardhana Bank PLC), (Previously : DFCC Vardhana Bank Limited) No ; 73, W.A.D. Ramanayaka Mawatha, Colombo 2. PLAINTIFF

vs Mahasen Sampath Vithanage Happawana, No.326, Pitakotte Road, Pitakotte. DEFENDANT And now Between

Mahasen Sampath Vithanage Happawana, No.326, Pitakotte Road, Pitakotte.

DEFENDANT - APPELLANT vs

DFCC Bank PLC,No. 03, “Chamini”, (Presently : DFCC Vardhana Bank PLC), (Previously : DFCC Vardhana Bank Limited) No ; 73, W.A.D. Ramanayaka Mawatha, Colombo 2.

PLAINTIFF - RESPONDENT

2

BEFORE : Yasantha Kodagoda, P.C., J. A. L. Shiran Gooneratne, J. M. Sampath K. B. Wijeratne, J. COUNSEL : Harith de Mel with Hasini Rupasinghe instructed By Chamithri Kaluhennadige for the Defendant- Appellant.

Kushan D’ Alwis, P.C. with Kaushalya Nawaratne, P.C. and Sashendra Mudannayake instructed by Tejaka Perera for the Plaintiff – Respondent. ARGUED ON : 09.10.2025 DECIDED ON : 26.05.2026

M. Sampath K. B. Wijeratne J.

Introduction

The Plaintiff -Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Plaintiff’) originally

instituted the instant action in the High Court of the Western Province holden in

Colombo (commonly referred to as the Commercial High Court) against the

Defendant-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Defendant’) for the recovery

of a sum of Rs. 5,555,008/66 together with interest thereon at the rate of 21%

per annum from July 01, 2011 on a sum of Rs. 4,004,547/17 till the date of decree

and further interest on decreed sum at the rate of 21% until the payment is made

in full. This appeal arises from the judgment of the Commercial High Court,

where it was held that the Defendant is liable in his capacity as a guarantor/surety

for the repayment of the credit facilities granted by the Plaintiff bank to ICM

Micro Computer System (PVT) Ltd (the Principal Debtor).

3

Analysis

It is the position of the Defendant that the aforesaid limited liability company

has borrowed the amounts in question, and as it is the sole beneficiary of the

credit facilities granted, the present action cannot be maintained solely against

the Defendant, who is only a guarantor, without making the principal debtor a

party to the action. It was submitted on behalf of the Plaintiff that the Defendant

is being sued in the Commercial High Court based on the personal guarantee

marked ‘P6’ and that the Defendant has assumed liability as the principal debtor

in the event of default by the principal debtor, as per ‘P 6’. Therefore, the Plaintiff

bank contends that it does not have any obligation to proceed against the

principal debtor in the first instance.

In light of the arguments presented, first, this Court has to determine whether the

Plaintiff can maintain the instant action against the Defendant without making

the company, which is the beneficiary of the credit facilities granted, a party to

the action and without first proceeding against the said company to recover

amounts due.

The law applicable in this connection is the Roman-Dutch Law, which is our

residual law and not the English law that is applicable concerning issues with

respect to the law of banks and banking, as repeatedly held in numerous

previously decisions of this Court as well as the Court of Appeal, though the

English law approach does not substantially differ from Roman-Dutch law. This

was highlighted in the case of Gurusin Appu vs Carlina Hamine1 where the

Court applied Roman-Dutch Law in determining the question of liability of a

surety.

At the outset, let me discuss the approaches of English law and Roman-Dutch

law to the law of guarantee. In Paget’s Law of Banking” (12th edn at 701-702)

provides “A guarantee obligation is secondary and accessory to the obligation

the performance of which is guaranteed; the guarantor undertakes that the

1 2 NLR 307.

4

principal debtor will perform his (the principal debtor’s) obligation to the

creditor and that he the (guarantor) will be liable to the creditor if the principal

debtor does not perform. Therefore, the guarantor’s liability for the non-

performance of the principal debtor’s obligation is co-extensive with that

obligation. If the principal debtor’s obligation turns out not to exist, or is void,

diminished or discharged so is the guarantors in respect of it”

Halsbury’s Laws of England, Secondary liability of the guarantor, (Vol XX,

4th edn at 180): “There are two different kinds of guarantee. One is a promise by

the guarantor which becomes effective if the principal debtor fails to perform his

obligations. The other is a promise that the principal debtor will perform his

obligations. In both cases, the guarantor’s liability is secondary. The guarantor

is under no liability if the principal debtor’s obligation is discharged, by

performance or otherwise, on or before the date of performance. In the one case,

the conditional promise never becomes effective; in the other, there is no breach

by the guarantor. Consequently, a creditor may not, before any default has been

committed, bring an action quia timet against a guarantor to force him to set

apart money to provide for the possibility of a debt becoming due from the

principal debtor and the principal debtor making default. Nor can the creditor

obtain a Mareva injunction against the guarantor, because he has no accrued

cause of action to support it. On the other hand, a guarantor is no more justified

in placing the whole of his property out of the reach of liability to pay the

guaranteed debt than if he were the principal debtor.”

According to the afore-cited English law authorities it is clear that guarantors’

liability would become effective only when the principal debtor fails to perform

his obligations.

The position of Roman Dutch law with regard to a guarantor is stated in the

following manner in Wessels’ Law of Contract in South Africa [Volume II, 2nd

edn] in the following manner. “When the debtor is in default the creditor is

entitled to demand payment from the surety. ... the mere default of the debtor does

not as a rule entitle the creditor to proceed against the surety. The principal

5

debtor must not only first be sued, but he must also be excused, and only after

this can the surety be called upon to pay the balance due. Hence, if a surety is

sued before the principal debtor, he may advance as an exception or defence the

beneficium ordinis seu excussionis – that the principal debtor be first excused

before payment is demanded of the surety.” [emphasis added]”

A similar view has been expressed in Maasdorp, The Institutes of Cape Law

[Volume I, The Law of Obligation, at 357] : “The benefit of excusion, as known

to our law, is the right of exception to which a security is entitled, who is being

sued before the principal debtor, to demand that the principal shall first be sued

and excused; [Voet 46:1:14; Grotius 3:3:27] and, where there are more than one

principal debtor, that all shall be excused. It further entitles the surety, where an

obligation has been secured as well by the giving of sureties as by a mortgage

on immovable property, to claim that the immovable property shall also be

excused before he is himself proceeded against.”

In Gamini Seneviratne and Another vs Sampath Bank Limited2 Obeyesekere J.

thus stated; “[t]he resultant position then is that under the Roman Dutch law, the

creditor’s first recourse is to the principal debtor, and the surety becomes liable

only once the principal debtor has been excused. Where that has not been done,

and subject to certain limitations, the surety shall be entitled to take up the

defence that the principal debtor be excused prior to proceeding against the

surety. What is significant however is that this defence can be renounced by the

surety.”

In such circumstances, the Plaintiff can only proceed against the Defendant if

there is a valid and enforceable renunciation of the defence to the effect that the

principal debtor need not be first sued, and that he must also be excused, before

payment is demanded of the guarantor.

In the event, the surety/ guarantor expressly renounces his right by agreeing to a

specific renunciation of this right, or impliedly renounces his right by accepting

2 SC (CHC) Appeal No. 24/2008 SC Minutes of 08.07.2025.

6

liability as a Principal Debtor and agreeing to be sued without the Debtor

excusing the Principal Debtor, the Surety cannot later claim this right or insist

that the Creditor must proceed against the Principal Debtor before proceeding

against the Surety.

Today what we see mostly are contracts guarantor provides a primary or

independent undertaking to fulfill the principal debtor’s obligation. The rational

for this could be found in in the Supreme Court case of Sri Lanka Insurance

Corporation Ltd. vs People’s Bank3 where by Eva Wanasundera PCJ, observed

“When any party grants an assurance to another party guaranteeing to pay on

demand, it is accepted that if the principal does not pay that the guarantor shall

pay. It is only on that assurance that the Bank grants the facility which the

principal requests from the Bank. That is the norm and accepted practice in the

business world. If any Bank takes it to mean that it has to first demand from the

principal, then file action against the principal and then only the Bank can

demand and file action against the guarantor, there will be no bank who would

want to grant any facility to any principal on such a guarantee.”

Under contract law, party autonomy is a fundamental concept that emphasizes

the freedom of parties to choose the substance of the contract that they are

entering into. Accordingly, rights and liabilities that each party has undertaken

can only be determined with reference to the agreement parties have entered into.

There was no clause in the document marked ‘P 6’ (guarantee) which obligates

the Plaintiff bank to first proceed against the principal debtor before demanding

the payment from the guarantor/guarantors. Rather, when going through ‘P 6’, it

is clear that the Defendant has assumed liability on behalf of the principal debtor

in the event of a default. Clause 15 of the said agreement states as follows;

“I/we and each of us specially agree that the Bank shall be at

liberty, either in one action to sue the debtor and me/us and each

or any of us jointly and severally, or to proceed in the first

3 SC (CHC) Appeal No. 18/09, SC Minutes of 17.03.2017.

7

instance against me/us and each or any of us only, and further

that I/we and each of us hereby renounce the right to claim that

the debtor should be excused or proceeded against by action in

the first instance, and (where this guarantee is given by more than

one person) the right to claim that the Bank should divide its claim

against us and bring actions against us, each for his portion pro

rata, and the right to claim in any action brought against all of us

that the Bank should only recover from each of us a pro rata share

of the amount claimed in that action, and all other rights and

benefits to which sureties are or may be by law entitled IT BEING

AGREED that I/we and each of us am/are and is liable in all

respects hereunder as principal debtor/principal debtors jointly

and severally, to the extend aforementioned, including the liability

to be sued before recourse is had against the debtor.”

When going through ‘P6’, Clause 15 clearly implies that bank has the discretion

to proceed against Principal debtor and/or guarantors and/or any of the guarantor

for they have already renounced their right to claim ‘the debtor should be

excused or proceeded against by action in the first instance’ and ‘to claim that

the Bank should divide its claim’ in the event where guarantee is given by more

than one person. In such circumstances, the Plaintiff is entitled to maintain the

instant action without making the principal debtor a party to the action.

In the instant case, the Defendant also claims that he is unaware of the contents

of the documents he signed, as they were never explained to him, and that he

placed his signature on blank documents. However, such a plea of non-est factum

would not succeed unless it could be proven that the person signing the document

is illiterate, blind, or lacks the mental capacity to understand what he is signing.

Dealing with the burden of proof of a person who seeks to invoke this defense

8

of non-est factum, Dissanayake J. in the Court of Appeal case of Mercantile

Credit Ltd vs Thilakaratne4 observed as follows;

“The burden of proving that the clauses relating to the renouncing of all

benefits and privileges to which sureties are entitled to by law were not

understood by him is a special fact within the knowledge of the person

alleging it and by virtue of section 101 of the Evidence Ordinance the

burden of proving that fact is with the person who asserts that fact. In this

case since it was the position of the 2nd defendant respondent that the

conditions of the agreement relating to renunciation of the rights and

benefits of the guarantors were not understood by him, the burden of proof

of that fact lies with the 2nd defendant respondent who alleges it. It is well

to be borne in mind that under section 102 of the Evidence Ordinance, the

burden of proof lies on that person who would fail if no evidence at all

were given on either side.”

I am also unable to accept the contentions of the Defendant that he did not

understand what he was signing, considering his status and background. Even if

we are to accept his contention that he signed blank documents, the consequences

of such irresponsible conduct must be borne by the Defendant himself. Professor

Weeramantry in ‘The Law of Contracts’ (vol. 1) at page 300 thus observed,

“A person signing a document is held strictly to its terms on the basis that

he does so at his peril. This is known as the caveat subscript or rule, and

in the operation of this rule the principles relating to Justus error come

into play. This rule must not however be viewed as a special head of

exemption from the ordinary rules relating to mistake. Where a person

deliberately affixes his signature to a written contract, the court would

naturally be more hesitant in permitting him to plead that he did so in

consequence of a mistake as to the nature or substance of the transaction,

and to this extent would be less prone to view the error as Justus. In

4 (2002) 3 Sri LR 206.

9

accordance with the rules of Justus error the court would not readily come

to the aid of a person who states that he did not sufficiently attend to the

terms of a contract or did not read it sufficiently carefully, or altogether

neglected to read the document containing the contract

In accordance with the rules of Justus error the Court would not readily

come to the aid of a person who states that he did not sufficiently attend

to the terms of a contract or did not read it sufficiently carefully, or

altogether neglected to read the document containing the contract. Thus,

where a person who is neither illiterate nor blind signs a deed without

examining its contents, he would not, as a general rule, be permitted in

Roman Dutch Law to setup the plea that the document is not his. If

however, without negligence, a person executes a document in ignorance

of its true nature, he may repudiate it, and this repudiation holds good

even as against 3rd persons who have in good faith acted upon it as a

genuine expression of intention."

The Defendant claims that he has not received any letter of demand sent by the

bank. In the Court of Appeal case of Athukorala vs Special Commissioner,

Municipal Council, Galle5 Grero J. held that the best proof of notice being sent

served is to produce a copy of such notice along with the registered postal receipt.

In the instant case, copies of the letter of demand sent and the registered post

receipt attached to the Plaint clearly substantiate the fact that the letter of demand

has been posted to the Defendant. Further, the Defendant has not produced any

material to substantiate his claim that the contents of the bank statements and the

amounts due to the bank are incorrect.

When the demand (P 11) was made by the Plaintiff to the Defendant, the

Defendant has not sent any reply. In the ordinary course of business, if a person

asserts in a letter to another that a certain state of facts exists, the person receiving

such business letter or a letter of demand must reply, if he does not agree with

5 [1994] 3 Sri LR 165.

10

the assertions. The failure to do so would amount to an admission to a claim

made therein, as I have already analysed in the previously decided case of Pasan

Madanayake vs DFCC Bank PLC.6

This position is very well articulated in Saravanamuttu vs de Mel7 in the

following manner. “In business matters, if a person states in a letter to another

that a certain state of facts exists, the person to whom the letter is written must

reply if he does not agree with or means to dispute the assertions. Otherwise, the

silence of the latter amounts to an admission of the truth of the allegations

contained in that letter.”

For the reasons set out above, I see no reason to interfere with the judgment of

the learned Commercial High Court Judge.

Conclusion

For the foregoing reasons I affirm the judgment of the Commercial High Court.

The Plaintiff shall be entitled to costs of both this Court and the Commercial

High Court.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Yasantha Kodagoda, P.C., J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

A. L. Shiran Gooneratne, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

6 SC/CHC/Appeal No.38/2023, SC minutes of 26.03.2026. 7 149 NLR 529.