1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

S.C (FR) 224/2012

In the matter of an Application under and in terms of the Article 126 read with the Article 17 of the Constitution.

1. M. G. Nishantha Rupasinghe

No. 59, Vihara Mawatha, New Puttalam Road, Pothanegama. PETITIONER Vs. 1. Dharmakeerthi Wijesundera

No. 280A, New Town, Anuradhapura. 2. Viraj Perera

Commissioner of Local Government Office of the Commissioner of Local Government Office, Provincial Council Building of the North Central Province, Anuradhapura. 3. Dumindu Dayasena Retiyala

(Member of the Municipal Council of Anuradhapura) “Hotel Thammenna”, Airport Road, Anuradhapura. 4. Headquarter Inspector of Anuradhapura

Headquarter Inspector’s Office, Anuradhapura.

2

5. W.M.R. Wijesinghe

Assistant Divisional Secretary Divisional Secretariat Office (Negenahira Nuwaragampalatha), Anuradhapura. 6. Divisional Secretary

Divisional Secretariat’s Office (Negenahira Nuwaragampalatha), Anuradhapura. 7. Dayananda,

Grama Niladari, No. 258, Thulana, Anuradhapura.

8. Dissanayake (Sub Inspector of Police),

Police Station, Anuradhapura. 9. Rupasinghe (Police Sergeant – 24707),

Police Station, Anuradhapura. 10. Nalaka (Police Constable – 9241)

Police Station, Anuradhapura. 11. Jagath (Police Constable – 46768),

Police Station, Anuradhapura. 12. Sirimal (Police Constable – 62953)

Police Station, Anuradhapura 13. Keerthi (Police Constable – 22255)

Police Station, Anuradhapura. 14. Inspector General of Police,

Police Headquarters, Colombo 1. 15. Provincial Commissioner of Lands,

North Central Province, Kachcheri Building, Anuradhapura. 16. The Hon. Attorney General

Department of the Attorney General. Colombo 12. RESPONDENS

3

BEFORE: Upaly Abeyrathne J. Anil Gooneratne J. & Prasanna S. Jayawardena P.C., J

COUNSEL: Saliya Peiris with Thanuka Nandasiri for the Petitioner Upali Jayamanne for the 1st and 3rd Respondents Dr. Avanti Perera S.S.C. for the 5th, 6th 15th & 16th Respondents 2nd, 7th – 13th Respondents are absent and unrepresented

ARGUED ON: 06.02.2017

DECIDED ON: 23.02.2017

GOONERATNE J.

The Petitioner is a retired Police Officer who has filed this

application complaining that some of the Respondents forcefully entered his

land and attempted to clear the land and cause certain destruction and even

demolished Petitioners fowl pens. He refers to three incidents, for which the

Respondents are responsible for causing damage to his property. In the manner

described in the petition of the Petitioner I note the following.

4

(a) On 19.06.2011, the 2nd and 3rd Respondents with several others tried to

forcefully enter the Petitioner’s land claiming that the land had been

leased to the 1st Respondent. Petitioner warned the gathering of people

who entered the premises, of making a police complaint against them.

Thereafter they left the property.

(b) On 24.06.2011 the 1st Respondent along with two others entered the

property and started to clear the land. Petitioner objected to this and

threatened to complain to the police. Thereafter the 1st Respondent and

the other two persons left the property.

(c) On 23.01.2012 1st to 3rd and 7th Respondents to 13th Respondent and three

other civilians forcefully entered the Petitioner’s property and

demolished the Petitioners fowl pens. On the next date on 24th January,

Petitioner lodged a complaint with the police (P8). I also note the other

documents produced along with P8, Photograph of the fowl pen after

illegal acts P8A-P81. Two video CDs containing illegal arbitrary acts of 1st

to 13th and 7th to 13th Respondents.

There is also reference to District Court, Anuradhapura Case No.

24613/L whereas Petitioner sought a declaration of rights to possession. This

action was filed as the Petitioner had reliable information that 1st and 3rd

Respondents were attempting to forcefully enter Petitioner’s land with a view

of starting a Tourist Hotel. Petitioner pleads he has also sought an interim

injunction to prevent acts of 1st to 3rd Respondents. Petitioner states that whilst

the inquiry into the interim injunction was pending 1st to 3rd with 7th to 13th

5

Respondents acted illegally as described in (c ) above. According to him acts of

demolition was done to make nugatory the Petitioners District Court action.

However the Petitioner states the District court granted an interim injunction

against the 1st to 3rd Respondents.

There is another incident described in the petition. That is on

23.12.2005 the 1st Respondent had come to his residence and abused his wife

and again tried to forcefully enter the premises. Thereafter his wife filed action

in the District Court for declaration of right of possession (case No. 21034/L)

Petition is so prepared to project land disputes between the 1st Respondent his

wife and other relatives, which has a history. There is reference to several other

cases i.e possessory action, land disputes, declaration on land permits etc.

This court on or about 11.07.2012 granted leave to proceed for the

alleged violation of Article 12(1) of the Constitution against the 2nd, 3rd and 7th

to 13th Respondents. On the date of hearing learned Senior State Counsel

informed court that no objection would be filed on behalf of the 5th ,6th ,15th and

16th Respondents. 2nd , 7th – 13th Respondents were absent and unrepresented

though duly noticed. Court was also informed that the 2nd Respondent had

expired. Learned Counsel who appeared for the 1st and 3rd Respondents denied

any liability and submitted to court that the material placed before court does

6

not indicate any involvement of his clients, and or even to connect them with

the alleged incidents relied upon by the Petitioner.

With regard to the Petitioner’s claim that, on 23rd January 2012, the

1st to 3rd and 7th to 13th Respondents forcibly entered his land and demolished

his fowl pens, counsel for the 3rd Respondent stated that, the 3rd Respondent did

enter the Petitioner’s land on that day but denied that any wrongful or unlawful

act was committed. There is no reliable material before Court to substantiate

the Petitioner’s claim that any of the other Respondents entered the Petitioner’s

land. There is no evidence to suggest that the 3rd Respondent committed any act

which is wrongful or unlawful since a viewing of the Video CD only shows a few

men clearing a land which is overgrown with some plants. There is no sign of any

fowl pens on the land. There are a few seconds of a video recording of a man

breaking a section of a low wall which is about a foot high but he is doing that

without any objection by any person. There is no evidence of any force or

violence being used or of any threatening language being used. Instead, there is

an amicable conversation between some men, one of whom appears to be the

Petitioner from the contents of the dialogue, discussing the fact that, there are

Court cases pending in the District Court over who has the rights to the land and

that this dispute will have to be referred to the District Court to be resolved.

Further, there is no evidence that the 3rd Respondent was acting under the

7

colours of his office as a member of the Municipal Council of Anuradhapura. In

fact, this land is outside the Municipal Limits of Anuradhapura. All this

establishes that whatever occurred on 23rd January 2012 was a private dispute

between the Petitioner and the persons who entered his land on that day and

that the Petitioner’s remedy, if any, is a civil action for damages. In fact, counsel

for the Petitioner admitted that such an action has been field in the District

Court.

This court having considered the material placed before court

cannot arrive at a definite finding of a violation of a fundamental right. The three

incidents discussed above and the other incident alleged to have taken place on

23.12.2005 does not take the petitioner’s case any further to justify a violation

of a fundamental right. I am unable to find material to corroborate any one or

more of such incidents. If at all incident at (c ) above though suggest unlawful

entry to Petitioner’s land, the available material do not directly implicate any

one or more of the Respondents. Police statement P8 refer to some names, but

I am unable to really pin point as to who would be held responsible amongst the

Respondents. Even the video CDs would not identify the Respondents. On this I

have to pose the questions who? When? And where? Above all the question of

identity is in grave issue. Even if this court takes a liberal view of the provisions

of Article 126, I am unable to declare a violation and a liability in the public law

8

of the State, unproved and unestablished incidents cannot form the basis of a

Fundamental Rights Application. Whatever allegation or incident should be

proved to the satisfaction of court.

For the reasons set out above, I am of the view that no fundamental

rights of the Petitioner has been violated. The Petitioner’s Application is

therefore refused and dismissed. There will be no costs.

Application dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Upaly Abeyrathne J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Prasanna S. Jayawardena P.C., J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT