==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Michael Laurents Cyrille

Caderamanpulle,

No. 15/5, Victoria Place,

Off Elvitigala Mawatha,

Colombo 8.

(Deceased)

Joseph Romesh Sherhan

Caderamanpulle,

No. 33, Booran Road,

Canfield, Victoria 3162,

Australia.

Substituted Respondent-Petitioner-

Appellant-Appellant

SC/APPEAL/81/2011

CA/APPEAL/960/1999(F)

DC COLOMBO/5386/1999/SPL

Vs.

Ceylon Paper Sacks Limited

No. 47, Maligawa Road,

Etul Kotte.

Petitioner-Respondent-Respondent-

Respondent

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

K. Priyantha Fernando, J.

Menaka Wijesundera, J.

2

SC/APPEAL/81/2011

Counsel: Dr. Lasantha Hettiarachchi with Minaali Haputantri and

Nishadini Gunawardana for the Substituted Respondent-

Petitioner-Appellant-Appellant.

Kuvera De Zoysa, P.C., with Sumedha Mahawanniarachchi

and Randeewari Arangala for the Petitioner-Respondent-

Respondent-Respondent.

Argued on: 14.10.2025

Written submissions:

By the Appellant and the Respondent on 14.11.2025.

Decided on: 26.03.2026

Samayawardhena, J.

The Respondent, Ceylon Paper Sacks Ltd., instituted this action

(5386/1999/SPL) in the District Court of Colombo in 1999 by way of

summary procedure against the Appellant, Mr. Caderamanpulle, under

the Registration of Documents Ordinance seeking the cancellation of

certain caveats filed by him over a property owned by the Respondent

and for damages.

On 22.07.1999, the Court issued an order nisi in terms of section 377 of

the Civil Procedure Code and fixed the next date as 27.08.1999. The

order nisi was served on the Appellant through the Fiscal.

When the case was called on 27.08.1999, the Appellant being absent and

unrepresented, the Court, in terms of section 383(1) of the Civil

Procedure Code, made the order nisi absolute.

Section 383(1) provides as follows:

383(1). If on such day the petitioner appears, and the respondent

does not appear, and if the court is satisfied by the affidavit of the

serving officer, stating the fact of the service, or by oral evidence,

that the order has been duly served upon the respondent in time

3

SC/APPEAL/81/2011

reasonably sufficient to enable him to appear, then if the order is an

order nisi made under (a) of section 377, the court shall make it

absolute, and shall pass no other order adverse to the respondent;

but otherwise it shall make such order within the prayer of the

petition as it shall consider right on the facts proved:

Provided, however, that in the latter case the court shall make no

order to pay costs against the respondent, except in cases where the

prayer of the petition expressly asks for the costs of the application,

and the court thinks it fit that the respondent should pay them.

The Appellant thereafter made an application on 08.09.1999 “under

section 839 of Chapter XXIV of the Civil Procedure Code” seeking to set

aside the order absolute on the ground that the order nisi had never been

served on him. Learned Counsel for the Appellant submitted that section

839 is a typographical error and that the correct provision referred to is

section 389 of Chapter XXIV of the Civil Procedure Code. A reading of the

judgment of the Court of Appeal indicates that the Court of Appeal has

also proceeded on that basis. Accordingly, I proceed on the footing that

it was a typographical error and that the application was in fact made

under section 389 of the Civil Procedure Code.

Section 389 in Chapter XXIV of the Civil Procedure Code provides as

follows:

No appeal by a respondent shall lie against any final order which

has been made, in the case of the respondent’s non-appearance, on

the footing of either an order nisi or an interlocutory order in the

matter of a petition; but it shall be competent to the court, within a

reasonable time after the passing of such order, to entertain an

application in the way of summary procedure instituted by any

respondent against whom such order has been made, to have such

final order set aside upon the ground that the applicant had been

prevented from appearing after notice of the order nisi or

interlocutory order by reason of accident or misfortune, or that such

4

SC/APPEAL/81/2011

order nisi or interlocutory order had never been served upon him.

And if the ground of such application is duly established to the

satisfaction of the court, as against the original petitioner, the court

may set aside the final order complained of upon such terms and

conditions as the court shall consider it just and right to impose upon

the applicant, and upon the final order being so set aside, the court

shall proceed with the hearing and determination of the matter of

the original petition as from the point at which the final order so set

aside was made.

According to section 389, the application shall be made under summary

procedure.

Upon that application dated 08.09.1999 being filed (Journal Entry No.

5), the learned District Judge, in chambers, directed that the case be

called on 14.09.1999 for support of the said application.

On 14.09.1999 (Journal Entry No. 6), the case was called in open court

and the Court fixed the matter for inquiry on 28.10.1999. This indicates

that the Court did not issue an order nisi in terms of section 377(a), but

instead made an interlocutory order appointing a day for the

determination of the matter of the petition dated 08.09.1999 in terms of

section 377(b).

Section 377 provides as follows:

If the court is satisfied on the evidence exhibited or adduced that the

material facts of the petition are prima facie established or is of

opinion that on the footing of these facts the petitioner is entitled to

the remedy, or to the order in his favour, for which the petition prays,

or any part thereof, then the court shall accordingly make either—

(a) an order nisi, conditioned to take effect in the event of the

respondent not showing cause against it on a day appointed

by the order for that purpose; or

5

SC/APPEAL/81/2011

(b) an interlocutory order appointing a day for the determination of

the matter of the petition, and intimating that the respondent

will be heard in opposition to the petition if he appears before

the court for that purpose on the day so appointed.

According to the proceedings dated 28.10.1999, on that day, the

Appellant was absent but was represented by two Attorneys-at-Law.

However, as borne out by the same proceedings, the Court dismissed the

Appellant’s application with costs on account of his absence in Court.

Being dissatisfied with this order, the Appellant appealed to the Court of

Appeal. The Court of Appeal, by its judgment dated 04.10.2010, affirmed

the order of the District Court and dismissed the appeal. Hence this

appeal to this Court.

Section 382 provides as follows:

If on the day appointed in an order made under section 377 for the

determination of the matter of the petition, the petitioner does not

appear before the court either in person or by his registered attorney

to support the petition, the court shall dismiss the petition, and shall

have power to make such order for the payment of costs by the

petitioner to the respondent as to the court shall seem just.

The pivotal argument of learned Counsel for the Appellant is that, in

terms of section 382, the Court cannot dismiss the application on the

ground of the absence of the Appellant if he was represented by his

Attorney-at-Law. I have no hesitation in accepting that argument.

According to section 382, the Court may dismiss the petition only if the

petitioner is neither present nor represented. In the present case,

however, on 28.10.1999, the Appellant was represented by his Attorneys-

at-Law. In other words, the Court ought to have proceeded on the basis

that both the Appellant and the Respondent Company were represented

in Court on 28.10.1999.

6

SC/APPEAL/81/2011

If both parties were represented, sections 384 to 387 became applicable,

and the inquiry ought to have commenced by the Respondent, not the

Appellant. In Chemisales Holding (Pvt) Ltd. v. People’s Bank

(SC/APPEAL/148/2019, SC Minutes of 03.04.2025 at pages 36-41), I

had the occasion to explain this procedure in some detail.

Sections 384 to 387 provide as follows:

384. If on such day both the petitioner and the respondent appear,

the proceedings on the matter of the petition shall commence by the

respondent in person, or by his registered attorney, stating his

objections, if any, to the petitioner’s application; and the respondent

shall then be entitled to read such affidavits or other documentary

evidence as may be admissible, or by leave of the court to adduce

oral evidence in support of his objections, or to rebut and refute the

evidence of the petitioner:

Provided that no affidavit or other documentary evidence shall be so

read without express leave of court, unless a copy of the document

shall have been served on the petitioner or his registered attorney

at least forty-eight hours before the day when the matter of the

petition comes on to be heard and determined; and the oral evidence

shall be taken down in writing by the Judge.

385. In the event of the respondent stating objections to the

application, and not otherwise, and after the respondent’s evidence,

if any, shall have been read or given, the petitioner shall be entitled

by way of reply to comment upon the respondent’s case.

386. When the respondent’s evidence has been taken, it shall be

competent to the court, on the request of the petitioner, to adjourn

the matter to enable the petitioner to adduce additional evidence; or,

if it thinks necessary, it may frame issues of fact between the

petitioner and respondent, and adjourn the matter for the trial of

these issues by oral testimony. And on the day to which the matter

7

SC/APPEAL/81/2011

is so adjourned, the additional evidence shall be adduced, and the

issues tried in conformity with, as nearly as may be, the rules

hereinbefore prescribed for the taking of evidence at the trial of a

regular action.

387. The court, after the evidence has been duly taken and the

petitioner and respondent have been heard either in person or by

their respective attorneys-at-law or recognized agents, shall

pronounce its final order in the matter of the petition in open court,

either at once or on some future day, of which notice shall be given

in open court at the termination of the trial.

It is therefore clear that both the District Court and the Court of Appeal

erred in law when both Courts disallowed the Appellant’s application

solely on the basis that the Appellant himself was not personally present

in Court on 28.10.1999.

On 21.06.2011, a previous Bench of this Court granted special leave to

appeal on several questions of law set out in sub-paragraphs (c) to (j) of

paragraph 51 of the petition dated 02.11.2010. In my view, it is

unnecessary to answer all the questions of law. It is sufficient to answer

question 51(d), which reads as follows:

Did the Court of Appeal fail to take cognizance of the significant fact

that the District Court gravely erred in law when it proceeded to

dismiss the petition dated 08.09.1999 on 28.10.1999 on the ground

that the Appellant was not personally present when the case was

called?

I answer the said question of law in the affirmative. Accordingly, the order

of the District Court dated 28.10.1999 and the judgment of the Court of

Appeal dated 04.10.2010 affirming that order are set aside, and the

appeal is allowed.

8

SC/APPEAL/81/2011

The District Court is directed to hold the inquiry under summary

procedure from the stage at which it was terminated on 28.10.1999, in

accordance with the law. The Appellant is entitled to costs of this appeal.

Judge of the Supreme Court

K. Priyantha Fernando, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Menaka Wijesundera, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court