==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of Article 128 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. Complainant S.C.Appeal No.169/2019 SC(SPL) LA Application No. 336/2018 Vs. C.A.Case No. 203/2015 H.C.Polonnaruwa Case No.39/2012

And 1. Hethambi Prabakaran alias Kumara 2. Kokka Koralage Mahindapala alias Gamunu 3. Adam Lebbe Mohamed Haris 4. Noor Mohamed Kabul(Dead) Accused AND NOW Hethambi Prabakaran alias Kumara, No.258, Muthuwella, Mahaweli Sinhapura, Walikanda. Presently at Walikada Prison 1st Accused-Appellant Vs.

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

2

Hon. Attorney General Attorney General’s Department. Colombo 12. Complainant-Respondent AND NOW BETWEEN Hethambi Prabakaran alias Kumara, No.258, Muthuwella, Mahaweli Sinhapura, Walikanda. Presently at Walikada Prison

1st Accused-Appellant- Appellant Vs. Hon. Attorney General Attorney General’s Department. Colombo 12. Complainant-Respondent- Respondent

BEFORE : P. PADMA N SURASENA, CJ. ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J. MAHINDA SAMAYAWARDHENA, J COUNSEL : Anil Silva P.C. with Tharindu Rukshan and D. Bhanu for the Accused-Appellant-Appellant

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

3

Ayesha Jinasena A.S.G., (P.C.) with Chathuranga Bandara S.C. for the Complainant- Respondent-Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 04th August, 2021 DECIDED ON : 30th January, 2026 ********** ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

The 1st accused-appellant-petitioner-appellant (hereinafter referred

to as “the 1st accused”) was indicted by the Hon. Attorney General, along

with two other accused and another called Noor Mohammed Kabul, who

since died, for committing the murder of Mohammed Riham on 25.07.2004,

at Mutuwella of Welikanda area. The 3rd accused was also accused of

committing the offence of retention of stolen property that belonged to the

deceased.

Upon the election made by the three accused for a trial without a

jury, the trial against them commenced and proceeded before the learned

Judge of the High Court of Polonnaruwa. During that trial, the prosecution

led evidence of several lay witnesses as well as of official witnesses,

including that of a Consultant Judicial Medical Officer. When the trial

Court called for the defence, the 1st and 2nd accused made statements

from the dock, whereas the 3rd accused gave evidence under oath and

called witnesses on his behalf.

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

4

In delivering his judgment, the learned High Court Judge acquitted

the 2nd and 3rd accused from the murder charge. The 3rd accused was

acquitted of the charge exclusively levelled against him under Section 394

of the Penal Code as well. Only the 1st accused was convicted for murder

and was accordingly sentenced to death.

Being aggrieved by the said conviction and sentence, the 1st accused

preferred an appeal to the Court of Appeal. The appellate Court, in

delivering its judgment which is being impugned in these proceedings,

dismissed the said appeal after affirming the conviction and sentence.

Thereupon, the 1st accused sought Special Leave to Appeal against the said

judgment.

After affording a hearing to the parties, this Court granted Special

Leave to Appeal to the 1st accused on 23.10.2019, in respect of the following

questions of law contained in paragraphs 14(c) and 14(j) of his petition;

i. Did the learned Judges of the Court of Appeal and the

learned High Court Judge misdirect themselves as

regards the inferences that could be drawn from the fact

the body was discovered consequent to a statement

made by the 1st accused?

ii. Did the learned High Court Judge as well as the learned

Judges of the Court of Appeal err in law when they

convicted the 1st accused for the charges levelled against

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

5

him notwithstanding the fact that the said charges had

not been proved beyond reasonable doubt?

During the hearing of the appeal of the 1st accused, learned

President’s Counsel, who represented him before this Court, contended

that the prosecution relied heavily on an item of evidence that indicated

the recovery of the body of the deceased was made subsequent to the 1st

accused pointing out the place where it was buried. The line of authorities

commencing from Edwin Singho v Inspector of Police Chilaw (46 CLW

52), Etin Singo v The Queen 69 NLR 353, Heen Banda v The Queen 75 NLR

54, Ranasinghe v Attorney General (2007) 1 Sri L.R. 223 and Sunil

Ratnayake v Attorney General (SC TAB Appeal 01/2016 – decided on

25.04.2019) consistently acted on the principle that, in situations where a

relevant fact had been discovered upon the information provided by an

accused, which made that portion of his statement admissible against him

under Section 27 of the Evidence Ordinance, the Courts would infer only

his “knowledge” to the fact that had been discovered and nothing more.

The learned President’s Counsel, who then submitted that however

the “new doctrine”, propounded in the judgment of Ariyasinge and Others

v The Attorney General (2004) 2 Sri L.R. 360, was inappropriately utilised

by the trial Court in the instant matter, when it cast a burden on the 1st

accused to give an explanation how he acquired the knowledge about the

location of the place where the body of the deceased was buried.

According to the learned President’s Counsel, in the peculiar set of

circumstances presented before the trial Court in this instance, the

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

6

evidence pertaining to the recovery of the dead body is totally insufficient

to cast any burden on the 1st accused to offer an explanation to the

prosecution case.

According to the learned President’s Counsel, this is due to the fact

that the 1st accused could not be presumed to have murdered the deceased,

based upon his inferred knowledge of the place where the dead body was

buried. Moreover, he contended that, it was wrong for the trial Court to

presume that he had the requisite common murderous intention, only on

mere ‘knowledge’ attributed to him over a Section 27 recovery. Hence, the

learned President’s Counsel’s contention is that the guilt of the 1st accused

could not be considered as the only irresistible conclusion that the trial

Court could have reached, and, in the given set of circumstances,

particularly in view of the item of evidence which indicates that it was the

3rd accused, who had the mobile phone of the deceased in his possession

soon after the latter’s death, such a finding could not be sustained at all.

In view of these multiple factors, it was submitted by the Counsel

that the Court of Appeal was clearly in error when it adopted the

erroneous reasoning of the trial Court as a correct finding in fact and law,

before proceeding to affirm the conviction of the 1st accused.

In view of the several contentions that were presented by the

learned President’s Counsel for consideration of this Court, in relation to

the nature and scope of the questions of law on which the instant appeal

was heard, and also in view of the fact that the case against the 1st accused,

being a one essentially based on circumstantial evidence, it is necessary to

highlight the relevant items of evidence that were presented by the

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

7

prosecution, before the trial Court. In order to ensure the narrative is

presented in a chronological order as much as possible, the multiple items

of circumstantial evidence are re-arranged to form a sequence.

Riham, the deceased was an unmarried businessman of 27 years who

was generally engaged in the textile trade. He lived in Periyamulla, area of

Negombo and had an elder sister, who is married and settled in Kurunegala.

On the evening of 23.07.2004, the deceased invited two of his friends

Malhas (PW6), and Saharan ( PW 5 ) to join him in a trip to visit his sister.

They boarded a bus and reached Kurunegala at about 5.00 or 6.00 in the

following morning. Having visited his sister, the deceased suggested that

they should attend a religious function held at Kalmunai. The three of them

boarded a bus bound to Kalmunai from Kurunegala. They alighted from the

bus at Ottamawadi around 3.00 a.m., on 25.07.2004 and spent some time in

a nearby mosque. That evening, the deceased, along with his two friends,

has visited the 4th accused at his residence, located in that area. The 4th

accused introduced the 1st, 2nd and 3rd accused, who later joined them to

the deceased. They all chatted for a while. The visitors from Negombo were

then served food by the family members of the 4th accused. This was

around 4.00 p.m. The group of men thereafter proceeded to Welikanda in

two three-wheeler taxis. They reached Welikanda town in the evening.

While at Welikanda town, the deceased indicated his mind to go with the

4th accused to some undisclosed place, a journey, which he said would take

only about 10 minutes. Malhas and Saharan decided to stay back and await

the return of the deceased. They stayed near the Welikanda police station.

The deceased and the four accused left in a three-wheeler. Having waited

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

8

till about midnight in Welikanda town expecting the return of the deceased,

Malhas and Saharan have thereafter decided to go back to the 4th accused’s

house, as none of the five men, who left them at Welikanda in that evening

did return as indicated.

While waiting for a Kalmunai bus, Malhas and Saharan saw the 4th

accused returning in a three-wheeler to Welikanda. The 4th accused told

them that the deceased is now waiting near Polonnaruwa bus stand at

Kaduruwela junction and invited them to join him in the three-wheeler to

meet up with the deceased. When the three of them reached Kaduruwela

bus stand, only the 1st, 2nd and 3rd accused were there, but the deceased

was nowhere to be seen. Upon being enquired of the whereabouts of the

deceased, the 1st, 2nd and 3rd accused told Malhas and Saharan that their

friend had already boarded a bus, in order to return to his sister’s place.

They further conveyed that the deceased wanted Malhas and Saharan also

to meetup with him in Kurunegala.

When the deceased left Malhas and Saharan at Welikanda, he had in

his possession a Nokia phone. He also carried Rs. 70,000.00 in cash with

him. The two friends tried to contact the deceased by repeatedly dialling

his number, as the latter was getting late. The calls went unanswered,

although they could hear the ringing signal. After about 3.30 a.m., on

26.07.2004, they realised the deceased’s phone did not respond at all to

their calls any longer.

The two friends returned to Kurunegala, only to find that the

deceased had not returned from Kalmunai, although they were told by the

1st, 2nd and 3rd accused that he did so. They searched for him in the

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

9

Negombo area and thereafter returned to the 4th accused’s house at

Ottamawadi once more, looking for the missing person. Thereupon, the 4th

accused took them to Valachchenai police, where a police officer was

introduced to them, who disclosed to Malhas that the deceased had been

arrested by Wehera police for possessing a firearm and is kept under its

detention. This lead provided by the 4th accused about the whereabouts of

the deceased too turned out to be a false one and therefore a formal

complaint was lodged with the Welikanda police by one Sriyananda, on

29.07.2004 at 11.30 a.m., in relation to the disappearance of the deceased,

without a trace, in that police area.

Malhas and Saharan had no information of the deceased, after he left

them that evening at Welikanda in the company of the four accused. But,

Malhas has noted down the number of the three-wheeler, in which the

deceased travelled along with the other accused that evening, when they

left Welikanda in that evening.

Armed with that information, Welikanda police traced two three-

wheeler drivers. Kumara (PW9) and Ranjith (PW3) operated their three-

wheeler taxis from a place near the Welikanda bus stand. Both of them

already knew the 1st to 4th accused, as passengers who regularly travelled

in their vehicles. According to Ranjith, the 3rd accused came with another

unknown person and wanted to go to Mutuwella. This was on 25.07.2004,

the day the deceased has disappeared. It’s a journey that would cover over

a distance of about nine kilometers from Welikanda and would generally

takes about 30 to 45 minutes to reach, depending on the speed and road

conditions.

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

10

Since it was already dark, Ranjith called one of his friends, Hemantha

also to join him, in case of an emergency. On their way to Mutuwella, the

3rd accused asked Ranjith to stop the three-wheeler at a point, well before

reaching Mutuwella, as he wanted to collect some money from the 1st

accused. The 3rd accused returned within 10 minutes with the other

passenger. They completed the journey by reaching Mutuwella, where

Ranjith had dropped off his two passengers near, the 3rd accused’s house.

On their return journey, nearing the point where Ranjith had

stopped the vehicle in order to allow the 3rd accused to collect some money

from the 1st accused, the 2nd accused signaled the vehicle to stop. The 1st,

2nd and 4th accused came running towards the three- wheeler. They all

wanted Ranjith to take them to Welikanda. Upon reaching Welikanda, the

three accused wanted him to take in two more passengers, who were

waiting there, to be taken to Kaduruwela junction. Since, it was not possible

to travel six passengers in one vehicle, Hemantha brought in his own three-

wheeler. They proceeded to Kaduruwela in two three-wheelers. They all got

off at Kaduruwela and the two drivers returned back to Welikanda, after

collecting their hires.

Similarly, Kumara also said that in the same night the 1st and 2nd

accused wanted him to take them to Mutuwella from Welikanda. At some

point during that journey, the 4th accused and another unknown person

too had joined them. After passing a jungle area and Mutuwella Farm and

at a point near the main Z- canal, all four passengers have got off from the

vehicle. Kumara was told that they would to take a walk through the

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

11

paddy filed. Kumara knew that the 1st accused lived in that area, as he had

dropped him off at the same spot, on several previous occasions.

Manimaran (PW7) is a shop assistant employed in a phone shop in

Batticaloa. On a particular day in July 2004, the 3rd accused brought a Nokia

6220 phone and wanted to sell it for Rs. 22,000.00. The 3rd accused said it

belonged to one of his aunts, who had returned from abroad recently. At

that point of time, the 3rd accused did not have the charger of that phone or

any of its other accessories with him, that usually are supplied along with

the phones by its manufacturer. He promised to bring them over some

other time. The phone had no SIM card inserted to it. After a bout of

bargaining, the 3rd accused agreed to part with the phone by accepting a

sum of Rs. 15,000.00. The witness knew the 3rd accused before this incident

as he was employed as a driver of a passenger bus that regularly plied

between Colombo and Batticaloa.

A few days later, the 3rd accused returned to the shop, but this time

with the police. The police officers, after having verified the details of the

phone, had taken charge of the same.

The Welikanda police, after receiving the 1st information regarding

the disappearance of the deceased on 29.07.2004 at 11.30 a.m., have acted

immediately to commence its investigations. IP Gunatillake (PW13)

conducted investigations into the said complaint and recorded a statement

from Ranjith, the driver of one of the three-wheelers, in which the deceased

and the others have travelled to Mutuwella. His statement was recorded on

the same day at 12.30 p.m. at Welikanda town and within two hours, the 1st

accused was arrested at 2.30 p.m., from his house at Mutuwella. He was

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

12

informed of the reason to arrest, being suspected of committing murder.

The 2nd accused too was arrested on the same day from a temporary hut in

Mutuwella paddy filed at 2.50 p.m. After questioning the 1st accused at

Mutuwella police post, his statement was recorded at 3.30 p.m., whereas

the statement of the 2nd accused was recorded ten minutes later at 3.40

p.m., on the same day.

The 1st accused thereafter pointed out a place, located close to the

said Mutuwella paddy field to the police. The place pointed out by the 1st

accused is located about 500-600 meters away from his own house. It is an

isolated and open area consisting of a large extent of paddy fields. There

were no dwellings located in the vicinity. The police, during its

investigations, had noted signs of recent disturbance to the top layer of soil

of the place pointed out by the 1st accused. Having secured the place

pointed out by the 1st accused by placing officers to stand guard, the police

team had returned to the station and reported facts to the Magistrate’s

Court of Polonnaruwa on 30.07.2004 in Case No. B 1392, requesting an

order of Court for the exhumation of the body.

Arrest of the 3rd accused was made on 03.08.2004 at 4.30 p.m., and

after recording his statement, he pointed out the phone shop, where the

witness Manimaran was employed.

The 4th accused could not be arrested as he evaded the police for

some time. He eventually surrendered to Court and had his statement

recorded by police on 06.09.2004, whilst being kept under the supervision

of prison officials, consequent to an order of Court issued to that effect.

After the service of the indictment, the 4th accused died, apparently due to

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

13

several firearm injuries he has sustained, and as a result, the indictment

already served on the other accused was amended to reflect the said

change.

Exhumation of the dead body was carried out in the presence of

learned Magistrate of Polonnaruwa on the same day. The body of the

deceased was buried in a shallow grave. After removing sandy soil into a

depth of about 1 ½ feet, the body of the deceased was discovered, wrapped

in two polybags. It was observed that the neck of the deceased was cut in a

manner that the cut had almost severed the head from the body. The body

was buried with its left side to the bottom of the pit, that too after bending

its legs from the knees. The body was properly identified by the relatives

of the deceased, who were present there and a post mortem examination

was ordered.

The post mortem examination on the body of the deceased was

conducted by the Consultant JMO of Kurunegala General Hospital, Dr.

Mahendra Senanayake, on 31.07.2004. There were three injuries on the body

that were observed by him. The 1st injury is a 24 cm long cut injury with a

width of 4 cm found in the neck of the deceased. That particular cut injury

had severed all the soft tissues, including the carotid arteries, jugular

veins, and trachea. The cut extended up to the spinal cord and into the 3rd

intervertebral disk in the neck. In the opinion of the Consultant JMO, the

neck of the deceased was cut probably when the deceased was in a

position of sleeping, as the edges of the cut injury were found to be of

irregular shape. It was cut with a single attempt; this is because it had only

two clean cutting edges on either side of the cut. The cut injury had

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

14

severed all the blood vessels that supply blood to and from the brain,

resulting in a severe blood loss and therefore was classified as the

necessarily fatal injury that caused the death of the deceased. The expert

estimated the death of the deceased would have occurred in a matter of

few minutes. The weapon used to inflict the said cut injury could be a

sharp, heavy and a long-bladed weapon and in inflicting the said cut, the

expert opined that a moderate force was used.

Of the other two injuries, one is another cut injury, which was noted

by the Consultant JMO, 3 cm above the left eyebrow and 2 cm to the right

from the midline. The said cut injury measured 2 cm long and 1 cm in

width. The other injury was a contusion measuring 5 cm long and 3 cm in

width, located 3 cm above the right eyebrow and 2 cm to the right from the

midline. These two injuries were classified as non-grievous injuries.

The Consultant JMO also expressed his opinion to the effect that the

deceased would have taken his last meal between 6-8 hours before his

death. He also expressed his opinion that the death of the deceased would

have been occurred about 3-4 days prior to his examination, which he did,

based on the degree of putrefaction found on the body.

It is against these items of evidence and, in the light of the processes

of reasoning adopted by the Courts below, this Court proceeds to consider

the contentions that were presented on behalf of the 1st accused. One such

contention advanced on behalf of the 1st accused by the learned President’s

Counsel is that the guilt of the 1st accused to the charge of murder could

not be considered as the only irresistible conclusion that the trial Court

could have reached, in the given set of circumstances.

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

15

In my view, this particular contention requires investigation at the

very outset of this judgment, even prior to make any attempt to consider

the three questions of law.

The reason for the adoption of that course of action is, if the 1st

accused is correct in this aspect, as it was claimed on his behalf, the

remaining issue with regard to his failure to offer an explanation to the

prosecution case does not arise for consideration at all. In the absence of a

substantial body of evidence establishing a strong prima facie case against

him that requires an explanation, a consideration into the legality of the

conclusion reached by the both Courts over the failure of the 1st accused to

offer such an explanation would merely be an academic exercise, which

this Court need not ordinarily undertake.

The trial Court as well as the Court of Appeal, in the respective

judgments, have expected the 1st accused to offer an explanation to the

allegation of murder, on the premise that the prosecution had established a

strong prima facie case against him. That is a conclusion reached by both

Courts. Hence, it is necessary to inquire into the question whether there

was a prima facie case established by the prosecution against the 1st accused

as the foremost consideration. This would also answer the contention that

the guilt of the 1st accused is not the only conclusion the trial Court have

reached in the given set of circumstances.

In order to carry out the said inquiry, I wish to commence from the

point that the deceased and his two friends leaving Kurunegala in a bus

bound to Kalmunai.

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

16

There is no evidence that the 1st accused has had any influence over

the decision of the deceased to make him visit the 4th accused’s house that

evening. In fact, even Malhas and Saharan were kept in the dark by the

deceased of his intention to visit the 4th accused, when he invited his two

friends to join him with in the trip to Kalmunai. The disclosed purpose of

the trip was to attend a religious function at Kalmunai. When the 1st, 2nd

and 3rd accused arrived at the 4th accused’s house in that evening, they did

not pay much attention to the three, who just arrived there from Negombo.

Similarly, the 1st accused apparently did not contribute to the decision of

the deceased to proceed to Welikanda. It was the deceased who indicated to

Malhas that they need to go there.

It was the 4th accused who arranged the two three-wheelers,

enabling all of them to travel to Welikanda. It is evident that the deceased

and the 4th accused had some undisclosed purpose, in taking the decision

to travel to Welikanda in that evening. Of course, the 4th accused had no

connection to Welikanda or to Mutuwella, other than through the other

accused, who are residents of that area.

After arriving at Welikanda, Malhas and Saharan were invited by the

deceased and the 4th accused to join them to go to some other place. No

mention of where exactly they would proceed from Welikanda or for the

purpose of such a journey was made, either by the deceased or the 4th

accused. Before leaving Welikanda in the company of the four accused, the

deceased indicated to Malhas and Saharan that he would be back within a

matter of ten minutes.

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

17

It is evident that the deceased has kept the purpose of coming to

Ottamawadi, then proceeding to Welikanda and from there proceeding

further into an undisclosed location, only for himself. This made Malhas

and Sharan suspicious about the whole transaction which in turn made

them to decide not to follow the deceased blindly. Malhas and Sharan

decided that they would remain in Welikanda town until the latter had

returned. Apparently, either Malhas or Saharan had no knowledge of the

real purpose of the deceased’s decision in coming to Ottamawadi that day

and then to meet up with the 4th accused in the evening. If they knew, they

pretended to know nothing. The reluctance shown by the two, to join with

the deceased to continue the journey with the others at Welikanda indicate

that it is more likely that they had no knowledge of what the deceased had

in his mind.

Evidence of the 2nd and 3rd accused that were presented before the

trial Court in support of their respective defences seems to suggest that the

purpose of the deceased’s visit to Ottamawadi and then to Welikanda and

beyond is not at all that innocent. They both claim to have knowledge of

the activities of others who are involved with illegal Cannabis trade.

Irrespective of the said motive, what is important to note in this regard is

that the decision of the deceased to proceed beyond Welikanda without his

friends was made after reaching Welikanda. Up to this point, the 1st accused

played no active role and was merely following the group of men, led by

the 4th accused.

It is undisputed that the 1st accused lived near the main Z canal on

Welikanda-Mutuwella road. The place where the house of the 1st accused is

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

18

located was at some considerable distance away from the nearest

motorable road and was found adjacent to vast tract of open paddy land.

A reserved forest, near the 1st accused house, formed a boundary to those

paddy fields. The area is in total isolation, barring a few temporary sheds

that were put up by the farmers, who cultivated these lands on a seasonal

basis.

The evidence presented before the trial Court is clear on the point

that the four accused and the deceased had travelled in two groups and in

two different three-wheelers to Mutuwella area that evening. The 1st and

2nd accused hired Kumara’s three-wheeler for their journey to Mutuwella.

The two accused accordingly proceeded from Welikanda in Kumara’s

vehicle. The 4th accused and the deceased did not travel with the 1st and 2nd

accused initially but joined them subsequently at some point en route

Mutuwella, when Kumara had to stop the three-wheeler after running out of

fuel. Having refuelled, the group of four men once again resumed their

journey towards Mutuwella in one vehicle. They travelled up to the point at

which the 1st accused would usually get down from the three-wheeler in

order to reach his house on foot. Thus, it was Kumara who saw the

deceased alive for the last time in the company of 1st, 2nd and 4th accused in

that late evening.

In respect of the 3rd accused, the situation is significantly different.

The 3rd accused travelled in the three-wheeler driven by Ranjith to

Mutuwella that evening with another person. The 3rd accused too had

stopped on their way to Mutuwella to visit the 1st accused’s house. The

reason given by the 3rd accused was that he needed to collect some money

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

19

from him. Ranjith was emphatic that both the 3rd accused and the other

person got off his three- wheeler upon reaching the 3rd accused’s house at

Mutuwella. Ranjith turned back from Mutuwella with his friend, in order to

return to Welikanda. The other person who travelled with the 3rd accused

happened to be another friend of that accused, who too lived in the same

area.

The 3rd accused’s evidence that he did not take part in the murder

was acted upon by the trial Court as that evidence was well supported by

other evidence. the Prosecution had no evidence as to the fate of the

deceased after he walked away in the company of the 1st and 4th accused.

This evidence came from an unexpected source.

Damayanthi is the wife of the 1st accused. She was called as a witness

for the defence by the 3rd accused, along with his own wife. During cross-

examination by the prosecution, Damayanthi excluded the 3rd accused from

the group of men who returned home that evening with a young person,

who was of about 25 years of age. She estimated the time of their arrival at

the 1st accused’s house to a point sometime after 7.30 p.m. The said young

person, whom she later identified as the deceased, has already fallen into

deep sleep after consuming some drink prepared by the 4th accused, when

she retired for the night, around 9.00 p.m.

The trial Court excluded Damayanthi’s evidence altogether in respect

of the 1st accused, acting in terms of Section 120(2) of the Evidence

Ordinance. Section 120(2) reads “ [I]n criminal proceedings against any person

the husband or wife of such person respectively shall be a competent witness if

called by the accused, …”. Damayanthi was not called by the prosecution for

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

20

the purpose of testifying against her husband, the 1st accused. She was

called by the 3rd accused, that too in order to corroborate his evidence that

he did not proceed with the 1st, 2nd, 4th accused and the deceased into the

1st accused’s house that night. The trial Court was rightly mindful of the

competency of Damayanthi as a witness against her husband, even though

she was called to testify on behalf of a co-accused. The trial Court used her

testimony only to the extent to find support to the 3rd accused’s claim that

he was not with the rest of the group of men who set off from Welikanda

town to Mutuwella that night.

On their way back to Welikanda, the 2nd accused signaled Ranjith to

stop the three-wheeler, near the point where the 1st accused would get

down to reach his house. Then the 1st and 4th accused too have appeared

from the darkness. Only the 1st, 2nd and 4th accused have returned back to

Welikanda that night in Ranjith’s three-wheeler, but without the deceased.

According to Malhas and Saharan, the 1st, 2nd and 4th accused have

returned back to Welikanda only about 11.30 p.m., or 12.00 midnight. The

three accused then informed Malhas and Saharan, who were anxiously

waiting for the deceased to return that their friend had boarded a bus and

is already on his way back to Kurunegala. The three accused also conveyed

that the deceased wanted his two friends to join him at Kurunegala.

Having referred to the multiple items of circumstantial evidence in

the preceding paragraphs, which sets out the sequence of events that led to

the death of the deceased in summary form, I now turn to consider the

strength of the case presented by the prosecution, particularly in relation

to the 1st accused.

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

21

The 1st accused’s active involvement in the murder of the deceased

appears to have commenced only after the group of men had left Welikanda

in that late evening for Mutuwella.

The two three-wheeler drivers, who drove the two groups of men

up to Mutuwella that evening, knew the exact point, at which the 1st

accused would usually get down on that Welikanda-Mutuwella road, in

order to reach his house. The evidence is clear on this point that, only after

walking through a foot path that runs through a vast tract of paddy lands,

one is able to reach the 1st accused’s house. The 4th accused, a resident of

Ottamawadi, had no apparent involvement in the Mutuwella area, other

than through his relationship with the 1st, 2nd and 3rd accused, all of whom

are residents of Mutuwella. It could be reasonably inferred that the 1st

accused was accordingly more familiar with the sparsely populated area

around Mutuwella, compared to the 4th accused, particularly around the

locality where his dwelling house was located at. The 2nd and 3rd accused

too have lived in the same area but further away from the place where the

1st accused lived. Their residences were located in the more populated

areas of Mutuwlella. These two had only connection to the area where the

1st accused lived was through the latter.

It is the uncontradicted evidence of Kumara that establishes the fact

that he had dropped off the 1st ,2nd, 4th accused and the deceased who

travelled in his three-wheeler that night, near the usual place where the 1st

accused would get down in order to reach his own residence. The 2nd

accused gave evidence stating that he parted company with the rest, soon

after they alighted from Kumara’s three-wheeler. The 2nd accused met the

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

22

1st and 4th accused in the same night once more with a kerosine bottle, on

the request of the 1st accused and had thereafter travelled with them back

to Welikanda to meet up with Malhas and Saharan. The trial Court accepted

this evidence and decided to acquit the 2nd accused from the indictment.

Thus, it is clear that there was uncontradicted evidence available

before the trial Court to indicate that the deceased was last seen in the

company of the 1st and the 4th accused. The trial Court relied on this item

of evidence with the other items of circumstantial evidence in order to find

the 1st accused guilty to the count of murder, upon reaching the

inescapable inference of guilt.

These items of circumstantial evidence shall be considered in the

following segment of this judgment.

What is popularly referred to by Counsel as the ‘last seen theory’

could be described as a situation where the prosecution establishes to the

required degree of proof that the deceased was last seen alive in the

company of the accused, a factor which would then be used by a Court, to

imply his involvement to the death of that deceased, particularly in a

circumstantial evidence case. However, delivering the judgment of the

Court of Criminal Appeal in The King v Appuhamy (1945) 46 NLR 128,

Keuneman J has held (at p. 132) that if the “… prosecution failed to fix the exact

time of the death of the deceased, and the fact that the deceased was last seen in the

company of the accused loses a considerable part of its significance”.

It is undisputed evidence that the deceased had taken his last meal

at the 4th accused’s house that afternoon around 4.00 p.m., and during the

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

23

post mortem examination, the Consultant Judicial Medical Officer found a

small quantity of rice in the stomach of the deceased. In the opinion of the

medical expert, the death of the deceased would have occurred within

hours of consuming his last meal, which he estimated as a time period

between 6 to 8 hours. He was affirmative that the time could not be more

than 8 hours.

This evidence indicates that the death of the deceased would have

taken place sometime before 12.00 midnight in that day. Thus, after the

deceased was last seen alive in the company of the 1st and 4th accused

around 7.30 p.m., his death occurred within 4 ½ hours. This time interval

is further reduced, in view of the evidence of Malhas and Saharan, who

vouched for the accuracy of the fact that the 1st, 2nd and 4th accused have

returned to Welikanda in that night between 11.30 p.m. to 12.00 midnight.

Taking the time of 30 minutes’ drive from Mutuwella to Welikanda into

consideration, the 1st accused, in order to reach the main road after taking

a long walk, would have left his residence at least by 11.15 p.m., from

which point, he had taken the three-wheeler to ride back to Welikanda.

Thus, the time gap that exists between the point at which the

deceased was last seen alive and to his eventual death, put at its most, is

only a four-hour period. On the other hand, if one takes the shorter span of

six hours since the last meal, then the death of the deceased would have

occurred, is reduced to mere two-hour period from the point he was last

seen alive, but in the company of the 1st accused.

Another factor taken into consideration by the trial Court in arriving

at the conclusion of guilt of the 1st accused is that he has lied about the

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

24

deceased’s whereabouts to Malhas and Sharan at Welikanda after he met

them around 11.30 p.m. or midnight on the same night the deceased had

disappeared.

The evidence indicated that it was the 4th accused who first came up

to Malhas and Sharan, who were waiting for their friend, to convey the

information that the deceased is at Kaduruwela junction bus halt, awaiting

them. Then the three of them proceeded to Kaduruwela junction bus halt, at

which point the 1st and 2nd accused told Malhas and Saharan that the

deceased already boarded a bus bound to Kurunegala. According to the

two accused, the deceased wanted them to convey his message to two of

his friends asking them to join him there.

There is no doubt, by then the deceased was already dead. The 1st

and 4th accused who was with him ought to know his fate. But the 1st and

4t accused have conveyed a totally false version providing an explanation

to the absence of the deceased to pacify Malhas and Saharan, by uttering a

deliberate lie that the deceased had already boarded a bus and is on his

way to Kurunegala. When there is evidence that an accused uttered a

falsehood relevant to the matter he is tried with (whether inside or outside

Court), what is known as the ‘Lucas principle’ becomes applicable.

The principle that had been laid down by Lord Lane LCJ, in the oft

cited case of Rex v Lucas [1981] QB 720, dealing with a situation where the

accused found to have uttered a lie, has since been followed in most

common law jurisdictions. This Court, in the judgment of Samy and

Others v Attorney General (2007) 2 Sri L.R. 216, considered the

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

25

applicability of the principles contained in the said judgment. Weerasuriya J

(at p. 231) identified and arranged them in the following manner;

“ … a lie told out of Court or in Court will amount to corroboration

if they satisfy the following requirements.

1. it must be deliberate,

2. it must relate to a material issue,

3. the motive for the lie must be a realization of guilt and fear of

the truth,

4. the statement must be clearly shown to be a lie by evidence

other than of the accomplice who is to be corroborated, that is

to say by admission or by evidence from an independent

witness”.

The evidence referred to in the preceding paragraphs indicate that in

this instance, the lie uttered by the 1st accused qualifies all of these

requirements, and therefore had the effect of corroborating the factual

narrative presented by the prosecution.

In a prosecution presented on items of circumstantial evidence, the

evidence relating to a possible motive on the part of the 1st accused also

assumes a greater significance than to a case presented on direct evidence.

If there is direct evidence, the Court need not infer the actus reus on the

part of the accused, but could act on that evidence, if it is found to be

truthful and reliable. But in a prosecution presented on the basis of several

items of circumstantial evidence and its cumulative effect on the decision

to impose of criminal liability on an accused, any evidence that tends to

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

26

show a motive entertained by the accused becomes an important link in

the chain of circumstances that supports the prosecution case.

In this context, it is important to inquire in to the question whether

the prosecution presented any evidence indicative of a possible motive

entertained by the 1st accused as well as the 4th accused, who were last seen

in the company of the deceased, to commit the latter’s murder.

It is undisputed that the deceased had more than Rs. 70,000.00 in

cash with him, when he left his two friends Malhas and Saharan at

Welikanda that evening, and proceeded in a three-wheeler in the company

of the Appellant, 2nd and 3rd accused. The deceased also had a smart phone

with him. According to Manimaran, who bought that phone from the 3rd

accused, in the year 2004, such mobile phones came into the market only

recently and paid Rs. 15,000.00 for that phone after much bargaining as it

could be re-sold to a much higher price. The phone was recovered by the

police from Manimaran on 04.08.2004.

The fact that the deceased had a significant amount of cash with him

was made known to the 1st accused and other accused is evident from their

conduct, as after his conversation with them at the 4th accused’s

Ottamawadi house, the deceased readily acted on that suggestion by setting

off with them to Welikanda, even without disclosing the real purpose of

that trip to any of his friends. Malhas felt suspicious of the purpose of this

trip and opted to stay near Welikanda police with Saharan. However, when

the body of the deceased was exhumed, except for a stainless-steel chain

and a gold-coloured talisman (iqrhla) there were no other valuable items

found on his fully clothed body. The mobile phone used by the deceased

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

27

was given to the 3rd accused by the 4th accused to convert it to cash also

supports this inference.

In view of these factors, it could be reasonably inferred that the

Appellant and the 4th accused were motivated to commit the murder of the

deceased in order to have his money and mobile phone.

Finally, I have reached the point at which the item of evidence that

the 1st accused relied on so heavily could conveniently be dealt with. The

1st accused relied on those items of evidence in order to support his

contention that the trial Court inferred very much more than it is legally

entitled to, when he pointed out the place where the body of the deceased

was buried.

After a statement was recorded at 12.30 p.m., from the driver of one

of the three wheelers, in which the deceased and the others have travelled

to Mutuwella, the investigators have arrested the 1st accused, within a

matter of two hours (at 2.30 p.m.), at his house at Mutuwella. After

questioning the 1st accused at Mutuwella police post, a statement was

recorded at 3.30 p.m., and thereupon he pointed out a place to them

located about 500-600 meters away from his own house and in a shrub

jungle that bordered the Mutuwella paddy field, as the place at which the

body of the deceased was found buried.

Due to the swift actions taken by the police, the 1st accused had no

opportunity to knowing that he would be arrested that day in connection

with the disappearance of the deceased. The 1st accused, when pointing

out the place where the body was buried, did not have to depend on

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

28

someone else’s information to disclose what he already knew to the

investigators. Of the four suspects arrested, all of whom were later

indicted for the murder of the deceased, but only the 1st accused was in

possession of any knowledge of the place of burial of the body of the

deceased. Thus, he had exclusive knowledge of the place of burial.

Learned President’s Counsel’s complaint of adopting the reasoning

from Ariyasinghe and Others v The Attorney General (2004) 2 Sri L.R. 357,

where the Court of Appeal accepted the proposition advanced before that

Court by the learned Solicitor General, as to the manner in which the 1st,

2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th accused, in that appeal would have acquired knowledge

of the place where some of the bank notes, belonging to the G/66 series,

were hidden.

The Court accepted the following three ways of acquiring such

knowledge by the accused;

1. the accused himself concealed those G/66 notes found in

the place where they were found,

2. the accused saw another person concealing the notes in

that place,

3. a person who had seen another person concealing those

notes in that place has told the accused about it.

None of the accused offered any explanation in that matter as to

how each of them acquired their individual knowledge of the places where

the bank notes were hidden, in order to exclude the proposition that it was

they who concealed the bank notes in those places. The Court of Appeal,

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

29

thereupon, was of the considered the fact that (at p. 387) “… in the

circumstances if they had any innocuous explanation about the manner in which

they acquired their knowledge or came to possess those notes one would expect

them to give those explanations to exculpate themselves.” In the absence of any

such explanation, the appellate Court thought it could proceed to concur

with the conclusion reached by the trial Court (at p. 388) that the failure to

offer any explanation supports the view that they knew where the money

was hidden “… because they themselves had put those notes in those places.”

It must be noted here that the Court of Appeal did not rely

necessarily on the application of the Ellenborough principle in reaching the

said conclusion. This becomes clearer when considered in the light of the

fact that the appellate Court had concurred with the trial Court’s act of

inferring the guilt of the accused, primarily over the exercise the discretion

available to it “ … in terms of the general principle contained in Sction114 of the

Evidence Ordinance” not only “… to draw the presumption” against the 1st,

2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th accused, and to hold “ … even the 6th to 12th accused were

not mere guilty receivers but were perpetrators of offences of conspiracy.”

In any event, the fact of recovery of bank notes and, the knowledge

of the relevant accused of same, forms only two of the many items

circumstantial evidence that were presented against them by the

prosecution. Therefore, the applicability of the proposition that it was the

accused who themselves put the bank notes from where they were

recovered could not be equated to situation of satisfying a “strong prima

facie” case established in terms of the Ellenborough principle to expect them

to offer an explanation.

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

30

In my humble opinion, the situation in Ariyasinghe and Others v

The Attorney General (supra) is relevant to situation where a discovery of a

fact is made following information provided by an accused during

investigation and the manner in which such an accused had acquired the

knowledge of that discovered fact. In the absence of an explanation

bringing the mode of acquisition of knowledge to one of the two

innocuous explanations, the Court, in that instance, acted on Section 114 of

the Evidence Ordinance, by which the Legislature conferred a discretion

on Courts to “… presume the existence of any fact which it thinks likely to have

happened” but “… in their relation to the facts of the particular case.”

In relation to the instant appeal, since only the 1st accused had any

knowledge of the place where the body of the deceased was buried, and,

in the absence of offering any innocuous explanation, if he had one on his

part over the manner in which he had acquired that knowledge, as any

reasonable person would have done under the circumstances, the trial

Court proceeded to hold that it was him who buried the dead body in the

shallow pit near his own house, from which the body was exhumed. This

could be termed as a justifiable and a reasonable inference reached by that

Court in consideration of the available evidence.

When all these factors, that were individually established by

different items of circumstantial evidence, are lined up; it is

unquestionable that indeed a strong prima facie case has been established

against the 1st accused. One such item is his exclusive knowledge of the

place of burial. But he offered no explanation to the damning set of

circumstances that were established against him by the prosecution, other

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

31

than merely to reiterate his claim that he had no involvement at all with

this incident. I find myself in total agreement with the determination made

by the Courts below that there is a strong prima facie case has been made

out against the 1st accused.

The trial Court, in arriving at the conclusion that the 1st accused is

guilty to the murder of the deceased, made references to the multiple items

of circumstantial evidence it had already considered in detailed at the

outset of its judgment, and had not totally relied upon the solitary fact of

him having exclusive knowledge over where the body of the deceased was

buried, even though it noted that he made no explanation how he acquired

that knowledge, following the reasoning to that effect adopted in

Ariyasinghe and Others v The Attorney General (supra).

The time is opportune to consider the validity of the expectation of

an explanation by the 1st accused over the incriminating circumstances by

the trial Court and affirmation of that expectation by the appellate Court.

This was among the primary contentions that were presented before

this Court by the learned President’s Counsel on behalf of the 1st accused,

which stood out from the rest, and therefore ought to be considered in a

more detailed manner than the rest of the contentions for its validity.

Learned President’s Counsel, after citing from page 127 of the book,

written by Professor G.L. Peiris with the title Recent trends in the

Commonwealth Law of Evidence, where the learned author observed “[I]t

is a feature of the Law of Sri Lanka that the only permissible inferences against the

accused is that he had knowledge of the whereabouts of the corpus delicti or other

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

32

objects discovered. It has been emphasised that in the absence of evidence

connecting the accused with the crime, the pointing out the corpus delicti is not

sufficient to constitute a prima facie case against him”; stressed upon the point

that, if that is the case, the application of the Ellenborough Principle by the

trial Court, has no relevance at all to the circumstances of the instant

appeal. He therefore submitted that the trial Court, having arrived at an

adverse finding against his client by erroneously applying the said

principle had fallen into grave error. This is because, learned President’s

Counsel further submitted, what had been established against the 1st

accused by the prosecution is that he only had ‘knowledge’ of the place of

burial and, owing to that very reason, it is wrong for the trial Court to

expect him to offer an explanation about the manner in which he had

acquired such knowledge since the only inference it could have reached on

that evidence is his mere knowledge of the place of burial.

In view of the said contention, it is important at this stage to identify

what actually is the Ellenborough Principle that had been applied by the

Courts of this Country, the circumstances under which it would be applied

and the nature and the extent to which, inferences that could be drawn

upon in such instances, if there is a failure on the part of an accused to

offer an explanation.

Since its first appearance in the text of the judgment of the Supreme

Court of Ceylon of Inspector Arendstz v Wilfred Pieris (1938) 10 Ceylon

Law Weekly 121, the said principle, attributed to a dictum of Lord

Ellenborough, had firmly taken root in our jurisdiction and is consistently

applied by the Courts, primarily in cases based on circumstantial evidence,

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

33

but also applied in the instances where direct evidence is available. The

applicability of this principle of logic, in turn would depend on the

circumstances of each case, whether those circumstances are based either

on direct or circumstantial evidence. However, the applicability of

Ellenborough dictum, although consistently utilised by of our Courts in the

exercise of its original as well as appellate jurisdiction, could not be taken

as a course of action without any form of criticism.

The said principle, essentially a one based on logic and common

sense, that had been applied by this Court in Inspector Arendstz v Wilfred

Pieris, is said to have been reproduced from the text of the judgment in R.

v Lord Cochrane and others, claiming to be found in Gurney’s Reports 479,

which is as follows;

“ … once the Prosecution has made out a strong prima facie case [

against an accused], and when it is within his own power to offer

evidence, if such exist, in explanation of such suspicious appearances

which would show them to be fallacious and explicable consistently

with his innocence, it is a reasonable and justifiable conclusion that

he refrains from doing so only from the conviction that the evidence

so suppressed or not adduced would operate adversely to his

interest”.

In the judgment of the Court of Criminal Appeal in The King v

Seeder De Silva (1940) 41 NLR 337, Howard CJ, while applying the said

dictum, held (at p. 242) that “[A] strong prima facie case was made against the

appellant on evidence which was sufficient to exclude the reasonable possibility of

someone else having committed the crime. Without an explanation from the

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

34

appellant the Jury were justified in coming to the conclusion that he was guilty.”

In that appeal, J.D.R. Illangakoon K.C., the Attorney General, who

represented the Crown, invited attention of Court to the fact that the said

principle was already described in Wills’ Circumstantial Evidence, (7th Ed,

pages 314 to 316) and adopted in our jurisdiction in the case of Inspector

Arendstz v Wilfred Pieris (supra). It was also brought to the notice of

Court that the said principle is referred to in Criminal Procedure Code

(Vol. I, at p. 640) by R. F. Dias as well, in order to substantiate his

contention that since 1940, the Courts of this country have consistently

applied that principle.

However, perhaps the first of the few traceable instances, in which

the applicability of the Ellenborough Principle was questioned, could be

found in the year 1962. It was by Basnayake CJ, in the judgment of The

Queen v Santin Singho (1962) 65 NLR 445.

I wish to digress at this point from the originally intended scope of

considering what actually is the Ellenborough Principle, the circumstances

under which it was applied and the nature and the extent to which, the

inferences that could be drawn upon such a failure on the part of an

accused, to deal with these challenges, particularly to its legality, for the

sake of completeness.

Basnayake CJ, once more challenged the applicability of that principle

in The Queen v Sumanasena (1963) 66 NLR 350. These challenges were

premised on two primary considerations. First, his Lordship commented

on the legality of the application of such a principle in a criminal case and

second, it was also challenged on the basis of the very existence of such a

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

35

dictum, appearing in the text of the reported judgment of R. v Lord

Cochrane and others, being doubtful. Elaborating further on the first of the

two, his Lordship observed (in The Queen v Santin Singho (ibid) at p. 450)

that;

“[T]he judicial dicta cited to the jury introduce the concept of a

prima facie case which finds no place in our Evidence Ordinance. It

is now well settled that the burden on the prosecution is to prove the

case against the accused beyond reasonable doubt. That burden is

not lessened by the fact that the accused does not give evidence. It

remains the same throughout the trial. We cannot be certain that

what was said in the passages cited above did not lead the jury to

think that the standard of proof required of the prosecution was

something less than proof beyond reasonable doubt. The concept of a

"prima facie " case is well known in the field of preliminary inquiry

prior to committal for trial where the question is one of sufficiency of

evidence. For instance, under section 156 of the Criminal Procedure

Code, before its amendment in 1938, a Magistrate holding an

inquiry under Chapter XVI into an offence not triable summarily

was empowered to discharge the accused if the evidence did not

establish a prima facie case of guilt and if the evidence did establish a

prima facie case of guilt the Magistrate was empowered to take the

further steps prescribed in that Chapter. The expression when used

in a direction to the jury in a criminal trial is out of place and is

likely to confuse the jury as to the burden that lies on the

prosecution. The view expressed above is fortified by the discussion

of the expressions "prima facie evidence" and "prima facie case " in

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

36

section 2494 of Wigmore on Evidence and the cases referred to

therein. For the reasons herein expressed we think that the appeal

should be allowed, that the conviction should be quashed and a

judgment of acquittal entered. We accordingly do so.”

Despite the said view being expressed quite strongly by Basnayake

CJ, in The Queen v Santin Singho (supra), T.S. Fernando J, in the case of

Seetin and Others v The Queen (1965) 68 NLR 316, had taken a contrary

view to that line of reasoning.

His Lordship states (at p. 322);

“[I] agree, with great respect, that it would be wrong to attribute to

any judge an intention to impose on an accused person a burden

which the law did not permit the latter to discharge. But it seems to

me necessary to point out that the words used by Lord Ellenborough

on the occasion in question did not refer to a failure of the accused to

give evidence but only to offer evidence which was in his power to

offer. Even in 1814 an accused, although not competent to give

evidence himself, was not denied the right (a) to call witnesses and

(b) to make an unsworn statement from the dock. The comment in

Lord Cochrane's case came to be made in respect of the failure of the

accused to call as his witnesses his servants to explain suspicious

features in the case which told against him. What has been referred

to above as the dictum of Lord Ellenborough is, if I may say so, not a

principle of evidence but a rule of logic. It is therefore not surprising

that this dictum is not ordinarily to be met with in books on

Evidence.”

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

37

His Lordship further points out that (at p. 322) “[I]n deed, Basnayake

C. J. himself, so recently as 1962, in The Queen v. Santin Singho (1962) 66 NLR

445, referred, without adverse comment, to this very dictum of Lord Ellenborough

which the trial judge in that case had quoted to the jury”.

In Chandradasa v The Queen (1969) 72 NLR 160, H.N.G. Fernando CJ

was also of the view that (at p. 163) “[T]his dictum has been applied in cases of

circumstantial evidence as well as where the evidence is direct. In many cases,

however, while it has been held that in the circumstances the failure of an accused

to offer evidence was a matter to be taken into account, the inference to be drawn

or the effect to be given to that fact has been set out in terms other than that

contained in the dictum of Ellenborough J.” In Wasalamuni Richard and

Others v The State (1973) 76 NLR 534, his Lordship applied the said dictum

by holding that (at p. 552) “[T]he majority of us are of the opinion, having

regard to all the facts and circumstances in the case against Premadasa, that this

was essentially a case in which he should have given evidence and explained his

presence at the scene, and his failure to do so was one which would attract the oft

quoted dictum of Lord Ellenborough in R. v. Lord Cochrane and others,

Gurney's Reports 479”.

Of these few instances, where the Court have questioned the legal

validity of the principle underlying in the Ellenborough dictum, Basnayake

CJ, in The Queen v Sumanasena (supra), also considered the likelihood of

such a pronouncement ever being made by Lord Ellenborough. After posing

that question, his Lordship proceeded to answer it by stating that it is

unlikely that the law Lord would make such a pronouncement, contrary to

the accepted norms of criminal law, as (at p. 352) “[I]n view of the fact that

this opinion was expressed by Lord Ellenborough in 1814 before the Criminal

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

38

Evidence Act and at a time when an accused person had no right to give evidence

on his own behalf, it is unthinkable that he thereby intended to impose on the

accused a burden which the law did not permit him to discharge”.

Interestingly, this is not the only instance where any

pronouncements of law made by Lord Ellenborough were challenged on the

basis of its legal validity. In the year 1897, Bonser CJ in Emanis v Sadappu

et al (1897) 2 NLR 261, in considering the issue of prescription in a land

matter, observed (at p. 264) that “[I]t is still more surprising that any editor

of Law Reports should have reported the case. The greatest Judges are liable to err,

and Lord Campbell, who, when at the bar, reported in the Court of King's Bench,

which at that time was presided over by Lord Ellenborough, one of the most

eminent of the Judges who have occupied the position of Lord Chief Justice of

England, used to say that he had a drawer full of Lord Ellenborough bad law”.

Perhaps, in view of these challenges made to the Ellenborough dictum

particularly on its legality, the said issue was fully considered by the Court

of Criminal Appeal in the case of Seetin and Others v The Queen (supra).

T.S. Fernando J, having observed that (at p. 322); the said dictum was

applied not only to prosecutions based on circumstantial evidence, but

also to the ones based on direct evidence, thereafter quoted from an

American case of Commonwealth v John W. Webster, decided in March

1850 and reported 59 Mass. 295, where Shaw CJ adopted an almost

identical, if not similar, reasoning. His Lordship cited the Americal

precedence in order to support the legal validity of the Ellenborough dictum

coming from the other side of the Atlantic. The said quoted section of the

text that appeared in the original judgment at page 316, was reproduced at

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

39

p. 322 of the judgment of Seetin and Others v The Queen (supra), which

reads as follows;

“[W]here probable proof is brought of a statement of facts tending to

criminate the accused, the absence of evidence tending to a contrary

conclusion is to be considered though not alone entitled to much

weight, because the burden of proof lies on the accuser to make out

the whole case by substantive evidence. But when pretty stringent

proof of circumstances is produced tending to support the charge,

and it is apparent that the accused is so situated that he could offer

evidence of all the facts and circumstances as they exist, and show, if

such was the truth, that the suspicious circumstances can be

accounted for consistently with his innocence and he fails to offer

such proof, the natural conclusion is that the proof, if produced,

instead of rebutting, would tend to sustain the charge.”

In Chandrasena v The Queen (supra) H.N.G. Fernando CJ noted that

(at p. 163) the proper effect to be given to the failure of an accused to offer

evidence when a strong prima facie case has been made out by the

prosecution and the accused is in a position to offer an innocent

explanation appears to have been set out more elaborately in the dictum of

Abbot J in the case of The King v Sir Francis Burdett (1820) 4 B & A 95, who

posed the question “[N]o person is to be required to explain or contradict, until

enough has been proved to warrant a reasonable and just conclusion against him,

in the absence of explanation or contradiction; but when such proof has been

given, and the nature of the case is such as to admit of explanation or

contradiction, if the conclusion to which the proof tends be untrue, and the

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

40

accused offers no explanation or contradiction; can human reason do otherwise

than adopt the conclusion to which the proof tends? ”

The Ellenborough dictum, believed to have been pronounced in 1814

and the judgment of the Kings Bench in the case of The King v Sir Francis

Burdett (ibid) was pronounced in 1820. The gap of six years between these

two pronouncements seem to indicate that the contemporary judicial

thinking of the common law tradition, in fact did entertain such similar

processes of reasoning. The underlying rule of logic, that the accused

ought to offer an explanation in certain circumstances, after having

survived for 180 long years, now been afforded with a statutory

recognition by an Act of Parliament of the United Kingdom. The

provisions of the said Act were endorsed by the European Court of

Human Rights at a later point in time, as statutory provisions that are in

conformity of the European Convention of Human Rights. These factors

shall be referred further down in this judgment in more detailed manner.

In Sri Lanka, said dictum was applied consistently by the Court of

Criminal Appeal since Inspector Arendstz v Wilfred Pieris (supra) and in

more recently by this Court, as indicative from the judgments of

Prematilleke v Republic of Sri Lanka (1972) 75 N.L.R. 506, Illangatilleke v

The Republic of Sri Lanka (1984) 2 Sri L.R. 38, Ajith Fernando and Others v

The Attorney General (2004) 1 Sri L.R. 288, Mohamed Niyas Naufer v The

Attorney General (2007) 2 Sri L.R. 144, and Kumarasiri and three Others v

Kumarihamy and another (SC TAB 02/2012 – decided on 02.04.2014).

It is noted earlier on that the challenges made to the applicability of

Ellenborough dictum were premised mainly on two factors. First of the two

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

41

was considered in the preceding paragraphs. The second factor is the

questioning of the very existence of such a dictum. At one time, a question

was posed by the Court, whether such a dictum, although believed to

pronounced by Lord Ellenborough, had ever been made.

In the case of The Queen v Sumanasena (supra), his Lordship, in

making reference to the dictum attributed to Lord Ellenborough in Gurney’s

Reports, observed that (at p. 352) “[T]he report of the trial in which he

expressed those observations is not available in any of the libraries in Hulftsdorp

and it is therefore not possible to ascertain the context in which it was stated.”

The issue regarding the very existence of such a dictum, once more

surfaced in the appeal of Mohamed Niyas Naufer v The Attorney General

(supra) as a distinct ground of appeal, by which one of the appellants

contended that the High Court at Bar erred in its application of a non-

existent dictum of Lord Ellenborough to the facts of that appeal. It was

strongly contended that such a dictum could not be found anywhere in the

reported text of the judgment of Rex v Lord Cochrane.

Shiranee Tilakawardane J, having considered the merits of the said

ground of appeal has held that (at p. 190) “[T]he principle has acquired a high

precedent value in Sri Lanka through its application and endorsement by this

Court in a plethora of cases as a rule of logic as well as evidence. While the

judgment in Cochrane provides the basis for the development of the law in this

area, the principle attached has undeniably evolved far beyond its roots in the

statements of Lord Ellenborough. This Court is not prepared to halt the

development of the law through a deliberate and regressive step in the opposite

direction to the march of the law in this field”.

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

42

It appears that the said pronouncement did not convince all the

sceptics who had doubts as to the legality of the said dictum. In an article

titled “Woolmington v Lord Cochrane, A misdirection of law and fact” (2008) 20

(No.1) Sri Lanka Journal of International Law 67, Professor L. Marasinghe

noted that “[T]he authority of the Ellenborough dictum continued until today

although the Supreme Court was faced with a frontal attack upon the dictum in

the Mohamed Niyaz Naufar Appeal, in 2006. The Supreme Court was unable in

2006 to precisely locate the dictum in Ellenborough’s direction to the Jury in the

Cochrane Case. The Learned judges merely presumed that, that dictum must be

somewhere in that Direction” and therefore, the learned writer was of the

view that “… that the dictum which runs contrary to the established rule

regarding the burden of proof in Woolmington is firstly untenable as a Rule of

Law and secondly is perhaps a product of a misdirection of both law and fact by a

colonial judge presiding in an Indian Court.”

In the year 1989, with the publication of the 2nd edition of the treatise

The Law of Evidence, E.R.S.R. Coomaraswamy observed (at Vol. II, Book 1,

p. 304) that “ … the dictum of Lord Ellenborough lives on in Sri Lanka and

continues to place a subtle burden on accused persons, even though it is not

worthy of a place in modern text-books in the country where it was first

formulated.”

However, after a lapse of mere five years, since the said statement

was inserted into the text by Coomaraswamy, in the year 1994, the

Parliament of the United Kingdom enacted the Criminal Justice and Public

Order Act. Section 35(2) of that Act states “[W]here this subsection applies, the

Court shall, at the conclusion of the evidence for the prosecution, satisfy itself …

that the accused is aware that the stage has been reached at which evidence can be

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

43

given for the defence and that he can, if he wishes, give evidence and that, if he

chooses not to give evidence, or having been sworn, without good cause refuses to

answer any question, it will be permissible for the Court or jury to draw such

inferences as appear proper from his failure to give evidence or his refusal, without

good cause, to answer any question”.

The said statutory provision of law appears to be a fulfilment of a

long-felt need for reform in the criminal justice system in that country. In

the House of Lords judgment in Regina v Becouarn [2005] UKHL 55, Lord

Carswell sets out in detail of the legal backdrop against which the necessity

to introduce necessary changes in the applicable law on this issue arose in

his exposition, which is found in paragraphs 9, 10 and 11 of the said

judgment. In order to fully comprehend the underlying process that led to

the enactment of the said law, it is necessary to reproduce the said three

paragraphs in verbatim in this judgment.

The contents of those three paragraphs referred to above are as

follows;

“9. The position of a defendant in a criminal trial and the options

open to him in relation to giving evidence have changed in

very material respects since the end of the 19th century. Until

the passage of the Criminal Evidence Act 1898 (“the 1898

Act”) the law did not permit him to give evidence on oath on

his own behalf, restricting him to giving an unsworn

statement from the dock. That Act made him generally a

competent witness in his own defence, but did not make him

compellable. From that time the defendant was quite entitled

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

44

to decline to give evidence – the privilege generally termed the

right of silence – but if he did testify, he was liable under

section 1(e) of the Act to be asked any question in cross-

examination, notwithstanding that it would tend to criminate

him as to any offence with which he was charged in the

proceedings.

10. Several consequences followed from other provisions in the

1898 Act. First, the prosecution was not permitted to

comment adversely on the defendant’s failure to give evidence

(section 1(b)) and the trial judge’s ability to comment on that

was fairly closely circumscribed. The judge was in most cases

bound to direct the jury that the defendant was fully entitled

to sit back and see if the prosecution had proved its case, and

that they must not make any assumption of guilt from the

fact that he had not gone into the witness box (see, eg. R v

Bathurst [1968] 2 QB 99, 107-8, per Lord Parker CJ). The

second consequence was that the defendant could not be asked

about any previous convictions, unless he had “lost his

shield” and incurred liability to such cross-examination by

reason of, inter alia, putting his character in issue. This

could occur if questions were asked or evidence was given

with a view to establish his good character or, most

commonly, if he attacked the character of the prosecution

witnesses: section 1(f)(ii), and see the decision of the House in

R v Selvey [1970] AC 304 on the operation of this provision.

Thirdly, if the defendant put his character in issue by

attacking the character of the prosecution witnesses, but did

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

45

not himself give evidence, he escaped the consequences of

having his convictions put in evidence (R v Butterwasser

[1948] 1 KB 4).

11. Although practitioners reckoned that the ability to give

evidence conferred by the 1898 Act was a not unmixed

blessing, it enabled those defendants who wished to put

forward their own evidence in support of their case to do so,

while those who wished to stay silent and challenge the

sufficiency of the prosecution case were able to follow that

course. Criticism of the state of the law, not least of the effect

of the ruling in R v Butterwasser, and the degree of

advantage which it conferred on defendants in criminal trials,

mounted in the Eleventh Report of the Criminal Law

Revision Committee (1972) (Cmnd 4991) p 83, para 131 it is

stated that “To many it is highly objectionable that the

accused should be able to do this with impunity.” Eventually

Parliament enacted the provisions contained in section 35 of

the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994 (“the 1994

Act”), with the objective of redressing the perceived

imbalance”.

The scope of the statutory provisions contained in Section 35 of the

Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994 was considered in R v Cowan

[1996] QB 373 and the specimen directions published by the Judicial

Studies Board, ( presently referred to as The Crown Court Compendium of

July 2024 – updated in April 2025), as a suggested model for the use by the

Judges in situations where Section 35 is applicable, was approved by the

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

46

Court of Appeal with the statement that “… the specimen JSB direction on

drawing inferences as sufficiently fair to defendants, emphasising as it does that

the jury must conclude that the only sensible explanation of his failure to give

evidence is that he has no answer to the case against him, or none that could have

stood up to cross-examination. This direction has been used for some years and

appears to have stood the test of time. It goes without saying, however, that trial

judges have full discretion to adapt even a tried and tested direction if they

consider that to do so gives the best guidance to a jury and fairest representation of

the issues.”

The some of the directions contained in the said specimen, relevant

to the appeal before this Court, are reproduced below;

“[T]he defendant has not given evidence. That is his right. But, as he

has been told, the law is that you may draw such inferences as

appear proper from his failure to do so. Failure to give evidence on

its own cannot prove guilt but depending on the circumstances, you

may hold his failure against him when deciding whether he is

guilty.”

“[W]hat proper inferences can you draw from the defendant’s

decision not to give evidence before you? If you conclude that there

is a case for him to answer, you may think that the defendant would

have gone into the witness box to give you an explanation for or an

answer to the case against him. If the only sensible explanation for

his decision not to give evidence is that he has no answer to the case

against him, or none that could have stood up to cross-examination,

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

47

then it would be open to you to hold against him his failure to give

evidence. It is for you to decide whether it is fair to do so.”

It is important to note that the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act

1994 does not restrict the inferences drawn in situations covered by that

Section by limiting them only to where an accused does not offer an

explanation after the prosecution has put up a case against him, but also to

cover the situations during investigations, irrespective of whether it was

before or after he was charged with a formal accusation, in terms of the

applicable law, by the investigators and his failure to answer the questions

put to him during that period (vide Section 34 of the Act).

In the case of Desmond Kavanagh v United Kingdom (Application

No. 39389/98 and decided on 28.08.2001), the European Court of Human

Rights considered the applicant’s complaint that “his right to a fair trial was

breached on account of the fact that the trial judge erred in allowing the jury to

draw adverse inferences from his silence in violation of Article 6 § 1 of the

Convention, separately and in conjunction with Article 6 § 2, since the terms of

the direction breached his right to a fair trial and undermined at the same time the

presumption of innocence.”

The Court at Strasburg, having considered the directions issued to

the jury by the trial Judge during his summing up, concluded that “… in

accordance with section 34 of the 1994 Act, it was the function of the jury to

decide whether or not to draw an adverse inference from the applicant’s silence.

Having regard to the fact that it is impossible to ascertain the weight, if any, given

by the jury to the applicant’ silence, it was crucial that the jury was properly

directed on this matter. It finds that in the instant case, and bearing in mind the

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

48

safeguards in place, the jury’s direction on this question was confined in a manner

which was compatible with the exercise by the applicant of his right to silence at

his trial”. Therefore, the Court held that view that “… accordingly no

appearance of a breach of the fairness guarantees of Article 6 § 1 of the

Convention”.

In terms of Section 35 of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act

1994, if the jury concludes that the prosecution at the close of its case has

established a case for the accused to answer, if they think that the accused

would have gone into the witness box to give them an explanation for or

an answer to the case against him but he did not, and if they are satisfied

that the only sensible explanation for his decision not to give evidence is

that he has no answer to the case against him, or none that could have

stood up to cross-examination, then it would be open for them to hold

against him his failure to give evidence.

If one were to make a comparison with the situation in the United

Kingdom and in Sri Lanka, it must be noted that, an accused in this

country is placed at two distinct advantages over his counterpart in the

United Kingdom. In the United Kingdom, an accused is called upon to

answer if the jury is of the view that there is a “case for him to answer”. In

Sri Lanka too, at the close of the prosecution’s case, if the trial Court

considers “… that there are grounds for proceeding with the trial”, it should

call upon the accused for his defence, in terms of Section 200(1) of the Code

of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979, as amended. However, it is

important to highlight a significant distinction between the two countries,

in situations where the rule of logic encapsulated in the Ellenborough dictum

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

49

applies. In Sri Lanka, an accused is expected to offer an explanation only

when a “strong prima facie” case is established by the prosecution not when

there is a “case for him to answer”.

After the enactment of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act

1994, an accused in United Kingdom could either remain silent, exercising

his right to silence, or could opt for the only other option available to him,

by offering evidence under oath, provided that the jury decides there is a

case for him to answer. If such an accused elects to offer evidence, he must

offer such evidence under an obligation to disclose the truth, subject

himself to cross- examination by the prosecution and must answer

questions, in spite of the fact that such answer might tend to incriminate

him. In relation to an accused in Sri Lanka, he need not answer any

question put to him which tends to incriminate him to the offence. In

addition, such an accused has another extra option to consider. This is

because, an accused in Sri Lanka could make a statement from the dock,

without being placed under any legal obligation to speak the truth and

also without subjecting himself to cross examination of the prosecution.

If at all the observation, which I have already referred earlier on

made by Coomaraswamy (supra), in relation to Ellenborough dictum could

aptly be used here to describe the present legal status in Sri Lanka,

attributed to a statement made by an accused from the dock. Here, the

opportunity given to an accused to make statement from the dock is not

due to any statutory provision permitting such a course of action. It is a

situation that resulted in after adopting the Common law practice of

permitting an accused to make a statement from the dock, and thereafter

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

50

continuing with that privilege, even after the United Kingdom, had

specifically taken away that opportunity, along with the provisions of

Section 72 of Criminal Justice Act 1982 coming into operation. Hence, it

could be stated that, as at present, the entitlement of an accused to make a

statement from the dock, continues to live on in Sri Lanka, even after its

validity found no place in the contemporary criminal justice system of the

country where it was first formulated and applied.

However, in a more recent pronouncement, in relation to the

entitlement to make a statement from the dock, Kodagoda J, has observed

(vide judgment of Munasinghe Mudalihamy Koralage Dissanayake v

Director General, Commission to Investigate Bribery and Corruption &

another (S.C. Appeal No. 160/2017 - decided on 21.11.2023), thus;

“[I]ndeed , a person accused of having committed an offence has an

unfettered right to remain silent. That means there can be no

compulsion on an accused person to incriminate himself or to give

evidence which is exculpatory in nature. Be that as it may, an

Accused also has the entitlement to give evidence under oath from

the witness box. If at a time when the Accused is being ably defended

by counsel, he opts to make a Dock Statement which is an unsworn

statement from the dock, in my view a pragmatic and a realistic

approach to criminal justice should necessitate the Court to consider

inter-alia as to why the Accused had opted to make a Dock

Statement. The reasons are obvious. They are (i) unwillingness to

take an oath or affirmation before commencing to give evidence, (ii)

unwillingness to face cross-examination, (iii) to prevent the contents

of the Dock Statement being compared and contrasted during cross-

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

51

examination with other exculpatory statements and admissible

inculpatory statements”.

This observation, although made in the context of an accused

electing to make a statement from the dock, is applicable with more vigour

and force when a strong prima facie case is established against him by the

prosecution.

In the neighbouring jurisdiction of India, although no reference

could be found in the significant body of jurisprudence in that country to a

direct reference to Ellenborough dictum in that very form, the apex Court of

that country, nonetheless expected an accused to offer an explanation in

certain situations. In this regard, the Supreme Court of India had clearly

acknowledged that there could be situations in which, either the failure of

the accused to offer an explanation or even if one is offered, which turned

out to be false, could result in an adverse inference drawn against him,

provided certain pre-conditions are satisfied. The Supreme Court of India,

in the judgment of Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v State of Maharashtra,

(1984) 4 SCC 166, laid down a five-point test, which it described as the

“panchasheel of the proof of a case based on circumstantial evidence”, which

must be satisfied before a conviction is entered against an accused in such

a case.

Paragraphs 153 of the said judgment states;

“[A] close analysis of this decision would show that the following

conditions must be fulfilled before a case against an accused can be

said to be fully established;

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

52

1. the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt

should be fully established,

2. the facts so established should be consistent only with the

hypothesis of the guilt of the accused, that is to say, they

should not be explainable on any other hypothesis except

that the accused is guilty,

3. the circumstances should be of a conclusive nature and

tendency,

4. they should exclude every possible hypothesis except

the one to be proved, and

5. there must be a chain of evidence so complete as not to

leave any reasonable ground for the conclusion consistent

with the innocence of the accused and must show that in

all human probability the act must have been done by the

accused.”

The Court further held that (at para 159), once the ““panchasheel of

the proof of a case based on circumstantial evidence” are established, a Court

could take into account both the absence of explanation or a false

explanation offered by an accused, to hold “… that it will amount to be an

additional link to complete the chain”, if the following essential conditions too

are fulfilled;

“ 1. various links in the chain of evidence led by the prosecution

have been satisfactorily proved,

2. the said circumstances points to the guilt of the accused with

reasonable definiteness and,

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

53

3. the circumstances is in proximity to the time and situation”.

After undertaking a long exposition on comparative jurisprudence

in the preceding segment of this judgment, the point that I wish to

highlight here is that the expectation of an explanation from an accused,

upon a strong prima facie case being established against him by the

prosecution, in terms of the principle enunciated in the statement of law

what generally termed as Ellenborough dictum,, is neither obnoxious to the

long-cherished presumption of innocence nor to his fundamental right to a

fair trial, guaranteed under Article 13(3) of the Constitution.

In this context, it is imperative that this Court makes a reference to

the Section 200(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979,

for the purpose of distinguishing the situation, as envisaged by that

Section, and the situations in which the Ellenborough dictum applies. The

relevant pre-requisite for calling of the defence in terms of Section 200(1),

as spelt out in that Section is, if the Judge considers “… that there are

grounds for proceeding with the trial”, whereas only when a strong prima facie

case established by the prosecution only the said dictum applies. There

could be situations where these two eventualities might arise in a case

simultaneously, as within the situation “… that there are grounds for

proceeding with the trial”, there could also be an instance of a strong prima

facie case was established. But in general terms the difference between the

two must be emphasised here.

In the judgment of The Attorney General v Baranage (2003) 1 Sri

L.R. 340, Court of Appeal examined the statutory provisions contained in

Section 200(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act. In relation to the

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

54

different situations envisage by that Section, and the conformant of power

on the trial Judge to “record a verdict of acquittal” the appellate Court held

that (at p. 353); “In a trial by a judge without a jury the judge is the trier of

facts and as such at the end of the prosecution case in order to decide whether he

should call upon the accused for his defence he is entitled to consider such matters

as the credibility of the witnesses, the probability of the prosecution case, the

weight of evidence and the reasonable inferences to be drawn from the proven

facts. Having considered those matters, if the judge comes to the conclusion that he

cannot place any reliance on the prosecution evidence, then the resulting position

is that the judge has wholly discredited the evidence for the prosecution. In such a

situation the judge shall enter a verdict of acquittal.”

The Court further held (ibid) “Even if the Judge has not wholly

discredited the prosecution evidence the words that the Judge 'is of opinion that

such evidence fails to establish the commission of the offence charged against

the accused or of any other offence of which he might be convicted on such

indictment' give him the power to enter a verdict of acquittal without calling for

the defence”. The last part of the said section reads thus; “if, however, the

Judge considers that there are grounds for proceeding with the trial he shall call

upon the accused for his defence”.

Generally, in a situation of calling for defence in terms of Section

200(1), if the accused chose to remain silent, the trial Court would carefully

consider the evidence of the prosecution and, if the charge is established

beyond reasonable doubt, enters a conviction or if there is a reasonable

doubt arises in its mind, enters a verdict of acquittal. If the accused offered

evidence, the Court would consider that evidence as well, applying the

same considerations that it applied to the prosecution witnesses and if it

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

55

accepts that evidence or entertains a reasonable doubt on that evidence,

would still enter a verdict of acquittal. However, there is no adverse

inference generally drawn against an accused who chose to remain silent,

and thereby putting to the prosecution to establish its allegation against

him.

After undertaking a careful consideration of the evidence available

before the trial Court presented by the prosecution against the 1st accused,

I am of the view that it has rightly concluded that he had lied about the

whereabouts of the deceased and thereby attracting the Lucas principle, he

was last seen with the deceased alive and, also that the place where the

body of the deceased was buried was discovered by the police only upon

his information. Of the four accused, only the 1st accused had knowledge

of the place where the body was buried. The 2nd accused who was arrested

a few minutes later, and was with the 1st accused when the latter pointed

out the place where the body is buried and brought along when it was

exhumed, but had no knowledge of that place. Neither the 3rd accused nor

the 4th accused indicate of any knowledge on their part as to where the

body was buried.

It was a shallow pit dug out in a sandy soil in an isolated place

located within a reserved forest, only about 500 meters from his place of

residence. Thus, it is safe to infer that only the 1st accused had the

exclusive knowledge of the place of burial of the body of the deceased,

who went missing whilst being with him and the 4th accused.

Thus, the trial Court was correct to apply Ellenborough dictum in

relation to the Appellant, as undoubtedly a strong prima facie case had been

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

56

established by the prosecution against him, a factor that justified the

expectation of an explanation entertained by that Court. The citation relied

upon by the learned President’s Counsel that “[I]t has been emphasised that

in the absence of evidence connecting the accused with the crime, the pointing out

the corpus delicti is not sufficient to constitute a prima facie case against him”

will not help the 1st accused as there is “evidence connecting the accused with

the crime” in addition to him pointing out the place, where the dead body

was found buried.

The 1st accused, in his statement from the dock, stated to Court as

follows;

“ uu f.dú;eka lghq;= lrñka isáhd’ .xcd fj<|dï l<d’ ta wjia:dfõ uuhs

uyskaomd,hs TÜgudjä j,g .shd’ TÜgudjä .xcd .kak .shd’ fidhd ne¨jd

kuq;a nvq ;snqfka ke .kak’ Bg miafi ldnq,a yuq fjkak .shd’ ldnq,ag óg

l,ska wms uqo,a oS,d ;snqkd’ ldnq,a lsõjd oeka .kak úoshla ke’ yji ;uhs

.kak fjkafka lsh,d’ ldnq,a lsõjd wmg hkak lsh,d’ ldnq,a wms;a tlal tkak

lsh,d msg;a jqkd’ Tyq lsõjd yji nvq álla tAú nvq ál wrka fokakï lsõjd’

Bg miafi wms ;=kafokdu ;%Sú,a tflka je,slkaog .shd’ ldnq,a fmd,Sish ,Õska

neiaid’ wms fokakd l,ska .sys,a,d nvq;a wrka f.org .shd’ wms ;=kafokd

.sys,a,d .skaor m;a;=lr,d ksod .;a;d’ Bg miafi ? ldnq,a wdjd’ Bg miafia

lsõjd je,slkaog nvq álla weú,a,d ;sfhkjd’ wvq .dkg weú,a,d ;sfhkafka

.kak mq¿jkao lsh,d’ ud weyqjd .dk lSho lsh,d’ wvq .dkg .kak mq¿jka

lshQ ksid uu;a uyskaomd,;a wdjd’ ldnq,a lsõjd oj,a wdmq ;=kafokdf.ka

fokafkla .shd tlaflfkla bkakjd’ ta fokakdg lÿrefj,g .sys,a,d mKsúvhla

lshkak mq¿jkao lsh,d’ uu weyqjd nvq fokjo lsh,d’ lÿrefj,g hkak uu

f.k;a fokakï lsõjd’ wms .syska ne¨jd lÜáh ysáfh ke’ Bg miq uu

kej;;a ldnq,af.a ÿrl:kh weu;=jd’ ldnq,a lsõjd uu u. tkjd ta lÜáh

tlalka tkak’ weyqju lsõjd uu lshk úoshg lshkak lsh,d’ uu lsõjd’ Bg

miq nvq lsf,` 2 la ÿkakd’ Bg miq i,a,s oS,d nvq wrka uu .ug .shd’ Bg miq

uyskaohs uuhs f.or .shd’ uu uf.a f.or kej;=kd’ fuu isoaêh isÿfjkak

i;shlg l,ska uu TÜgudjä .shd’ nvq;a wrka wdjd’ ldnq,a f.ka ;uhs wrka

wdfõ’ lnq,a lsõjd uu;a tkakï lsh,d’ Bg miafi weú,a,d je,slkafoka neiaid’

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

57

ta wjia:dfõ uf.a wf;a i,a,s ;snqfk ke’ uu ;S%ú,a tfla hkak ´k’ kuq;a

;S%ú,a tfla hkak uf.a <Õ i,a,s ;snqfka ke’ ldnq,af.ka uu i,a,s b,a¨jd’ Bg

miafi ldnq,a lsõjd ug;a hkak ´k uu;a tkjd lsõjd’ ál fj,djla ne¨jd’

ldnq,a tk mdgla ke’ uu iïm;a ;=Idrf.a ;S%ú,a tl wrka hkak msg;a jqkd’

hk fldg ksyd,a ydâfjhd¾ tl tyd me;af;a ldnq,a bkakjd oelald’ Tyq lsõjd

uu tkakï lshd’ Tyqj;a k.a.ka .shd’ ug fumukhs lshkak ;sfhkafka’ uu

fï isoaêhg lsisÿ iïnkaOhla ke’ uu ug ksoyi ,nd fok f,i lshd

isákjd’”

Perusal of the contents of the statement made by the 1st accused

from the dock clearly indicates that the only reference made by him to the

sequence of events that led to the death of the deceased person and to the

recovery of the body upon information provided by himself is the

statement that reads “ldnq,a lsõjd oj,a wdmq ;=kafokdf.ka fokafkla .shd tlaflfkla

bkakjd’ ta fokakdg lÿrefj,g .sys,a,d mKsúvhla lshkak mq¿jkao lsh,d’” With this

assertion, the 1st accused expected the trial Court to accept the fact that the

deceased was with the 4th accused. He further expected from the trial

Court accept the fact that he had no knowledge of the whereabouts of the

deceased, other than what was told to him by the 4th accused. The 1st

accused thereby places himself outside the ring of possible suspects for the

murder, by taking up the position, that too indirectly, that he was

elsewhere, when the deceased was murdered.

It is obvious that the 1st accused, when he made that statement from

the dock, had sufficient knowledge of the nature of the accusation levelled

against him over “this incident” (fuu isoaêh), the nature of evidence presented

before the trial Court by the prosecution and the fact that the body of the

deceased was recovered upon him pointing out the place where it was

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

58

buried was already established before that Court. This made the 1st

accused a probable candidate having involvement with the death of the

deceased. The reason for this is the evidence of the Consultant JMO

indicate that the body of the deceased was buried soon after the death has

occurred. The three-day period of time since the death of the deceased and

the estimation of time of death since the last meal of the deceased clearly

supports such a conclusion. Thus, it was safe to infer that it was the 1st

accused who buried the body of the deceased soon after he was killed. This

places the 1st accused at the scene when the deceased was killed.

It is natural for a person, who is placed in such a situation, to offer

an explanation by protesting his innocence to the serious accusation.

Nonetheless, he chose to offer no explanation how is that only he had

acquired that knowledge all by himself.

In view of the resultant situation, it is important to inquire into the

effects of such a failure to offer an explanation that would accrue on the 1st

accused in consequence of his failure. It has already been accepted that

where the Ellenborough dictum is applicable, the failure of an accused to

offer an explanation would tend to make certain suspicious circumstances

to become presumptive against him.

This particular aspect was considered by a divisional bench of this

Court in the judgment of Ajith Fernando and Others v The Attorney

General (supra). In that instance, this Court relied on the text of

Coomaraswamy’s Law of Evidence, where it is stated (at Vol. 1, p.21) “[A]

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

59

party’s failure to explain damning facts cannot convert insufficient into prima

facie evidence, but it may cause prima facie evidence to become presumptive.

Whether prima facie evidence will be converted into presumptive evidence by the

absence of an explanation depends on the strength of the evidence and the

operation of such rules as that requiring especially a high standard of proof on a

criminal charge”, when the 2nd and 3rd separately pointed out the “muddy

hole” where the dead body of Rita John Manoharan was found under the

cover of a cluster of water hyacinth plants, but failed to offer an

explanation of their knowledge.

Lord Carswell, in the judgment of Regina v Becouarn (supra ) in

relation to the nature of the inferences that could be drawn by a jury, upon

the failure of an accused to offer an explanation (at para 25) stated that “[I]

would regard the specimen JSB direction on drawing inferences as sufficiently fair

to defendants, emphasising as it does that the jury must conclude that the only

sensible explanation of his failure to give evidence is that he has no answer to the

case against him, or none that could have stood up to cross-examination. This

direction has been used for some years and appears to have stood the test of time. It

goes without saying, however, that trial judges have full discretion to adapt even a

tried and tested direction if they consider that to do so gives the best guidance to a

jury and fairest representation of the issues.

In India too, the adoption of similar approach on this issue, could

clearly be seen from the judicial pronouncements made by its Supreme

Court. The judgment of Ram Gulam Chaudhary and Others v State of

Bihar (2001) 8 SCC 311, dealt with a case where the deceased boy was

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

60

brutally assaulted and the appellants have carried him away. The deceased

was not seen alive thereafter. The appellants gave no explanation as to

what they did after they took away the boy. The Supreme Court held “[I]n

the absence of an explanation, and considering the fact that that the appellants

were suspecting the boy to have kidnapped and killed the child of the family of the

appellants, it was for the appellants to have explained what they did with him after

they took him away. When the abductors withheld that information from the

Court, there is every justification for drawing the inference that they had

murdered the boy.” Similarly, in the case of Sahadevan v State represented

by Inspector of Police, Chennai (2003) Vol. 1 SCC 534, the prosecution

established that the deceased was seen in the company of the appellants

from the morning of March 6, 1985. The Court held “… it has become

obligatory on the appellants to satisfy the Court as to how, where and in what

manner Vedivelu parted company with them. This is on the principle that a person

who is last found in the company of another, if later found missing, then the

person with whom he was last found has to explain the circumstances in which

they parted with company.”

In the relatively recent judgment of State of Himachal Pradesh v

Raj Kumar (2018) INSC 9, the Supreme Court of India said (at para 17);

“Meena Devi who was residing in the same house with the accused and was last

seen alive with the accused, it is for him to explain how the deceased died. The

accused has no reasonable explanation as to how the body of Meena Devi was

found hanging from the tree. … If the accused does not throw light on the fact that

which is within his knowledge, his failure to offer any explanation would be strong

militating circumstances against him.”

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

61

Coming back to the evidence against the 1st accused, it is already

noted that it was in the night of 25.07.2004 that the group of the men

including the 1st accused and the deceased went to Welikanda. It was

almost midnight on the same day when the 1st accused, 2nd accused and 3rd

accused had returned without the deceased. After returning without the

deceased, the accused had told a lie about the whereabouts of the deceased

to Malhas and Zaharan (the friends of the deceased). The evidence is that

the deceased’s phone was ringing (without an answer) till about 3.30 a.m.

on 26.07.2004 and thereafter it emanated no ringing signal.

The 1st accused knew where the body of the deceased was buried.

The 1st accused pointed out this place of burial to police on 29.07.2004.

This site is located about 500 to 600 meters away from his house. It is an

isolated and open area consisting of a large extent of paddy fields. There

were no dwellings located in the vicinity. Furthermore, the evidence

shows that it is somewhere near this locality that the deceased got off the

three-wheeler along with others including the 1st accused.

The 1st accused in his dock statement has absolutely not stated

anything that could be taken as a challenge to the evidence of police

officers with regard to the recovery of the body under Section 27 Statement

made by him.

The evidence has proved beyond reasonable doubt that the deceased

was in his company up until 25.07.2004. Evidence also has established that

the place, the deceased has commenced his last journey with some other

persons is a location where the house of the 1st accused was situated. The

deceased is not a person from that area. He lives far away. He was

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

62

brought there with the knowledge of the 1st accused. The Section 27

statement of the 1st accused and the subsequent recovery of the body of the

deceased has established that the 1st accused knew that the body of the

deceased was buried at that particular location which was about 500 to 600

meters away from his own house. The medical evidence has established

that the deceased has died on 25.07.2004. This proves that the 1st accused

knew that the deceased would not be amongst the living after that day

from the inception of the saga that led to his death.

Applying the principle enunciated in Ariyasinghe’s case, it must be

through the following three ways that the 1st accused would have acquired

the knowledge relating to the whereabouts of the dead body of the

deceased.

I. the 1st accused himself concealed the dead body of the

deceased in the place where it was found;

II. the 1st accused saw another person burying the dead body of

the deceased in the place where it was found;

III. a person who had seen another person burying the dead body

of the deceased in the place where it was found has told the 1st

accused about it;

The next question that would arise for consideration is as to which

way out of the above three propositions, the 1st accused has acquired the

knowledge relating to the whereabouts of the dead body of the deceased.

Who knows it? It is only the 1st accused. Who can explain it? It is only the

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

63

1st accused. Then Section 106 of the Evidence Ordinance must apply. It

states as follows:

“When any facts is especially within the knowledge of any person, the

burden of proving that fact is upon him.”

The first illustration to Section 106 is as follows;

“When a person does an act with some intention other than that

which the character and circumstances of the act suggest, the burden

of proving that intention is upon him.”

However, the 1st accused has not adduced any material to discharge

that burden. It is not the position of the 1st accused that he had seen

somebody else burying the body of the deceased at that place or that he

heard from somebody else that the body of the deceased was buried there.

If that was the case the 1st accused should have been first to exculpate him

on that basis.

Moreover, he would have brought this fact to the law enforcement

authorities immediately or even at a later stage thereafter. If he had reason

such as a fear of facing any possible reprisal from somebody and if that

was the reason for not divulging it, well, he should have said so at least in

the dock statement.

On the other hand, he told the friends of the deceased on 25.-07.2004

itself a blatant lie regarding the whereabouts of the deceased. The fact that

the deceased had died according to medical reasons on the same day taken

in the light of the fact that the 1st accused did not only divulge the fate of

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

64

the deceased but deliberately misled the friends of the deceased regarding

his whereabouts, cries for an explanation from the 1st accused. If he

doesn’t, he does so simply because that explanation would be detrimental

to him. Therefore, Court is justified in drawing inference under Section

114(f) of the Evidence Ordinance.

The Rule in a circumstantial evidence case is that Court must be able

to make an irresistible inference on the proven facts that it was the accused

who has committed the crime. Since above sentence refers to “proven facts”

let me examine its meaning.

Section 3 of the Evidence Ordinance defines the term ‘proved’. It

states:

“A fact is said to be proved when, after considering the matters before it,

the court either believes it to exist or considers its existence so probable that

a prudent man might, under the circumstances of the particular case, to act

upon the supposition that it exists.”

Thus, a fact is proved in following two ways:

After considering the matters before it,

I. the Court either believes it to exist or

II. considers its existence so probable that a prudent man

might, under the circumstances of the particular case,

act upon the supposition that it exists.

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

65

Applying both these propositions, shouldn’t the Court after

considering the aforementioned material in this case, consider that it is so

probable that a prudent man, under the circumstances of this case, will

have no hesitation to act upon the supposition that the 1st accused was

someway involved in the death of the deceased? The answer clearly, is the

Court should. This means that the fact the 1st accused was someway

involved in the death of the deceased becomes a proven fact.

When considering the circumstantial evidence adduced in this case

as a whole, shouldn’t the irresistible inference, the Court must draw on the

proven facts, in the absence of any explanation from the 1st accused, be that

it was the accused who has committed the crime? Indeed, it should be.

Therefore, taking all the evidence into consideration in its totality, I

conclude that both Courts are justified in coming to the conclusion that

the 1st accused must stand convicted for the murder of the deceased.

Therefore, in conclusion, I hold that the contention of the 1st accused

presented by learned President’s Counsel that he was convicted for

murder solely on his knowledge of the place where the body of the

deceased was buried is clearly at variance with the undisputed evidence

presented before the trial Court and therefore could not be accepted as a

valid one. Similarly, the submissions of the 1st accused that the trial Court

as well as the Court of Appeal have insisted on his explanation merely on

the discovery of a fact is also not an acceptable proposition, in view of the

body of evidence considered by the Courts below.

S.C. Appeal No. 169/2019

66

In view of the reasoning contained in the preceding paragraphs of

this judgment, I now proceed to answer the two questions of law on which

this appeal was argued in the negative.

The judgment of the High Court convicting the 1st accused to the

charge of murder and the Judgement of the Court of Appeal concurring

with that finding are hereby affirmed, along with the sentence of death

imposed on him.

The appeal of the 1st accused is accordingly dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT P. PADMA N SURASENA, CJ.

I agree.

CHIEF JUSTICE

MAHINDA SAMAYAWARDHENA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT