==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 26

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application

under Articles 17 and 126 of the

Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

S.C.F.R.A. No: 1. Gamage Don Yasasvin

181/2021 Hemantha Kumara Sudasinghe,

No. 430/2B, Sunethradevi Road,

Kohuwala, Nugegoda.

2. Iresha Menike Jayathilake

Banda,

No. 54, Samudrasanna Road,

Mount Lavinia.

3. Jayalath Arrachchige Dona

Hasanthi Jayalath,

Udaya, Halpita, Polgasowita.

4. Rathnayake Mudiyanselage

Susantha Rathnayake,

No. 311/07, Hettiyadeniya Road,

Gampaha.

5. Mannapperuma Mudiyanselage

Premasiri Anura Bandara,

No. 45/1, 1st Lane,

Pengirigaswatta Road,

Gangodawila, Nugegoda.

PETITIONERS

Vs.

Page 2 of 26

1. S. H. Munasinghe,

Secretary,

Ministry of Health, Suwasiripaya,

No. 385, Rev. Baddegana

Wimalawansa Thero Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

1A. Janaka Sugathadasa,

Secretary,

Ministry of Health, Suwasiripaya,

No. 385, Rev. Baddegana

Wimalawansa Thero Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

1AA. Dr. P. G. Mahipala,

Secretary,

Ministry of Health, Suwasiripaya,

No. 385, Rev. Baddegana

Wimalawansa Thero Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

2. Ayanthi Karunaratne,

Acting Director/Tertiary Care,

Ministry of Health, Suwasiripaya,

No. 385, Rev. Baddegana

Wimalawansa Thero Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

3. Anver Hamdani,

Previous Acting Director/Tertiary

Care, Ministry of Health,

Suwasiripaya, No. 385,

Rev. Baddegana Wimalawansa

Thero Mawatha, Colombo 10.

Page 3 of 26

4. Priyantha L. Atapattu,

Director Primary Care,

Ministry of Health, Suwasiripaya,

No. 385, Rev. Baddegana

Wimalawansa Thero Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

5. Asela Gunawardane,

Director General,

Ministry of Health, Suwasiripaya,

No. 385, Rev. Baddegana

Wimalawansa Thero Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

6. S. Sridharan,

Acting Director General,

Heath Services,

Ministry of Health, Suwasiripaya,

No. 385, Rev. Baddegana

Wimalawansa Thero Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

7. Lal Panapitya,

Deputy Director General

(Medical Services),

Ministry of Health, Suwasiripaya,

No. 385, Rev. Baddegana

Wimalawansa Thero Mawatha,

Colombo 10.

8. Jagath Balapatabendi,

Chairman,

Public Service Commission,

No. 1200/9, Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

Page 4 of 26

9. M. A. B. Daya Senarath,

Secretary,

Public Service Commission,

No. 1200/9, Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

10. Indrani Sugathadasa,

Member,

Public Service Commission,

No. 1200/9, Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

11. V. Shivagnanasothy,

Member,

Public Service Commission,

No. 1200/9, Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

12. T. C. R. Ruberu,

Member,

Public Service Commission,

No. 1200/9, Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

13. Ahamod Lebbe Mohammed,

Member,

Public Service Commission,

No. 1200/9, Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

14. Leelasena Liyanagama,

Member,

Public Service Commission,

No. 1200/9, Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

Page 5 of 26

15. Dian Gomes,

Member,

Public Service Commission,

No. 1200/9, Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

16. Dilith Jayaweera,

Member,

Public Service Commission,

No. 1200/9, Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

17. W. H. Piyadasa,

Member,

Public Service Commission,

No. 1200/9, Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

18. H. L. D. S. Ariyaratne,

Consultant General Surgeon,

Base Hospital, Mulleriyawa.

19. W. U. P. C. Gunarathna,

Consultant General Surgeon,

Base Hospital, Tangalle.

20. M. A. Mallawatantri,

Consultant General Surgeon,

Base Hospital, Marawila.

21. N. A. Perera,

Consultant General Surgeon,

Base Hospital, Wathupitiwala.

22. D. A. K. N. Dunusinghe,

Provincial General Hospital,

Rathnapura.

Page 6 of 26

23. D. Wickramasekera,

Consultant General Surgeon,

Base Hospital, Homagama.

24. P. K. K. H. Halpage,

Consultant General Surgeon,

Base Hospital, Panadura.

25. J. M. L. B. Jayasundara,

Consultant General Surgeon,

District General Hospital, Matale.

26. P. K. Ravindran,

Consultant General Surgeon,

Base Hospital, Akkaraipattu.

27. V. Y. Sabaratnam,

Consultant General Surgeon,

Teaching Hospital,

Anuradhapura.

28. N. W. Halpe Gamage,

Consultant General Surgeon,

Base Hospital, Wathupitiwala.

29. G. M. K. Bogammana,

Consultant General Surgeon,

District General Hospital, Kegalle.

30. B. Aathavan,

Resident Surgeon,

National Hospital of Sri Lanka,

Colombo 10.

31. J. A. V. R. Jayasinghe,

Consultant General Surgeon,

Base Hospital, Gampola.

Page 7 of 26

32. H. R. Thambawita,

Consultant General Surgeon,

National Hospital of Sri Lanka,

Colombo 10.

33. E. G. K. M. Jayasuriya,

Consultant General Surgeon,

Base Hospital, Dambulla.

34. G. K. S. P. Premarathna,

Consultant General Surgeon,

Base Hospital, Balapitiya.

35. H. P. Dias,

Consultant General Surgeon,

Base Hospital, Embilipitiya.

36. W. A. T. M. N. Perera,

Consultant General Surgeon,

Base Hospital, Elpitiya.

37. W. R. M. Obayasekera,

Consultant General Surgeon,

District General Hospital,

Hambanthota.

38. R. G. Rajendran,

Consultant General Surgeon,

Colombo South Teaching

Hospital, Kalubowila.

39. S. J. Jayasinghe,

Consultant General Surgeon,

Colombo South Teaching

Hospital, Kalubowila.

Page 8 of 26

40. J. M. A. D. Leelaratne,

Visiting Surgeon – OPD,

National Hospital of Sri Lanka,

Colombo 10.

41. R. P. N. Samarasekera,

Base Hospital, Balapitiya.

42. G. Kugarajh,

Consultant General Surgeon,

District General Hospital,

Polonnaruwa.

43. P. A. U. S. Samaraweera,

Consultant General Surgeon,

Provincial General Hospital,

Badulla.

44. K. C. Gamage,

Consultant General Surgeon,

District General Hospital,

Embilipitiya.

45. S. Saieswaran,

Consultant General Surgeon,

Base Hospital,

Puttalam.

46. B. J. R. Cooray,

Consultant Clinical Oncologist,

District General Hospital,

Kalutara.

47. C. R. B. Gunarathne,

Consultant Clinical Oncologist,

Provincial General Hospital,

Rathnapura.

Page 9 of 26

48. M. Chenthuran,

Consultant Clinical Oncologist,

Provincial General Hospital,

Badulla.

49. R. M. A. Wijekoon,

Consultant Clinical Oncologist,

District General Hospital,

Chilaw.

50. H. S. N. Peiris,

Consultant Clinical Oncologist,

Provincial General Hospital,

Rathnapura.

51. N. M. T. E. K. Nawarathna,

Consultant Clinical Oncologist,

District General Hospital,

Monaragala.

52. G. D. B. J. Karunaratne,

Consultant Clinical Oncologist,

District General Hospital,

Hambanthota.

53. P. Sasikala,

Consultant Clinical Oncologist,

Teaching Hospital,

Batticaloa.

54. P. K. D. P. Alahakoon,

Consultant Clinical Oncologist,

Teaching Hospital,

Kandy.

Page 10 of 26

55. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

56. Sanath J. Ediriweera,

Chairman,

Public Service Commission,

No. 1200/9, Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

57. S. M. Mohamed,

58. N. H. M. Chithrananda

59. N. Selvakkumaran

60. M. B. R. Pushpakumara

61. A. D. N. De Zoysa

62. R. Nadarajapillai

63. C. Pallegama

64. G. S. A. De Silva,

All of Public Service Commission,

No. 1200/9, Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

RESPONDENTS

Before : Achala Wengappuli, J.

: Menaka Wijesundera, J.

: Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

Counsel : Manohara De Silva, P.C. with Harithriya Kumarage

instructed by Gaithri De Silva for the Petitioners.

Page 11 of 26

: Sanjeewa Jayawardena, P.C. with Shantha

Jayawardena instructed by Sanjeewa Kaluarachchi

for the 18th, 22nd, 27th, 30th, 33rd, 35th, 37th, 38th,

44th, 45th Respondents.

: K. G. Jinasena with Dulari Kahawaththa and

Imalka Dissanayake instructed by Thouli

Jayawardana for the 32nd Respondent.

: Viveka Siriwardane, P.C. with Hashini Opatha, SSC

for the 1st, 2nd, 4th to 17th, 55th Respondents.

Argued on : 08-09-2025

Written Submissions : 20-10-2022 (By the 1st to 5th Petitioners)

: 08-10-2025 [Post-Argument] (By the 1st to 5th

Petitioners)

: 03-10-2025 (By the 1st, 2nd, 4th to 17th, 55th

Respondents)

: 08-10-2025 (By the 18th, 22nd, 27th, 30th, 33rd, 35th,

37th, 38th, 44th, 45th Respondents)

: 26-10-2022 (By the 49th, 51st, 52nd Respondents)

Decided on : 05-03-2026

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

This is an application by the petitioners alleging that their fundamental rights

guaranteed under the provisions of the Constitution have been infringed or

would imminently be infringed by the 1st to 17th respondents mentioned in

the petition.

Page 12 of 26

On the said basis, they have sought several reliefs from the Court as prayed

for in the prayer of the petition.

When this matter was supported for leave to proceed on 10-12-2021, this

Court, having considered the submissions made by the parties in that regard,

granted leave to proceed under Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

At the hearing of this application, the Court heard the submissions of the

learned President’s Counsel who represented the petitioners and the

submissions of the learned Additional Solicitor General (ASG) who

represented 1st, 2nd, 4th to 17th and 55th respondents, the 55th respondent

being the Attorney General. The Court also heard the submissions of the

learned President’s Counsel who represented the 18th, 22nd, 27th, 30th, 33rd,

35th, 37th, 38th, 44th, and 45th respondents, as well as that of the learned

Counsel who represented the 32nd respondent.

The parties were also allowed to file a synopsis of their submissions for the

consideration of the Court.

The facts-

The five petitioners are specialist medical officers of the government health

service and are specialists in the field of oncology.

This fundamental rights application relates to annual transfers of specialist

medical officers of the government health service for the year 2021.

At the hearing of this application, the position of the learned President’s

Counsel on behalf of the petitioners was that;

1. There was no legally acceptable transfer scheme in place before the

annual transfers were effected for the year 2021.

2. The scheme used was arbitrary.

He submitted that the transfer scheme that existed was one based on the

marks given to the grades achieved by the applicants within the service, and

it was changed by an amendment to the Service Minutes in that regard, which

has resulted in the infringement of the fundamental rights of the petitioners.

Page 13 of 26

Submitting further as to his contention that there was no legal transfer

scheme during the relevant period, he pointed out that in terms of Article 55

of the Constitution and the relevant subsequent Articles, it is the Public

Service Commission who has the authority to effect the transfers relating to

the petitioners which can only be delegated by the said Commission.

He submitted that the Service Minute published in the Government Gazette

Extraordinary No. 1883/17 dated 11-10-2014 (the document marked P-13),

was the Service Minute applicable at that time in relation to the transfers of

medical officers, and under 12.3 of the said Service Minute, it has been

specifically stated that the transfers of all the medical officers, the category

under which the petitioners fall, and the dental medical officers, will have to

be effected according to the transfer procedure approved by the Public Service

Commission. It was his position that there was no such approved transfer

scheme when the transfers for the year 2021 were published. It was his

position that is a fact that has been admitted by the 9th respondent, who is

the Secretary of the Public Service Commission.

It was submitted that there was no basis for the respondents to follow the

previous Service Minute gazetted in the year 2001, namely Gazette No.

1176/15 dated 22-03-2001 (document marked P-10), and it should not have

been considered for the preparation of the transfer list based on the marks

given under the said scheme, which was not a transfer scheme prepared and

approved by the Public Service Commission. It was his position that any

transfer effected under the said scheme for the year 2001 was something that

had been done without jurisdiction.

It was pointed out that the Public Service Commission, by publishing the

Gazette No. 1990/24 dated 27-10-2016, delegated its powers of transferring

the officers of Sri Lanka Medical Service to the Health Service Committee

appointed by the Public Service Commission (the document marked Y-3 along

with the counter-affidavit of the petitioners). It was submitted that the

document Y-3 has also laid down that the scheme needs to be approved by

the Public Service Commission, to argue that the transfer effected for 2021 in

relation to the petitioners has been done without authority.

Page 14 of 26

In relation to his initial submission that the transfer scheme applied was

arbitrary, it was the position of the learned President’s Counsel that even if

there is ex facie nothing wrong in the transfer scheme gazetted in the year

2001 (P-10), the application of it for the year 2021 was arbitrary.

He pointed out and compared the several Service Minutes which were

applicable for the time relevant to this application relating to the transfers of

medical officers, which include the Service Minute published in Gazette No.

662/11 dated 17 05-1991 (document marked P-8) and the two subsequent

Service Minutes marked P-10 and P-13.

It was his position that until 2001 there was no issue as to the transfer of

medical officers, but with the publication of the Service Minute marked P-10

in the year 2001, the scheme which used to give marks for the purpose of

preparation of the transfer list was changed in relation to the time period

taken to get the promotion from Grade II to Grade I.

It was his submission that under the previously applicable marking scheme

P-10, a medical officer had to obtain both postgraduate qualifications

mentioned in appendix 1 and 2 in the Service Minute. However, in the year

2014, the said requirement was changed to having one of those qualifications

to move from Grade II to Grade I. Under the previous scheme, marks would

be given up to a period of 10 years a qualified person was in Grade II when

considering it for the purpose of transfer. He pointed out that since the then

applicable requirement to be promoted to Grade I was fulfilling both the earlier

mentioned postgraduate qualifications, the petitioners were unable to move

to Grade I of the service. However, under the new Service Minute, a person

who has fulfilled only one of the postgraduate qualifications could move to

Grade I.

It was his submission that hence, the petitioners should be considered

entitled to be allowed additional marks for the period they had to spend than

the minimum years under which marks would be calculated in the said

category as the said requirement has now been changed.

Page 15 of 26

It was his position that because of this inequality, the petitioners could not

obtain the marks they should have obtained, and that was arbitrary.

He further submitted that since the medical service officers are subjected to

being transferred every four years, this new scheme only affected them when

their transfers were due, which appears to be an explanation as to the delay

in coming before the Court in order to challenge a Gazette Notification

published in the year 2014.

He submitted that when the petitioners complained about the

unreasonableness of the new marking scheme, the Secretary to the Ministry

of Health recognized this, and the Board appointed by the Secretary to look

into these provisions had recommended that corrective measures should be

taken in this regard.

It was further submitted that the decision of the said Board (marked as 9R1

and also the document marked as R4) has clearly been recommended under

paragraph No. 10 that the specialist medical officers who were promoted to

Grade I during the interim period (2006-2013) should be given the same

benefits as those who were promoted after 2013, in the calculation of marks.

It was his position that by the letter marked 9R2(a) dated 18-05-2021, the

Public Service Commission has in fact communicated to the Secretary of the

Ministry of Health that the said recommendation in paragraph 10 has been

approved. However, the same commission has given a different interpretation

to it subsequently by the letter marked 9R2(b) dated 31-05-2021, which has

the effect of nullifying the said recommendation in paragraph No-10.

It was his contention that this was a mistake committed by the Public Service

Commission.

The letter marked 9R3, which was a letter addressed to the Secretary of the

Public Service Commission by the Secretary of the Ministry of Health, shows

that as a result of the letter dated 18-05-2021, the Ministry has recalculated

the marks given to two of the specialist doctors who were the persons who

Page 16 of 26

appealed against the marking scheme to the Ministry, and due to that, an

issue has arisen among the other specialist doctors who were not granted the

same benefit.

As a result of the letter dated 31-05-2021 marked 9R2(b), the Ministry has

reverted to the earlier transfer list, which has already been published by that

time. It has also been proposed to appoint another committee to look into the

matter until a scheme acceptable to everyone can be formulated and to allow

the earlier transfer scheme to be maintained till then.

The letter marked 9R41 shows that the Public Service Commission has

approved the said recommendations in writing to the Health Committee of the

Public Service Commission.

Submitting that all these procedural faults and misinterpretations are

arbitrary and have violated the fundamental rights guaranteed under the

Constitution towards the petitioners, it was his position that since several

years have passed from the year 2021, which was the year relevant to this

application, he will only pursue reliefs sought under prayer (c) and (d) of his

amended petition when new transfers are effected in the case of specialist

medical officers.

He agreed that quashing the transfer list published for the year 2021 will not

arise as of now.

The said two reliefs now pursued by the petitioners read as follows-

(c) Declare that transfers of all Specialist Medical Officers should be

carried out under one uniform scheme of Transfer/Point Scheme, and

accordingly, if the basis of the allocation of marks is seniority, allocation

of marks for the officers’ service should not be based on the Service

Minute that was applicable to the respective Medical Officer in such a

Grade but the actual service of the officer concerned,

(d) Declare that in the transfer scheme, every Specialist is entitled to be

given equal number of marks for every year in service in Grade II

Page 17 of 26

irrespective of whether the 1991 Service Minute was applicable or the

2014 Service Minute was applicable to such officer for the purpose of

their promotion.

The objections as to the maintainability of the application-

The learned ASG who represented the 1st, 2nd, 4th to 17th, and 55th respondents

in her submission before the Court took up three objections for the

consideration of the Court as to the maintainability of the application.

The said objections are,

1. That the application is time-barred.

2. The petitioners have failed to name the necessary parties as

respondents.

3. In any way, proceeding with the application is a futile exercise.

It was her contention that both the positions taken up by the learned

President’s Counsel on the basis that there was no legal transfer scheme and

the applied transfer scheme was arbitrary should fail accordingly.

Submitting as to her position that the application was time barred, it was

pointed out that the fundamental rights petition was filed on 30-06-2021 and

if one is to go by the Service Minutes published in the Gazette marked P-10,

which was published on 22-03-2001, the application would be belated by 10

years, and if the application is to be considered on the basis of the Gazette

issued in the year the 2014, which was the Gazette marked as P-13, still the

application would be 7 years out of time.

She drew the attention of the Court to Article 126(2) of the Constitution where

a party who alleges that his fundamental rights were infringed, such a person

should apply to the Supreme Court seeking relief in respect of such

infringement within one month of the alleged violation.

Submitting as to the 2nd objection where it was contended that the necessary

parties were not before the Court and the petitioners have failed to name them

Page 18 of 26

in the petition, it was her position that the contentious transfer scheme

applied for the year 2021 was in relation to all the medical specialists who

were functioning under the Ministry of Health and eligible to apply for

transfers, numbering 721 medical specialists. She pointed out that the

petitioners are specialists in the field of oncology and they have only named

other oncologists as 8th to 24th respondents while ignoring the other medical

specialists who are similarly circumstanced and have a right to be heard in

an application of this nature, for the simple reason that the marking scheme

which was considered for transfers was one applicable across the board to all

medical specialists.

Submitting as to the futility of the application, it was the position of the

learned ASG that the petitioners had come before the Court to get the approval

granted by the Public Service Commission in terms of the letter marked P-29

dated 18-05-2021 validated. (The letter marked 9R2(a) by the 9th respondent

in his objections.)

It was her position that the Public Service Commission has rescinded the said

approval by its letter dated 26-07-2021 marked as R-9 filed along with the

objections tendered by the Secretary to the Ministry of Health, which is also

the letter marked 9R-4, and hence, such a recommendation no longer exists.

Making submissions as to the concerns of the petitioners, she pointed out

that the annual transfers of specialist medical officers for the year 2021 were

commenced by the issuing of the letter marked P-20 dated 05-04-2021 by the

Secretary to the Ministry of Health, which is a letter issued with the consent

of the Health Service Committee of the Public Service Commission.

She pointed out paragraph 13 of the said letter, which stipulates the mode of

awarding points, and was of the view that it has clearly stated that the

transfers would be carried out as per the Gazette Notification 1176/15 dated

22-03-2021 (P-10) and 1883/17 dated 11-10-2014. It was her position that it

was only in the Gazette dated 22-03-2001 the mode of awarding points has

been spelt out and not in the Gazette published on 11-10-2014. It was

Page 19 of 26

submitted that the contention of the petitioners in that regard was wrong and

misleading.

It was stated that the petitioners, even before the said letter marked P-20 was

published, knew very well that the applicable transfer scheme and the fact

that marks would be calculated on the basis of the Gazette published in the

year 2001, and that was the very reason why the 2nd and 3rd petitioners

submitted an appeal to the Public Service Commission seeking the

Commission to change the points awarding system.

It was contended that the petitioners do not maintain the position that there

was no valid transfer scheme in the applicable 2021 scheme, and they have

also agreed that it has not discriminated one against another, and that it was

the transfer scheme that existed for around 25 years and successfully used

up to date. She took up the position that it was the scheme applied to transfer

all the medical specialists, which has not caused any prejudice or

infringement of the fundamental rights of the petitioners.

On the other hand, it was her position that, if what the petitioners wanted

were to be granted by the Court, it would infringe the fundamental rights of

all the other medical officers who were transferred in the year 2021 based on

the marking scheme considered for such transfers. It was also brought to the

notice of the Court that the 4th petitioner was a person who never applied for

a transfer for the year 2021, and therefore had no basis whatsoever to claim

that his fundamental rights were infringed or would be infringed.

The learned President’s Counsel who represented the 18th to 22nd, 27th, 30th,

33rd, 35th, 37th, 38th, 44th and 45th respondents, while agreeing with the

submissions of the learned ASG, submitted that other than his clients who

are also Consultant Surgeons, the petitioners have conveniently left out the

other medical specialists who are necessary parties that should be brought

before the Court. It was his position that by failing to name them as parties,

the petitioners have deprived them of an opportunity of being heard.

Page 20 of 26

He pointed out that in terms of the powers vested with the Public Service

Commission under Article 57(1) of the Constitution, the Commission has

delegated its power of transfers, including annual transfers of the officers of

the Sri Lanka Medical Service for which the petitioners as well as his clients

belong, to the Health Service Committee appointed by the Public Service

Commission.

It was his view that therefore, the Health Service Committee of the Public

Service Commission, who actually effected the transfers, shall be a necessary

party, and not making the members of the committee as parties to this

application would be fatal as to its maintainability.

To stress his point, he referred to the document marked P-20, which was the

notice published with regard to the annual transfers of medical officers for the

year 2021, which states that the said notification was published with the

consent of the Health Service Committee of the Public Service Commission.

He was of the view that the real reason for the petitioners to come before this

Court was to negate the effects of their failure to obtain the necessary

specialist qualifications over a long period of time as against the other medical

specialists who had gained the same qualifications within a short period, as

reflected in paragraph 15 of the objections tendered on behalf of his clients

by the 38th respondent.

The submissions of the learned Counsel who represented the 49th, 51st and

52nd respondents were also to the same effect, and all the learned Counsel

submitted that the fundamental rights application should stand dismissed for

want of any merit.

Consideration of the objections-

Having considered the above factual matrix and the submissions by the

learned Counsel, I find it necessary to consider the objections raised as to the

maintainability of this application before the Court at this point.

Page 21 of 26

It is my view that if the objections succeed, considering the other factual

matters would not arise.

The Applicability of the Time Bar-

In terms of Article 126(2) of the Constitution, an application in relation to any

infringement of fundamental rights or an imminent infringement should be

complained within one month thereof to the Supreme Court.

The relevant Article 126(2) reads as follows,

126(2). Where any person alleges that any such fundamental right

or language right relating to such person has been infringed or is

about to be infringed by executive or administrative action, he may

himself or by an Attorney-at-Law on his behalf, within one month

thereof, in accordance with such rules of Court as may be in force,

apply to the Supreme Court by way of petition in writing addressed

to such Court praying for relief or redress in respect of such

infringement. Such application may be proceeded with only with

leave to proceed first had and obtained from the Supreme Court,

which leave may be granted or refused, as the case may be, by not

less than two Judges.

In the case of Edirisuriya Vs. Navaratnam and Others (1985) 1 SLR 100 at

105, it was held:

“This Court has consistently proceeded on the basis that the time limit of

one month set out in Article 126(2) of the Constitution is mandatory.”

In SC/FR Application No. 542/2009 decided on 20-01-2021, Priyantha

Jayawardena, P.C., J. held:

“Article 126(2) of the Constitution states that an application for

infringement or imminent infringement or fundamental rights can be filed

‘within one month’ thereof in the Supreme Court.

Page 22 of 26

The word ‘within’ used in the said Article requites the period of one month

to be calculated from the date of the alleged infringement, imminent

infringement, or from the date on which the petitioner became aware of

the alleged infringement, if knowledge on the part of the petitioner is

required to be established the alleged infringement.”

The only exception to this requirement is the provisions of section 13 of the

Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka Act (HRCSL Act) No. 21 of 1996,

which refers to the applicability of the time limitation in terms of Article 126(2)

of the Constitution.

The said section reads as follows:

13 (1). Where a complaint is made by an aggrieved party in terms

of section 14, to the Commission, within one month of the alleged

infringement or imminent infringement of a fundamental right by

executive or administrative action, the period within which the

inquiry into such complaint is pending before the Commission,

shall not be taken into account in computing the period of one

month within which an application may be made to the Supreme

Court by such person in terms of Article 126 (2) of the

Constitution.

However, since there is no averment in relation to a complaint made to the

Human Rights Commission by the petitioners, considering the applicability of

the said provision would not be necessary.

In reply to the time bar objection, the petitioners in their additional written

submissions have taken up the position that the final marks list for the

annual transfer of the specialist medical officers was published only on 12-

06-2021, whereas the application before this Court was filed on 30-06-2021,

and thereby, they have come before the Court within the stipulated time

period.

Page 23 of 26

The petitioners have cited the judgment pronounced in Dayaratne and

Others Vs. National Savings Bank and Others (2002) 3 SLR 116 at 126 to

argue that they have come before the Court not because of the imminent

infringement, but after it had occurred, which is permissible under the law.

I find that the basis for the allegation of infringement of fundamental rights

urged in the petition before this Court is not the actual transfer list for the

year 2021 as claimed, but the basis upon which the said transfer list was

formulated.

This becomes so clear when one looks at the reliefs sought by the petitioners

from this Court. In the prayer, the petitioners are seeking relief while

challenging the validity of the two Service Minutes published in the years

2001 and 2014. There cannot be any argument that the said two Service

Minutes had been used thus far in deciding the transfers of the respective

specialist medical grades across the board, which should be well within the

knowledge of the petitioners at the time the applications were called upon for

annual transfers by the relevant authority. I find no basis for the petitioners’

argument that the said Service Minutes would become applicable to them only

at the time they become eligible to be transferred from one station to another,

which generally occurs every four years. Admittedly, one of the petitioners,

namely the 4th petitioner, is not a person who was to go on transfer during

the relevant year.

The notice dated 05-04-2021 issued by the Secretary to the Ministry of Health

(the document marked P-20) notifying the specialist medical officers under

different specialities in medicine about the call for applications for their

transfers has clearly spelt out the mode of calculation of points under which

the preferential list will be finalized.

Paragraph 13 of the said letter reads as follows-

13. The annual transfer of specialist medical officers for the year

2021 (effective from 01-01-2021) will be done as per Gazette

Notification 1176/15 dated 22-03-2001 and 1883/17 dated 11-10-

Page 24 of 26

2014. Points will be calculated up to 31-12-2020 for the annual

transfers of the year 2021.

I find that the letter itself was self-explanatory as to the method that would

be followed in calculating points in relation to the transfers.

Since this was a time-tested method, it should be well within the knowledge

of all the medical specialists, that this was the method previously applied, and

that it would be the same scheme that will be applicable when it comes to the

annual transfers for the year 2021.

Hence, there cannot be any basis for the petitioners to claim that they waited

until the publication of the list of transferred medical specialists to come

before this Court claiming the violation of their fundamental rights

guaranteed in terms of Article 12(1) of the Constitution under which leave to

proceed with the application was granted by this Court.

Under the circumstances, I am of the view that the ratio decidendi of

Dayaratne and Other Vs. National Savings Bank and Others (Supra)

cannot be applied to the instant situation as the time has clearly begun to

run several years before the institution of the petitioners’ fundamental rights

application.

For the reasons as considered above, I agree with the objection and hold that

the application before this Court is clearly time-barred, and hence, the

petitioners are not entitled to maintain the action before the Supreme Court.

The Petitioners have failed to name the necessary parties-

As pointed out correctly by the learned ASG, the petitioners have only named

the specialist medical officers that fall under their category of specialization

as respondents to the application.

However, the Service Minutes which the petitioners are now challenging

before the Court and also the transfer list for the year 2021, are applicable

not only to the petitioners and the specialist medical officers mentioned in the

Page 25 of 26

petition as respondents, but also to all the other specialist medical officers

serving under the Ministry of Health, who are eligible to apply for annual

transfers. As the transfer list was out and in public domain at the time this

application was preferred, there would have been no difficulty for the

petitioners to find out the details of the other specialists who received

transfers. In such a scenario, there may be several other specialist medical

officers who are satisfied with their annual transfers and do not agree with

the contentions of the petitioners. I find that by failing to name all the

necessary parties as respondents to this application, the petitioners have

deprived them of an opportunity to be heard.

As correctly pointed out by the learned President’s Counsel who represented

some of the specialist medical officers who have been named as respondents,

and the learned Counsel who represented the other respondents, it is clear

that it has been the Health Service Committee of the Public Service

Commission under whose consent P-20 has been published.

All the other documents tendered to this Court also establish the fact that it

was the Health Service Committee of the Public Service Commission that is

responsible for deciding on the matters relating to the annual transfers of the

specialist medical officers.

It is clear to me that apart from naming the members of the Public Service

Commission as respondents, the petitioners have failed to name the members

of the Health Service Committee of the Public Service Commission as

respondents to this application.

Under the circumstances, I am of the view that the said Committee is also

entitled to be heard in relation to this application.

In the case of Don Shelton Hettiarachchi Vs. Sri Lanka Ports Authority

and Others (2007) 2 SLR 307, it was observed-

“The need for having necessary parties before Court was considered by

this Court in Farook Vs. Siriwardhena, Election Officer and Others

Page 26 of 26

(1997) 1 SLR 145, where it was clearly stated that failure to make a

party to an application of person/s whose rights would be affected in the

proceedings is fatal to the validity of the application.

It was therefore an essential requirement that the parties who were

necessary to this application should have been brought before this Court,

and the petitioner had not adhered to this requirement.”

For the reasons as considered above, I agree with the above-considered

objections raised by the respondents as to the maintainability of this

application and conclude that the application is time-barred and also the

petitioners have failed to name the necessary parties to this application.

Accordingly, I hold that the petitioners’ application should fail on the said

grounds alone, and hence, considering the futility of the application would no

longer be necessary.

The application is dismissed.

Having considered the facts and the circumstances, I order no costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Achala Wengappuli, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Menaka Wijesundera, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court