1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

S.C. Appeal 195/2015 SC/HCCA/LA No. 485/2014 SC/HCCA/LA No. 489/2014 H.C Appeal No. WP/HCCA/COL/365/2004F D.C Colombo Case No. 16900/MR Sea Consortium Lanka (Pvt) Limited 174, George R de Silva Mawatha, Colombo 10. PLAINTIFF Vs.

1. The Associated Newspapers of Ceylon Limited Lake House No. 35, D.R. Wijewardena Mawatha, Combo 10. 2. E. Weerapperuma

No. 21/22, Maradana Road, Hendala. Wattala. DEFENDANTS AND BETWEEN In the matter of an Appeal under Section 754(1) of the Civil Procedure Code, read together with Section 5A of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions Amendment) Act No. 54 of 2006

2

1 The Associated Newspapers of Ceylon

Limited Lake House No. 35, D.R. Wijewardena Mawatha, Combo 10. 2. E. Weerapperuma

No. 21/22, Maradana Road, Hendala. Wattala. DEFENDANT-APPELLANTS Vs.

Sea Consortium Lanka (Pvt) Limited 174, George R de Silva Mawatha, Colombo 10. PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENTS

AND NOW

In the matter of an Application Leave to Appeal under Section 5C of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 54 of 2006 1. The Associated Newspapers of Ceylon

Limited Lake House No. 35, D.R. Wijewardena Mawatha, Combo 10. 2. E. Weerapperuma

No. 21/22, Maradana Road, Hendala. Wattala. DEFENDANT-APPELLANT-PETITIONERS Vs.

3

Sea Consortium Lanka (Pvt) Limited 174, George R de Silva Mawatha, Colombo 10. And presently of 256, Sri Ramanathan Mawatha, Colombo 15. PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT BEFORE: Sisira J. de Abrew J. Upaly Abeyrathne J. & Anil Gooneratne J. COUNSEL: Palitha Kumarasinghe P.C., with Nuwan Rupasinghe for the Appellant Ananda Kasthuriarachchi for the Respondent ARGUED ON: 15.02.2017 DECIDED ON: 23.05.2017 GOONERATNE J. This was an action filed in the District Court of Colombo on or about

05.09.1995 claiming damages in a sum of Rs. 50 million by the Plaintiff Company

against the 1st and 2nd Defendants for a publication of an Article in the Sunday

Observer of 25.6.1995, alleging that the Article published is defamatory perse

and by innuendo. The Article in question is pleaded in paragraph 10 of the plaint

4

and its heading reads as “Ports Authority Ultimatum to Shippers”. The said

Article was written by the 2nd Defendant. In paragraph 15 of the plaint the

Plaintiff Company pleads the items (a to g) of innuendo to prove its case.

Two Leave to Appeal Applications were filed in the Supreme Court

by the Plaintiff and Defendant respectively against the Judgment of the High

Court (485/14 and 489/14). This court granted leave on both Applications. Both

matters were consolidated. The question of law on which leave was granted are

as follows:

By the Defendant-Appellant-Petitioners

1. Are the Defendant-Appellant-Petitioners entitled to defence of

justification qualified privileged against the action of the Plaintiff-

Respondent-Respondent, in view of the evidence adduced at the trial?

2. Did the learned High Court Judges err in holding that the Article published

by the Defendant-Appellant-Petitioners is defamatory of the Plaintiff-

Respondent-Respondent in view of the evidence adduced at the trial in

particularly in absence of any independent evidence of the alleged

defamation and innuendo?

3. Did the learned High Court Judges err in law disregarding evidence of the

2nd Defendant-Appellant-Petitioner who was present when Hon. Minister

of Ports made inspection at Sri Lanka Ports Authority premises when

particularly no other witness gave evidence to contradict the evidence of

the 2nd Defendant?

5

4. Did the learned High Court Judges err in law in holding that

(i) The pith and substance of the Article was that the Respondent had

used some undue influence and/or had bribed certain officials of

Sri Lanka Ports Authority in order them not to present the cheques

that were given by the Respondent in that, ex facie, the pith and

substance of the said Article is to disclose inefficiency and remiss of

2duties by employees of a State Instituted as discovered by Hon.

Minister in charge of the Institute at an inspection held in presence

of Media and no allegation of bribery whatsoever ever mentioned

in the said Article and no independent witness had given any such

evidence;

(ii) The allegation in the Article triggered a shockwave in the business

community, banks and overseas as the Plaintiff is considered the

biggest leading shipping Company when no such admissible

evidence has been adduced at the Trial?

5. Did the learned High Court Judges err in awarding damages without

proper analysing or evidence or quantification particularly since, the

business activities increased after the publication of the alleged

defamatory Article by the Defendant-Appellant–Petitioners, the Net

profit of the Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent was only Rs. 2 million per

annum and the Respondent incorporated in September 1994 whereas the

publication made in June 1995?

6

By the Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent

1. Is the Judgment of the learned High Court Judges dated 21.08.2014

contrary to law and evidence before the Court?

2. Did the Honourable Judges of the High Court err in holding that the

quantum of damages should be reduced to Rs. 30 million without fresh

evidence or facts?

3. Did the Honourable Judges of the High Court exercising Appellate powers

err in substituting its judgment on quantum of damages where damages

are awarded for defamation?

What really happened was that the then Hon. Minister of Ports, to the Sri

Lanka Ports Authority along with the 2nd Defendant a journalist attached to the

“Sunday Observer” visited the Ports Authority and personally witnessed what

had taken place, in an inspection tour and the newspaper reported same in a

news item. It would be convenient to reproduce that part of the Newspaper

Article as follows which according to the Plaintiff is defamatory of the Plaintiff

by innuendo.

“But when the Minister went through a register checking with

cheques at hand at the time of sudden inspection, he found that some of the

cheques entered into the register were not of that day but several months old.

He also found that the document together with the cheques did not have the

date stamp. He also found that most of the cheques that had not been entered

7

into the register were in respect of a single shipping firm – Sea Consortium Lanka

(Pvt.) Ltd.”

The above version is the gist of the main Article which could give

rise to a cause of action to the Plaintiff. However if that was something the

Minister and the 2nd Defendant observed, then the question is whether the

defences pleaded such as on privileged occasion and published in good faith on

a matter of public interest was justifiable, and a fair comment without any

malice or ill will towards the Plaintiff. It is to be noted that the 2nd Defendant

who gave evidence states there was no ill will or malice towards the Plaintiff but

reported what was observed and detected by the Minister. On the other hand

Plaintiff’s position was that the above news item is false, as payments are made

to the Ports Authority within 2/3 days and a document could be produced to

indicate such payments. Position of the Defendant on this aspect was that no

such document was produced at the trial. In fact it was not produced.

One Mr. Abeywickrema on behalf of the Plaintiff Company gave

evidence, and several pages of evidence had been recorded. This witness testify

that the news item was a false news item. Cheques were promptly presented to

the Port Authority when invoices were sent to the company. Cheques given to

the Ports Authority by the Company were deposited in the Bank within 2/3 days.

Plaintiff Company makes a profit of Rs. 2 million per year. The Plaintiff Company

8

was not privy to the Ministers visit on 19.06.1995. He also stated in evidence

that several of his customers inquired from him after the publication of the news

item as to any fraud was committed wehs tfia jrdhg f.jSu iuSnkaOfhka jxpd

isoq lrkafka lshd. Several letters were also received (Pg. 146) subsequent to the

news item, company had more business.

The 2nd Defendant a journalist as stated above gave evidence for

the Defendants. He accompanied the Minister on an inspection tour. It was the

2nd Defendant who wrote the Article in question. He saw several cheques that

were spread over a table at the Accounts Division and most of the cheques were

not registered in the relevant books, and not credited to the Bank Account.

There was a failure of the Ports Authority Officials to perform their duties

properly and bank the cheques properly. All these facts were revealed at the

visit to the Finance Division and the 2nd Defendant directly participated in this

visit. The Minister found that most of the cheques that were spread on the table

were cheques of the Plaintiff Company.

It was the position of the 2nd Defendant that he should bring the

fact of inefficiency to the notice and knowledge of the general public. This Article

was published to demonstrate the inefficiency, negligence and the remiss in

duties on the part of the officials of the Ports Authority. There is also no evidence

led to show that the Plaintiff Company failed to make payments, on the invoices

9

submitted by the Ports Authority. As such the Plaintiff is not a defaulter. 2nd

Defendant testified that he has no animosity towards the Plaintiff Company and

had not defamed the Plaintiff.

The case consists of several pages of evidence and submissions. The

issue is whether the Article is defamatory of the Plaintiff Company and the

question whether Plaintiff had discharged his burden of proof. In this

background I note the following matters, highlighted by the Defendant party.

(a) There was no other independent evidence led of a witness other than the

Plaintiff, to demonstrate that the reading public understood the Article to

be defamatory of the Plaintiff.

(b) No documentary proof placed before court to establish that the cheques

were promptly banked by the Plaintiff Company, though the only

witnesses for the Plaintiff in his evidence undertook to produce

documentary proof.

(c) Plaintiff failed to call the Ports Authority to prove that the cheques given

by the plaintiffs were promptly presented for payments, and that such

cheques were not kept in the Ports Authority, as reported by the

Defendant.

(d) In the oral testimony of the Plaintiff it was submitted that several of

Plaintiff’s customers inquired from the Plaintiffs witness about a fraud, on

10

reading the Article in question. However none of those customers were

called to support such a view. This is in a way hearsay evidence.

(e) Evidence was placed by the Plaintiff that after the publication of the

Newspaper Article, the Plaintiff Company made profits and the business

was improving for the Plaintiff Company, irrespective of the alleged

defamatory Article. This is indicative of the position that the allegation

had no impact on the Plaintiff Company and its business. In other words

the Plaintiff has not suffered as a result of the alleged defamatory Article.

Plaintiff’s position was that it continued to make a net profit of Rs. 2

million per annum. Plaintiff has not been able to prove that there was an

injury to trading reputation whereas no damages whatsoever had been

proved.

In the above circumstances I cannot accept the views of the learned

High Court Judges and the High Court has erred in holding that the Article refers

to the Plaintiff and the pith and substance of the said Article was that the

Plaintiff used influence or bribed officials at the Ports Authority not to present

the cheques for payment.

I also note that documents P1 to P4 were produced and marked in

evidence. A point had been made that these documents are inadmissible in law

and cannot be acted upon as evidence. More emphasis is on P4, and at the

closure of Plaintiff’s case the documents were not read in evidence. It is the

cursus curiae of the District Court that documents produced and marked

11

through a witness should be read in evidence at the close of the case. This is a

practice adopted from time immemorial and which has developed and

recognised by our courts. Vide Sri Lanka Ports Authority and Another Vs. Jugolina

1981 (1) SLR 18 This practice had been accepted in several decided cases.

Jamaldeen Abdul Lateef Vs. Abdul Majeed Mohomed Mansoor and Anoher

2010(2) SLR 333 SC at 371, 372 and 373. It is observed that P4 was marked

subject to proof. As such the proof of document P4 is in doubt.

The Article was published, no doubt for the benefit of the public

and educate the reader of the state of affairs of an Institution like the Ports

Authority. Public no doubt should be aware of what happened at the Ports

Authority perusal of the Article does not bring about any complication. Nor can

a normal reader pin point any fraud on the part of the Plaintiff Company, but

the Ports Authority has to take the blame. No independent witness supported

Plaintiff’s case. There is no ‘Animus Injuriandi’ on the part of the Defendants.

The existence of Animus Injuriandi is an essential basis of the cause of action. De

Costa Vs. Times of Ceylon (1963) 65 NLR 217 at 224.

The other matter is whether the allegations triggered a shockwave

in the business community. There was no proper evidence placed before court

to prove above. Documents P2, P2A and P3 relied by Plaintiff refer to total

volume handled by x-press container line, performance in the year 1998 and

12

awards received. It is not possible to conclude by these documents of any

calculations to establish damages. Defendants describe it to be self serving

documents. The newspaper Article is certainly not calculated to injure the

business reputations of the Plaintiff Company.

The 1st and 2nd Defendants merely reported facts which arose as a

result of an inspection tour of the relevant Minister of the Ports Authority. It is

justifiable to do so. A case of this nature would require independent evidence.

It is the view of a normal reader of the newspaper that could throw some light

to the Article and call it defamatory. If it is defamatory perse and by innuendo it

need to be proved, independent evidence. It would be necessary. In the case in

hand as stated above no such evidence was placed before court. In all the above

circumstances the questions of law (1) to (5) are answered as ‘Yes’ in favour of

the Defendant-Appellant-Petitioners. In view of the above answers the

questions of law (1) to (3) raised by the Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent does

not arise. I hold that the Judgment of the High Court is contrary to law and

evidence led. Therefore the 1st and 2nd Defendant-Appellant-Petitioners’ appeal

is allowed and are entitled to relief as per sub paragraphs (b) and (c ) of the

13

prayer to the petition. Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent appeal is dismissed

with costs.

Defendant-Appellant-Petitioners’ appeal is allowed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Sisira J. de Abrew

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Upaly Abeyrathne J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT