==== BLOCKS ==== 

SC / CHC / APPEAL / 19 / 2013 HC / Civil / 552 / 2009 / MR

In the matter of an appeal made in terms of

Article 127 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Demuni Cuthbert Kingsley Silva,

No.23, 17th Lane,

(Off College Street),

Kotahena,

Colombo 13.

PLAINTIFF

-Vs-

Shanthalingam Shanthakumar,

No.25/1, 17th Lane,

(Off College Street),

Kotahena,

Colombo 13.

DEFENDANT

SC / APPEAL / 48 / 2014

SC / HCCA / LA / 195 / 2014

WP / HCCA / COL / 65 / 2011 (LA)

DC Colombo: DLM / 174 / 2008

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

SC / APPEAL / 48 / 2014 1

AND THEN BETWEEN

Shanthalingam Shanthakumar,

No.25/1, 17th Lane,

(Off College Street),

Kotahena,

Colombo 13.

DEFENDANT – APPELLANT

-Vs-

Demuni Cuthbert Kingsley Silva,

No.23, 17th Lane,

(Off College Street),

Kotahena,

Colombo 13.

PLAINTIFF – RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

Demuni Cuthbert Kingsley Silva,

No.23, 17th Lane,

(Off College Street),

SC / APPEAL / 48 / 2014 2

Kotahena,

Colombo 13.

PLAINTIFF – RESPONDENT – APPELLANT

(Deceased)

Nalini Krishnajina Silva nee Ruwanpura,

23, 17th Lane,

(Off College Street),

Kotahena,

Colombo 13.

SUBSTITUTED PLAINTIFF –

RESPONDENT – APPELLANT

-Vs-

Shanthalingam Shanthakumar,

25/1, 17th Lane,

(Off College Street),

Kotahena,

Colombo 13.

DEFENDANT – APPELLANT –

RESPONDENT

SC / APPEAL / 48 / 2014 3

Before: S. Thurairaja, PC, J

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J &

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J

Counsel: Romesh De Silva, PC with Saumya Amarasekara, PC for the Substituted –

Plaintiff – Respondent – Appellant.

V. Thevasenathipathy with F. Nissa Faiz for the Defendant –Appellant –

Respondent.

Argued on: 07.11.2024

Decided on: 19.03.2026

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J.

1. The core issues in this case revolve around the question whether the Learned

District Judge of Colombo rightly allowed an issue based on title, which had

been raised only in the replication, and whether the Learned High Court

Judges correctly overturned that decision. The District Judge permitted the

issue on title to proceed despite it being set out in replication rather than in

the original plaint. However, the Civil Appellate High Court Judges took a

different stance, disallowing the issue based on procedural grounds to which I

will advert later.

2. This Court granted leave to appeal on 18 March 2014, in order to evaluate the

aforesaid quintessential questions, formulating the following questions of law

as substantial having regard to the petition of appeal;

SC / APPEAL / 48 / 2014 4

1. When there is no dispute with regard to the dominant land, is

it necessary to plead title in detail to the dominant land in an

action where the dispute is over the servient land?

2. Is it necessary to pray for a declaration of title to the dominant

land when the dispute only relates in respect of the servient

land?

3. Is the Plaintiff entitled to plead title in detail in a replication

where his title to a dominant land is challenged for the first

time in the answer filed by the Defendant?

4. Where a title is pleaded in a replication in order to clarify

rights to an incidental matter to the dispute set out in the

plaint, is the Plaintiff entitled to raise issues on the said

pleadings.

3. This is an action filed by the Plaintiff – Respondent – Appellant (the Plaintiff)

for a declaration of right of way in favour of his land. The plaint recited the

entitlement as follows;

(a) He is legally in possession of the land described in the 1st

Schedule to the plaint;

(b) The Defendant has not disputed the Plaintiff’s possession

to the land described in the 1st Schedule to the plaint or the

title of the Plaintiff’s to the premises described in the 1st

Schedule to the plaint;

SC / APPEAL / 48 / 2014 5

(c) The Plaintiff has acquired prescriptive rights to the land

described in the 1st Schedule and the roadway described in

the 2nd Schedule to the plaint;

(d) The Plaintiff has a right of way over the land described in

the 2nd Schedule to the plaint in order to access his land

described in the 1st Schedule to the plaint;

(e) The Defendant has raised the height of the roadway

described in the 2nd Schedule to the plaint by 52” inches;

(f) By the said action of the Defendant, he has prevented the

Plaintiff's access to his land over the roadway described in

the 2nd Schedule to the plaint;

4. When one looks at this plaint, it is crystal clear that the Plaintiff asserts to be

the holder of a servitude or right of way over a road way which is described in

the 2nd Schedule to the plaint. It has to be noted that the plaint did not set out

a title in the plaint but the Plaintiff was emphatic that he had prescribed to

the roadway and in addition, he was being obstructed in his use and enjoyment

of the roadway by Defendant.

5. The prayer of the Plaintiff was formulated in the following tenor;

(a) For a declaration that the Plaintiff has a right of way over the

roadway described in the 2nd Schedule to the plaint;

(b) For a declaration that the land described in the 2nd Schedule is

a right of way to the land described in the 1st Schedule to the

plaint;

SC / APPEAL / 48 / 2014 6

(c) For order preventing the Defendant from obstructing the road

described in the 2nd Schedule to the plaint;

(d) For a mandatory order directing the Defendant to restore the

roadway described in the 2nd Schedule to the plaint to its original

condition.

6. Thus, it is quite clear that the basis of the plaint for a right of way over the

servient tenement was prescriptive user and obstruction thereof by the

Defendant. He also asserted possession over the dominant tenement but had

not recited his title thereto.

7. The amended answer of the Defendant took up the following positions;

1. That the Defendant was unaware of the Plaintiff’s possession

or the title to the land described in the 1st schedule to the plaint.

In those circumstances the Defendant rejected paragraphs 2

and 3 of the plaint which is related to the land which is

described in the 1st schedule hereto.

2. The Defendant also denied that the Plaintiff had prescriptive

rights to the land described in the 1st Schedule.

8. In his amended answer, the Defendant raised a claim in reconvention based

on an alleged encroachment by the Plaintiff onto the roadway and thereby

sought an order to combine the encroached portion to the road way in dispute.

9. The Defendant thus challenged the Plaintiff’s title to the roadway in dispute

and prayed for a declaration that he was entitled to use the roadway set out in

SC / APPEAL / 48 / 2014 7

the 2nd Schedule to the plaint and for a further declaration that the Plaintiff

had no right over the said roadway.

10. From the foregoing it is clear as daylight that even though the Plaintiff claimed

a right of way over the roadway described in the 2nd Schedule based on his

prescriptive user, the Defendant sought a declaration that the Plaintiff had no

right whatsoever over the roadway. The rival pleadings thus exhibited

elements of actio confessoria and actio negatoria on the part of the Plaintiff and

the Defendant respectively.

11. It is a salient fact that there is no contest raised or an adverse title pleaded

against the Plaintiff in respect of his dominant tenement. The gravamen of the

complaint of the Defendant is that the Plaintiff had not pleaded his title to the

dominant tenement in the plaint.

12. The claim in reconvention comprised two distinct components. First, the

Defendant alleged encroachment by the Plaintiff upon his land; secondly, he

sought damages consequent upon such alleged encroachment. In addition, the

Defendant prayed for a declaration that he was entitled to the portion said to

have been encroached upon.

13. In answer to the claim in reconvention, as embodied in the amended answer,

the Plaintiff filed a replication. In that replication, the Plaintiff set out more

fully his title to the dominant tenement and, correspondingly, the basis upon

which he asserted rights over the servient tenement.

14. It is significant that the Defendant raised no objection to the replication setting

out the Plaintiff’s title to the lands described in the 1st and 2nd Schedules. When

the matter proceeded to trial, the Plaintiff invited the Court to frame issue No.

28 as follows:

SC / APPEAL / 48 / 2014 8

Is the Plaintiff the title holder or the owner of the land depicted in

the 1st Schedule as described in the replication. The Defendant

objected to the aforesaid issue raised by the Plaintiff and the

learned District Judge by his order dated 13 October 2011

overruled the objections and proceeded to permit issue No.28 and

have the trial continued.

15. The learned District Judge came to the finding that the dispute between the

parties is not an action for a declaration of title to the land but in respect of a

right of way and the question before court was not whether the Plaintiff had

title to the dominant tenement but whether the Plaintiff was entitled to a right

of way over the Defendant’s land.

16. Aggrieved by the order, the Defendant appealed to the Civil Appellate High

Court but the High Court took the view that the learned District Judge had

erred in law when he allowed issue No.28. It is against this judgement of the

High Court of Colombo pronounced on 5 April 2013, the Plaintiff appealed to

the Supreme Court.

17. In his submissions before this court the learned counsel for the Defendant Mr.

V. Thevasenathipathy contended that the aforesaid issue could not be raised

by the Plaintiff as it was a fact which should have been pleaded in the plaint.

He argued that the title of the Plaintiff to the dominant tenement would have

to be set out clearly in the plaint by way of a clear chain of title with numbers

of relevant deeds and the Plaintiff grievously failed as he presented a plaint

which was devoid of the material particulars.

18. Mr. Romesh De Silva the learned President’s Counsel argued that issues would

not be confined to the pleadings and it is axiomatic that it could arise even

outside the pleadings – see the judgement of the Privy Council in Bank of

SC / APPEAL / 48 / 2014 9

Ceylon v. Chelliahpillai1. In fact, it is apposite to recall the principle laid

down by the Privy Council in this case to the effect that “a case must be tried

upon the issues on which the right decision of the case appears to the court to

depend” – See comparable dicta to this effect in Franklin Fernando v.

Analectus Fernando and Others2.

19. As I said before, the Plaintiff’s action is classified as actio confessoria, whilst

the Defendant sued for its counterpart actio negatoria.

20. In a nutshell, “the great type of real action was the vindicatio for the recovery of

specific property, as the condictio was the type of personal action. For servitudes

the appropriate actions were the actio confessoria, claiming a servitude; the

actio negatoria, denying a servitude”.3

21. Hall and Kellaway on “Servitudes” delineate “actio confessoria” and “actio

negatoria” thus;

“The actions recognized by Roman Dutch Law were the actio confessoria

and the actio negatoria or contraria, the former being an action to enforce

a servitude, and the latter to declare a property free from a servitude.”4

22. Wille alluded to actio confessoria in the following tenor:

“The holder of a servitude may approach a court for a declaration of

rights if his or her rights under the servitude are threatened or have been

infringed.”

1 64 N.L.R. 25 at p 27.

2 (2015) 1 Sri.L.R. at p 9. 3 See R.W Leage “Roman Private Law Founded on the Institutes of Gaius and Justinian (1906) – Kissinger Legacy Reprints at p 383. 4 C.G.Hall & E.A.Kellaway Servitudes p.139.

SC / APPEAL / 48 / 2014 10

23. The learned authors described actio negatoria thus;

“The actio negatoria, an action in rem, is available to the owner

of property to restrict any physical disturbance of land”.

24. So much for the common law. Turning to Judicial precedents they are galore –

see J.A.N. de Silva, J (as he then was) in Saparamadu v Melder5;

Karunadasa v. Jinadasa Subasinghe6; Fernando v Wickremasinghe7;

for a discussion on the distinction between the two actiones and the previous

precedents – see Gertrude Tressila and Another v Rukmali

Hathurusinghe.8

25. The forgoing discussion while bringing out the distinction between the two

actions also brings into sharp focus the following.

26. Where the actio negatoria is the bulwark of ownership, enabling the dominus

to repel unwarranted claims and vindicate the plenitude of his title, the actio

confessoria stands as the proper remedy of the servitude-holder. It enables

the claimant to affirm and enforce the existence of the servitude, not by

disputing the ownership of the servient tenement, but by asserting a limited

real right carved out of that ownership.

27. Thus, when the exercise of a servitude is obstructed, the holder may institute

the actio confessoria to secure recognition of the right and to prevent

interference with its lawful enjoyment. Unlike the actio negatoria, which

proclaims freedom from encumbrance, the actio confessoria affirms

entitlement to a defined use — whether it be a right of way, a right to draw

5 (2004) 3 Sri.L.R.148. 6 CA 1172 / 98 (F) Decided on 16.06.2014. 7 (1998) 3 Sri.L.R. 37. 8 SC Appeal 221 / 2016 Decided on 22.08.2024.

SC / APPEAL / 48 / 2014 11

water, or some other specified utility — and thereby preserves the integrity of

the limited real right.

28. The actio confessoria presupposes that the claimant is the holder of a servitude,

whereas the actio negatoria is the appropriate remedy of an owner asserting

the plenitude of his proprietary rights. In the present case, the Plaintiff

invokes the former remedy. It therefore becomes incumbent upon him to

establish, as a fact in issue, the manner in which he became vested with the

servitude which he asserts in his plaint.

29. As earlier adverted to, the Plaintiff traces his entitlement to the servitude to

the deed by which he acquired title to the dominant tenement. It is true that

this particular articulation emerged more fully in the replication than in the

original plaint. However, the amended answer filed by the Defendant alleges

encroachment upon his land. In that context, it cannot be said to offend the

rules of pleadings for the Plaintiff to respond that his acts were confined within

the limits of his own land. For that purpose, the pleading of his title in the

replication becomes both relevant and material.

30. In the replication, the Plaintiff sets out the provenance of the servitude and

the manner of its acquisition. While the plaint originally relied upon

prescription as a mode of acquisition, the replication clarifies that the

servitude was also created by notarial grant appurtenant to the dominant

tenement. The learned District Judge, in my view, cannot be faulted for

framing an issue with reference to the Plaintiff’s title to the dominant

tenement, for it is by virtue of that title that the servitude—if proved—would

arise. The ownership of the dominant tenement is not asserted as an

independent cause of action, but as the juridical foundation upon which the

servitude rests.

SC / APPEAL / 48 / 2014 12

31. Ultimately, what is before this Court is the Plaintiff’s claim to a servitude and

the Defendant’s denial thereof. It is this assertion of a limited real right,

coupled with its repudiation, that furnishes the cause of action.

A servitude may be acquired either by express grant or by prescription.

32. In the first instance, a servitude over land may be created by deed. Section 2

of the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance mandates notarial execution in respect

of the creation of any “interest or encumbrance affecting land,” and a

servitude—being a limited real right burdening the servient tenement—

plainly falls within that statutory requirement. Accordingly, where a servitude

is constituted by agreement, its validity depends upon compliance with the

formalities prescribed by the Ordinance.

33. Apart from express grant, a servitude may also be acquired by prescription.

The Prescription Ordinance governs this mode of acquisition. A claimant must

establish uninterrupted and undisturbed enjoyment of the servitude, as of

right, for a period of ten years or more. Mere temporary inability to exercise

the right, occasioned by natural causes such as floods or other vis major, does

not amount to legal interruption. This principle was recognised in Perera v.

Gunatilleke9, where the Court held that such involuntary suspensions do not

defeat the continuity required for prescriptive acquisition.

34. Thus, whether by formal notarial grant or by long and uninterrupted user

maturing into a legal right, the law recognizes distinct juridical pathways

through which a servitude may come into existence.

35. The Plaintiff has presented this case before Court and it has to be resolved on

the rival claims.

9 4 N.L.R. 181

SC / APPEAL / 48 / 2014 13

36. In any event, the issue sought to be raised does not suffer from any legal

impediment for another striking reason. The deeds that bestow ownership of

the dominant tenement on the Plaintiff have been listed in the list of witnesses

and documents. These deeds appear to invest the Plaintiff with the grant of a

servitude, and as such, the Plaintiff could raise his issue having due regard to

the documents listed in the list of witnesses and documents. Section 146 of the

Civil Procedure Code (the operative provision when the issue on ownership of

the land was sought to be raised) permitted issues to be framed on documents.

Therefore, issue No.28 must be permitted to be raised and thus, the learned

District Judge was quite right in allowing that issue to be raised. It is the Civil

Appellant High Court that fell into an error. In the circumstances, I set aside

the judgment of the Civil Appellate High Court dated 05.04.2013 and affirm

the order of the District Court dated 13.10.2011.

37. All questions of law touching upon the raising of the issue are answered in

favor of the Plaintiff.

38. The appeal of the Plaintiff – Respondent – Appellant is allowed and the case is

remanded to the District Court of Colombo to permit issue No.28 to be raised

and the trial to be proceeded with ensuring an expeditious conclusion of the

trial.

Judge of the Supreme Court

S. Thurairaja, PC, J.

I agree Judge of the Supreme Court

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

I agree Judge of the Supreme Court