==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Bandukula Arachchige Anura

Kumara Silva,

No. 211/60,

Old Kottawa Road,

Mirihana.

Defendant-Petitioner-Appellant-

Appellant

SC/APPEAL/194/2018

WP/HCCA/MT/07/14

DC NUGEGODA L/389/11

Vs.

1. Hettiarachchige Don Rejinorld

Upali Gunathilake,

No. 465/5,

Ganahena,

Battaramulla.

Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent-

Respondent

2. Hettiarachchige Don Damien

Prience Roach Gunatilleke,

No. 465/5,

Ganahena,

Battaramulla.

Respondent-Respondent-

Respondent

Before: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J.

Menaka Wijesundera J.

2

SC/APPEAL/194/2018

Counsel: Maura Gunawansha, P.C., with Yashodi Wijayasekara and

Senuri Mudannayake for the Defendant-Petitioner-

Appellant-Appellant.

Athula Bandara Herath with Ms. Chamodi Sandunika for

the Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent-Respondent.

Chathusala Jayasinghe for the Respondent-Respondent-

Respondent.

Argued on: 13.02.2026

Decided on: 17.03.2026

Samayawardhena, J.

Introduction

The plaintiff instituted this action in the District Court of Nugegoda

seeking a declaration of title to the land in suit, ejectment of the

defendant therefrom, and damages. The plaintiff relied on the deed of

transfer annexed to the plaint marked P6 to prove his title to the land,

which had been executed by the alleged power of attorney holder of the

real owner. The power of attorney was produced marked P7. It is not in

dispute that the real owner died one week after the execution of deed P6.

The defendant, in his answer, pleaded that the real owner had, by a last

will allegedly executed one day prior to his death, bequeathed the said

property together with other properties to him. He further averred that

P6 and P7 are fraudulent documents prepared in collusion among the

plaintiff, the notary, and the power of attorney holder. While seeking

dismissal of the plaintiff’s action, the defendant also made a claim in

reconvention praying for declarations that P6 and P7 are null and void,

not being acts and deeds of the deceased.

Thereafter, the defendant moved the District Court in terms of section

18 of the Civil Procedure Code to add the power of attorney holder and

the notary as parties to the action. The plaintiff, the power of attorney

3

SC/APPEAL/194/2018

holder, and the notary filed objections to that application. The learned

District Judge refused the application, and on appeal, the High Court

affirmed that order. The present appeal with leave obtained is against the

judgment of the High Court. This Court granted leave to appeal on the

following two questions of law:

(a) Did the High Court err in law in failing to apply the wider

construction attributed to section 18 of the Civil Procedure Code?

(b) Did the High Court fail to consider that, in view of the allegations

of fraud and collusion against the power of attorney holder and the

notary, the defendant could not effectively set up his defence or

maintain his claim in reconvention, nor enable the Court

effectually and completely to adjudicate upon and settle all the

questions involved in the action, without adding them as parties?

Subsequent to the grant of leave, the notary passed away. Accordingly,

the issue left for determination is whether the application to add the

power of attorney holder as a party ought to have been allowed.

Order of the District Court and the High Court

Although the application before the District Court was to add both the

power of attorney holder and the notary as parties, the learned District

Judge, in his order, considered only the application insofar as it related

to the addition of the notary and failed altogether to address the

application to add the power of attorney holder. Therefore, there is a

fundamental omission that amounts to an error on the face of the order

of the District Court.

The High Court affirmed the refusal to add the parties, predominantly on

the basis that in a rei vindicatio action such as the present, the initial

burden rests on the plaintiff to establish his title, particularly in

circumstances where the defendant has challenged the validity of deed

P6. The High Court took the view that there was no necessity to add the

4

SC/APPEAL/194/2018

power of attorney holder and the notary as parties, as they would, in any

event, be necessary witnesses for the plaintiff to succeed in the action.

Argument before the Supreme Court

At the hearing before this Court, we explored the possibility of arriving

at a consensus, inasmuch as the present appeal arises from an

interlocutory order made even prior to the pre-trial stage. Learned

President’s Counsel for the defendant submitted that he would not press

the application to add the power of attorney holder as a party, provided

he is permitted to raise issues on the cross-claim set out in the answer

against the power of attorney holder and there is a guarantee that the

power of attorney holder would be called as a witness for the plaintiff at

the trial.

It is to be noted that the plaintiff and the power of attorney holder are

represented by the same counsel. In response, learned counsel stated

that he is unable to give an undertaking that the power of attorney holder

would be called as a witness at the trial, but that he would not object to

the framing of issues in respect of the cross-claim contained in

paragraph 8 of the answer. Paragraph 8 of the answer reads as follows:

ඉහත තත්වයන් යටතත් තෙෙ විත්ිකරු කියා සිටින්තන් පැමිණිල්ල සෙඟ “පැ6” තලස

සලකුණු තකාට ඇි ආර්.සී.බී. ත ෝෂෆ් ත ාතාරිස් විසින් 2011.09.16 දි ලියා

සහික කල බවට උද්තද්ශිත තලස කියා පාණු ලබ අංක 2139 දර තල්ඛ ය

කිසිදු ප්‍රිෂ්ඨාවක් ත ාසැපයූ එකී මිය ගිය අයතේ කාර්යක් තහෝ ක්‍රියාවක් ත ාව කූඨ

හා වංචනික තලස සකස් කරගනු ලැබූ තල්ඛ යක් ව බවත් එකී කූඨ හා වංචනික

ඔප්පුව සකස් කර ගැනීෙට මිය ගිය අයතේ උද්තද්ශිත ඇටර්නි බලකරු තලස තපනී

සිටිමින් ඉහත කී තහට්ටටිආරච්චිතේ ත ාන් තේමියන් ප්‍රින්ස් තරාජ් ගුණිලක සකස්

කරතග ඇි ප්‍රසිද්ධ ත ාතාරිස් ඩී.ජී.පී. කරුණාරත් ෙැි අය 2004.04.20 දි

ලියා සහික කල බවට දැක්තව උද්තද්ශිත “පැ7” තලස සලකුණු කර ලද ඇටර්නි

බලපත්‍රයද එකී මිය ගිය අයතේ කාර්යක් තහෝ ක්‍රියාවක් ත ාව ශූ ය හා බලරහිත

තල්ඛ යක් බවට ප්‍රකාශයක් ලබා ගැනීෙට ඉහත පැමිණිලිකරුට ද එකී

තහට්ටටිආරච්චිතේ ත ාන් තේමියන් ප්‍රින්ස් තරාජ් ගුණිලක ය අයට හා ඉහත කී

5

SC/APPEAL/194/2018

ආර්.සී.බී. ත ෝෂෆ් ෙැි අයට එතරහිව තෙෙ ඩුතේදීෙ හරස් ඉල්ීෙක් ඉදිරිපත්

කිරීෙ උතදසා ඩු නිමිත්තක් ඉහත විත්ිකරු තවත උපචය වී ඇි බවත්ය.

Paragraph 8 of the answer contains two distinct cross-claims. The first

is founded on a cause of action alleged to have accrued to the defendant

against the notary in respect of deed P6. That aspect is no longer a live

issue in view of the subsequent death of the notary. The second cross-

claim is founded on a cause of action alleged to have accrued to the

defendant against the power of attorney holder in respect of the power of

attorney P7, the defendant asserting that it is a nullity, not being an act

and deed of the deceased, but a fraudulent document.

If an issue based on that pleading is permitted to be framed in respect of

the validity of P7, the question arises whether, after trial, the Court could

determine such issue against the power of attorney holder without him

being made a party and without affording him an opportunity to be

heard. The answer must necessarily be in the negative. A Court cannot

make a determination adverse to a person who is not a party to the case,

or at least without affording such person an opportunity of being heard,

even if he is not a party, as this would violate the fundamental principle

of natural justice, audi alteram partem. Learned counsel for the plaintiff

does not state that the power of attorney holder will be summoned as a

witness for the plaintiff, and learned President’s Counsel for the

defendant states that he cannot call the power of attorney holder as an

adverse witness.

Accordingly, if that issue is to be allowed, the power of attorney holder

would be a necessary party to the action.

Cross-claim and alternative claim

A cross-claim is not a mere defensive plea but a substantive assertion of

rights. In terms of section 75(e) of the Civil Procedure Code, “a claim in

reconvention duly set up in the answer shall have the same effect as a

6

SC/APPEAL/194/2018

plaint in a cross action so as to enable the Court to pronounce a final

judgment in the same action both on the original and on the cross claim.”

In addition to the cross-claim set out in paragraph 8 of the answer, the

defendant has pleaded an alternative claim in paragraph 9, which reads

as follows:

ඉහත විත්ිකරු තවදුරටත් කියා සිටින්තන් එකී “පැ7” තලස සලකුණු කර ලද අංක

533 දරණ උද්තද්ශිත ඇටර්නි බලපත්‍රය වලංගු තල්ඛ යක් තලස උපකල්ප ය කල

ද එකී උද්තද්ශිත ඇටර්නි බලපත්‍රය පද ම් කරතග මිය ගිය අයතේ තද්පළ පවරා

දීෙට නීිෙය හැකියාවක් හා/තහෝ ශක්නුතාවයක් එකී තහට්ටටිආරච්චිතේ ත ාන්

තේමියන් ගුණිලක ය අයට ත ාිබූ තහෝ ත ාපැවි බවට ප්‍රකාශයක් ඉහත හරස්

ඉල්ීෙට විකල්පව තෙෙ ඩුතේදීෙ ලබා ගැනීෙ උතදසා විකල්ප තලස ඩු නිමිත්තක්

ඉහත විත්ිකරු තවත උපචය වී ඇි බවත්ය.

It is apparent that the cross-claim and the alternative claim are mutually

contradictory.

Although the law may permit alternative pleadings in appropriate

circumstances, a defendant ought not to be permitted to advance

alternative claims that is fundamentally inconsistent with each other. To

allow such a course would be to permit a party to approbate and

reprobate within the same pleading, which the law does not

countenance. It would also cause prejudice to the opposite party and

cause confusion in the orderly conduct of proceedings. Judges of original

Courts ought not to permit the framing of issues founded on such

mutually contradictory positions. A party to an action must elect one of

the two alternatives, but not both.

As Sharvananda C.J. stated in the oft-cited case of Ranasinghe v.

Premadharma [1985] 1 Sri LR 63 at 70:

The rationale of the above principle appears to be that a defendant

cannot approbate and reprobate. In cases where the doctrine of

approbation and reprobation applies, the person concerned has a

choice of two rights, either of which he is at liberty to adopt, but not

7

SC/APPEAL/194/2018

both. Where the doctrine does apply, if the person to whom the

choice belongs irrevocably and with full knowledge accepts the one

he cannot afterwards assert the other; he cannot affirm and

disaffirm. Hence a defendant who denies tenancy cannot

consistently claim the benefit of the tenancy which the Rent Act

provides.

In Sudarshani v. Somawathi (SC/APPEAL/173/2011, SC Minutes of

06.04.2017), Prasanna Jayawardena J. stated that “where a plaintiff who

has executed a deed transferring a land to a defendant, prays for a

declaration that the defendant holds the land in Trust for the benefit of the

plaintiff, that plaintiff cannot, at the same time, also ask for a declaration

that the same deed is null and void on the ground of laesio enormis.”

Constructive trust and laesio enormis rest on mutually inconsistent legal

principles and cannot in law be maintained together.

It follows that the alternative claim pleaded in paragraph 9 of the answer

cannot stand.

Section 18 of the Civil Procedure Code

Although the law relating to the addition of parties is well settled, this

issue continues to arise before District Courts. It is possible that the

decision in The Chartered Bank v. L.N. De Silva (1964) 67 NLR 135 has

contributed to some confusion when contrasted with the wider scope and

object of section 18 of the Civil Procedure Code. In that case, Sri Skanda

Raja J. and Alles J. held that “A person who is no more than an important

witness in a case is not liable to be added as a party under section 18(1)

of the Civil Procedure Code on the pretext that his presence is necessary

in order to enable the court effectually and completely to adjudicate upon

all the questions involved in the action.”

Section 18 of the Civil Procedure Code provides for the deletion, addition

and alteration of parties.

8

SC/APPEAL/194/2018

Prior to the amendment introduced by Act No. 29 of 2023, section 18(1)

permitted applications for the deletion of parties to be made “on or before

the hearing”. By Act No. 29 of 2023, that temporal limit was curtailed to

read “on or before the day first fixed for the pre-trial conference”.

Following the amendment introduced by Act No. 29 of 2023, section 18(1)

reads as follows:

18(1) The court may, on or before the day first fixed for the pre-trial

conference, upon the application of either party and on such terms

as the court thinks just, order that the name of any party, whether

as plaintiff or as defendant, improperly joined, be struck out; and

the court may at any time, either upon or without such application

and on such terms as the court thinks just, order that any plaintiff

be made a defendant, or that any defendant be made a plaintiff,

and that the name of any person who ought to have been joined,

whether as plaintiff or defendant, or whose presence before the

court may be necessary in order to enable the court effectually and

completely to adjudicate upon and settle all the questions involved

in the action, be added.

Applications under section 18(1) may broadly be considered in two

stages:

(a) applications made on or before the day first fixed for the pre-trial

conference; and

(b) applications made at any time of the action.

Before the day first fixed for the pre-trial conference, the Court may,

upon an application made by either party, but not on its own motion,

strike out the name of any party who has been improperly joined.

The Court may, at any time, either upon an application of either party or

on its own motion, order the transposition of parties or the addition of

parties.

9

SC/APPEAL/194/2018

In relation to the addition of parties, section 18(1) contemplates two

distinct categories of persons. In the language of the section itself:

(a) “the name of any person who ought to have been joined, whether

as plaintiff or defendant”; and

(b) “whose presence before the court may be necessary in order to

enable the court effectually and completely to adjudicate upon and

settle all the questions involved in the action.”

A party to an action is a person formally joined to the action as plaintiff

or defendant. A party may either be a necessary party or a proper party.

Persons falling within category (a) above are necessary parties. A

necessary party is a person against whom relief is sought, whether

directly or indirectly, in the prayer to the pleadings or by way of issues,

or a person without whose presence no effective adjudication of the

matter is possible.

Persons falling within category (b) above are proper parties. A proper

party, on the other hand, is a person against whom no relief is claimed

but whose presence before Court is necessary to enable it to effectually

and completely adjudicate upon and settle all the questions involved in

the action.

When section 18(1) is read in isolation, both categories of persons appear

to be amenable to addition as parties at any stage of the action. However,

that position does not hold when section 18(1) is read in conjunction

with, inter alia, sections 21, 22 and 93(2) of the Civil Procedure Code.

The addition, deletion or transposition of parties almost invariably

necessitates an amendment to the pleadings. Section 21 of the Civil

Procedure Code expressly provides that where a defendant is added, the

plaint shall, unless the Court directs otherwise, be amended accordingly

and served on the new defendant as well as on the original defendants.

10

SC/APPEAL/194/2018

Section 22 provides that all objections for want of parties, for the joinder

of parties who have no interest in the action, or for misjoinder as co-

plaintiffs or co-defendants, shall be taken at the earliest possible

opportunity and, in any event, before the day first fixed for the pre-trial

conference. Any such objection not so taken shall be deemed to have

been waived by the defendant. Thus, although it is desirable that such

objections be taken at the earliest possible opportunity after summons

is received, the outer limit prescribed by the statute is the day first fixed

for the pre-trial conference. Within that period such objections may

properly be taken. An objection for want of parties bears a direct

relationship to the addition of parties. This, in turn, indicates that the

addition of parties ought ordinarily to be made before the pre-trial

conference.

Following the amendments introduced by Act No. 9 of 1991 and Act No.

29 of 2023, section 93(2) expressly prohibits amendments to pleadings

after the day first fixed for the pre-trial conference unless the Court is

satisfied, for reasons to be recorded, that grave and irremediable

injustice would result if the amendment is refused and that the applicant

has not been guilty of laches. Both requirements must be satisfied before

such an amendment can be permitted, and the Court is not entitled to

take any other consideration into account in making that determination.

Section 93(2) reads as follows:

On or after the day first fixed for pre-trial conference of the action

and before final judgment, no application for the amendment of any

pleadings shall be allowed unless the Court is satisfied, for reasons

to be recorded by the Court, that grave and irremediable injustice

will be caused if such amendment is not permitted, and on no other

ground, and that the party so applying has not been guilty of laches.

Apparent conflicts within a statute must be resolved by adopting a

harmonious construction, a well-recognised principle of statutory

interpretation. The doctrine of harmonious construction rests on the

11

SC/APPEAL/194/2018

premise that every provision of a statute is enacted with a definite

purpose and should therefore be interpreted so as to give effect to all

provisions as part of a cohesive whole.

Accordingly, although section 18(1), when read in isolation, appears to

permit the addition of parties at any stage of the action, a harmonious

reading of sections 18(1), 21, 22 and 93(2) makes it clear that such

addition cannot be permitted on or after the day first fixed for the pre-

trial conference unless it is established to the satisfaction of the Court

that grave and irremediable injustice will be caused if such addition is

not permitted and that the party so applying has not been guilty of

laches.

Joinder, misjoinder and non-joinder of parties

Section 11 of the Civil Procedure Code permits all persons to be joined

as plaintiffs in whom the right to any relief is alleged to exist, whether

jointly, severally, or in the alternative, in respect of the same cause of

action. Judgment may be entered in favour of such plaintiff or plaintiffs

as are found entitled to relief, without amendment of the plaint.

Section 14, in turn, governs the joinder of defendants. It provides that

all persons may be joined as defendants against whom the right to any

relief is alleged to exist, whether jointly, severally, or in the alternative,

in respect of the same cause of action. Judgment may be entered against

such defendant or defendants as are found liable according to their

respective liabilities, without amendment.

Section 5 of the Code defines the cause of action as the wrong for the

prevention or redress of which an action may be brought.

It is important to bear in mind that misjoinder or non-joinder of parties

does not, per se, defeat an action. The Court is required to adjudicate

upon and determine the rights of the parties who are actually before it.

A judgment binds only the parties to the action and their privies, and not

12

SC/APPEAL/194/2018

the world at large, unless the proceeding is one in rem, such as a partition

action.

Section 17 of the Civil Procedure Code provides:

17. No action shall be defeated by reason of the misjoinder or non-

joinder of parties, and the court may in every action deal with the

matter in controversy so far as regards the rights and interests of

the parties actually before it.

Nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to enable plaintiffs to join

in respect of distinct causes of action.

If the consent of anyone who ought to be joined as a plaintiff cannot

be obtained, he may be made a defendant, the reasons therefore

being stated in the plaint.

The foregoing provision must be understood subject to sections 33 to 38

of the Civil Procedure Code, which fall under Chapter VI. The cumulative

effect of those sections is to ensure that parties place before Court their

entire claim arising from a cause of action so as to prevent further

litigation concerning the same subject matter. However, that objective

shall not be pursued in a manner that causes prejudice to the opposite

party. The indiscriminate combination of distinct and unrelated causes

of action, even as between the same parties, may unnecessarily

complicate the trial.

33. Every regular action shall, as far as practicable be so framed as

to afford ground for a final decision upon the subjects in dispute so

to prevent further litigation concerning them.

34(1) Every action shall include the whole of the claim which the

plaintiff is entitled to make in respect of the cause of action; but a

plaintiff may relinquish any portion of his claim in order to bring the

action within the jurisdiction of any court.

13

SC/APPEAL/194/2018

(2) If a plaintiff omits to sue in respect of, or intentionally

relinquishes any portion of, his claim, he shall not afterwards sue

in respect of the portion so omitted or relinquished. A person entitled

to more than one remedy in respect of the same cause of action may

sue for all or any of his remedies; but if he omits (except with the

leave of the court obtained before the hearing) to sue for any of such

remedies, he shall not afterwards sue for the remedy so omitted.

(3) For the purpose of this section, an obligation and a collateral

security for its performance shall be deemed to constitute but one

cause of action.

According to section 35(1), in an action for the recovery of immovable

property or for a declaration of title thereto, no other claim or cause of

action may be joined except those expressly permitted, namely claims for

mesne profits or arrears of rent, damages arising from breach of a

contract relating to the property or from the trespass constituting the

cause of action, and claims by a mortgagee to enforce his remedies under

the mortgage. Any other claim may be joined only with the leave of court.

Section 36(1) permits a plaintiff to unite several causes of action against

the same defendant or defendants in one action, and similarly allows

plaintiffs jointly interested in causes of action against the same

defendant or defendants to combine them in a single action. However, if

the Court considers that such causes of action cannot be conveniently

tried together, it may order separate trials or make other appropriate

orders for their separate disposal.

Section 37 is to similar effect. It enables a defendant, who alleges that

the plaintiff has improperly united causes of action that cannot

conveniently be disposed of in one action, to apply before the hearing for

an order confining the action to such causes as may properly be tried

together.

14

SC/APPEAL/194/2018

While section 36 recognises the plaintiff’s right to unite several causes of

action against the same defendant, it simultaneously preserves the

Court’s control over the conduct of proceedings. Section 38(1) further

supplements that control by empowering the Court, in an appropriate

case, to exclude any such cause of action altogether and to direct the

amendment of the plaint where joinder would render the disposal of the

action inconvenient.

Taken together, these provisions underscore the policy of the Civil

Procedure Code of avoiding multiplicity of actions. However, in

furtherance of that objective, the Court shall not encourage misjoinder

of parties or causes of action, nor convert proceedings into unwieldy and

unmanageable litigation by the indiscriminate addition of parties. The

discretion vested in Court under section 18 shall therefore be exercised

cautiously and in accordance with the settled principles of law.

Wider construction

The English authorities discussed below arose under Order XVI, Rule 11

of the Rules of the Supreme Court made pursuant to the Judicature Acts

of England. The language of that Rule is materially similar to the

provision in section 18(1) of our Civil Procedure Code which empowers

the Court to add a person whose presence before the Court may be

necessary in order to enable it effectually and completely to adjudicate

upon and settle all the questions involved in the action. For that reason,

our Courts have frequently relied upon those English decisions as

persuasive authority when interpreting section 18. Order XVI, Rule 11

provided as follows:

No cause or matter shall be defeated by reason of the misjoinder or

nonjoinder of parties, and the court may in every cause or matter

deal with the matter in controversy so far as regards the rights and

interests of the parties actually before it. The court or a judge may,

at any stage of the proceedings, either upon or without the

application of either party, and on such terms as may appear to the

15

SC/APPEAL/194/2018

court or a judge to be just, order that the names of any parties

improperly joined, whether as plaintiffs or defendants, be struck

out, and that the names of any parties, whether plaintiffs or

defendants, who ought to have been joined, or whose presence

before the court may be necessary in order to enable the court

effectually and completely to adjudicate upon and settle all the

questions involved in the cause or matter, be added. No person shall

be added as a plaintiff suing without a next friend, or as the next

friend of a plaintiff under any disability, without his own consent in

writing thereto. Every party whose name is so added as defendant

shall be served with a writ of summons or notice in manner

hereinafter mentioned, or in such manner as may be prescribed by

any special order, and the proceedings as against such party shall

be deemed to have begun only on the service of such writ or notice.

In construing that provision, two competing approaches emerged in the

English Courts, namely, a narrow construction and a wider construction.

In Norris v. Beazley (1877) 2 C.P.D. 80 at 84, Lord Coleridge C.J., with

whom Denman J. and Grove J. agreed, adopted the narrower

construction and stated:

[T]he defendant to be added must be a defendant against whom the

plaintiff has some cause of complaint, which ought to be determined

in the action, and that it was never intended to apply where the

person to be added as defendant is a person against whom the

plaintiff has no claim and does not desire to prosecute any. It seems

to me that this application is answered, and that it was not intended

that persons in the position of this company should be added as

defendants, merely for the convenience of another defendant

between whom and the company there may be questions which will

afterwards have to be settled. It seems to me that it is the more

important to construe this rule strictly, because it is obvious that in

many cases, if the defendant’s contention is right, its provisions

16

SC/APPEAL/194/2018

might be made use of in a manner exceedingly harassing to

plaintiffs, by forcing them to include in their actions persons against

whom they do not seek to proceed, and to mix up their rights as

against one person, with questions of a highly complicated nature

arising between themselves and others.

In contrast, in Byrne v. Brown and Diplock (1889) 22 Q.B.D. 657 at 666,

Lord Esher M.R., delivering the judgment of the Court of Appeal, adopted

a wider construction and observed:

One of the chief objects of the Judicature Act was to secure that,

whenever a Court can see in the transaction brought before it that

the rights of one of the parties will or may be so affected that under

the forms of law other actions may be brought in respect of that

transaction, the Court shall have power to bring all the parties before

it, and determine the rights of all in one proceeding. It is not

necessary that the evidence in the issues raised by the new parties

being brought in should be exactly the same; it is sufficient if the

main evidence, and the main inquiry will be the same, and the Court

then has power to bring in the new parties, and to adjudicate in one

proceeding upon the rights of all the parties before it. Another great

object was to diminish the cost of litigation. That being so, the Court

ought to give the largest construction to those Acts in order to carry

out as far as possible the two objects I have mentioned.

In the decision of the Court of Appeal in Moser v. Marsden [1892] 1 Ch.

487, Lindley L.J. with whose judgment Kay L.J. concurred, decided in

favour of narrower construction of the Rule.

However, in Montgomery v. Foy, Morgan & Co. [1895] 2 Q.B. 321, Lord

Esher M.R. reaffirmed the wider approach articulated in Byrne v. Brown

and Diplock. In the course of the judgment, he referred to Norris v.

Beazley and stated at page 325:

17

SC/APPEAL/194/2018

With regard to the case of Norris v. Beasley, it is to be observed that

it was decided at an early stage of the decisions with regard to the

meaning of the Judicature Acts, and, though I do not say that the

actual decision was wrong, I do not think that all the statements

made in the judgments could now be supported.

After analysing the Rule and the earlier authorities in considerable detail,

Devlin J., in Amon v. Raphael Tuck & Sons Ltd. [1956] 1 All ER 273 at

290, clarified that if a plaintiff could show that he could not obtain

effectual and complete relief unless the new party was joined, or if a

defendant could show that he could not effectually set up a defence

which he desired to advance unless the new party was joined, then the

addition should be allowed. He observed:

It must not be supposed that the test which I have employed can be

applied to every sort of application under the rule, and I am not

attempting to lay down, or holding that the authorities lay down, a

test of universal efficacy. A plaintiff may in the first instance join as

a defendant any person “against whom the right to any relief is

alleged to exist” (Ord. 16, r.4). If, after he has issued his writ, he

wants to join another defendant, no doubt he will have to proceed

under r.11, but he will not have to show that the new defendant will

be directly affected by an order in the action as it is then constituted:

what he generally shows is that he cannot get effectually and

completely the relief for which he asks unless the new defendant is

joined, and that, in that sense, the new defendant is a necessary

party to the action. Likewise, a defendant who seeks to join another

defendant does not inevitably have to show that the new defendant

will be directly affected by an order in the action as it is constituted.

He may succeed if he can show that he cannot effectually set up a

defence which he desires to set up unless the new defendant is

joined, or unless the order made binds the new defendant. It is not

that the construction of the rule differs according to circumstances.

The construction of the rule is, and must be, the same in all

18

SC/APPEAL/194/2018

circumstances; but the test that is appropriate to determine whether

a party is necessary may vary according to the circumstances.

Thus, the governing principle remained whether the presence of the

proposed party was necessary to enable the Court to effectually and

completely adjudicate upon and settle the questions involved in the

action.

However, Devlin J. narrowed the wider interpretation in two respects.

First, he analysed several English authorities in which the addition of

parties had been allowed, and observed that the operative consideration

in those cases appeared to be the prevention of multiplicity of actions

but it should not be the predominant consideration in deciding whether

or not a party be added. He stated at page 285:

If I may express with diffidence my own view of the rule, apart from

the authorities, I would support the narrower construction. I do not,

with deference to those who have thought otherwise, agree that the

main object of the rule is to prevent multiplicity of actions, though it

may incidentally have that effect.

Accordingly, Devlin J. cautioned that the prevention of multiplicity of

proceedings should not displace the true purpose of the Rule, which is

to identify the parties necessary for the proper determination of the

existing action.

Secondly, Devlin J. drew a distinction between a party having a legal

interest and one having merely a commercial interest in the subject

matter of the action, confining addition to those with a direct or legal

interest. He stated at page 287:

The only reason which makes it necessary to make a person a party

to an action is so that he should be bound by the result of the action,

and the question to be settled therefore must be a question in the

action which cannot be effectually and completely settled unless he

19

SC/APPEAL/194/2018

is a party. On the wider construction of the rule, I do not understand

where the line is to be drawn between a commercial interest in the

question involved in the case and a legal one… It is not enough that

the intervener should be commercially or indirectly interested in the

answer to the question; he must be directly or legally interested in

the answer.

The oft-quoted local authority resisting the addition of parties is The

Chartered Bank v. L. N. De Silva (1964) 67 NLR 135, where this Court

endorsed both of the above restrictions and held at page 142 that “the

principle laid down in Amon’s case and followed in the later decisions

should be preferred to the broad generalisation of Lord Esher in

Montgomery’s case.”

However, after Amon, Denning M.R. and Diplock L.J., in Gurtner v. Circuit

[1967] 2 Q.B. 587, adopted a more flexible approach and recognised that,

in appropriate circumstances, a person with a sufficient commercial

interest in the subject matter of the litigation could properly be joined as

a party.

Accordingly, the second restriction imposed by Devlin J. in Amon, namely

that only a person with a direct legal interest may be joined and that a

commercial interest would not suffice, can no longer be regarded as fully

reflective of the modern English position.

The current position in England and Wales is governed by the Civil

Procedure Rules in 1998, in particular CPR Part 19, which came into

force on 26 April 1999, following the Woolf reforms.

19.1 Any number of claimants or defendants may be joined as

parties to a claim.

19.2

20

SC/APPEAL/194/2018

(1) This rule applies where a party is to be added or substituted

except where the case falls within rule 19.6 (special provisions

about changing parties after the end of a relevant limitation period).

(2) The court may order a person to be added as a new party if –

(a) it is desirable to add the new party so that the court can resolve

all the matters in dispute in the proceedings; or

(b) there is an issue involving the new party and an existing party

which is connected to the matters in dispute in the proceedings, and

it is desirable to add the new party so that the court can resolve that

issue.

(3) The court may order any person to cease to be a party if it is not

desirable for that person to be a party to the proceedings.

(4) The court may order a new party to be substituted for an existing

one if –

(a) the existing party’s interest or liability has passed to the new

party;

(b) it is desirable to substitute the new party so that the court can

resolve the matters in dispute in the proceedings.

Rule 19.2(2) provides that the Court may order a person to be added as

a new party if (a) “it is desirable to add the new party so that the court can

resolve all the matters in dispute in the proceedings”; or (b) “there is an

issue involving the new party and an existing party which is connected to

the matters in dispute in the proceedings, and it is desirable to add the

new party so that the court can resolve that issue.”

The Court may likewise order that a party cease to be a party if it is not

desirable for that person to remain, and may substitute a new party

where the existing party’s interest or liability has passed, or where

substitution is desirable to enable proper resolution of the dispute.

21

SC/APPEAL/194/2018

The language of CPR 19.2 unmistakably reflects a broader and purposive

approach. The operative test is whether it is “desirable” to add the party

in order to resolve the matters in dispute effectively. The focus is not

confined to whether the plaintiff has a direct cause of action against the

proposed party, but whether the presence of that party will enable the

Court to resolve all connected issues in a single proceeding.

In that respect, the modern English rule aligns more closely with the

broader construction articulated in Byrne v. Brown and Diplock and in

Gurtner v. Circuit, rather than with the restrictive approach adopted in

Norris v. Beazley. Even Amon v. Raphael Tuck & Sons Ltd, on a closer

analysis of that case, has not invalidated this broader construction.

This historical development was analysed in the leading decision of

Arumugam Coomaraswamy v. Andiris Appuhamy [1985] 2 Sri LR 219,

where Ranasinghe J. (as he then was), with the concurrence of

Sharvananda C.J. and Atukorale J., preferred the wider construction of

section 18(1) of the Civil Procedure Code.

In deciding whether the addition of a new party should be allowed

under section 18(1) of the Civil Procedure Code the wider

construction adopted by English Courts is to be preferred. Whenever

a Court can see in the transaction brought before it that the rights of

one of the parties will or may be so affected that other actions may

be brought in respect of that transaction the Court has the power to

bring all the parties before it and determine the rights of all in one

proceeding. It is not necessary that the evidence on issues raised by

the new parties being brought in should be exactly the same. It is

sufficient if the main evidence and the main inquiry will be the same.

Even if the narrower construction is adopted a person who has to

be bound by the result of the action, or has a legal right enforceable

by him against one of the parties to the action which will be affected

by the result of the action should be joined; so also where the

question raised by the party seeking to be added is so inextricably

22

SC/APPEAL/194/2018

mixed with the matters in dispute as to be inseparable from them

and the action itself cannot be decided without deciding it, then the

addition should be made; if the plaintiff can show that he cannot get

effectual and complete relief unless the new party is joined or a

defendant can show that he cannot effectually set up a defence

which he desires to set up unless the new party is joined, the

addition should be allowed.

In Hilda Enid Perera v. Somawathie Lokuge [2000] 3 Sri LR 200 at 206,

Bandaranayake J. (as she then was) followed Arumugam

Coomaraswamy:

In order to avoid multiplicity of actions and to diminish the cost of

litigation as pointed out by Ranasinghe, J., in Arumugam

Coomaraswamy's case (Supra), and for the effective and complete

adjudication and settlement of all questions involved in this case,

the learned Trial Judge was correct when he made the order to add

the 2nd respondent as a party defendant.

As held in Susil Perera v. Kelly [2002] 3 Sri LR 163 at 168:

The objective in adding a party to an action is to enable the court to

effectively and completely adjudicate upon and settle all the

questions involved in the action and not necessarily to claim relief

against him. The fact that no relief has been claimed against the

petitioner does not entitle the petitioner to a discharge from the

proceedings if his presence is necessary for the effectual

determination of all the issues involved in the case.

It is to be noted that the aforesaid cases, contrary to the restriction to

the wider interpretation set down by Amon, have favored the prevention

of multiplicity of actions as an operative ground for addition of parties.

23

SC/APPEAL/194/2018

The Indian position is governed by Order I Rule 10(2) of the Code of Civil

Procedure, 1908, which is in pari materia with section 18(1) of our Civil

Procedure Code. Order I Rule 10(2) provides as follows:

The Court may, at any stage of the proceedings, either upon or

without the application of either party, and on such terms as may

appear to the Court to be just, order that the name of any party

improperly joined, whether as plaintiff or defendant, be struck out,

and that the name of any person who ought to have been joined,

whether as plaintiff or defendant, or whose presence before the

Court may be necessary in order to enable the Court effectually and

completely to adjudicate upon and settle all the questions involved

in the suit, be added.

The Indian courts, much like the Courts in England, have consistently

adopted a wider and purposive construction of the provision relating to

the addition of parties.

As regards Indian position, Sarker’s The Code of Civil Procedure, Vol I,

11th Edition, LexisNexis, 2011, page 916 states:

Useful guidance in the case of addition of parties: (1) If, for

adjudication of the real controversy between the parties on record,

the presence of a third party is necessary, then he can be

impleaded; (2) It is imperative to note that by such impleading of the

proposed party, all controversies arising in the suit and all issues

arising thereunder may be finally determined and set at rest,

thereby avoiding multiplicity of suits over a subject matter, which

could still have been decided in the pending suit itself; (3) The

proposed party has a defined, subsisting, direct and substantive

interest in the litigation, which interest is either legal or equitable

and which right is cognisable in law; (4) Meticulous care should be

taken to avoid the adding of a party if it is intended merely as a ruse

to ventilate certain other grievances of one or the other of the parties

on record, which is neither necessary or expedient to be considered

24

SC/APPEAL/194/2018

by the court in the pending litigation; (5) It should always be

remembered that considerable prejudice would be caused to the

opposite party when irrelevant matters are allowed to be considered

by courts by adding a new party whose interest has no nexus to the

subject matter of the suit.

I am in respectful agreement with the wider construction of section 18 of

the Civil Procedure Code, so as to ensure that matters inextricably

connected with the main controversy are adjudicated in the same

proceeding and that finality in litigation is achieved, while safeguarding

procedural fairness and preventing prejudice to the parties.

Conclusion

In determining an application for the addition of parties under section

18(1) of the Civil Procedure Code, a wider and purposive construction

must be preferred to a narrow and restrictive approach.

Section 18(1) contemplates two distinct categories of persons: first, those

who ought to have been joined as parties, whether as plaintiff or

defendant; and second, those whose presence before Court is necessary

to enable the Court effectually and completely to adjudicate upon and

settle all the questions involved in the action. Both categories are

amenable to addition provided the application is made on or before the

day first fixed for the pre-trial conference of the case. If the application

is made after the day first fixed for the pre-trial conference, the Court

may allow the application only if it is fully satisfied that grave and

irremediable injustice will be caused if such addition is not allowed and

that the party so applying has not been guilty of laches, as the addition

of parties necessarily entails amendment of pleadings.

In the instant case, the defendant made the application for addition

before the day first fixed for the pre-trial conference. I am satisfied that

the power of attorney holder sought to be added by the defendant is both

a necessary party and a proper party. He is a necessary party because

25

SC/APPEAL/194/2018

reliefs are sought against him by way of issues. In any event, he is also

a proper party, as his presence before Court is required to enable the

Court effectually and completely to adjudicate upon and settle the

questions involved in the action.

Accordingly, I answer the two questions of law on which leave to appeal

was granted in the affirmative and allow the appeal.

The power of attorney holder shall be added as a party to the action. If

learned counsel for the plaintiff does not wish to add him as an added

plaintiff, learned President’s Counsel for the defendant may add him as

an added defendant. Consequential steps shall thereafter be taken in

accordance with law.

The defendant-appellant is entitled to costs in all three Courts,

recoverable from the plaintiff and the added party who resisted the

application for addition in all three Courts.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Menaka Wijesundera J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court