SC Appeal 69/2013 JUDGMENT Page 1 of 27

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

In the matter of an application for

Leave to Appeal under Section 5C of

the High Court of the Provinces

(Special Provision) (Amendment) Act

No. 54 of 2006.

Aluth Muhandiramge Somawathie

(Deceased)

PLAINTIFF

1. (A) Sumanasiri Harischandra

2. (B) Susila Mukthalatha

3. (C) Chithra Dharmalatha

4. (D) Liliat Chandrawathie

5. (E) Piyaseli Sarathchandra

6. (F) Jayasiri Nimalchandra

7. (G) M. Aratchilage Ariyaseeli

8. (H) Gayani Fonseka

9. (I) Pradeep Premachandra

10. (J) Dilhani Fonseka

All of Keppetiwalana, Alawwa.

SUBSTITUTED PLAINTIFFS

Vs

Amarapathy Mudiyanselage

Podishingo (Deceased)

S.C. Appeal No. 69/2013

SC(SPL) LA No. 07/2012

CA 257/97(F)

D.C. Kurunegala 4009/L

SC Appeal 69/2013 JUDGMENT Page 2 of 27

DEFENDANT

1. (A) Lucy Nona

2. (B) Amarapathy M. Senarathne

3. (C) A. M. Indra Amarapathy

4. (D) A.M.M.J. Amarapathy

5. (E) A.M. Jane Nona Amarapathy

6. (F) A. M. Ashoka Chandrawathie

7. (G) A.M. Wijeratne

8. (H) A.M.Premawathie

9. (I) J.T. Somawathie

10. (J) A.M.Ramulatha Sriyakantha

11. (K) A.M.Ranjith Senaratne

12. (L) A.M. Pushparaj Chaminda

13. (M) A.M. Priyantha Damayanthi

14. (N) A.M. Samantha Amarapathy

15. (O) A.M. Dhammika Amarapathy

16. (P) A.M. Wijesiri Amarapathy

All of Keppetiwalana, Alawwa.

SUBSTITUTED DEFENDANTS

AND BETWEEN

1. Amarapathy Mudiyanselage M.J.

Amarapathy,

Ihala Keppitiwalana, Alawwa.

SC Appeal 69/2013 JUDGMENT Page 3 of 27

1(D) SUBSTITUTED

DEFENDANT-APPELLANT

Vs

1. (A) Sumanasiri Harischandra

2. (B) Susila Mukthalatha

3. (C) Chithra Dharmalatha

4. (D) Liliat Chandrawathie

5. (E) Piyaseli Sarathchandra

6. (F) Jayasiri Nimalchandra

7. (G) M. Aratchilage Ariyaseeli

8. (H) Gayani Fonseka

9. (I) Pradeep Premachandra

10. (J) Dilhani Fonseka

All of Keppetiwalana, Alawwa.

SUBSTITUTED PLAINTIFF-

RESPONDENTS

1. (A) Lucy Nona

2. (B) Amarapathy M. Senarathne

3. (C) A. M. Indra Amarapathy

4. (D) A.M.M.J. Amarapathy

5. (E) A.M. Jane Nona Amarapathy

6. (F) A. M. Ashoka Chandrawathie

7. (G) A.M. Wijeratne

8. (H) A.M.Premawathie

9. (I) J.T. Somawathie

10. (J) A.M.Ramulatha Sriyakantha

SC Appeal 69/2013 JUDGMENT Page 4 of 27

11. (K) A.M.Ranjith Senaratne

12. (L) A.M. Pushparaj Chaminda

13. (M) A.M. Priyantha Damayanthi

14. (N) A.M. Samantha Amarapathy

15. (O) A.M. Dhammika Amarapathy

16. (P) A.M. Wijesiri Amarapathy

All of Keppetiwalana, Alawwa.

SUBSTITUTED DEFENDANT-

RESPONDENTS

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. (A) Sumanasiri Harischandra

2. (B) Susila Mukthalatha

3. (C) Chithra Dharmalatha

4. (D) Liliat Chandrawathie

5. (E) Piyaseli Sarathchandra

6. (F) Jayasiri Nimalchandra

7. (G) M. Aratchilage Ariyaseeli

8. (H) Gayani Fonseka

9. (I) Pradeep Premachandra

10. (J) Dilhani Fonseka

All of Keppetiwalana, Alawwa.

SUBSTITUTED PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT-APPELLANTS

Vs

SC Appeal 69/2013 JUDGMENT Page 5 of 27

Amarapathy Mudiyanselage M.J.

Amarapathy,

Ihala Keppitiwalana, Alawwa.

1(D) SUBSTITUTED

DEFENDANT-APPELLANT

1. (A) Lucy Nona

2. (B) Amarapathy M. Senarathne

(Deceased)

3. 1(B) Amarapathy Mudiyanselage

Priyantha Padmakumari

Senarathne

4. 2(B) Amarapathy Mudiyanselage

Piyumi Pushpa Amarapathy

5. (C) A. M. Indra Amarapathy

(Deceased)

6. 1(C) Amarapathy Mudiyanselage

Jane Nona

7. 2(C) Amarapathy Mudiyanselage

Premawathie

8. 3(C) Amarapathy Mudiyanselage

Anulawathie

9. 4(C) Amarapathy Mudiyanselage

Chandrawathie

10. 5(C) Amarapathy Mudiyanselage

Wijeratne

11. (D) A.M.M.J. Amarapathy

12. (E) A.M. Jane Nona Amarapathy

SC Appeal 69/2013 JUDGMENT Page 6 of 27

13. (F) A. M. Ashoka Chandrawathie

14. (G) A.M. Wijeratne

15. (H) A.M.Premawathie

16. (I) J.T. Somawathie

17. (J) A.M.Ramulatha Sriyakantha

18. (K) A.M.Ranjith Senaratne

19. (L) A.M. Pushparaj Chaminda

20. (M) A.M. Priyantha Damayanthi

21. (N) A.M. Samantha Amarapathy

22. (O) A.M. Dhammika Amarapathy

23. (P) A.M. Wijesiri Amarapathy

All of Keppetiwalana, Alawwa.

SUBSTITUTED DEFENDANT-RESPONDENT-RESPONDENTS

BEFORE : S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J

A.H.M.D. NAWAZ, J AND

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J

COUNSEL: W. Dayaratne, PC with Ms. Ranjika Jayawardena for the

Substituted Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellants.

Manohara De Silva, PC with Ms. P. Wickramaratne and Hirosha

Munasinghe for the 1(D) Substituted Defendant-Appellant-

Respondent.

WRITTEN Substituted Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant on 19th July 2013

SUBMISSIONS: and 04th July 2023.

SC Appeal 69/2013 JUDGMENT Page 7 of 27

1D Substituted Defendant-Appellant-Respondent on 18th

November 2013.

Substituted Defendant-Appellant-Respondent on 04th July 2023.

ARGUED ON: 16th May 2023.

DECIDED ON: 15th February 2024.

S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

This case is one that has traversed the halls of these courts for several years. The action

was first instituted in 1972 by the original Plaintiff (hereinafter referred to as the

Plaintiff) in the District Court of Kurunegala against the original Defendant

(hereinafter referred to as the Defendant) for a declaration of title to the land called

Damunugahamulawatta, ejectment of the original Defendant from the said land,

restoration of possession and damages.

The learned District Judge, by judgment dated 29th March 1976, held in favour of the

Plaintiff. The Defendant preferred an appeal to the Court of Appeal, following which,

by judgment dated 25th October 1984, the learned Court of Appeal Judges set aside

the judgment of the District Court and sent the case back for a trial de-novo on the

basis that the learned District Court Judge had not taken into consideration the

documents marked D1 to D8 in evidence.

Following the second trial, the learned District Judge, by judgment dated 28th April

1997, held in favour of the Plaintiff. The Substituted 1D Defendant-Appellant-

Respondent preferred an appeal to the Court of Appeal. The learned Judge of the

Court of Appeal, by judgment dated 02nd December 2011, set aside the District Court

judgment on the grounds that the Plaintiff had failed to properly discharge the burden

of proof to establish title and identity of the land in dispute. Finally, being aggrieved

SC Appeal 69/2013 JUDGMENT Page 8 of 27

by the Court of Appeal judgment, the Substituted Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellants

appealed to the Supreme Court. Leave to appeal was granted by this Court on 6th May

2013 on the following questions of law:

a) Did His Lordship of the Court of Appeal err in law when he held that as the

Plaintiff failed to read her documents in evidence at the conclusion of her case

she has failed to prove her title when there was no objection raised by the

Defendant for any of the documents of the Plaintiff marked in evidence? [sic]

b) Did His Lordship of the Court of Appeal err in law when his Lordship held that

the Petitioner had failed to identify the corpus?

c) Did his Lordship of the Court of Appeal err in law when he held that the Lease

Agreement marked V7 dated 26/02/1963 is valid?

d) Did His Lordship of the Court of appeal seriously misdirect himself when he held

that the deeds marked V2 and V3 are need not be proved under section 68 of

the Evidence Ordinance as the Plaintiff did not object for those documents

when the Defendants read those documents in evidence at the conclusion of

their case?

e) Did His Lordship of the Court of Appeal seriously misdirect himself when his

Lordship held that the Plaintiff's action should be dismissed as there was a valid

lease at the time of filing this action and held that 1(F) Substituted

/Defendant/Respondent had title to the property which are two contradictory

positions?

Factual Matrix

It is usually my practice to lay out the facts of the case inasmuch description as needed

and available prior to the analysis from my perspective and the ultimate decision,

especially if the narration of events and facts of one party appear drastically different

from the other(s).

SC Appeal 69/2013 JUDGMENT Page 9 of 27

However, to quote the Plaintiffs own written submission in the District Court, [t]he

issue that this Court has to decide is a simple one, though an attempt is being made to

complicate it. I believe both parties are culpable of this fallacy; the questions of law

themselves, for instance, appear overly convoluted and ambiguous, despite the courts

directive to the Counsel to refine and crystallise the questions of law afresh. While I do

not wish to divulge into the perils of inadequate and imprecise legal drafting in this

judgment, I believe there is much to be said about its correlation to delayed and

ineffective access to justice.

To return to the instant case, I have attempted, to the best of my capabilities, to

simplify the facts of the case as told by the parties in presenting them as a precursor

to the analysis. The land in question, Damunugahamulawatta is described in

Schedule A to the amended plaint in the extent of 2R.10P depicted as Lots 5D1 and

5E1, and the pedigree of the said land is as follows: one Abdul Jabbar became the

owner of the property described in Schedule B to the plaint in the extend of 4 Kurakkan

Lahas (KL) by virtue of Deed No. 22528 dated 13th October 1919 and attested by S.P.S.

Jayawardena Notary Public. Following the passing of Jabbar in 1925, his estate was

administered in the testamentary case bearing No. 3039/T, and the property devolved

on his widow, Hajji Umma, and his son, Mohamadu Kalideen (alias Halideen).

Following the passing of Hajji Umma, Halideen became the sole owner of the property.

According to the Petitioner, Halideen transferred the entirety of the property to the

original Plaintiff by virtue of Deed No. 462 dated 30th January 1969 and attested by

P.S. Suriyarachchi Notary Public (marked P8). The Petitioner states that, on the same

day, the original Defendant forcibly entered the land illegally and unlawfully, causing

damage to the Plaintiff.

SC Appeal 69/2013 JUDGMENT Page 10 of 27

According to the Respondents, prior to the agreement between Halideen and the

Plaintiff, Halideen had executed four lease agreements for the land with one

Ausadahamy, the original Defendants brother, and subsequently, with the original

Defendant in the manner tabulated below.

06th November 1959 Deed of Lease bearing No. 6305

between Halideen and

Ausadahamy

1959 1962 (3 years)

22nd March 1960 Deed of Lease bearing No. 6716

between Halideen and

Ausadahamy

1962 1964 (2 years)

29th November 1960 Deed of Lease bearing No. 7287

between Halideen and

Ausadahamy

1964 1970 (6 years)

26th February 1963 Deed of Lease bearing No. 9601

between Halideen and

Podisingho (original Defendant)

(marked V7)

1970 1980 (10 years)

Following the passing of the original Defendant, one Ashoka Chandrawathie was

substituted in his place as the 7E Substituted-Defendant (now 1(F) Substituted-

Defendant-Respondent-Respondent) on 17th January 1986 in terms of Section 398(1)

of the Civil Procedure Code. When the retrial proceedings in the District Court

commenced on 01st December 1992, the Substituted Defendants also moved to allow

the 1(F) Substituted Defendant-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as

the 1(F) Substituted Defendant) to intervene and be made an independent party in

terms of Section 18 of the Civil Procedure Code. It was the position of the Substituted

Defendants that, in fact, Halideen had transferred the property described in Schedule

SC Appeal 69/2013 JUDGMENT Page 11 of 27

A to Podisinghos daughter, the 1(F) Substituted-Defendant, prior to the deed

executed with the Plaintiff in the following manner:

23rd December

1964

Deed of Transfer bearing No. 10861

between Halideen and 1(F) Substituted-

Defendant (marked V2)

2/3 of the land

11th April 1967 Deed of Transfer bearing No. 12644

between Halideen and 1(F) Substituted-

Defendant (marked V3)

1/6 of the land

The learned District Judge disallowed the said application by order dated 04th April

1993 on the basis that the 1(F) Substituted Defendants failure in entering this

application at the time she was substituted in place of the original Defendant, and only

making such request 6 years after this period, is a request made with the purpose of

delaying the case, and is, therefore, contravention of Section 18 of the Civil Procedure

Code.

In the Court of Appeal judgment, the learned Court of Appeal Judge held that the

Plaintiff had failed to discharge the burden of proving proper title and establishing

identity, as well as that the Plaintiff had not proven title due to the Plaintiffs failure to

read documents in evidence, including Deeds P1 to P8, at the closure of the case.

Simultaneously, the learned Court of Appeal Judge accepted Deeds V2 and V3

produced by the 1(F) Substituted-Defendant on the basis that the Plaintiff did not

object to these documents in evidence at the conclusion of the case.

SC Appeal 69/2013 JUDGMENT Page 12 of 27

Proof of Title

This is evidently a rei vindicatio action, and it is settled law that in order to succeed in

a rei vindication action, the Plaintiff must, firstly, prove ownership of the property and,

secondly, that the defendant is in possession of the property. The burden of proof is

placed on the Plaintiff to prove ownership on a balance of probabilities.

In Luwis Singho and Others v. Ponnamperuma [1996] 2 S.L.R. 320 [page 324] it was

stated by Wigneswaran J. that,

No doubt actions for declaration of title and ejectment (as is the present case)

and vindicatory actions are brought for the same purpose of recovery of property.

But in a rei vindicatio action, the cause of action is based on the sole ground of

violation of the right of ownership. In such an action proof is required that ; (i) the

Plaintiff is the owner of the land in question i.e. he has the dominium and, (ii) that

the land is in the possession of the Defendant.

The standard of the burden proof placed on the Plaintiff has been extensively

discussed, such as in Preethi Anura v. William Silva (SC Appeal No.

SC/LA/116/2014, Minutes of the Supreme Court on 5th June 2017), where Dep. C.J.

stated:

In a rei vindicatio action, the Plaintiff has to establish the title to the land. Plaintiff

need not establish the title with mathematical precision nor to prove the case

beyond reasonable doubt as in a criminal case. The Plaintiff's task is to establish

the case on a balance of probability. In a partition case the situation is different

as it is an action in rem and the trial judge is required to carefully examine the

title and the devolution of title. This case being a rei vindicatio action this court

has to consider whether the Plaintiff discharged the burden on balance of

probability.

SC Appeal 69/2013 JUDGMENT Page 13 of 27

Samayawardhena Js discussion in Premawathie v. Jayasena (SC Appeal No.

176/2014, Minutes of the Supreme Court on 17th May 2021) is an important

reference, wherein he states:

It is well settled law that in a rei vindicatio action the burden is on the Plaintiff

to prove title to the land in suit irrespective of weaknesses in the Defendants

case. H.N.G. Fernando J. (later C.J.) in Pathirana v. Jayasundara (1955) 58 NLR

169 at 171 required strict proof of the Plaintiffs title.

But this shall not be understood that a Plaintiff in a rei vindicatio action shall

prove his title beyond reasonable doubt such as in a criminal prosecution, or on

a high degree of proof as in a partition action. The standard of proof of title is

on a balance of probabilities as in any other civil suit. The stringent proof

of chain of title, which is the norm in a partition action to prove the

pedigree, is not required in a rei vindicatio action.

[Emphasis added.]

Samayawardhena J further elaborated upon the circumstances in which the Court shall

hold that the Plaintiff has discharged his burden, establishing that this determination

is dependent upon the totality of the evidence presented in each case:

The Court shall not protect rank trespassers and promote unlawful occupation

to the detriment of the legitimate rights of lawful landowners by setting an

excessively higher standard of proof in a rei vindicatio action than what is

expected in an ordinary civil suit.

Bearing in mind the burden of proof cast upon the Plaintiff in a rei vindicatio

action, if the Plaintiff in such a case has sufficient title or superior title than

that of the Defendant, the Plaintiff shall succeed. No rule of thumb can be laid

down on what circumstances the Court shall hold that the Plaintiff has

SC Appeal 69/2013 JUDGMENT Page 14 of 27

discharged his burden. Whether or not the Plaintiff proved his title shall

be decided upon a consideration of the totality of the evidence led in the

case.

[Emphasis added.]

Counsel for the Plaintiff in this instant case, in reference to deeds V2 and V3,

submitted the argument that despite the failure of the adverse party to object when

documents are read in evidence, it is mandatory that deeds marked subject to proof

are proved in terms of Section 68 of the Evidence Ordinance.

Section 68 of the Evidence Ordinance reads:

If a document is required by law to be attested, it shall not be used in evidence

until one attesting witness at least has been called for the purpose of proving its

execution if there be an attesting witness alive and subject to the process of the

court and capable of giving evidence.

It is curious to note that, in fact, neither the Plaintiff nor the Defendant called for an

attesting witness in order to prove the title deeds submitted by the respective parties.

However, it is also pertinent to consider that these deeds were executed more than

fifty years ago, which therefore brings into operation another relevant provision from

the Evidence Ordinance.

Section 90 of the Evidence Ordinance reads:

"Where any document purporting or proved to be thirty years old is produced

from any custody which the court in the particular case considers proper, the court

may presume that the signature and every other part of such document which

purports to be in the handwriting of any particular person is in that person's

SC Appeal 69/2013 JUDGMENT Page 15 of 27

handwriting and in the case of a document executed or attested, that it was duly

executed and attested by the persons by whom it purports to be executed and

attested.

Further, while there have been seemingly conflicting views on the application of

section 68 in the past, fortunately, the Civil Procedure Code (Amendment) Act, No. 17

of 2022, has settled this matter; sections 2 and 3 read as follows:

(2) (1) Notwithstanding the provisions of the Evidence Ordinance (Chapter 14), in any

proceedings under this Code, it shall not be necessary to adduce formal proof of

the execution or genuineness of any deed, or document which is required by

law to be attested, other than a will executed under the Wills Ordinance (Chapter

60), and on the face of it purports to have been duly executed, unless

(a) in the pleadings or further pleadings in an action filed under regular

procedure in terms of this Code, the execution or genuineness of such deed

or document is impeached and raised as an issue; or

(b) the court requires such proof:

Provided that, the provisions of this section shall not be applicable in an event,

a party to an action seeks to produce any deed or document not included in

the pleadings of that party at any proceedings under this Code.

[...]

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 2 of this Act, and the provisions of the

Evidence Ordinance, in any case or appeal pending on the date of coming into operation

of this Act

(a) (i) if the opposing party does not object or has not objected to it being

received as evidence on the deed or document being tendered in evidence;

or

SC Appeal 69/2013 JUDGMENT Page 16 of 27

(ii) if the opposing party has objected to it being received as evidence

on the deed or document being tendered in evidence but not objected

at the close of a case when such document is read in evidence, the

court shall admit such deed or document as evidence without requiring

further proof;

[Emphasis added.]

Perusal of the evidence submitted in the instant case shows that the Plaintiff submitted

the documents marked P1 to P8, which include, inter alia, Deed No. 22528 in

evidence of Abdul Jabars ownership of the property, inventory of the administration

and devolution of the estate to Halideen in the testamentary case bearing No. 3039/T,

and the Deed of Sale bearing No. 462 executed between Halideen and the Plaintiff for

the transfer of the property. Furthermore, the title deeds were not marked subject to

proof nor challenged by the Substituted Defendants.

In Cinemas Limited v. Sounderarajan [1998] 2 S. L. R. 16 Jayasuriya, J. held that;

In a civil case when a document is tendered the opposing party should

immediately object to the document. Where the opposing party fails to object, the

trial judge has to admit the document unless the document is forbidden by law to

be received and no objection can be taken in appeal - S. 154 CPC (explanation).

As such, in the application of section 2(1) and section 3 of the Civil Procedure Code

(Amendment) Act together with section 90 of the Evidence Ordinance, and the totality

of evidence produced by the Plaintiff, I am of the opinion that the Plaintiff has

sufficiently proved, on a balance of probabilities, ownership of title to the property.

SC Appeal 69/2013 JUDGMENT Page 17 of 27

I do not discern that the Plaintiffs failure to read documents in evidence at the

conclusion of the case in the District Court corresponds to the Plaintiffs failure to

establish title by those documents in evidence. While in agreement with the learned

Judge of the Court of Appeal that this is a serious lapse on the part of the trial court,

the practice of reading documents in evidence at the closing of a case has been

discussed by Marsoof J in Jamaldeen Abdul Latheef v. Abdul Majeed

Mohamed Mansoor 2010 2 SLR 333 [page 204] as follows:

There remains, however, one more matter on which learned counsel for the

contending parties have made submissions, which was raised in the context that

the usual practice of reading in evidence the documents that were marked and

produced at the trial in the course of witness testimony was not followed when

the case for the Respondents was closed on 27 April 1993.

This is substantive question 5, which specifically focuses on this issue, namely: is

it mandatory to read the documents in evidence at the conclusion of the trial.

There is no provision in the Civil Procedure Code that mandates the reading

in of the marked documents at the close of the case of a particular party.

However, learned and experienced Counsel who have appeared in the

original courts in civil cases from time immemorial developed such a

practice, which has received the recognition of our Courts.

[Emphasis added.]

In light of the aforementioned circumstances, facts, and evidence, I answer the first

question of law affirmatively.

Identity of Corpus

It is trite law that the identity of the property in a rei vindicatio action is as fundamental

to the success of the action as the proof of the ownership (dominium) of the owner

SC Appeal 69/2013 JUDGMENT Page 18 of 27

(dominus); the owner must prove on a balance of probabilities not only his or her

ownership in the property but also that the property exists and is clearly identifiable.

I once again quote Marsoof J in the case of Jamaldeen Abdul Latheef v. Abdul

Majeed Mohamed Mansoor 2010 2 SLR 333 on the importance of this principle:

The identity of the subject matter is of paramount importance in a rei vindicatio

action because the object of such an action is to determine ownership of the

property, which objective cannot be achieved without the property being clearly

identified. Where the property sought to be vindicated consists of land, the land

sought to be vindicated must be identified by reference to a survey plan or other

equally expeditious method. It is obvious that ownership cannot be ascribed

without clear identification of the property that is subjected to such ownership,

and furthermore, the ultimate objective of a person seeking to vindicate

immovable property by obtaining a writ of execution in terms of Section 323 of

the Civil Procedure Code will be frustrated if the fiscal to whom the writ is

addressed, cannot clearly identify the property by reference to the decree for the

purpose of giving effect to it. It is therefore essential in a vindicatory action, as

much as in a partition action, for the corpus to be identified with precision.

In the instant case, it is clear that the Plaintiff has successfully identified the corpus; the

land described in the schedule to the amended plaint is as follows:

- , - ,

- , - 143/2

. 1919 27

450 .

SC Appeal 69/2013 JUDGMENT Page 19 of 27

450

(.0 2 .10) 51 51 -

450 8 , -

( 18 ) -

, - 5 5 .

683/178.

[ALL that land called Damunugahamulawatta situated in the village of

Keppitiwalana, Dambadeni Udukaha Korale, Dambadeni Hatpattu, Kurunegala

District in Wayamba Province and extended in the extent of 07 Kurakkan Lahas

is bounded on the North- Meegahamulawatta, on the East-Ambagahamulawatta

and Weheragawawatta, on the South- Delgahamulawatta, On the West- ditch of

the state lands and registered as F 143/2. This land is bounded as per Plan No.

450 issued dated 27th June 1919 by the Surveyor General's Office.

All that Lots No. 5D1 and 5E1 of the aforesaid Damunugahamulawatta depicted

in the aforesaid Plan No.450 extended in the extent of Two Roods and Ten Perches

(A: 0 R: 2 P: 10 ) is bounded on the North- the land bearing Lot No. 8 of

aforesaid Plan No.450 of Meegahamulawatta, on the East-

Ambagahamulawatta alias Weheragawawatta (Lot No.18 of the aforesaid plan)

on the South - Alawwa-Giriulla Bus Route on the West-5D and 5E of the said

plan. Registered under F 683/178.]

The title deed produced by the Plaintiff marked P8 describes the land in the same

manner. Further, the land was surveyed by Court Commissioner A.M. Weber who

prepared and produced Plan No. 1566 dated 29th October 1991 (marked X) and

subsequent report marked X1. The following extracts from the plan and report

confirm the identity of the subject matter:

SC Appeal 69/2013 JUDGMENT Page 20 of 27

, ,

450 5D1 5E1

[I have surveyed the land called Damunugahamulawatta situated in the village

Keppitiwalana, Dambadeni Udukaha Korale-South, Dambadeni Hatpattu in

Kurunegala District contained 2 lots superimposed and prepared by utilizing the

5D1 and 5E1 of the Final Village Plan no. 450.]

Hence, I find no reason to disagree with the conclusions of the learned District Court

Judge pertaining to the Plaintiffs identification of the corpus, as stated below:

450 51 51

,

51 51 1979.01.30 462

, .

."

[Beyond reasonable doubt, it has been proved that Lot No. 5D1 and 5E1 of Plan

No. 450 belonged to Halideen and the Plaintiff's evidence strongly supports as

per the said ownership, its boundaries, and the plan prepared i.e., by Deed No.

462 dated 30.01.1979 that the Lots 5D1 and 5E1 have been transferred to the

plaintiff and the defence has also accepted it. Accordingly, I decide that the

Plaintiff has successfully proven its case based on the balance of probability.]

As such, I answer to the second question of law affirmatively.

SC Appeal 69/2013 JUDGMENT Page 21 of 27

Lease Agreement

The third question of law pertains to the validity of V7, the lease agreement bearing

Deed No. 9601 between the original Defendant, Podisingho, and Halideen dated 26th

February 1963 commencing from 1970 to 1980 for a period of 10 years, and specifically

whether the two deeds must be proved in terms of Section 68 of the Evidence

Ordinance.

It is, once again, settled law that when the paper title to the property is admitted or

proved to be in the plaintiff, the burden shifts to the defendant to prove on what right

he is in possession of the property.

In Siyaneris v. Udenis de Silva (1951) 52 NLR 289 the Privy Council held:

In an action for declaration of title to property, where the legal title is in the

plaintiff but the property is in the possession of the defendant, the burden of proof

is on the defendant.

In Theivandran v. Ramanathan Chettiar [1986] 2 Sri LR 219 at 222, Sharvananda

C.J. stated:

In a vindicatory action the claimant need merely prove two facts; namely, that

he is the owner of the thing and that the thing to which he is entitled to possession

by virtue of his ownership is in the possession of the defendant. Basing his claim

on his ownership, which entitles him to possession, he may sue for the ejectment

of any person in possession of it without his consent. Hence when the legal title

to the premises is admitted or proved to be in the plaintiff, the burden of proof is

on the defendant to show that he is in lawful possession.

Despite the fact that the lease agreement between Podisingho and Halideen was

signed in 1963, the deed would not come into operation until 1970, by which point

SC Appeal 69/2013 JUDGMENT Page 22 of 27

Halideen no longer possessed title to the property. Further, it is an admitted fact that

the prior three lease agreements from the period between 1959 and 1970 were

executed between Halideen and the Defendants brother, Ausadahamy and not the

original Defendant himself. I fail to understand the Defendants claim for his rights as

a lessee when, in fact, the Defendant was not a party to the lease agreements,

specifically Deed No. 7287 in operation from 1964 to 1970, at all.

In these above-mentioned circumstances, I answer the third question of law

affirmatively.

Deeds belonging to the 1(F) Substituted Defendant

The fourth question of law draws attention to the two deeds marked V2 and V3

which, according to the Substituted-Defendants, made the 1(F) Substituted Defendant

owner to the property denoted as the subject matter in this instant case.

From my point of view, this creates several gaps in the narrative. It is indeed curious

that the original Defendant, in the action instituted against him in 1972, would plead

for his rights as a lessee under the lease agreement between himself and Halideen and

not for declaration of title and/or ownership, when by that time, the property had

allegedly been transferred to his daughter several years ago; even more fascinating is

the fact that Ausadahamy should continue to occupy property as a lessee alongside

his brother, the Defendant, up until 1970 under the lease agreement wherein Halideen

retains ownership and not the 1(F) Substituted-Defendant.

Nevertheless, in this instant case, there are no grounds upon which the 1(F) Defendant

can claim ownership of the land. It is settled law that a defendant who enters into a

land in a subordinate character such as a tenant, lessee or licensee of the plaintiff is

SC Appeal 69/2013 JUDGMENT Page 23 of 27

estopped from disputing the title of the plaintiff to the land as per section 116 of the

Evidence Ordinance, which enacts:

No tenant of immovable property, or person claiming through such tenant, shall

during the continuance of the tenancy, be permitted to deny that the landlord of

such tenant had, at the beginning of the tenancy, a title to such immovable

property; and no person who came upon any immovable property by the licence

of the person in possession thereof shall be permitted to deny that such person

had a title to such possession at the time when such licence was given.

In Ruberu v. Wijesooriya [1998] 1 Sri LR 58 at 60, Gunawardana J. held:

Whether it is a licensee or a lessee, the question of title is foreign to a suit

in ejectment against either. The licensee (the defendant-respondent)

obtaining possession is deemed to obtain it upon the terms that he will not

dispute the title of him, i.e. the plaintiff-appellant without whose

permission, he (the defendant-respondent) would not have got it. The effect

of the operation of section 116 of the Evidence Ordinance is that if a licensee

desires to challenge the title under which he is in occupation he must, first, quit

the land. The fact that the licensee or the lessee obtained possession from the

plaintiff-appellant is perforce an admission of the fact that the title resides in the

plaintiff. No question of title can possibly arise on the pleadings in this case,

because, as the defendant-respondent has stated in his answer that he is a lessee

under the plaintiff-appellant, he is estopped from denying the title of the plaintiff-

appellant. It is an inflexible rule of law that no lessee or licensee will ever be

permitted either to question the title of the person who gave him the lease or the

licence or the permission to occupy or possess the land or to set up want of title

in that person, i.e. of the person who gave the licence or the lease. That being so,

it is superfluous, in this action, framed as it is on the basis that the defendant-

respondent is a licensee, to seek a declaration of title.

SC Appeal 69/2013 JUDGMENT Page 24 of 27

[Emphasis added.]

Moreover, as discussed within the factual matrix, the application by the 1(F)

Substituted Defendant (named 7E Defendant in the judgement by the District Court)

to be added as an independent party was refused by the learned District Court Judge,

whose inferences I find no discerning reason to disagree with, as stated:

1985 . 1-17

.

398(1)

17

, . 86.1.17

. 7 .

1964 10861

1967 12644 .

7 86.1.17

. 86.1.17

7

. 6

.

7

18

7

......

[Podisingho, the first Defendant in this case, passed away in May 1985.

Accordingly, his children 1-17 have been included as Defendants. This has been

done as per the provisions of Section 398(1) of the Civil Procedure Code.

Chandrawathie, now been substituted as the 7E Defendant, and currently seeking

SC Appeal 69/2013 JUDGMENT Page 25 of 27

to intervene in the case, appeared in the courts and did not object to the

substitution. Ashoka Chandrawathie appeared before the court as per the journal

entry dated 17.01.86. She has been substituted as the 7E Defendant. Presently,

she is seeking independent entry as a Defendant, claiming ownership of the

property based on Deeds No. 10861 of 1964 and No. 12644 of 1967. By the date

of her appearance in court on 17.01.1986, she must have been aware of the fact

that the relevant deeds were available to assert these claims. At that juncture, on

17.01.1986, she had the opportunity to contest her substitution as the 7E

Defendant and plead to be entered as a separate independent Defendant by

presenting pertinent facts. Without doing so, the current application is being

submitted after a lapse of six years and this can be construed as an application

made to delay this case. Even though the facts presented in the written submission

on behalf of the 7E Defendant are considered, it is evident that her application to

be entered as a separate Defendant cannot be allowed based on the institution

of the initial case when considering the procedure prescribed in law for the

addition of parties under Section 18 of the Civil Procedure Code.]

Further, Id like to once again underscore the provisions of the Civil Procedure Code

(Amendment) Act, No. 17 of 2022, specifically the constraints upon the application

of section 2 that allows for parties to prove documents without formal proof, which

reads:

(2)(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of the Evidence Ordinance (Chapter 14), in

any proceedings under this Code, it shall not be necessary to adduce formal proof

of the execution or genuineness of any deed, or document which is required by

law to be attested, other than a will executed under the Wills Ordinance (Chapter

60), and on the face of it purports to have been duly executed, unless

SC Appeal 69/2013 JUDGMENT Page 26 of 27

(a) in the pleadings or further pleadings in an action filed under regular

procedure in terms of this Code, the execution or genuineness of such deed

or document is impeached and raised as an issue; or

(b) the court requires such proof:

Provided that, the provisions of this section shall not be applicable in an

event, a party to an action seeks to produce any deed or document not

included in the pleadings of that party at any proceedings under this Code.

[Emphasis added.]

Upon the passing of the original Defendant, his daughter, the 1(F) Substituted

Defendant, was substituted in the room, place and shoes of the original Defendant,

Podisingho.

In Careem vs. Sivasubramaniam and Another (2003) 2 SLR 197 Udalagama J states

that:

In the event of the death of a party substitution would be for the purpose of

representing the deceased solely for the purpose of prosecuting the action and

nothing more.

As the original Defendant did not claim for a declaration of title to the corpus and

instead claimed for his rights as a lessee under the agreement executed between

himself and Halideen, the 1(F) Substituted Defendant cannot take up a position

different to the original Defendant.

Further, in application of section 2 of the Civil Procedure Code (Amendment) Act, No.

17 of 2022, the provisions of this section are not applicable to any deed and/or

SC Appeal 69/2013 JUDGMENT Page 27 of 27

document not included in the pleadings of that party, and therefore I find that the 1(F)

Substituted Defendants deeds are not proved.

In light of these aforementioned facts, I answer the fourth question of law affirmatively.

As the third and fourth questions of law have been answered in the affirmative, it

follows that the fifth question of law is also answered in the affirmative.

In consideration of the totality of the above facts and submissions, the appeal is

allowed with costs.

Appeal Allowed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

A.H.M.D. NAWAZ, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT