IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application under and in terms of Articles 17 and 126 of the Constitution of Sri Lanka. Ranjith Udaya Kumara Rajapakse, No.43, Amunugama, Gunnapana.

Petitioner S.C.(F.R.) Application No. 374/2017. Vs. 1. G.K.G.A.R.P.K. Nandana, Secretary, Chief Ministry and Ministry of Education, Central Provincial Council, Provincial Council Complex, Pallakele, Kundasale. 1A. K.G.Upali Ranawaka, Secretary, Chief Ministry and Ministry of Education, Central Provincial Council, Provincial Council Complex, Pallakele, Kundasale. 2. Sarath Ekanayake Chief Minister and Minister of Education, Central Provincial Council, Provincial Council Complex, Pallakele, Kundasale. 2A. Gamini Rajaratne,

S.C. /FR A/ No. 374/2017

2

Chief Minister and Minister of Education, Central Provincial Council, Provincial Council Complex, Pallakele, Kundasale. 3. Lalith U. Gamage, Governor of the Central Province, Governors Secretariat, Palace Square, Kandy. 04. P.D. Amarakoon, Chariman/ Member, Provincial Public Service Commission of the Central Provincial Council No. 244, Katugastota Road, Kandy. 05. W.M.S.D. Weerakoon, Member, Provincial Public Service Commission of the Central Provincial Council No. 244, Katugastota Road, Kandy. 06. A.M. Wais, Member, Provincial Public Service Commission of the Central Provincial Council No. 244, Katugastota Road, Kandy. 07. Rohitha Tennakoon, Member, Provincial Public Service

S.C. /FR A/ No. 374/2017

3

Commission of the Central Provincial Council No. 244, Katugastota Road, Kandy. 08. N.D.K. Piumsiri, Member, Provincial Public Service

Commission of the Central Provincial Council No. 244, Katugastota Road, Kandy. 08.A. W.M.K.K. Karunarathne, Member, Provincial Public Service

Commission of the Central Provincial Council No. 244, Katugastota Road, Kandy. 09. T.A. Don Wilson Dayananda, Member, Provincial Public Service

Commission of the Central Provincial Council No. 244, Katugastota Road, Kandy. 09A. N.M.D.R. Herath, Member, Provincial Public Service

Commission of the Central Provincial Council No. 244, Katugastota Road, Kandy. 09B. Keerthi Wickramaratne, Member,

S.C. /FR A/ No. 374/2017

4

Provincial Public Service

Commission of the Central Provincial Council No. 244, Katugastota Road, Kandy. 10. Gamini Rajarathna, Chief Secretary of the Central Province, Chief Secretarys office, Kandy. 11. E.P.T.K. Ekanayake, Provincial Director of Education, Provincial Department of Education, Kandy. 12. M.W. Wijeratne, Zonal Director of Education, Zonal Education Office, Kandy. 13. Prof. K.K.C.K. Perera, Secretary, Ministry of Education, Isurupaya, Pelawatte, Battaramulla. 14. M.R.P. Mayadunne, Principal, Vidyartha College, Kandy.

15. Hon. Attorney General, Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12. Respondents

S.C. /FR A/ No. 374/2017

5

BEFORE : BUWANEKA ALUWIHARE, PC., J. JANAK DE SILVA, J. ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J. COUNSEL : Sanjeewa Jayawardene, P.C. for the Petitioner. Viveka Siriwardene, (P.C.), ASG for the 1st to 13th and 15th Respondents. ARGUED ON : 18th January, 2023 DECIDED ON : 13th November, 2023

********* ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

The Petitioner, a Grade 3 Sri Lanka Education Administrative

Service officer, was transferred on the basis of exigencies of service

from Vidyartha College, Kandy where he functioned as its principal. In

invoking the jurisdiction conferred on this Court, under Articles 17 and

126 of the Constitution, the Petitioner alleges that the decisions of the 1st

and 12th Respondent to transfer him are violative of his fundamental

rights guaranteed under Articles 12(1) and 14(1)(g) of the Constitution.

It was strongly asserted by the Petitioner that the impugned

transfer was made illegally, unlawfully, arbitrarily, unreasonably,

unfairly, irrationally and was prompted by mala fides, ulterior motives

and extraneous considerations.

On 09.02.2018, this Court granted leave to proceed as prayed for.

S.C. /FR A/ No. 374/2017

6

At the hearing, learned Presidents Counsel submitted on behalf

of the Petitioner that since assuming office as the principal of Vidyartha

College in March 2015, the Petitioner had effectively rectified and

resolved many a problem that affected proper administration of the

school. It was further submitted that the Petitioner had eradicated the

drug abuse among student population that prevailed when he assumed

office and instilled discipline in them and, as a result, was able to

restore the status of Vidyartha College as a leading and respectable boys

school in Kandy.

The Petitioner averred in his petition that, commencing from or

about November 2016, there were several anonymous letters addressed

to Central and Provincial Authorities, containing a series of false,

frivolous and defamatory allegations against him. The Petitioner further

added that, however, none of the several investigations carried out by

the provincial authorities on these anonymous complaints revealed any

misconduct, irregularity, fault or wrongdoing on his part.

The Petitioner asserts that he was surprised, when he received a

letter, signed by the Zonal Director of Education (the 12th Respondent),

on 25.09.2017 (P18), which enclosed another letter dated 22.09.2017

(P17) signed by the Secretary to the Provincial Ministry of Education

(the 1st Respondent), conveying of his transfer on exigencies of service

with immediate effect. He was further directed to report to the

Provincial Department of Education. The Petitioner, therefore, seeks a

declaration of this Court that the said decisions are illegal, null and void.

He further sought to nullify the appointment of the 14th Respondent,

who succeeded him as the principal, Vidyartha College, and in addition,

S.C. /FR A/ No. 374/2017

7

prays for a declaration that the Respondents have violated his

fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 12(1) and 14(1)(g).

The Petitioner contended that the decisions made by the 1st and

12th Respondent to transfer him on exigencies of service, were violative

of his fundamental rights. He relied on the following grounds, in order

to substantiate his contention;

a. the decision to transfer was made mala fide, and with ulterior

motives and on extraneous considerations

b. letters P17 and P18 were issued in blatant violation of the

Rules of the Public Service Commission, since no reasons were

provided for the decision to transfer the Petitioner on

exigencies of service,

c. the transfer of the Petitioner, not being a disciplinary transfer

but on exigencies of service, was made without satisfying the

ingredients that constitute conditions precedent to the lawful

exercise of power,

d. the transfer was not made in respect of any particular post or

position at the Department of Education and there was no

mention that the Petitioners services are needed at that

institution,

e. the normative period of 5 years to serve in one station was

summarily denied.

The 1st Respondent, through his Statement of Objections, denied

the allegation of infringement of fundamental rights of the Petitioner

and resisted his entitlement to the reliefs sought. The 1st Respondent

averred that an exigency of service arose to have the Petitioner

transferred to the Central Provincial Department of Education, in order

S.C. /FR A/ No. 374/2017

8

to facilitate the conduct of several preliminary inquiries. The 1st

Respondent also seeks to counter the Petitioners claim that none of the

inquiries conducted by the Respondents revealed any misconduct,

irregularity, a fault or wrong doing on his part by stating that the latter

was well aware of the fact that there were several preliminary inquiries

being conducted out regarding multiple allegations of misconduct,

which included admission of students contrary to the applicable

circulars, accepting donations for admission of students, printing and

selling of diaries to students, renting out school premises to park

private vehicles for a fee and permitting a private educational

institution to erect a hoarding within school premises for a payment.

Whilst denying the impugned transfer was made arbitrarily,

unreasonably, mala fide and for collateral purposes the 1st Respondent

avers that the reasons for the impugned decision to transfer the

Petitioner on exigency of service arose due to following factors;

i. his failure to co-operate with the inquiring officers and

causing obstruction to the unimpeded conduct of

preliminary investigations;

ii. his conduct of repeatedly making frivolous excuses in

order to avoid making a statement to the inquiring officers,

despite the many opportunities that were afforded to him;

iii. his presence as the principal of the school which became a

hindrance to record statements of the members of staff who

came under his direct supervision and control.

It is the position of the 1st Respondent that the 14th Respondents

appointment was intended to fill the vacancy created by the impugned

S.C. /FR A/ No. 374/2017

9

transfer and made only as a measure to avert the situation that had

arisen due to the conduct of the Petitioner.

In support of the contention of the Petitioner that he was

transferred out illegally by the 1st and 12th Respondents, alleging that

they acted mala fide, with ulterior motives and on extraneous

considerations due to political pressure, learned Presidents Counsel

relied on the fact that the Respondents, in spite of an already concluded

preliminary inquiry on the allegation of irregular admissions of

students, had more initiated a second preliminary inquiry on the same

unfounded allegation, in order to somehow rope in him. Learned

Counsel further contended that the said second inquiry was initiated

due to political interference and that too only after the Presidential

Secretariat had directed the Respondents to conduct a comprehensive

investigation by an experienced officer (R12).

This contention shall be considered at the outset of this judgment

for its merits.

The 12th Respondent, by letter dated 10.03.2017 (R1) directed a

Deputy Director of Education to conduct a preliminary inquiry into the

allegations of admission of students to Vidyartha College irregularly and

submit a report along with his recommendations. The said Deputy

Director of Education had conducted an inquiry on the same day and

submitted his report (R2). In that report, the inquirer had identified of

39 specific instances of irregular admission of students, contrary to

applicable circulars. The inquirer also made an entry, in the logbook of

the school, directing that no student shall be admitted to any of the

grades until further notice.

S.C. /FR A/ No. 374/2017

10

In spite of the said prima facie finding that there were instances of

irregular student admissions, the inquirer however did not make any

recommendations in R2, nor did he ensure compliance of the provisions

contained in Clause 13.12 of Chapter XLVII of the Establishment Code,

which states [T]he officer conducting the preliminary investigation should

also prepare a draft charge sheet as per Appendix 5 of this Code and forward it

to the relevant authority in the event that sufficient material is disclosed that

call for disciplinary action against the suspect officer .

The Petitioner, along with his counter affidavit, had tendered a

letter containing his observations (CA-1), that had been submitted to the

1st Respondent on 26.04.2017. This was in response to the allegation of

irregular admission of students. However, the 1st Respondent, in his

Statement of Objections, failed to disclose of any decision taken either

on P2 or CA-1 and of any follow up action taken thereafter.

Interestingly, the counter affidavit of the Petitioner, also annexed

documents CA-2(a) to (e), by which the 1st Respondent had directed

him to admit students on several occasions outside the regular

admission process.

On 08.08.2017, after almost five months since P2 was tendered,

the Director (investigation) of the Presidential Secretariat, called a

report from the Director of Education of Kandy on several allegations

that were received against the Petitioner (R6). This report was to be

submitted to the President of the Republic. The allegations referred to in

R6 were in relation to several other matters and did not include the

allegation of irregular admission of students. However, upon this

direction from the Presidential Secretariat, the 12th Respondent

appointed a three-member team of inquirers on 15.08.2017 (R7) and

S.C. /FR A/ No. 374/2017

11

directed them to conduct a preliminary investigation into the

allegations referred to in R6. The report of this inquiry was submitted to

the 12th Respondent by the panel of inquirers on 24.09.2017 (R10).

The 1st Respondent, however, failed to explain the reason to

appoint another two-member panel of inquirers in respect of the

allegation of irregular admission of students, in spite of an already

concluded inquiry. The report of the said panel of inquirers, who were

appointed to inquire into the allegation of irregular admission of

students, issued their report on 17.08.2018 (R10A). The introduction of

the said report indicates that the inquiry panel was constituted and

directed by the 12th Respondent to conduct a preliminary inquiry on

15.08.2017 and also made reference to a letter dated 03.07.2017, issued

by the Secretary to the Governor of the Central Province in that regard.

It is not clear that the report of the 1st inquirer (R2) was

forwarded to the Presidential Secretariat at any point of time. However,

it is to be noted that the report R10A, prepared by the said two-member

panel of inquirers on irregular admission of students, consists of a total

of 32 pages whereas the 1st report (R2), which also refers to inquiry into

the same allegation, confines to a mere one side of a single A4 sheet of

paper. Considered in this context, the directions issued by the

Presidential Secretariat on the 1st Respondent to conduct a

comprehensive investigation by an experienced officer would have been

resulted after perusal of P2.

Similarly, the enquiries made by the Presidential Secretariat

regarding the conduct of inquiries was necessitated due to a petition

addressed to that establishment by a group of concerned parents of

certain students of Vidyartha College. In this context, it is relevant to

S.C. /FR A/ No. 374/2017

12

note here, that another group, claiming themselves to be committee

members of the School Development Society, also made an allegation in

their letter to the Presidential Secretariat that, despite that fact of

making several complaints against the Petitioner, the Respondents have

thus far failed to initiate a single inquiry (P12(c)). They attributed the

close relationship the Respondents had with the Petitioner as the reason

for the said inaction.

If these two factors, the obvious failure to take any meaningful

action on R2 and the decision to appoint a two-member inquiry panel to

conduct a second preliminary inquiry, are considered together, it

appears that the 2nd inquiry was prompted only when the Presidential

Secretariat had indicated its concerns on R2. This comparison indicates

that the allegation, that there were mala fides, ulterior motives and

extraneous considerations on the part of the Respondents in making the

transfer, is not supported by the available material. It appears that, the

actions of the Respondent indicate contrary position to the one

presented by the Petitioner as clearly a very conciliatory approach had

been adopted, in dealing with the allegations of irregular admission of

students. This inference finds further support when considered in the

light of another factor, which will be dealt during the latter part of this

judgment.

Learned Presidents Counsels other contention was founded on

the failure of the Respondents to provide reasons for their decision, as

set out in the applicable Sections of the Rules of Procedure of the Public

Service Commission, which they were bound to comply with.

In this regard, learned Presidents Counsel contended that the

decision to transfer the Petitioner was said to have been taken on the

S.C. /FR A/ No. 374/2017

13

premise that his retention in his post was inappropriate due to the

possibility of obstructions and interference to the conducting of an

inquiry. If that being the real reason, learned Counsel argued that, in

fact the transfer was made on disciplinary grounds and not on an

exigency of service.

Learned Presidents Counsel also contended that, if indeed the

purported allegations against the Petitioner were genuine and

legitimate as the Respondents claim, they had recourse to Section 222 of

the said Rules, under which a transfer order could validly be made, but

only after giving reasons. Thus, he submitted that the illegality which

taints the decision to transfer is the failure of the Respondents to

comply with the provisions of Section 222, where a mandatory

requirement to give reasons for the transfer of a public officer was

imposed.

It appears from the above, that the contention advanced by the

Petitioner before this Court on this point is that he was transferred in

fact on disciplinary grounds and not on exigencies of service is in turn

based on the 1st Respondents explanation that the transfer was made in

order to conduct the several investigations initiated by them

unimpeded by actions of the Petitioner. The letters of transfer P17 and

P18 indicate that the Petitioner was transferred on exigencies of services

and not on disciplinary grounds.

In view of these divergent positions of the contesting parties, it is

relevant to have a cursory glance over the scheme of transfer that had

been laid down in the Procedural Rules of the Public Service

Commission, published in the Government Gazette (Extraordinary) No.

S.C. /FR A/ No. 374/2017

14

1589/30, dated 20.04.2009 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules), which

deals with different types of transfers that could be made.

Section 195 of the said Rules stipulates all or several or any one of

the following objectives are sought to be achieved by transferring a

public officer;

i. fill a vacancy in an institution;

ii. meet the administrative needs of an institution;

iii. promote the efficiency and productivity of an institution;

iv. meet the needs of a disciplinary process;

v. implement a disciplinary order;

vi. provide the officer with an opportunity to gain experience

in a wider field;

vii. provide the officer with an opportunity for professional

development and improve of his skills

viii. provide relief from personal difficulties experienced by the

officer.

Thus, in terms of Article 55 of the Constitution and Section 194, a

public officer can be transferred only by the Public Service Commission

or by an Authority with Delegated Power of the Commission to achieve

any one or more of these objectives.

Section 196 states as follows;

Transfers are fourfold as indicated below:

(i) Transfers done annually;

(ii) Transfers done exigencies of service;

(iii) Transfers done on disciplinary grounds;

S.C. /FR A/ No. 374/2017

15

(iv) Mutual transfers on requests made by officers.

Of these fourfold categories of transfers, the ones that would be

examined in relation to the instant matter are the transfers on exigencies

of service and transfers on disciplinary grounds. Sections 218 to 221

governs the transfer procedure applicable to service exigencies while

Section 222 governs the transfer procedure applicable to transfers made

on disciplinary grounds.

The contention of the Petitioner in this respect is twofold. First, he

contends that the Respondents have blatantly violated the said

procedural rules, in their failure to discharge the obligation to convey

reasons that formed the basis of the transfer to the Petitioner and cited

dicta of Sripavan CJ in Sumedha Jayaweera v Dharmasena Dissanayake,

Chairman of the Public Service Commission (SC(FR) Application No.

484/2011 decided on 16.01.2017).

Secondly, he contended that the Respondents claim of

obstructing or refusing to co-operate with the inquiries that were being

conducted against him is a belated concoction by the 1st Respondent to

deceptively justify the impugned transfer. In this regard, the Petitioner

stressed that the 1st Respondent must present credible material before

this Court in order to establish the said allegation that he refused to

cooperate with the inquiring officers. He further contended that the

inquiry reports reveal that even though the Petitioner was unable to

present himself for investigations on two occasions, he had

subsequently cooperated with the inquirers by making statements

within a reasonable time.

S.C. /FR A/ No. 374/2017

16

In support of the contention that the Respondent failed to adduce

reasons for the transfer, the Petitioner relied heavily on the provisions

of the Section 222 (iii) which states [W]here it is found on matters revealed

either before the beginning, or in the course of an investigation or on existing

circumstances that the retention of a Public Officer in his post or station may

obstruct the conduct of a preliminary investigation such an officer could be

transferred out even without prior notice. It was his position that the

transfer order was made under this Section. Section 222 of the Rules

further imposes a duty on the appointing authority that it shall convey

the reasons in writing to the officer concerned. Thus, the Petitioner

contends that the impugned transfer is illegal, as it was made in

violation of the provisions contained in these Sections.

In presenting a counter argument, learned Addl. S.G submitted

that in fact an exigency arose to have the Petitioner transferred out with

immediate effect, in order to conclude the investigations against him as

his presence in the school as its principal had become a hindrance to

record statements of those who came under his direct control and

supervision. She submitted therefore he was rightly transferred out on

exigencies of services to assume duties as Assistant Director of

Education at the Provincial Department of Education. She further

submitted that since the completion of the preliminary inquiries, the

Petitioner was served with a charge sheet containing a total 13 charges,

which in itself is an indication as to the seriousness of the allegations

and the nature of the inquiries that had been conducted by the

Respondents. Learned Addl. S.G. also contended that the Petitioner had

made blatantly a false statement in his petition by stating that no

disciplinary action whatsoever had been initiated or taken against the

Petitioner.

S.C. /FR A/ No. 374/2017

17

It appears from the contention that had been advanced by the

Petitioner, that he presupposes the fact that an Appointing Authority

could transfer a public officer, who is facing a preliminary inquiry from

station he currently serves, only under Section 222(iii) as that is the sub

Section, which provide for situations where it found that the retention

of that officer may obstruct the conduct of a preliminary inquiry. This

Section deals with transfers made on disciplinary grounds.

However, the Petitioner was transferred not on disciplinary

grounds but on exigencies of service, as the said letters P17 and P18

clearly indicate. In view of the contention of the Petitioner, a question

arises whether there is a similar provision in the Rules of Procedure that

govern transfers on exigencies of service, which also permits the

Appointing Authority to transfer an officer due his failure to cooperate

with the conduct of a preliminary inquiry. Section 218, which generally

deals with transfers made on exigencies of service, in sub section (iii)

provides an answer to that question in the affirmative. Section 218(iii)

states [W]here it is found, due to administrative reasons, that the retention

of an officer in his present station is not suitable.

Thus, in both these instances, Rules of Procedure indeed provide

for transfer of a Public Officer from his current station, but such a

transfer could validly be made only when the conditions that are

stipulated in the said Sections are satisfied and fully complied with.

However, it must be noted here that the considerations that apply in

these two specific instances are slightly different to each other in certain

aspects.

In view of the Respondents justification of the transfer and the

Petitioners contention that it was a concocted position, taken up

S.C. /FR A/ No. 374/2017

18

belatedly as an attempt to justify otherwise an illegal transfer, it

becomes necessary at this stage to consider whether there were factors

which could reasonably be taken as administrative reasons which in

turn would render the retention of an officer in his present station is not

suitable, and those factors did exist before the issuance of P17 (on

22.09.2017).

It has been stated earlier on in this judgment that there was a

preliminary inquiry that had already been conducted against the

Petitioner on irregular admission of students and its report R2 was

tendered. During this inquiry, as R2 indicate, the Petitioner had

provided necessary information to the inquirer facilitating the conduct

of the said inquiry. The Deputy Director made a log entry of the school

on 10.03.2017 (R3), expressing his appreciation of the assistance

rendered by the Petitioner and his staff during the course of his inquiry.

The Respondents have not decided that at that point of time that it was

expedient to transfer the Petitioner, notwithstanding the serious

allegation that had been inquired into i.e., irregular admission of

students.

In addition to the said allegation, there were other anonymous

complaints alleging several other acts of wrongdoing on the part of the

Petitioner. One such allegation was that the Petitioner had misused the

school grounds by allowing it to be used as a parking area and collected

a substantial amount of funds. The Petitioner himself was aware of

these allegations as some of the anonymous petitions were in fact

copied to him (P12(a)-(e)) by the Respondents themselves.

The inquirer, who was appointed to inquire into the said

allegation of misuse of school grounds, reported back to 12th

S.C. /FR A/ No. 374/2017

19

Respondent that the Petitioner declined to make a statement, when

requested to do so on 13.09.2017 and continued to avoid making one,

despite several opportunities being afforded for that purpose (R5). The

said report highlighted the fact that the Petitioner also failed to

handover the receipt books used to issue parking tickets and owing to

those reasons the inquirer was unable to complete her report.

It was during this time that the Presidential Secretariat, directed

the 1st Respondent to submit a report on or before 22.08.2017 for the

consideration of the President of the Republic (R6).

The conduct attributed to the Petitioner, as indicative in the

report R5, signifies a clear change of his behaviour towards the pending

inquiries. Having rendered his assistance to conduct the first inquiry

(P2), after a mere lapse of six months and whilst serving in the same

school, the Petitioner had adopted a contrasting approach with a view

to delay the conclusion of several inquiries that were pending against

him. This was noted by the 11th Respondent who conveyed same to the

1st Respondent, by a letter dated 18.09.2017 (R8).

The 1st instance of the Petitioners evasive approach was noted by

the Respondents on 13.09.2017(R5). In R5 a specific reference was made

that the Petitioner refused to make a statement citing different reasons.

The 2nd instance of not cooperating with the inquirers was noted in R8,

a letter issued on 18.09.2017.

Paragraph 13.11 of Chapter XLVIII of the Establishment Code,

under the heading Rules of Disciplinary Procedure it is stated that

[I]t would be an act of grave misconduct for an officer to refuse to make a

statement with regard to an investigation when he is required to do so by an

S.C. /FR A/ No. 374/2017

20

officer duly appointed to conduct a preliminary investigation. When such an

incident is reported by an officer conducting a preliminary investigation, it will

be the responsibility of the relevant Head of Institution to report such fact to

the relevant Disciplinary Authority to enable him to take disciplinary action

against the officer concerned.

Contrary to the claim of the Petitioner that he was illegally

transferred out for extraneous reasons, it is thus evident that the

Respondents have taken the decision to transfer him only after they

were made aware of his conduct, which was clearly indicative of his

reluctance to voluntarily participate in the inquiries pending against

him. In addition, the Petitioner was reported by the inquirer, due to the

failure of the former to submit relevant documentation that were in his

possession, when demanded.

In view of the foregoing, I am of the considered view that there

were factors that were presented before for the Respondents for them to

reasonably entertain administrative reasons that the retention of an

officer in his present station is not suitable. In the judgment of

Waidyaratne v Provincial Commissioner- Local Government and

Others (SCFR Application No. 137/2011 decided on 25.10.2019)

Amarasekara, J. was of the view when there are grounds to satisfy that

there was a situation that demanded the transfer was necessary for the

proper administration of the service and the workplace, a need of a

disciplinary inquiry does not arise.

The other premise on which the Petitioner sought to impugn the

decision to transfer (P17) was the failure of the Respondents to provide

reasons for the said decision other than merely stating exigencies of

service. He relied on the Section 221 where it states that the Appointing

S.C. /FR A/ No. 374/2017

21

Authority shall convey reasons to the officer concerned. Section 221 not

only imposes a duty on the Appointing Authority to convey reasons for

the decision to transfer but also impose a similar duty that it shall

record in the relevant file clearly all the factors that caused the transfer of an

officer on exigencies of service.

It is to be noted that the 1st Respondent, failed to tender a copy of

the minute/entry made in the relevant file, in which the several factors

that contributed to the decision to transfer, should have been clearly set

out. The letter of transfer P17 merely conveyed that the Petitioner was

transferred due to exigencies of service. It cannot be emphasised

enough that the necessity to comply with the Rules of Procedure, as set

out by the Public Service Commission, by the Appointing Authorities

and thereby ensuring transparency in the decision-making process

regarding transfer of public officers on exigencies of service. The strict

compliance of the Rules is therefore fundamental to the proper

administration of the Public Service.

The question, whether the Petitioner was conveyed of the reasons

of his transfer, shall be considered next. In this particular instant, it

must be noted that the Petitioner was possessed of the fact of his

impending transfer well in advance, even prior to the issuance of P17

on 22.09.2017. This was evident from the contents of the letter P12(f)

annexed to the petition. The Petitioner tendered copies of several

anonymous letters and petitions were sent to him by the 11th and 12th

Respondents, annexed to his petition. Letter P12(f) to be a one such

petition, appears to have been sent by a group of parents who attended

a meeting convened by the Petitioner. What is important is that the said

meeting was convened on 20.09.2017, two days prior to the issuance of

S.C. /FR A/ No. 374/2017

22

P17, and the Petitioner had publicly declared in that gathering of his

transfer. He described his imminent transfer as a promotional transfer.

There is no denial by the Petitioner in his petition as to the truth of the

contents of this particular letter or to the specific event it speaks of.

Prior to this meeting, a petition was signed by 132 members of the staff

of Vidyartha College, addressed the Chief Minister informing him of

certain moves to have the Petitioner transferred out (P15).

The Petitioner claims there were strong rumours indicating that

he would be transferred out soon. But it is evident from this letter,

despite the rumours, the Petitioner himself was aware of the fact that he

would be transferred out of the school. He also knew that transfer in

effect offered him a promotion. Coupled with this fact, the Petitioners

presence in the Provincial Department of Education on 22.09.2017 for

the purpose of making a statement (R10), being the day on which P17

was issued, makes it more probable that he was informed of the reasons

for the issuance of letter P17 as well.

Letter of transfer P17 was signed by the 1st Respondent whereas

letter of transfer P18 was signed by the 12th Respondent on the

25.09.2017. The fact that Petitioner was in contact with the 12th

Respondent in the previous day, before P18 was signed, is evident from

his own statement to police on 24.09.2017 (P10(e)). In his statement, the

Petitioner mentions that he sought advice on that very morning from

the 12th Respondent before making the statement, meant for future

reference. In these circumstances, it is highly unlikely that the Petitioner

was not informed of the reasons for his transfer, given the apparent

close relationship he had with the 12th Respondent.

S.C. /FR A/ No. 374/2017

23

The Petitioner, however, averred in paragraph 31 of his petition

that to my shock and surprise, I received a letter on 25.09.2017 from/through

the 12th Respondent, which enclosed a further letter sent to me by the 1st

Respondents predecessor in office (dated 22.09.2017) informing that I had

been transferred with immediate effect . In view of the several factors

considered in the preceding paragraph, this particular averment of the

Petitioner, claiming that he was surprised to receive the transfer order,

could not be accepted as an accurate description of the events that had

taken place. Thus, the fact that Petitioner had prior knowledge of his

impending transfer and the type of transfer is undoubtedly evident

from his own actions.

Section 221 as well as Section 222 (iii) imposes a duty on the

Appointing Authority to convey reasons for transfer to the officer

concerned. Section 221 lay down the procedure and the manner in

which a decision should be made to transfer a public officer on

exigencies of service, when it specified a requirement of making an

entry in the relevant file of all the factors that caused the transfer. It also

imposes a similar duty that it shall be conveyed to the officer under

transfer.

However, a significant difference exists in relation to the manner

of conveying the reasons. Section 222 (iii) speaks of conveying the

reasons to transfer in writing to the transferred officer whereas Section

221, speaks of mere conveying the reasons, allowing the Appointing

Authority to convey reasons for transfer to the concerned officer in any

other form as well.

Returning to the question, whether the 1st Respondent

conveyed the reasons to the Petitioner in this particular instance, in

S.C. /FR A/ No. 374/2017

24

my view, it could be answered in the affirmative since he was most

probably was verbally conveyed of the reasons for his transfer.

Although this form of informal conveyance cannot be considered

as the best method that should be adopted and followed by the

Appointing Authority in making orders for transfer, nor it could be

taken as an acceptable manner of formally conveying the reasons for

transfer. In Range Bandara v Gen. Anuruddha Ratwatte and Another

(1997) 3 Sri L.R. 360 Mark Fernando J held (at p. 372);

the summary transfer of the petitioner to a distant place

was unreasonable, on the material available to the 2nd

respondent, and it was also a misuse of discretion to withhold

from him the true reason for the transfer, because it deprived

him of the opportunity to rebut it.

A similar approach was taken in Chandrasena v Kulatunga and

Others (1996) 2 Sri L.R. 327. Connected to the issue of giving reasons for

the transfer, learned Presidents Counsel for the Petitioner relied on the

judgment of Sripavan CJ in Sumedha Jayaweera v Prof. Dayasiri

Fernando (supra) where his Lordship states thus;

Giving of reasons is an essential element of administration of

justice. A right to reason is, therefore, an indispensable part of a

sound system of judicial review. Reasoned decision is not only for

the purpose of showing that the citizen is receiving justice, but also a

valid discipline for the administrative body itself. Conveying reasons

is calculated to prevent unconscious, unfairness or arbitrariness in

reaching the conclusions. The very search for reasons will put the

authority on the alert and minimize the chances of unconscious

infiltration of bias or unfairness in the conclusion. The duty to

S.C. /FR A/ No. 374/2017

25

adduce reasons will be regarded as fair and legitimate by a

reasonable man and will discard irrelevant and extraneous

considerations. Therefore, conveying reasons is one of the essentials

of justice (Vide S. N. Mukherjee Vs. Union of India (1990) 4

S.CC.C. 594; A.I.R. 1990 S.C. 1984.

But, since the circumstances referred to in the preceding

paragraphs are strongly supportive of the conclusion that the Petitioner

had been adequately forewarned of the impending transfer and

therefore the reasons for his transfer were conveyed to the Petitioner

even before P17 was issued, it could be taken as sufficient compliance of

the procedural requirements imposed by Section 221, in relation to this

particular instance.

In a recent pronouncement of this Court, the judgment of

Bandulani Basnayake v Sunil Hettiarachchi and Others (SC(FR)

Application No. 311/2016 decided on 16.10.2023) De Silva J, in

reference to the Rules made by Public Service Commission stated [I]t is

important to follow them in all matters pertaining to public officers. Failure to

do so will result in a violation of Article 12(1) of the Constitution. This was

an instance where this Court found an infringement of fundamental

rights of the petitioner, when she was transferred on exigencies of

service, after an audit inquiry which conducted and concluded without

recording a statement from her and thereby denying her an opportunity

to respond to any of the allegations that had been inquired into.

Strangely, the said audit report did not even recommend her transfer.

However, the factual position revealed from the pleadings in the

instant matter is totally different to the position revealed in the said

application.

S.C. /FR A/ No. 374/2017

26

Thus, after a careful consideration of all the circumstances, I am

of the view that the decision to transfer the Petitioner was made on

account of his conduct which provided justification for entertaining an

administrative reason that a preliminary inquiry could not be

conducted unimpeded with the presence of the Petitioner. The said

decision thus cannot be termed as an unreasonable decision. Moreover,

the Respondents have sufficiently conveyed reasons for the transfer

order, well in advance to the issuance of P17.

In these circumstances, I hold that the Petitioner failed to

establish that the executive and administrative action of the

Respondents in transferring him, infringed his fundamental rights

guaranteed to under Articles 12(1) and 14(1)(g) of the Constitution.

Accordingly, the petition of the Petitioner is dismissed without

costs.

Application dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

BUWANEKA ALUWIHARE, PC., J. I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

JANAK DE SILVA, J I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT