==== BLOCKS ==== 

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 1

IN THE SUPREME COURT

OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the nature of a Fundamental Rights

Application invoking the jurisdiction of the

Supreme Court under Articles 126 read

with 17 of the Constitution.

SC FR Application No. 23/2014

1. D.D. Matharaarachchi

No. 189/1, 2nd Lane,

Daham Mawatha, Palenwatta,

Pannipitiya.

2. Sri Lanka Planning Service

Association

Ministry of Highways,

9th Floor, “Sethsiripaya”,

Battaramulla.

3. Hewa Gamage Piyarathna

No. 40/1/1, 2nd Lane, Gemunupura,

Pelawatte,

Pannipitiya.

4. Rajaye Ayurveda Waidya

Niladareenge Sangamaya

No. 130/10A, Samanala Place,

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 2

Navinna,

Maharagama.

5. W.A.K. Karunathilaka

Research Officer,

Nature Resource Management

Centre,

P.O. Box 52,

Peradeniya.

6. Epa Kankanamge Premasiri

Assistant Director,

Ministry of Education,

Isurupaya,

Battaramulla.

Petitioners

vs.

1. P.B. Abeykoon

Secretary,

Ministry of Public Administration,

Independence Square,

Colombo 7.

1A. J. Dadellage

Secretary,

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 3

Ministry of Public

Administration and Local

Government,

Independence Square,

Colombo 7.

1B. J.J. Rathnasiri

Secretary,

Ministry of Public

Administration and Local

Government,

Independence Square,

Colombo 7.

1C. N.M.P.K. Mayadunne

Secretary,

Ministry of Public

Administration and Home

Affairs, Provincial Councils and

Local Government,

Independence Square,

Colombo 7.

1D. N. Bandara Hapuhinne

Former Secretary,

Ministry of Public

Administration and Home

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 4

Affairs, Provincial Councils and

Local Government,

Independence Square,

Colombo 7.

1E. Pradeep Yasaratna

Secretary,

Ministry of Public

Administration and Home

Affairs, Provincial Councils and

Local Government,

Independence Square,

Colombo 7.

2. Dayasiri Fernando

Former Chairman

The Public Service Commission,

No. 177, Nawala Road, Narahenpita.

2B. Sathya Hettige

Former Chairman

The Public Service Commission,

No. 177, Nawala Road,

Narahenpita.

2C. Dharmasena Dissanayake

Former Chairman

The Public Service Commission,

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 5

No. 177, Nawala Road,

Narahenpita.

2D. Jagath Balapatabendi

Former Chairman

The Public Service Commission,

No. 177, Nawala Road,

Narahenpita.

2E. Sanath J. Ediriweera

Chairman

The Public Service Commission,

No. 1200/9, Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

3. S.C. Mannapperuma

Former Member

The Public Service Commission,

No. 177, Nawala Road, Narahenpita.

3B. Kanthi Wijetunga

Former Member

The Public Service Commission,

No. 177, Nawala Road,

Narahenpita.

3C. A. Salam Abdual Waid

Former Member

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 6

The Public Service Commission,

No. 177, Nawala Road,

Narahenpita.

3D. Indrani Sugathdasa

Former Member

The Public Service Commission,

No. 177, Nawala Road,

Narahenpita.

3E. N.H.M. Chithrananda

Member

The Public Service Commission,

No. 1200/9, Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

4. Ananda Seneviratne

Former Member

The Public Service Commission,

No. 177, Nawala Road,

Narahenpita.

4B. Sunil A. Sirisena

Former Member

The Public Service Commission,

No. 177, Nawala Road,

Narahenpita.

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 7

4C. D. Shirantha Wijayatilaka

Former Member

The Public Service Commission,

No. 177, Nawala Road,

Narahenpita.

4D. V. Sivagananasothi,

Former Member

The Public Service Commission,

No. 177, Nawala Road,

Narahenpita.

4E. G.S.A. de silva

Member

The Public Service Commission,

No. 1200/9, Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

5. N.H. Pathirana

Former Member

No. 177, Nawala Road,

Narahenpita.

5B. L.N. Soyza

Former Member

The Public Service Commission,

No. 177, Nawala Road,

Narahenpita.

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 8

5C. Prathap Ramanujam,

Former Member

The Public Service Commission,

No. 177, Nawala Road,

Narahenpita.

5D. V. Sivagananasotji

Former Member

The Public Service Commission,

No. 177, Nawala Road,

Narahenpita.

5E. A.D.N. de Zoysa

Member

The Public Service Commission,

No. 1200/9, Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

6. Palitha M. Kumarasinghe

Former Member

The Public Service Commission,

No. 177, Nawala Road,

Narahenpita.

6A. V. Jegarasasingam,

Former Member

The Public Service Commission,

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 9

No. 177, Nawala Road,

Narahenpita.

6B. Ahammed Lebbe Mohammed

Saleem,

Former Member

The Public Service Commission,

No. 177, Nawala Road,

Narahenpita.

6C. S.N. Mohomed

Member

The Public Service Commission,

No. 1200/9, Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

7. Sirimavo A. Wijeratne,

Former Member

The Public Service Commission,

No. 177, Nawala Road,

Narahenpita.

7A. Santi Nihal Seneviratne,

Former Member

The Public Service Commission,

No. 177, Nawala Road,

Narahenpita.

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 10

7B. Leelasna Liyabagama

Former Member

The Public Service Commission,

No. 177, Nawala Road,

Narahenpita.

7C. Ranjani Madarajapillei

Member

The Public Service Commission,

No. 1200/9, Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

8. Thillanadarajah,

Former Member

The Public Service Commission,

No. 177, Nawala Road,

Narahenpita.

8A. S. Ranugge

Former Member

The Public Service Commission,

No. 177, Nawala Road,

Narahenpita.

8B. Dian Gomas

Former Member

The Public Service Commission,

No. 177, Nawala Road,

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 11

Narahenpita.

8C. C. Pallegam

Member

The Public Service Commission,

No. 1200/9, Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

9. A. Mohomed Nahhiya

Former Member

The Public Service Commission,

No. 177, Nawala Road,

Narahenpita.

9A. D.L. Mendis

Former Member

The Public Service Commission,

No. 177, Nawala Road,

Narahenpita.

9B. Dilith Jayaweera

Former Member

The Public Service Commission,

No. 177, Nawala Road,

Narahenpita.

9C. M.B.R. Pushpakumara

Member

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 12

The Public Service Commission,

No. 1200/9, Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

10. M.D.W. Ariyansa,

Former Member

The Public Service Commission,

No. 177, Nawala Road,

Narahenpita.

10A. A. Sarath Jayathilak

Former Member

The Public Service Commission,

No. 177, Nawala Road,

Narahenpita.

10B. W.H. Piyadasa

Former Member

The Public Service Commission,

No. 177, Nawala Road,

Narahenpita.

10C. N. Selva Kumaran

Member

The Public Service Commission,

No. 1200/9, Rajamalwatta Road,

Battaramulla.

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 13

11. Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondents

Before: Justice Yasantha Kodagoda, PC

Justice A.H.M.D. Nawaz

Justice Kumudini Wickremasinghe

Appearance: Manohara de Silva, PC with Hirosha Munasinghe,

Harithriya Kumarage, Sasiri Chandrasiri and Senal

Kariyawasam instructed by Anusha Perusinge for the

Petitioners.

Dr. Avanti Perera, Deputy Solicitor General for the

Respondents.

Written Submissions: For the Petitioners: Pre-argument written submissions on 4th

July 2024, and post-argument written submissions on 28th

November 2024.

For the Respondents: Pre-argument written submissions on

21st October 2021 and post-argument written submissions on

4th November 2024.

Argued on: 29th August, 2024

Decided on: 25th February, 2026

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 14

JUDGMENT

Yasantha Kodagoda, PC, J.

Preliminaries

1. This Judgment relates to an Application filed invoking the jurisdiction of this

Court vested in it by Articles 126 read with 17 of the Constitution. Following the

Application having been Supported, a differently constituted Bench of this Court

had granted Leave to Proceed under Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

2. This Application has been filed on behalf of four (4) groups of public servants who

belong to the following All-Island services of the public sector:

i. Sri Lanka Planning Service

ii. Sri Lanka Ayurvedic Medical Service

iii. Sri Lanka Agriculture Service

iv. Sri Lanka Education Administrative Service

3. The cause for the institution of this Fundamental Rights Application is the

publication of a Gazette notification by T.M.L.C. Senaratne, the then Secretary of

the Public Service Commission who had acted pursuant to a directive issued by

the Public Service Commission (of which the 2nd Respondent had been the

Chairman and the 3rd to 10th Respondents had been Members of the said

Commission at the time of filing the Application). The notification is captioned

“Minute of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service”. This ‘Service Minute’ is

contained in the Gazette of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, No.

1842/2 dated 23rd December 2013 (“P11”).

4. The afore-said Service Minute of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service (“P11”)

states that it shall come into operation with effect from 1st July 2012 and would

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 15

replace the Service Minute of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service dated 28th

October 2005. This Service Minute (“P11”) contains inter-alia a list of 381 posts

(listed in its Appendix marked “A”) which only officers of the Sri Lanka

Administrative Service shall be entitled to hold. These posts have been classified

under different Grades of officers of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service who

would be entitled to hold such posts. Furthermore, the list contains a reference to

which State sector institution in which the relevant post shall exist and whether

the respective post is attached to the Government or to a Provincial Council.

5. The grievance of the Petitioners pertaining to this Service Minute of the Sri Lanka

Administrative Service (“P11”) stem from the following reasons:

i. That certain posts previously assigned to certain other All-island Services,

such as the All-Island Services being represented by the Petitioners, have

by “P11” been exclusively assigned to officers of the Sri Lanka

Administrative Service.

ii. That a similar provision has not been made identifying posts in the public

sector to be exclusively assigned to be held by officers of the other All-

Island Services such as those being represented by the Petitioners.

iii. That posts which the All-Island Services, being represented by the

Petitioners, should be entitled to hold, have now been exclusively assigned

to officers of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service.

iv. That the identification of posts to be exclusively held by officers of the Sri

Lanka Administrative Service had been decided upon in an arbitrary or

unreasonable manner.

Due to these reasons, the Petitioners have impugned this (presently operative)

Service Minute of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service (“P11”) issued in

December 2013.

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 16

Preview of the Judgment

6. This Judgment initially considers the factual basis for the allegation of the

Petitioners in respect of the impugned Service Minute of the Sri Lanka

Administrative Service and the explanation provided in that regard by the

Respondents. It also considers the nature, manifestations and the requirements

imposed by the Fundamental right to Equality recognized by Article 12(1) of the

Constitution and views the impugned Service Minute (“P11”) in the light of those

legal requirements. Finally, the Judgment contains a finding on whether by the

issuance of the impugned Service Minute (“P11”) of the Sri Lanka Administrative

Service, the Fundamental rights of the Petitioners guaranteed by Article 12(1) have

been infringed.

The complaint of the Petitioners

7. The Petitioners claim that the decision contained in the afore-stated Gazette

notification (“P11”) infringe their Fundamental right to Equality and Equal

protection of the law, guaranteed by Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

8. Giving contextual background to the complaint presented to this Court, the

Petitioners have provided, albeit brief, the following narrative:

i. In the public sector, primarily, staff officer level (Executive Grade)

appointments are held by (i) officers of ‘All-island Services’, (ii) officers of

certain ‘Closed Services’ and by (iii) officers of ‘Combined Services’.

ii. The following eleven (11) Services have been recognized and nomenclated

as ‘All-Island Services’:

a) Sri Lanka Engineering Service

b) Sri Lanka Administrative Service

c) Sri Lanka Planning Service

d) Sri Lanka Scientific Service

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 17

e) Sri Lanka Agriculture Service

f) Sri Lanka Accountants Service

g) Sri Lanka Education Administrative Service

h) Sri Lanka Animal Production and Health Service

i) Sri Lanka Medical Service

j) Sri Lanka Architecture Service

k) Sri Lanka Ayurvedic Medical Service

iii. Appointments, emoluments receivable, Grades and promotions of officers

belonging to each of these All-Island Services are governed by their

respective Service Minutes.

iv. A large number of positions including almost all senior managerial,

administrative and other high positions in the public sector (excluding

posts of heads of government departments who unless otherwise provided

are appointed by the Cabinet of Ministers and certain other posts allocated

for officers of ‘Closed Services’) are held by officers of these ‘All-Island

Services’. These top positions in the public service include those with

designations such as Additional Secretaries, Senior Assistant Secretaries

and Assistant Secretaries to Ministries, Commissioners, and Directors.

v. In November 2005, the 1988 Service Minute of the Sri Lanka Administrative

Service was repealed and a new Service Minute was introduced. By the new

Service Minute, a ‘Special Grade’ was introduced above ‘Class I’. This new

Service Minute of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service was published as a

Gazette notification in Gazette Extraordinary dated 14th November 2005

(“P4”).

vi. This new Service Minute of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service (“P4”)

provided under the caption ‘Schedule of SLAS Posts’ a list of posts which

officers of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service could aspire to hold. That

list included posts which only officers of the ‘Special Grade’ were entitled

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 18

to hold. These were very high posts in the public sector, and these were

posts which previously officers of ‘Grade I’ of all the All-Island Services

could aspire to hold (independent of the All-Island Service to which they

belonged). This in effect prevented officers of ‘Grade I’ of the other All-

Island Services from holding such higher posts listed under the ‘Special

Grade’ of the ‘Schedule of SLAS Posts’ in “P4”.

vii. Either parallel or soon after the issue of “P4”, the Service Minutes of the

other All-Island Services were not revised, introducing a ‘Special Grade’ to

each of those Services. This resulted in only some officers of the Sri Lanka

Administrative Service (as opposed to senior officers of the other All-Island

Services) being appointed to the ‘Special Grade’.

viii. In April 2006, Public Administration Circular No. 6/2006 (“P3”) was issued

by the Secretary to the Ministry of Public Administration and Home Affairs,

which inter-alia provided for the following:

a) Recategorization of Grades III, II and I.

b) Introduction of a ‘Special Grade’ over and above ‘Grade I’ to which

officers who had completed five (5) years in ‘Grade I’ of any of the

All-Island Services were entitled to be promoted to. (This was to

prevent stagnation in Grade I.)

c) Introduction of a two-fold promotion scheme for officers of the All-

Island Services to rise up the several Grades. This scheme provided

for (a) an exceptional performer to be eligible to earn his first

promotion at the end of the sixth (6th) year following recruitment,

based on passing a competitive examination, and (b) an officer

whose performance is judged to be average at the afore-stated

process of appraisal, to be promoted at the end of the tenth (10th)

year following recruitment.

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 19

ix. Public Administration Circular No. 06/2006 (“P3”) necessitated the

revision of the Service Minutes of the several All-Island Services. This was

particularly due to the introduction of the ‘Special Grade’.

x. In this backdrop, most of the All-Island Services represented in this

Application jointly filed Fundamental Rights Application No. 17/2006

complaining that “P4” caused injustice to them, as by that time only some

of the officers of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service were in the ‘Special

Grade’ and therefore only such officers were entitled to hold the high posts

contained in “P4”. On 3rd December 2008, proceedings relating to that

Application was terminated, as the Public Service Commission undertook

to the Supreme Court to amend “P4” so as to address the concerns of the

Petitioners in that Application.

xi. Consequent thereto, “P4” was revised by the inclusion of the following

averment at the end of the list of posts that had been assigned for officers

of the ‘Special Grade’ of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service:

“Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the SLAS Minute, posts already

approved for the All-Island Services would continue to be held by the respective

Services.”

Revised “P4” was published in Gazette Extraordinary No. 1773/23 dated 28th

August 2012 (“P7”).

xii. However, the Service Minutes of the other All-Island Services were not

amended in line with Public Administration Circular No. 06/2006. This

resulted in none of the officers of the other All-Island Services being entitled

for promotion to the ‘Special Grade’ in their respective services. This led to

some of the Petitioners in this Application together with some others of the

All-Island Services not represented in this Application filing Fundamental

Rights Application No. 312/2008, seeking revision of their respective

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 20

Service Minutes as required by Public Administration Circular No. 06/2006

(“P3”).

xiii. Following a consideration of submissions made by the State Counsel who

represented the Respondents to that Application, on 6th March 2009, the

Supreme Court made the following order:

“State Counsel who appears for the 1st to 14th Respondents has no objection to

granting relief prayed for in paragraph (c) of the prayer to the Petition. In view of

this, the 1st to 14th Respondents are directed to implement what is requested in

prayer (c) within 3 months.” Accordingly, proceedings were terminated. [By

prayer (c), the Petitioners sought a direction to amend the Service Minutes

of the Sri Lanka Engineering Service, Sri Lanka Animal Production and

Health Service, Sri Lanka Planning Service, Sri Lanka Accountants Service

and the Sri Lanka Agriculture Service in the manner required by the afore-

stated Public Administration Circular.]

xiv. Consequent to this Order of the Supreme Court, the Service Minute of the

Sri Lankan Planning Service was amended so as to make it compliant with

Public Administration Circular No. 06/2006 by the recognition of a ‘Special

Grade’ and the inclusion of senior officers of ‘Grade I’ to the ‘Special Grade’.

It was published in Gazette Extraordinary No. 1670/32 dated 10th September

2010. (“P10a”). However, none of the Service Minutes of the other All-

Island Services were revised.

xv. It is in this backdrop that in December 2013, the Public Service Commission

issued “P11” which inter-alia contains a list of high posts in the public sector

which could be held only (exclusively) by officers of the Sri Lanka

Administrative Service.

xvi. Furthermore, neither the revised Service Minute of the Sri Lanka Planning

Service (“P10a”) issued on 10th September 2010, nor the Service Minutes of

the Sri Lanka Ayurveda Medical Service (“P10b” issued on 20th May 1996),

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 21

Sri Lanka Agricultural Service (“P10c” issued on 8th May 2002) and Sri

Lanka Education Administration Service (“P10d” issued on 1st March 2002)

contain a schedule of posts exclusively identified for officers of the

respective services, including high posts assigned for officers of the ‘Special

Grade’ of the respective services.

xvii. This placed officers of the other All-Island Services at a disadvantage vis-a-

viz officers of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service.

9. The position of the Petitioners is that, due to the following reasons, the impugned

Service Minute of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service (published in Gazette

Extraordinary No. 1842/2 dated 23rd December 2013 – “P11”) is unlawful, illegal

unreasonable and arbitrary:

i. Instead of reviewing and issuing a new Service Minute each for the All-

Island Services represented by the Petitioners, the Respondents have issued

a further Service Minute for the Sri Lanka Administrative Service. It has

resulted in a series of high posts being exclusively allocated for officers of

the Sri Lanka Administrative Service, including certain posts previously

held by certain officers of the other All-Island Services.

ii. “P11” would result in even very senior officers of the Special Grade of the

All-Island Services, represented by the Petitioners, being disqualified from

holding all high posts of the public sector, including certain posts they must

ideally hold. Some examples cited by the Petitioners are as follows:

a) Additional Commissioner General, Department of Agrarian

Development (held previously by an officer of the Sri Lanka

Agriculture Service)

b) Commissioner, Deputy Commissioner and Assistant

Commissioners of the Provincial Departments of Ayurveda

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 22

(previously held by officers of the Sri Lanka Ayurvedic Medical

Service)

c) Director, National Institute of Indigenous Medicine (previously

held by an officer of the Sri Lanka Ayurvedic Medical Service)

d) Additional Secretary and Director, Ministry of Agriculture

(previously held by officers of the Sri Lanka Agriculture Service)

e) Director, Provincial Agriculture Departments (previously held by

officers of the Sri Lanka Agriculture Service)

f) Additional Regional Education Directors (Administration) of the

Provincial Education Ministries (previously held by officers of the

Sri Lanka Education and Administrative Service)

iii. “P11” is contrary to the settlement reached between the parties in SC FR

Application No. 17/2006.

iv. The assignment of posts in the public sector (as contained in “P11”) to

officers of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service has been decided upon by

the Respondents without any logical basis or rational justification and is

thus arbitrary and irrational.

v. Implementation of “P11” will result in promotions of public officers of the

All-Island Services, being represented by the Petitioners, being curtailed,

and their being unable to assume high posts in the public sector.

vi. “P11” is tantamount to a change in policy relating to the public sector,

which should have been decided upon in terms of Article 55(4) of the

Constitution only by the Cabinet of Ministers. The contents of “P11” had

not been decided upon by the Cabinet of Ministers. Thus, in issuing “P11”,

the Respondents have acted ultra-vires their powers.

vii. “P11” contravenes Article 55(3) of the Constitution, and therefore is

unconstitutional.

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 23

viii. The Petitioners had a legitimate expectation of being able to hold senior

posts in the public sector, which by “P11” have now been exclusively

assigned to officers of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service.

ix. Prior to formulating “P11”, the Petitioners were not afforded a hearing on

the proposed scheme, and thus their legitimate expectations have been

unlawfully frustrated.

Submissions of President’s Counsel for the Petitioners

10. Mr. Manohara De Silva, PC submitted that the issuance of “P11” was against the

spirit of the settlements reached in SC/FR 17/2006 and SC/FR 312/2016. He

submitted that both those Applications were settled on the understanding reached

between the parties that the officers of the several All-Island Services being

represented by the Petitioners would be treated by the Public Service Commission

and other authorities in an equitable manner. Learned President’s Counsel

submitted that the said expectation had been breached by the Respondents by

listing in the schedule of “P11” a series of high-profile posts that may be held only

by officers of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service. Thus, officers of the other All-

Island Services had not been treated in an equitable manner.

11. Learned President’s Counsel emphasized that the identification of such posts to be

held only by officers of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service had been done in an

arbitrary and unreasonable manner and thus was unlawful. He submitted that in

these circumstances, the impugned Service Minute of the Sri Lanka

Administrative Service (“P11”) was an infringement of the Fundamental rights of

the Petitioners guaranteed by Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

12. Furthermore, learned President’s Counsel submitted that implementation of

“P11” would result in (a) the Petitioners and other public servants whom they

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 24

represent being deprived of assuming and serving in a large number of posts to

which they and their respective predecessors were previously entitled to serve, (b)

such deprivation was caused without any valid basis, (c) the promulgation of

“P11” tantamounted to a change in State policy, which had been carried out

contrary to Article 55(4) of the Constitution, in that the Cabinet of Ministers had

not approved the change in such policy, (d) the Petitioners had been deprived of

their legitimate expectation of assuming some of the posts contained in Appendix

A of “P11”, and (e) the Petitioners were not afforded a hearing prior to the

formulation of “P11”.

13. Responding to the position taken up by the Respondents that the impugned

decisions which resulted in the issuance of “P11” was taken by the Director

General of the Department of Management Services (DGMS), learned President’s

Counsel emphasized that there was no ‘law’ that authorized such officer to

formulate Appendix “A” of “P11”. On that footing, he submitted that the Public

Service Commission cannot shield themselves of the responsibility of having

issued “P11”. Learned President’s Counsel submitted that, in terms of Article 55(3)

of the Constitution, the responsibility for determining which category of public

servant, possessing which attributes and aptitudes, is entitled to assume a

particular post in the public service lies with the Public Service Commission.

Furthermore, learned President’s Counsel emphatically expressed his

disagreement with the submission made on behalf of the Respondent’s by learned

Deputy Solicitor General, that the decision of the Director General of the

Department of Management Services with regard to posts to be assigned

exclusively for officers of the Sri Lanka Administrative Services was ‘final’. He

quipped that such submission was without any basis in ‘law’ and contrary to

contemporary judicial precedent regarding the Rule of Law and the scope of

Judicial Review of executive and administrative decisions.

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 25

Explanation provided by the Respondents

14. Jinasiri Dadellage (the holder of the office of the 1st Respondent – Secretary to the

Ministry of Public Administration and Management), by his Affidavit dated 26th

January 2016, has provided the following explanation:

i. Unlike the All-Island Services represented by the Petitioners and the other

All-Island Services, the Sri Lanka Administrative Service was established in

1822 during the British colonial rule of this country. It was previously

known as the ‘Ceylon Civil Service’ and thereafter as the ‘Ceylon

Administrative Service’. It was in 1972, that it was re-named the ‘Sri Lanka

Administrative Service’.

ii. Whether a particular post is departmental (assigned to a closed service) or

whether it belongs to an All-Island Service or to a Combined Service is

decided upon by the Director General of the Department of Management

Services. Decisions regarding the cadre and positions of the public sector is

arrived at when approving the cadre requested by a State institution. This

is done by taking into consideration the needs of the relevant service. It is

thereafter, that the decision is incorporated into the applicable Scheme of

Recruitment or to the Service Minute. It is a matter outside the purview of

the Public Service Commission.

iii. Senior posts in the public sector are not only assigned to officers of the

several All-Island Services. They are assigned to other services and

personnel as well.

iv. A ‘Special Grade’ was created above ‘Grade I’ of the All-Island Services and

was categorized as a ‘Senior Executive’ category. Salary code ‘SL.03-2006’

was assigned to it. Furthermore, according to Public Administration

Circular No. 6/2006, a post within the ‘Special Grade’ should be filled only

when a vacancy arises and from among officers who have completed five

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 26

(5) years in ‘Class I’ together with a total of eighteen (18) years in the

Executive category of the Public Service.

v. The posts in public services assigned to officers of the Sri Lanka

Administrative Service who belong to the ‘Special Grade’ and the other

Grades were first prepared and approved by the Director General of the

Department of Management Services, prior to their inclusion in “P4”.

vi. “P10a” was prepared to bring the Service Minute of the Sri Lanka Planning

Service compatible with Public Administration Circular No. 06/2006. In

September 2010, at a time when the Public Service Commission was

defunct, the Cabinet of Ministers approved “P10a”. The Service Minutes of

the Sri Lanka Agricultural Service (“P10b”) and the Sri Lanka Educational

Administrative Service (“P10c”) which were developed before, were

approved by the Public Service Commission (as it was functioning by that

time).

vii. The new Service Minute of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service (“P11”)

was formulated in accordance with the provisions of Public Administration

Circular No. 6/2006 and the settlement arrived at in SC/FR 17/2006.

Furthermore, policy clearance for that Service Minute was obtained from

the Cabinet of Ministers on 15th August 2013.

viii. Those positions (as approved by the Director General of the Management

Services – “Y1”) listed in ‘Appendix A’ of the Service Minute of the Sri

Lanka Administrative Service (“P11”) were determined based on (a) policy

considerations, (b) demands of the public service, and (c) requirements of

the respective service. In the future, based on the same considerations,

‘Appendix A’ will be revised from time to time.

ix. The post of ‘Additional Director General of the Department of National

Planning’ had been included in Appendix A, inadvertently.

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 27

x. The posts of ‘Additional Secretary of the Presidential Secretariat’ and

‘Director General of the Ministry of Finance and Planning’ have always

been held by officers of the Sri Lanka Administrative service. Whereas, the

posts of ‘Additional Secretary of Ministries’ have been held by officers of

the Sri Lanka Administrative Service and by officers of the other All- Island

Services. That has also been decided upon by the Director General of the

Department of Management Services, based on the classification of the post

and the nature of the duties and functions of such post (“Y2”).

xi. “P11” has been revised to enable the following positions (listed in “Y3”) to

be held by an officer of any All-Island Service:

a) Secretary, Public Service Commission

b) Secretary, National Police Commission

c) Secretary, Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or

Corruption

d) Secretary, Salaries and Cadre Commission

e) Secretaries of Provincial Ministries

f) Director General and Additional Director General, Customs

Department

g) Post Master General

This amendment to the Service Minute of the Sri Lanka Administrative has

been published in Gazette No. 1923/47 dated 16th July 2015.

xii. As at 20th November 2015, the Director General of the Department of

Management Services has from time to time approved certain posts to be

held by officers of the ‘Special Grade’ of the other All-Island Services.

(Those positions have been listed in documents produced marked “Y4A”,

“Y4B”, “Y5”, “Y6”, “Y7A” and “Y7B”.) This would amount to a revision of

“P11”.

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 28

15. In addition to the foregoing explanation, Dharmasena Dissanayake (the holder of

the office of the 2nd and 12th Respondents – Chairman, Public Service Commission)

by his Affidavit dated 5th February 2016 has in addition to corroborating the

position contained in the Affidavit of the Secretary to the Ministry of Public

Administration, provided to the following explanation as well:

i. Following a period of non-functioning, the Public Service Commission had

been re-constituted on or about 2nd July 2014.

ii. Determination of posts and cadre of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service

is a matter outside the purview of the Public Service Commission. The

Public Service Commission is only empowered to approve the Service

Minutes of the several Services and the Schemes of Recruitment of each

posts. Subject to policy clearance by the Cabinet of Ministers, they are

determined by the relevant administrative authority, and in this instance

by the Director General of the Department of Management Services.

iii. Appointments to senior administrative posts in the public sector are filled

in accordance with Articles 55(2) and 55(3) of the Constitution. Heads of

Departments are appointed by the Cabinet of Ministers and other positions

are filled according to the relevant Schemes of Recruitment and the Service

Minutes.

iv. There are several senior administrative posts that are not set apart

exclusively for officers of any of the All-Island Services.

v. The Petitioners do not have any legal right in respect of the posts contained

in Appendix ‘A’ of “P11”. The only legitimate expectation the Petitioners

could have (following the publication of “P4”) is that the posts already

approved or to be approved in the future for the several All-Island Services,

being represented by the Petitioners, will be available to be held by officers

of such All-Island Services.

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 29

vi. “P11” was formulated in accordance with Public Administration circular

No. 6/2006 and the settlement arrived at in SC FR Application No. 17/2006.

Policy clearance for the impugned Service Minute of the Sri Lanka

Administrative Service was granted by the Cabinet of Ministers on 15th

August 2013 (relevant Cabinet memorandum – “X3”, Cabinet Decision –

“X4”).

vii. “X5” reflects that, by letter dated 19th November 2013, the Director General

of the Department of Management Services has informed the Secretary to

the Ministry of Public Administration and Home Affairs that he has

approved the posts contained in Appendix ‘A’ of “P11” for the Sri Lanka

Administrative Service.

viii. The Director General of the Department of Management Services has

approved several posts for officers of the Special Grade of the Sri Lanka

Planning Service, Sri Lanka Agriculture Service, Sri Lanka Educational and

Administrative Service and the Sri Lanka Ayurvedic Medical Service.

Those will be enforced in due course.

Submissions of Deputy Solicitor General for the Respondents

16. Replying to the submissions of learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioners,

learned Deputy Solicitor General (DSG) Dr. Avanti Perera citing from the

published responsibilities of the Director General of the Department of

Management Services (DGMS), submitted that to the extent relevant to this

Application, it was the responsibility of the DGMS to inter-alia (i) determine the

cadre of each of the positions in the public sector, (ii) identify and include specific

posts in the public sector under a particular service, (iii) approve recruitment and

promotional procedures of the posts in the public sector, (iv) study and review

service minutes and service conditions, and (v) conduct studies on recruitment

policy.

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 30

17. Learned DSG submitted further that the contents of Service Minutes pertaining to

the categories of public officers who are eligible to hold specified posts in the

public sector is ultimately a reflection of State policy. In terms of Article 55(1), the

Cabinet of Ministers shall provide for and determine all matters of policy relating

to public officers, including policy relating to appointments, promotions, transfers,

disciplinary control and dismissal. According to Cabinet decision dated 21st

February 2013 (“X4”), the Cabinet of Ministers had decided that the list of posts to

be assigned exclusively for officers of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service (list of

posts in ‘Appendix A’ of “P11”) was to be updated in consultation with the

Department of Management Services. Accordingly, based on the needs of the

relevant Services, as intimated to it by the relevant administrative authorities and

having considered each post, the DGMS had by “Y1” approved the lists of posts

contained in ‘Appendix A’ of “P11”. Citing the contents of letter dated 19th

November 2023 (“X5”) sent by DGMS to the 1st Respondent (Secretary to the

Ministry of Public Administration), learned DSG submitted that DGMS had given

careful consideration to each post and determined whether or not such post should

be included in ‘Appendix A’ of “P11”, while giving reasons therefor. Learned DSG

therefore submitted that, the identification of posts to be included in ‘Appendix A’

of “P11” had been done by the DGMS in an objective manner and not in an ad-hoc

or arbitrary manner. She further submitted that, the posts listed in ‘Appendix A’

of “P11” was a culmination of the Cabinet decision (“X4”) and the approval given

by the DGMS as contained in “Y1”. Thus, she emphasized that ‘Appendix A’ of

“P11 was not the exclusive creation of the 1st Respondent (Secretary to the Ministry

of Public Administration) nor that of the 12th to 15th Respondents (Public Service

Commission). Therefore, learned DSG submitted that the formulation of

‘Appendix A’ of “P11” was completely outside the purview of the Public Service

Commission.

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 31

18. Furthermore, learned DSG submitted that, even though certain posts in the public

sector have been exclusively assigned to officers of the ‘Special Grade’ of the Sri

Lanka Administrative Service (as contained in “P11”), certain posts have been

similarly assigned (after the filing of this Application) and have been proposed to

be assigned to officers of the Sri Lanka Planning Service (“Y4A”, “X13”, “X14” and

“X17”), Sri Lanka Agriculture Service (“Y4B”, “X1”, “X8”, “X9” and “X19”), Sri

Lanka Education Administrative Service (“Y5”, “X2”, “X12” and “X18”) and the

Sri Lanka Ayurvedic Medical Service (“Y5”, “X15” and “X16”).

19. Learned DSG also submitted that the identification of posts to be exclusively

assigned to each All-Island Service is an ongoing process and “much water has

flowed since the Petitioners’ Application”.

20. Furthermore, learned DSG submitted that the Petitioners have failed to show how

the impugned decisions were grossly arbitrary, irrational or unreasonable.

21. Learned DSG also submitted that it would not be reasonable to expect this Court

to consider the justification for each of the posts in ‘Appendix A’ of “P11” to be

listed alongside each such post. That task learned DSG submitted “has already been

carried out by the 1st Respondent, with the approval of the Department of Management

Services”.

22. In these circumstances, learned Deputy Solicitor General submitted that the

position of the Respondents is that none of the Respondents have infringed the

fundamental rights of the Petitioners.

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 32

Analysis and Conclusions

23. Core issue which requires adjudication - While the case of the Petitioners is

founded upon multiple grounds including certain historical factors such as the

settlements reached in SC/FR 17/2006 and 312/2016 and their ensuing

expectations (which was categorized as being ‘the legitimate expectations of the

Petitioners’), the primary ground is premised upon the allegation that the

preparation of ‘Appendix A’ of “P11” which contains a list of senior managerial

and administrative posts in the public sector has been carried out in an arbitrary

and unreasonable manner and such posts have been exclusively assigned to

officers of the several Grades of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service.

Additionally, the Petitioners have alleged that similar exclusive allocations have

not been made for officers of the several Grades of the other All-Island Services

which the Petitioners represent. This additional ground was a fact as at the time

this Application was filed in January of 2014. However, as pointed out by learned

Deputy Solicitor General who represented the Respondents, this purported

anomaly has been addressed after this Application was filed. Several lists

containing posts that have been and will be exclusively assigned to the All-Island

Services which the Petitioners represent have been tendered to this Court by way

of Motions submitted to Court. Multiple documents (which have been referred to

in the learned DSG’s submissions referred to above) have been filed per each All-

Island Service, since such lists have evolved due to preparation of such lists going

through several rounds of review. However, learned President’s Counsel for the

Petitioners submitted that, although such posts are to be exclusively filled by

officers of the several Grades of the All-Island Services represented by the

Petitioners and the relevant lists have been prepared by the competent authorities,

the Petitioners are not satisfied. This is because the so-called ‘plum’ posts in the

public sector (set out in ‘Appendix A’) continue to remain within the list of posts

reserved to be exclusively filled by officers of the several Grades of the Sri Lanka

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 33

Administrative Service. Therefore, it is evident that the case of the Petitioners is in

fact founded upon the first ground referred to above; that being, the allegation that

‘Appendix A’ which contains posts in the public sector which are to be filled

exclusively from among officers of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service had been

prepared in an arbitrary and unreasonable manner, and thus the corresponding

decision to permit only officers of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service to fill such

posts, infringes the fundamental rights of the Petitioners guaranteed by Article

12(1) of the Constitution. While learned President’s Counsel insisted on the well-

founded nature of this allegation, the learned DSG vehemently denied this

allegation. In these circumstances, I shall approach the judicial adjudication of this

Fundamental Rights Application focused on that core issue.

24. Key questions to be answered - In the course of adjudicating this Application, I

shall seek to answer the following among other questions:

i. Have the decision-makers who decided upon the positions to be included

in ‘Appendix A’ of “P11” taken the corresponding decisions objectively or

in the alternative in an arbitrary or unreasonable manner?

ii. In taking such decisions, have the decision-makers been subjective and or

biased in favour of officers of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service?

iii. Are the corresponding decisions lawful and in national and public

interests?

iv. Are the impugned matters within the scope of judicial review of a

Fundamental Rights Application, or are they non-justiciable issues, which

are beyond the scope of the jurisdiction of this Court?

v. Would the answers to any one or more of these questions [questions (i) to

(iii) above] constitute an infringement of the Petitioners’ fundamental rights

guaranteed by Article 12(1) of the Constitution?

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 34

vi. Have any one or more of the Respondents infringed the fundamental rights

of the Petitioners guaranteed by Article 12(1)?

25. Officers of All-Island Services and which category (class) they belong – This

Fundamental Rights Application relates to public servants (officers) belonging to

four (4) All-Island Services (represented by the Petitioners) and the Sri Lanka

Administrative Service. This Court was informed that within the overall public

service of this country, there are another seven (7) other All-Island Services,

making a total of eleven (11) All-Island Services. In addition thereto, there are

certain other Services referred to as ‘Closed Services’ and ‘Combined Service’.

26. Both Counsel agreed with one another, and I too find myself in agreement with

the assertion that, all public servants (officers) of the eleven (11) All-Island Services

are –

a) public servants belonging to their respective All-Island Service, and

b) ranked either in the ‘Senior Executive’ or ‘Executive’ categories of

the public service of this country.

Therefore, they constitute one category (class), that being ‘officers of the several

All-Island Services of the public service of Sri Lanka’ who also belong to the ‘Senior

Executive’ and ‘Executive’ Grades of the public service.

27. Nevertheless, learned Deputy Solicitor General in her submissions seemed to

suggest that in comparison with the other ten (10) All-Island Services, officers of

the Sri Lanka Administrative Service constitute a special and superior category

(class). Thus, she attempted to justify the exclusive allocation of posts contained in

‘Appendix A’ of “P11” to public servants of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service.

Apart from adducing some historical facts that reflect its colonial origins and

heritage, no evidence in support of the proposition of their superiority was

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 35

presented to this Court. Due to the absence of evidence in support of that

contention of superiority, it is not possible for this Court to proceed on the footing

that officers of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service constitute a superior category

of public servants.

28. It is common ground that these public servants of the several All-Island Services

(including the Sri Lanka Administrative Service, the All-Island Services which the

Petitioners represent and the remaining ten (10) All-Island Services) -

i. possess certain core skills, experience, expertise and aptitudes which

are common to all officers of the same Grade of each such All-Island

Services, and

ii. possess certain other skills, experience, expertise and aptitudes

which are unique to officers of the same Grade of the respective All-

Island Service, and therefore uncommon to officers of the same

Grade of the other All-Island Services.

29. This necessitates me to proceed to adjudicate this matter (particularly for the

purpose of applying Article 12(1) of the Constitution) on the premise that, public

servants (officers) of each of the Grades (including the Special Grade) of the Sri

Lanka Administrative Service, Sri Lanka Planning Service, Sri Lanka Ayurvedic

Medical Service, Sri Lanka Agriculture Service and Sri Lanka Education

Administrative Service constitute five (5) distinct sub-categories (sub-classes) of

public servants belonging to five distinct Services. However, officers of these five

(5) All-Island Services along with officers of the other All-Island Services not

represented in these proceedings, do constitute one main category (class), which

single category can be nomenclated as ‘Officers of All-Island Services of the public

service of Sri Lanka’. In language that is often used by Counsel before the Supreme

Court, this situation can be described as ‘officers of the several All-Island Services are

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 36

in fact ‘apples’ and ‘oranges’ and several other distinct varieties of fruits (as per each All-

Island Service), yet, they are all ‘fruits’’. In this jargon, the class is a reference to

‘fruits’ and the sub-classes are references to ‘apples’ and ‘oranges’.

30. This same principle would apply to the other All-Island Services (the six such

other Services) which are not represented by the Petitioners. Each such All-Island

Service constitutes a separate sub-category within the earlier mentioned single

main category (class).

31. In these circumstances and based on the evidence placed before this Court, I

cannot treat any one All-Island Service as constituting a superior class within the

public service in comparison with the other All-Island Services. Thus, the eleven

(11) All-Island Services cannot be placed in a hierarchical order and must be placed

separately and collaterally under one broad category; that being ‘All-Island

Services of the public service of Sri Lanka’. However, within each such All-Island

Service, indeed officers of the Special Grade, Grade I, Grade II and Grade III must

be placed in a hierarchical order, in that sequence.

32. Public Administration Circular No. 06/2006 (“P3”) – In April 2006, titled

“Restructuring of Public Service Salaries based on Budget Proposals 2006” the then

Secretary of the Ministry of Public Administration and Home Affairs had issued

‘Public Administration Circular No. 06/2006’ (“P3”). This circular announced the

implementation of a new salary structure and other emoluments for public

servants, according to the basis contained in ‘Annexure I’ of that circular. This

circular prescribed the manner in which existing salaries were to be converted into

the new salary scales. The implementation of the new salary structure necessitated

all posts in the public service to be re-categorised / re-grouped by each Ministry

and Department based on the definitions contained in ‘Annexure II’ and in terms

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 37

of ‘Annexure III’ of the circular. “P3” also provided for restructuring of service

Grades III, II, I and Special Grade, and introduced a two-fold promotional scheme

from Grade III to II in the public service. According to the scheme, promotion from

Grade I to the Special Grade was after five (5) years. Implementation of these

schemes contained in “P3” necessitated the revision of the Service Minutes of the

several All-Island Services.

33. Impugned Service Minute of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service (“P11”) –

Published in Gazette Extraordinary No. 1842/2 of 23rd December 2013, captioned

“Minute of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service”, it has been issued by the then

Secretary of the Public Service Commission T.M.L. Senaratne. It is stated in its

‘Notification’ that it is being issued by the Order of the Public Service Commission.

It is also stated that it is to come into operation (and during the hearing it was

revealed that it did come into operation with retrospective effect) with effect from

1st July 2012. It causes the substitution of the previous Minute of the Sri Lanka

Administrative Service dated 28th October 2005 (published in Gazette Extraordinary

No. 1419/3 dated 14th November 2005 - “P4”) and amendments made to it from

time to time.

34. Decision-maker of impugned “P11” - Throughout her submissions, learned

Deputy Solicitor General laid emphasis on the fact that ‘Appendix A’ of “P11” had

been originally prepared by the Secretary to the Ministry of Public Administration,

revised at the instance of the Director General of Management Services (DGMS)

and thereafter approved by the DGMS, and finally approved by the Cabinet of

Ministers. Documents tendered on behalf of the Respondents such as “X5”, “Y1”

and “Y2” seems to support that position. Nevertheless, it is ex-facie evident from

“P11” that “P11” has been issued by the Secretary of the Public Service

Commission on the Order of the said Commission. “P11” makes no reference to

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 38

approval given by the Cabinet of Ministers, the Director General of Management

Services and to the role performed by the Secretary to the Ministry of Public

Administration. Therefore, the purported authority under which “P11” has been

issued lies with the Public Service Commission. Therefore, the responsibility for

“P11” must be vested in the Public Service Commission. In these circumstances,

the position advanced by the Petitioners that the impugned “P11” contains and

reflects a series of decisions taken by the Public Service Commission cannot be

faulted. Furthermore, that the Petitioners having not cited the Cabinet of Ministers

and the Director General of Management Services as parties to this Application

also cannot be faulted.

35. Article 55 of the Constitution – Article 55 of the Constitution provides as follows:

“(1) The Cabinet of Ministers shall provide for and determine all matters of

policy relating to public officers, including policy relating to appointments,

promotions, transfers, disciplinary control and dismissal.

(2) The appointment, promotion, transfer, disciplinary control and

dismissal of all Heads of Department shall, vest in the Cabinet of

Ministers.

(3) Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, the appointment, promotion,

transfer, disciplinary control and dismissal of public officers shall be

vested in the Public Service Commission.

(4) The Commission shall not derogate from the powers and functions of the

Provincial Public Service Commissions as are established by law.

(5) The Commission shall be responsible and answerable to Parliament in

accordance with the provisions of the Standing Orders of Parliament for the

exercise and discharge of its powers and functions. The Commission shall also

forward to Parliament in each calendar year, a report of its activities in respect of

such year.” [Emphasis added by me.]

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 39

36. It is evident from a plain reading of Article 55, that the Cabinet of Ministers has

been vested with the Constitutional mandate of determining and laying down

policy relating to public officers. Such policy would include those relating to

appointments, promotions, transfers, disciplinary control and dismissal of public

officers. However, in terms of Article 55(3), the Constitutional mandate of making

specific appointments, granting promotions, effecting transfers, carrying out

disciplinary control and dismissal of public officers has been vested in the Public

Service Commission. In terms of Article 55(4), this authority is subject to the

authority vested in Provincial Public Service Commissions. Furthermore, in terms

of Article 55(2), such functions relating to Heads of Departments have been vested

in the Cabinet of Ministers. An examination of a Service Minute of an All-Island

Service (such as “P11”) reveals that it contains policy, a scheme, a mechanism and

procedure to be followed relating to the relevant sub-category of public officers

pertaining to the –

a) role of the service,

b) modes of entry into the relevant All-Island service,

c) appointments to the service, including basic qualifications and the

applicable schemes of recruitment,

d) service categories and grades,

e) salary scales,

f) manner of confirmation in service,

g) posts belonging to the service,

h) promotions to higher grades, and

i) appointments to posts.

However, the Service Minute does not contain all provisions relating to officers of

the service, such as matters pertaining to transfers, disciplinary control and

dismissal. Be that as it may, it is evident that, a Service Minute of a particular All-

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 40

Island Service (such as “P11”) is the outcome of the exercise of power by both the

Cabinet of Ministers and the Public Service Commission. While the relevant policy

is laid down by the Cabinet of Ministers, the exact mechanism to give effect to such

policy and many other matters is specified and promulgated by the Public Service

Commission. Within a Service Minute of a particular All-Island Service, it is not

possible to separate policy provided by the Cabinet of Ministers and the scheme

and the mechanism developed by the Public Service Commission to give effect to

such policy. Therefore, as in the instant situation, it is the issuing authority which

must take responsibility for the Service Minute. Therefore, the Petitioners having

impugned the final decision of the Public Service Commission in issuing “P11”

cannot be faulted.

37. Contents of “P11” – As referred to in the preceding paragraph, “P11” contains

several sets of information pertaining to the Sri Lanka Administrative Service. It

also contains a list of posts which only officers of prescribed Grades of the Sri

Lanka Administrative Service are entitled to hold.

38. ‘Appendix A’ of the Service Minute of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service

(“P11”) - ‘Appendix A’ is found in the 1st Schedule of “P11” with the caption “The

Schedule of the Posts of Sri Lanka Administrative Service”. It contains a list of

posts in the public service which can be held exclusively (only by) officers of the

Sri Lanka Administrative Service. These positions are categorized under the

Grades of the officers of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service who would be

entitled to be appointed to and hold such posts. Within each Grade, there is

reference to whether or not the relevant post is that of the Government or a

Provincial Council and the institution to which the post has been assigned. This

categorization takes the following structure:

i. Special Grade officers of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 41

a) Government posts - 62

b) Provincial Council posts - 6

ii. Grade I officers of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service

a) Government posts – 111

b) Provincial Council posts - 10

iii. Grade II officers of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service

a) Government posts – 62

b) Provincial Council posts - 16

iv. Grade III officers of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service

a) Government posts – 97

b) Provincial Council posts – 17

This adds up to 381 posts in the public sector. However, the actual number of

positions exclusively assigned to officers of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service

would be much higher than 381. That is because certain posts in ‘Appendix A’

such as Additional Secretaries of Ministries and Government Agents / District

Secretaries constitutes multiple positions which would obviously be held by

several officers. Thus, the total number of positions exclusively assigned to officers

of the several Grades of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service would far exceed

381.

39. As stated previously, a few positions listed in ‘Appendix A’ assigned to officers of

the ‘Special Grade’ have been subsequently removed from the list by the

introduction of several amendments to “P11”. Examples are the posts of Secretary

of the Public Service Commission, Secretary of the National Police Commission,

Secretary of the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption,

the Director General of the Ministry of Finance and Planning and Secretaries to

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 42

Provincial Ministries. These amendments were carried out after this Fundamental

Rights Application was filed.

40. Posts exclusively assigned to the Sri Lanka Administrative Service - With the

view to illustrating the importance of positions exclusively assigned to officers of

the ‘Special Grade’ of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service, I list below some such

posts:

i. Additional Secretary, Presidential Secretariat

ii. Additional Secretary, Prime Minister’s Office

iii. Additional Secretaries of Ministries

iv. Director General, Combined Service Division, Ministry of Public

Administration and Home Affairs

v. Director General, Establishments Division, Ministry of Public

Administration and Home Affairs

vi. Government Agents / District Secretaries

vii. Commissioner General of the Departments of Labour, Land, Land

Settlement, Land Use Policy Planning, Motor Traffic, Registration of

Persons, Samurdhi, Prisons, Immigration and Emigration, and

Commissioners General of several other Government Departments.

viii. Directors General of the Departments of External Resources, Fiscal Policy,

Government Information, Management Services, Manpower and

Employment, National Budget, Pensions, and Directors General of several

other Departments of the Government.

ix. Additional Commissioners General, Additional Commissioners,

Additional Directors General of several Government Departments.

x. Secretaries of Provincial Public Service Commissions, Governor’s Offices,

and Council Offices of Provinces.

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 43

41. Thus, there is no doubt, and therefore I find myself in complete agreement with

the submission made by learned President’s Counsel for the Petitioners that, the

apex and most important and responsible posts of high recognition in public sector

(colloquially referred to by learned President’s Counsel as ‘plum’ or ‘prestigious’

posts in government) have been exclusively assigned to officers of the ‘Special

Grade’ of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service. A consideration of the revised

Service Minutes of the All-Island Services prepared following the filing of this

Fundamental Rights Application supports the submission of learned President’s

Counsel that the positions in the public service exclusively assigned to officers of

the several All-Island Services represented by the Petitioners are far less superior

in status and junior in ranking than those posts in both the Government and

Provincial Councils assigned exclusively to officers of corresponding Grades of

the Sri Lanka Administrative Service.

42. Thus, it is evident that all officers of the All-Island Services other than the Sri Lanka

Administrative Service have not been treated equally in comparison with the

manner in which officers of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service have been

treated. However, what constitutes an infringement of Article 12(1) of the

Constitution, is not mere unequal treatment. An infringement of Article 12(1)

arises out of inequitable treatment of persons belonging to one class (absence of

equality in the treatment of persons belonging to one class). In this instance, that

class would be public officers of Senior Executive and Executive Grades of the

Public Service of Sri Lanka belonging to the several All-Island Services. Thus,

the issue for consideration is whether, by the assignment of a specified set of posts

in the public sector to be filled exclusively by officers belonging to specified

Grades of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service (which is a sub-class), the other

public officers of the remaining sub-classes have been inequitably treated.

However, it is necessary to note that, the scope of this Fundamental Rights

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 44

Application necessitates adjudication of only whether in the listing of posts to be

exclusively held by officers of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service (‘Appendix A’

of “P11”), officers of the All-Island Services represented by the Petitioners have

been treated in an inequitable manner.

43. The Fundamental right to Equality and its original manifestation - This may be

an opportune moment to briefly reflect on the Fundamental right to Equality

enshrined in Article 12 of the Constitution. In W.P.S. Wijerathna vs. Sri Lanka

Ports Authority and Others [SC/FR 256/17, Supreme Court Minutes of 11th December

2020] this Court has illustrated in detail the nature and the scope of Article 12(1)

of the Constitution by detailing out the evolution of the judicial precedent

pertaining to the Fundamental right to Equality. Commenting on the early period,

the Court observed the following:

“During the very early stages of the evolution of the legal concept of equality in Sri

Lanka, Chief Justice Sharvananda in Elmore Perera v. Major Montague

Jayawickrema, Minister of Public Administration and Plantation

Industries and Others explaining the nature of Article 12, held that it forbids the

State from denying to any person equality before the law and equal protection of

the law. … It means that all persons are equally subject to the law and have a right

to equal protection of the law, in similar circumstances, both as regards privileges

and liabilities imposed by the law. It ensures that, laws have to be applied equally

to all persons, and that there must be no discrimination between one person and

another, when their position is substantially the same. The principle which

underlines Article 12 is that, equals must be treated equally, operate equally on all

persons, under like circumstances. Article 12 guarantees equality among equals. It

is violated both by unequal treatment of equals and equal treatment of the unequal.

… equality before the law does not mean that persons who are different shall be

treated as if they were the same. Article 12 does not absolutely preclude the State

from differentiating between persons and things. The State has the power of what

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 45

is known as ‘classification’ on a basis of rational distinction relevant to the

particular subject dealt with. So long as all persons falling into the same class are

treated alike, there is no question of discrimination and there is no question of

violating the equality clause. The discrimination that is prohibited, is treatment in

a manner prejudicial as compared to another person in similar circumstances. So

long as classification is based on a reasonable and a justifiable basis, there is no

violation of the constitutional right to equality. What is forbidden is invidious

(unfair / offensive / undesirable) discrimination. The guarantee of equal protection

is aimed at preventing undue favour to individuals or class privilege, on the one

hand, and at hostile discrimination or the oppression of equality on the other. …

Since the essence of the right guaranteed by Article 12 and the evils which it seeks

to guard against are the avoidance of designed and intentional hostile treatment, or

discrimination on the part of those entrusted with the administering of the same, a

person setting up grievances of denial of equal treatment must establish that

between persons similarly circumstanced, some were treated to their prejudice and

the differential treatment had no reasonable relevance to the object sought to be

achieved. He must show that, the other person was similarly situated or equally

circumstanced. He must make out that not only had he been treated differently from

others, but had been so treated from persons similarly placed without any

reasonable basis, and such differential treatment is unjustifiable. …

Discrimination can exist only where two persons or two subjects are treated in

different ways. It arises only from two dissimilar treatments and from similar

treatment. There is no discrimination when two equals are treated alike.

Discrimination can exist only where two persons or two subjects are treated in

different ways. … It would thus be seen that, former Chief Justice S. Sharvananda’s

views of the concept of equality is akin to the ‘reasonable classification doctrine’

which is consonant with the conventional description of discrimination founded

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 46

upon the concept of ‘equality between similarly placed persons’. [Emphasis added

by me.]

44. In J.G. Mangala and Others vs. Amith Jayasundera, Commissioner General of

Examinations and Other [SC/FR 286, 287, 289, 291 & 294/2024, SC Minutes of 31st

December 2024] this Court has reiterated that “… it is trite law recognised consistently

by this Court, that equals must be treated equally. Equals cannot be classified and treated

unequally. Classification unless founded upon intelligible criteria to facilitate a lawful

objective and the intended purpose for which power has been conferred, violates the right

to equality and therefore Article 12. However, as held by this Court on numerous occasions,

equality, which is a concept based on the firm foundation of the Rule of Law, does not

totally forbid classification.”

45. Contemporary judicial precedent: Referring to more recent and contemporary

judicial precedent which in my view illustrates the full ambit of the right of

equality and better serves the interest of the public by outlawing all outright and

subtle manifestations of inequality, in Wijerathna vs. Sri Lanka Ports Authority

and Others (supra) the Court proceeded to observe that -

“… the Supreme Court has provided an expansive and more progressive definition

of the concept of equality, founded upon the concept of ‘substantive equality’,

aimed at protecting persons from arbitrary, unreasonable, malicious and

capricious executive and administrative action. … After careful examination

and consideration of the law and the need for such law, respectfully, I am also

inclined to distance myself from the conservative interpretation given by Chief

Justice Sharvananda to the concept of equality, while expressing my agreement

with the subsequent views expressed by their Lordships enumerated in the

judgments referred to below, which encompass the broad concept of ‘substantive

equality’. It is necessary to place on record that the ‘reasonable classification

doctrine’ continues to play an important role in certain factual situations,

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 47

in determining whether the right to equality has been infringed. … It would

thus be seen that, both ‘equality between similarly placed persons’ and

‘substantive equality’ come within the scope of Article 12(1) of the

Constitution. As former Chief Justice Parinda Ranasinghe has pointed out in

Ramuppillai v. Festus Perera, Minister of Public Administration,

Provincial Councils and Home Affairs and Others, Article 12 requires that,

(i) among equals, the law should be equal and it should be equally administered, (ii)

like should be treated alike, (iii) all persons are equal before the law and are entitled

to the equal protection of the law, (iv) no citizen shall be discriminated against on

grounds of race, religion, language, caste, sex, political opinion, place of birth or

any such grounds, (v) equality of opportunity is an instance of the application of

the general rule underlying Article 12, (vi) whilst Article 12 does not confer a right

to obtain State employment, it guarantees a right to equality of opportunity for

being considered for such employment, (vii) what is postulated is equality of

treatment to all persons in utter disregard of every conceivable circumstance of

difference as may be found amongst people in general, (viii) it prohibits class

legislation, but that reasonable classification is not forbidden, and (ix) in instances

where a classification exists, it must appear that not only that a classification has

been made, but also that the classification is one based on some reasonable ground

or some difference which bears a just and proper relation to the purpose of the

classification. … Justice Dr. Shirani Bandaranayake (as she then was) has pointed

out in Kanapathipilli v. Sri Lanka Broadcasting Corporation and Others,

that the concept of equality, is a “dynamic concept”. It is based on the principle that

the status and dignity of all persons should be protected whilst preventing

inequalities, unfairness and arbitrariness. …

It is also necessary to point out that in Wickremasinghe v. Ceylon Petroleum

Corporation and Others, Chief Justice Sarath Silva has pointed out that,

although the objective of the right to equality is to ensure that all persons,

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 48

similarly circumstanced are treated alike, it is seen that the essence of this

basic standard is to ensure ‘reasonableness’ being a positive connotation,

as opposed to ‘arbitrariness’ being the related negative connotation. If

legislation or the executive or administrative action in question is ‘reasonable’

and ‘not arbitrary’, it necessarily follows that all persons similarly circumstanced

will be treated alike, being the end result of applying the guarantee of equality. …

In Weligodapola v. Secretary, Ministry of Women’s Affairs, Justice Dr.

A.R.B. Amerasinghe has held that, though Article 12 of the Constitution does not

especially mention the right to equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters

relating to employment under the State, it is ‘a necessary incident of application of

the concept of equality’ enshrined in Article 12. … As Justice Mark Fernando has

pointed out in Ramuppillai v. Festus Perera, Minister of Public

Administration, Provincial Councils and Home Affairs and Others, the term

‘the law’ contained in Article 12(1) relates not only to the ‘law’ as it is

conventionally understood and interpreted, it would include both subordinate

legislation and executive action. Thus, for the purpose of Article 12, schemes of

recruitment, promotion and appointment would come within the scope of the term

‘the law’”.

I would add to this list propounded by Justice Mark Fernando, “Service

Minutes of the several services of the public service”. In fact, as regards the

instant matter, the scheme of recruitment, appointments and promotions

are contained in the respective ‘Service Minutes’ of the several All-Island

Services.

46. Full recognition of the Fundamental right to Equality (application of the new

doctrine) - It would thus be seen that the Fundamental right to Equality is no

longer limited to prohibiting discrimination taking the manifestation of (a) persons

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 49

of one distinct class being invidiously treated in an unequal manner, founded

upon unintelligible differentia (similarly circumstanced persons being

dissimilarly (unequally) treated in a manner that does not have a causal rational

nexus to the purpose for which such persons have been classified), and (b) persons

of two or more distinct classes being treated in an equal manner based on

unintelligible differentia (dissimilarly circumstanced persons being similarly

(equally) treated without a rational basis for the amalgamation of the two classes).

It is now well accepted that this prohibition (referred to as the ‘classification

doctrine’) merely protects people against only one form of inequality.

47. Therefore, the doctrine against inequality now frowns upon and outlaws a host of

other maladies as well. This is in the realm of the exercise of power by public

functionaries which causes ‘injustice’ and declares them to also infringe the

Fundamental right to Equality. This wide ambit is referred to as the ‘new doctrine’

regarding the Fundamental right to Equality. In today’s context, not only does the

Fundamental right to Equality reign supreme over and embrace and absorb into

its fold other Fundamental rights such as the rights that protect liberty and

multiple other freedoms, it serves as the guardian against possible other

infringements of the rule of law. In that regard, the term ‘law’ is to be understood

in the widest possible sense as including non-legislative and yet ‘applicable and

governing sets of rules’ as well.

48. Thus, particularly following the Constitutionalisation of principles of

Administrative Law into the domain of Fundamental Rights Law, it can now be

said that in the sphere of executive and fundamental action (including decision-

making), in addition to situations where the original narrow doctrine pertaining

to the Fundamental right to Equality would be infringed, based on contemporary

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 50

judicial precedent, the Fundamental right to equality and thereby Article 12(1)

would also be infringed in the following situations as well:

i. Exercise of power contrary to law (including in a manner that violates

prohibitions contained in law) [Vavuniya Solar Power (Private) Ltd. v. Ceylon

Electricity Board (SC FR No. 172/2017, SC Minutes of 20th September 2023)],

ii. Exercise of power in the absence of legal authorization (power conferred)

or in excess of legal authorization [Menaka Gandhi v. Union of India (1978)

AIR 0597 SC, Weligodapola v. Secretary, Ministry of Women’s Affairs and

Teaching Hospitals and others (1989) 2 SLR 63 and Perera and nine others v.

Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka and others (1994) 1 SLR 152],

iii. Exercise of power contrary to the procedure established by law [K.L.I.

Amarasekera and others v. Sri Lanka Ports Authority and others (SC FR No.

52/2015, SC Minutes of 27th September 2023) and Wijerathna v. Sri Lanka Ports

Authority (SC FR No. 256/2017, SC Minutes of 11th December 2020)],

iv. Exercise of power in violation of the Rules of Natural Justice [Gamini

Dissanayake v M.C.M. Kaleel and others (1993) 2 SLR 135, A.H. Hulugalla v Sri

Lanka Bureau of Foreign Employment (SC FR No. 72/2019, SC Minutes of 29th

November 2024) and Dr. Athulasiri Kumara Samarakoon and others v. Minister

of Finance and others (Economic crisis case) (SC FR Nos. 195/2022, 212/2022, SC

Minutes of 14th November 2023)],

v. Exercise of power for purposes contrary to the purpose for which such

power has been conferred and exercise of power for collateral reasons

[Vasudeva Nanayakkara v Choksy and Others (John Keells Case) (2008) 1 SLR

134],

vi. Exercise of power in an arbitrary or unreasonable manner [Rajavarothiam

Sampanthan v. Attorney General and others (Parliament dissolution case) (SC FR

No. 351-361/2018, SC Minutes 13th December 2018), Ariyawansa and others v.

The People’s Bank and others (2006) 2 Sri LR 145, Karasinghe Arachchillage

Ruwan Lasantha Deshapriya v. The Institute of Valuers of Sri Lanka (SC FR No.

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 51

372/2019, SC Minutes of 16th June 2025), Ambika Sathkunanathan v. Attorney

General and others (Promulgation of a State of Emergency and Emergency

Regulations case) (SC FR Nos. 246/2022, 261/2022, 262/2022, 274/2022,

276/2022, SC Minutes of 23rd July 2025), Dr. Athulasiri Kumara Samarakoon and

others v. Minister of Finance and others (Economic crisis case) (SC FR Nos.

195/2022, 212/2022, SC Minutes of 14th November 2023) and Rathnayake

Mudiyanselage vs. Secretary to the Treasury, Minister of Finance (Local

Government Election Case) (SC FR Nos. 69/2023, 79/2023, 90/2023, 139/2023,

SC Minutes of 22nd of August 2024)],

vii. Exercise of power founded upon malice or in a capricious manner [Elmore

Perera v. Major Montague Jayawickrema, Minister of Public Administration and

Plantation Industries and others (1985) 1 SLR 285, Jayawardena v. Dharani

Wijayatilake, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and others (2001) 1

SLR 132 and Wijerathna v. Sri Lanka Ports Authority (SC FR No. 256/2017, SC

Minutes of 11 December 2020)],

viii. Non-fulfillment of statutory and other public duties by statutory and public

functionaries [Vavuniya Solar Power (Private) Ltd v. Ceylon Electricity Board

(SC FR No. 172/2017, SC Minutes of 20th September 2023), Faiz v. AG (1995) 1

SLR 372, Sugathapala Mendis v. Chandrika Kumarathunga (Waters edge case)

(2008) 2 SLR 339, Rathnayake Mudiyanselage vs. Secretary to the Treasury,

Minister of Finance (Local Government Election Case) (SC FR Nos. 69/2023,

79/2023, 90/2023, 139/2023, SC Minutes of 22nd of August 2024), Dr. Athulasiri

Kumara Samarakoon and others v. Minister of Finance and others (Economic crisis

case) (SC FR Nos. 195/2022, 212/2022, SC Minutes of 14th November 2023) and

Janath S.Vidanage v. Inspector General of Police and others (Easter Sunday attack

case) (SC FR 163/2019, 165/2019, 166/2019, 184/2019, 188/2019, 191/2019,

193/2019, 195/2019, 196/2019, 197/2019, 198/2019, 293/2019, SC Minutes of 12th

January 2023)],

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 52

ix. Exercise of power resulting in the frustration of a legitimate expectation

generated [Dayarathna v. Minister of Health and Indigenous Medicine (1999) 1

SLR 393, Fernando v. Associated Newspapers of Ceylon Ltd (2006) 3 SLR 141 and

Edirachchige Kushan v. Sri Lanka Bureau of Foreign Employment (SC FR No.

66/2019, SC Minutes of 29th November 2024) and Vavuniya Solar Power (Private)

Ltd v. Ceylon Electricity Board (SC FR No. 172/2017, SC Minutes of 20th

September 2023)],

x. Exercise of power in violation of the Rule of Law [Ambika Sathkunanathan

v. Attorney General and others (Promulgation of a State of Emergency and

Emergency Regulations case) (SC FR Nos. 246/2022, 261/2022, 262/2022,

274/2022, 276/2022, SC Minutes of 23rd July 2025), Rajavarothiam Sampanthan

v. Attorney General and others (Parliament Dissolution case) (SC FR Nos. 351-

361/2018, SC Minutes of 13th December 2018) and Dr. Athulasiri Kumara

Samarakoon and others v. Minister of Finance and others (Economic crisis case)

(SC FR Nos. 195/2022, 212/2022, SC Minutes of 14th November 2023)],

xi. Exercise of power in violation of the Public Trust Doctrine [Sugathapala

Mendis v Chandrika Kumarathunga (Waters edge case) (2008) 2 SLR 339, Janath

S. Vidanage v. Inspector General of Police and others (Easter Sunday attack case)

(SC FR 163/2019, 165/2019, 166/2019, 184/2019, 188/2019, 191/2019, 193/2019,

195/2019, 196/2019, 197/2019, 198/2019, 293/2019, SC Minutes of 12th January

2023) and Chandra Jayaratne and others v. Attorney General and others

(Economic crisis case) (SC FR Nos. 195/2022, 212/2022, SC Minutes of 14th

November 2023)],

xii. Exercise of power contrary to the principle of inter-generational equity

[Bulankulama and Others v. Secretary, Ministry of Industrial Development and

Others [2000] 3 Sri L.R. 243 and Watte Gedera Wijebanda v. Conservator General

of Forests and Others [2009] 1 Sri L.R. 337],

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 53

xiii. Exercise of power contrary to the principle of intra-generational equity

[Sarath Fernando, Conservator General of Forests and two others vs. P.B.S.

Dissanayake and two others, (Supreme Court Minutes of 8th October 2024)], and

xiv. Exercise of power contrary to the due process of the law (i.e. in a manner

where the exercise of power is not just, fair or reasonable) [Menaka Gandhi

v. Union of India (1978) AIR 0597 SC and Wijerathna v. Sri Lanka Ports

Authority (SC FR No. 256/2017, SC Minutes of 11 December 2020)].

I must hasten to add that the foregoing list is not to be understood as a

comprehensive citation of situations where the right to Equality is violated. It is

also necessary to note that, in reality, a particular impugned situation may come

under more than one of these fourteen grounds.

49. All such infractions of the rule of law (which in practice may overlap) are now

recognized as amounting to infringement of the Fundamental right to Equality.

Therefore, in the contemporary administration of justice, the primary objective of

judicially screening impugned decisions and actions through the lens of the

Fundamental right to Equality, is to ensure legitimacy, justice and fairness by

outlawing multiple forms and manifestations of injustices caused in the exercise

of power by public functionaries in a manner that amounts to an abuse of power.

Simply put, the Fundamental right to Equality is aimed at facilitating good

governance by the State by ensuring that they exercise power as intended by

Parliament in public interest.

50. Though Article 126 read with Article 17 of the Constitution has conferred on the

Supreme Court judicial scrutiny of alleged infringement or imminent

infringement of Fundamental rights limited to Executive or Administrative action,

it must be borne in mind that the other two organs of the State being the

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 54

Legislature and the Judiciary and the latest addition to those organs (branches) of

the State (which may be appropriately referred to as the ‘fourth branch of the

State’) being the Constitutional Council and the several independent

Commissions, are all equally obliged by the Constitution to respect, protect and

abide by the Fundamental right to Equality.

51. Application of the original understanding of the Fundamental right to

Equality - This matter can be considered from the conventional application to the

Fundamental right to Equality. By listing out a series of apex, high ranking, high

profile, well-recognised and leading managerial and administrative posts

(included in ‘Appendix A’ of “P11”) to be filled only by officers of the Sri Lanka

Administrative Service, has the final decision-maker (namely the Public Service

Commission) drawn a distinction between officers of the Sri Lanka Administrative

Service and officers of the other All-Island Services? In other words, has the Public

Service Commission classified officers of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service and

officers of all other All-Island Services by placing them into two groups? If that is

the case, it is the final decision-maker’s burden to justify that classification, and

convince this Court that the said classification is reasonable and just in relation to

the justiciable object sought to be achieved by such classification. In this instance,

the purported objective is the identification of officers who would better possess

the required competencies to efficiently perform the job functions of the several

posts listed in ‘Appendix A’ of “P11”. In the pleadings filed in this Fundamental

Rights Application, the Respondents have not submitted any factual justification

for the classification of the two groups referred to above, this being the officers of

the Sri Lanka Administrative Service into one group and the officers of the All-

Island Services represented by the Petitioners into the other group.

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 55

52. Furthermore, given the fact that officers of the respective Grades of the several All-

Island Services possess certain core competencies, it is the burden of the decision-

maker to justify as to why Senior Executive and Executive Grade public servants

of all All-Island Services are not on an equal footing eligible for consideration of

appointment to the posts listed under ‘Appendix A’ of “P11”. Is it that only officers

of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service possess the required competencies to

efficiently discharge the job functions of the several posts listed under ‘Appendix

A’ of “P11”? No such explanation has been provided by the Respondents. It

appears so evidently that the decision-maker has proceeded on the presumed

assumption that officers of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service are superior in

their competencies to perform the job functions associated with all the posts listed

in ‘Appendix A’ in comparison with their counterparts in the other All-Island

Services. However, no empirical or other evidence in support of that assumption

was presented to this Court. Thus, in that regard too, the Respondents have not

discharged their burden of proof.

53. Application of the contemporary recognition of the Fundamental right to

Equality (the new doctrine) to the instant matter - Applying the contemporary

recognition of the principles of law enshrined within the Fundamental right to

Equality to the evidence before this Court, it would be seen that, what is necessary

to determine is not only whether public officers of the several All-Island Services

constitute one broad category (class) of persons or whether they constitute

different categories (classes), or whether they possess equal or similar attributes

(such as basic educational qualifications (at entry point), advanced education

secured during employment in public service, training, skills, experience and

expertise and aptitude to be equally entitled to hold the posts contained in

‘Appendix A’. The corollary would be to determine whether disentitling officers

of the All-Island Services represented by the Petitioners from holding posts

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 56

contained in ‘Appendix A’ was based in intelligible differentia. Though those are

also relevant factors, based on the case presented by the Petitioners, what is

necessary for the adjudication of this Fundamental Rights Application is to

determine whether in the preparation of the list of posts to be included in

‘Appendix A’ of “P11”, the decision-maker had acted arbitrarily or unreasonably,

and therefore whether conferring on Senior Executive and Executive Grade

officers of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service the exclusive opportunity of

holding the posts contained in ‘Appendix A’ was arbitrary or unreasonable. In

other words, was it arbitrary or unreasonable to have disentitled officers of the

All-Island Services represented by the Petitioners to hold posts contained in

‘Appendix A’?

54. Public Service appointments must be based on the identification of necessary

competencies and determination of merit founded upon objective decision-

making - I wish to approach this matter from another perspective, from which it

would be possible to inter-alia determine whether the decision-maker has acted in

an arbitrary or unreasonable manner. This approach stems from the basic premise

that appointments to posts in the public service must necessarily be made upon an

objective consideration of suitability of the applicant(s) to hold the respective post

and founded upon an objective assessment of merit. In other words, appointments

to and in the public service (whatever may be the category, service or post) must

be founded upon meritocracy. Merit-based appointments and promotions in the

public sector is the only reasonable, reliable, fair and sustainable starting point by

which the State can ensure that public officers whose primary duty is to serve the

public according to law and through the execution of State policy, diligently and

efficiently perform the tasks of the respective posts they hold. While the degree of

confidence the appointing authority has in respect of the person to be appointed

as to his suitability is a relevant fact, such confidence must be founded upon an

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 57

objective consideration of relevant suitability criteria and assessment of the

candidate’s merit, and not based on irrelevant considerations such as ethnic,

religious, personal, political or personal affiliations, nor should suitability be

determined arbitrarily or unreasonably.

55. Schemes of Recruitment - What a ‘Scheme of Recruitment’ in the public service

seeks to achieve is the laying down of suitability criteria for the relevant post

(developed based on an objective consideration of necessary attributes and

aptitudes) and the setting in place of a transparent selection methodology and

process, by which it can reasonably be expected that the decision on selection

would be objective and correct. An objective decision on selection would and

should exclude favoritism, corruption, mala-fides, subjective or irrelevant

considerations, arbitrariness and unreasonableness. Thus, the guarantee of

equality enshrined in Article 12 can be ensured only through such objective

decision-making in public sector selections, appointments and promotions,

founded upon objective criteria. Furthermore, the cherished expectation of the

Public, of a competent, efficient and service oriented public service can be achieved

only if selection for appointment and promotion in the public sector is founded

upon equality of treatment to those desirous of being selected for appointment and

promotion, and the process of selection being founded upon the objective

assessment relevant suitability criteria and determination of merit. Such must be

the governing criteria for appointments to and promotions in the public service.

56. Determination of suitability to hold posts in the public sector - Competency for

selection to hold different posts in the public service must be founded upon

objectively developed suitability criteria that enables the identification of the most

suitable person(s) to hold the respective posts. Such suitability criteria are

generally divided into two groups; these being attributes and aptitudes (which

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 58

reflect potential). The assessment of such criteria for the objective determination

of suitability can be determined through several primary considerations:

i. Entry qualifications:

a) basic and advanced qualifications (which would reflect education

up to the point of selection, knowledge and capacity),

b) pre-recruitment training that had been received,

c) relevant experience,

d) skills to enable successful discharge of the job functions,

e) relevant expertise, and

f) aptitude,

ii. Seniority (for promotions)

iii. Determination of the level of competency at the stage of selection;

iv. Predictability of the potential to successfully perform job functions; and

v. Performance at competitive examinations for the assessment of knowledge,

and skills and aptitude (which would be necessary to select the required

number from among a larger group of applicants).

57. It need not be emphasized that the preparation of posts to be included in

‘Appendix A’ of “P11” should have been done in consonance with the principle of

equality and therefore should have been based on objective criteria. The law on

fundamental rights would not recognize the Cabinet of Minister, the Public Service

Commission, the Secretary to the Ministry of Public Administration or the Director

General of Management Services to possess any unquestionable prerogative or

personal power or any authority which is beyond judicial review in the

determination of posts to be included in ‘Appendix A’. Conferment of such

unquestionable and unreviewable authority to any one or more of them would be

obnoxious to the Rule of Law and contrary to public interests. Fundamental rights

of the People including those of public officers cannot be protected by the adoption

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 59

of such an outdated and undesirable approach, which would most certainly be

contrary to public interest.

58. Duty to explain the grounds upon which the impugned decision is arrived at -

If the formation of the list of posts in ‘Appendix A’ of “P11” was developed

objectively sans any arbitrariness or unreasonableness, the Respondents should

have been in a position to explain based on objective criteria as to why only officers

of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service were deemed to be suitable for selection

to each of those posts contained in ‘Appendix A’ and as to why none of the officers

of the corresponding Grades of the other All-Island Services would be unsuitable

for selection to such posts.

59. The duty to provide to this Court reasons for the impugned decision lay with the

Respondents. Such a rational basis for the determination of the posts to be

exclusively held by officers of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service was not

disclosed to this Court. In fact, no basis at all was revealed to the Supreme Court.

The only purported explanation provided was that, based on the job functions of

the relevant posts and service requirements, the Director General of the

Department of Management Services determined that only officers of certain

Grades of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service would be eligible to hold the posts

listed in ‘Appendix A’ of “P11”. The specific criteria per each post used for such

determination was not disclosed to this Court. In these circumstances, I am

compelled to conclude that objective criteria for the selection of posts to be

exclusively filled by officers of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service was not

disclosed to Court, because objective criteria had not been applied in that regard.

Thus, there was none to be disclosed. Therefore, the irresistible inference to be

drawn in that regard is that the decision-maker had acted arbitrarily and

unreasonably in determining that only officers of the Sri Lanka Administrative

Service should be entitled to hold posts listed in ‘Appendix A’ of “P11”.

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 60

Findings

60. In view of the foregoing, I conclude that the series of decisions encapsulated in

‘Appendix A’ of “P11” relating to the posts to be exclusively held by officers of the

Sri Lanka Administrative Service had been prepared by the Secretary to the

Ministry of Public Administration original Respondents in an arbitrary and

unreasonable manner, and therefore, infringes the Fundamental right to Equality

of the Petitioners recognized by Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

Declarations

61. Accordingly, I declare that ‘Appendix A’ of the Service Minute of the Sri Lanka

Administrative Service (“P11”) infringes the fundamental rights of the Petitioners

guaranteed by Article 12(1) of the Constitution. Accordingly, I further declare that

the Members of the Public Service Commission who decided on the issuance of

the Service Minute of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service (“P11”) have

collectively infringed the fundamental rights of the Petitioners guaranteed by

Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

62. In view of the declarations contained in the preceding paragraph, I declare

‘Appendix A’ of “P11” a nullity. Such declaration of nullity will come into effect

prospectively from the date of this Judgment. Therefore, such declaration of

nullity shall not affect the legality of appointments to the posts listed in ‘Appendix

A’ of “P11”, made from 23rd December 2013 up to the date of this Judgment.

63. Furthermore, for a period of two (2) years from the date of this Judgment, the

Public Service Commission shall be entitled to make appointments to posts listed

in ‘Appendix A’ based on an identification of necessary competencies to hold each

such post and assessment of competencies of officers who belong to the several

All-Island Services who may be desirous of being appointed to such posts.

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 61

Orders

64. The Public Service Commission is directed to, in compliance with Article 55 of the

Constitution and in consultation with relevant officials of the public sector

including the Secretary of the Ministry of Public Administration and the Director

General of Management Services to prepare afresh and publish ‘Appendix A’ of

“P11”. In doing so, the Public Service Commission shall be guided by objective

considerations including the principles contained in this Judgment in a manner

that would enable the said Commission to identify and determine per each post

(a) the competencies necessary for a public officer to be able to successfully

discharge the job functions of each post, and (b) the methodology to be adopted to

assess such competencies, enabling the Commission to be able to identify and

appoint the most suitable officer to each such post. Ideally, prior to finalising

corresponding decisions, the Public Service Commission shall afford an

opportunity to representative groups of officers of the several All-Island Services

to express their views regarding such formulation of competencies and assessment

methodology. The task of preparing ‘Appendix A’ afresh shall be completed

within two (2) years from the date of this Judgment. If the revision of ‘Appendix

A’ of “P11” necessitates the revision of similar appendixes of the Service Minutes

of the other All-Island Services, the Public Service Commission shall carryout such

revisions as well within the afore-stated stipulated time period of two (2) years.

65. The Attorney-General is directed to prepare a legal advisory founded upon the

principles and reasoning contained in this Judgment and forward it to the (i)

Honourable Minister of Public Administration, (ii) Chairman of the Public Service

Commission, (iii) Secretary to the Ministry of Public Administration, and to the

(iv) Director General of the Department of Management Services.

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 62

Clarification

66. The findings contained in this Judgment should not be interpreted as a finding

that all public officers of the same Grade of the several All-Island Services (a)

possess identical or nearly similar competencies, and (b) would be equally entitled

to hold all posts assigned to the relevant Grade in the public service, and more

particularly to the posts contained in ‘Appendix A’ of “P11”.

67. Indeed, an objective consideration of the competencies applicable to each post in

the public sector may justify the conclusion that officers of a particular Grade of a

particular All-Island Service would be more suitable than their counterparts in

other All-Island Services to hold one or more specified posts and to perform the

corresponding job functions.

68. Officers of a particular Grade of a particular All-Island Service are more suitable

than their counterparts to hold and discharge the functions of a particular post in

the public sector can be a finding consonant with the Fundamental right to

Equality, provided such finding is reached following an objective and diligent

consideration of the relevant facts. Therefore, that is a matter to be decided upon

following the identification of the job specific competencies required to

successfully discharge the job functions of each post and the competencies

common and related attributes of officers of a particular Grade of the several All-

Island Services. Furthermore, this Judgment should not be interpreted as causing

the nomenclated identities of the several All-Island Services redundant.

69. Furthermore, it is necessary to note that this Judgment is founded upon the formal

pleadings tendered by the Petitioners and the Respondents to the Supreme Court.

However, in the interest of justice, to the extent possible, this Court has taken into

consideration the contents of most of the additional documents tendered by the

Honourable Attorney-General by way of Motions.

SC/FR 23/2014 - D.D. MATHARAARACHCHI AND 5 OTHERS VS. P.B. ABEYKOON AND 9 OTHERS - JUDGMENT 63

Outcome

70. For the reasons stated in this Judgment, this Fundamental Rights Application is

allowed.

71. The Petitioners shall be entitled to recover from the State the actual costs incurred

by them to file and prosecute this Application.

Judge of the Supreme Court

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court