Page 1 of 12

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application under and in terms of Article 17 and 126 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. L. Saman Kumara, No. 04/3, Jaya Samarugama, Kandana.

Petitioner

S.C.(F.R.) Application No: 171/2017 Vs.

1. Rathnakumara Collure, District Medical Officer, District Hospital, Kandana. 2. U. L. Perera, Director, Colombo Teaching Hospital, Ragama. 3. S. K. Gamage,

Administrative Officer, Medical Support Division, No. 357, Baddegama, Wimalawansa Mawatha, Colombo 10. 4. D. M. C. K. Dissanayake, Director (Control) 04. 5. J. M. W. Jayasundara Bandara, Director General of Health Services. 4th to 5th Respondents all of; Ministry of Health, Nutrition and Indigenous Medicine, Sawsiripaya, No. 385, Rev. Baddegama Wimalawansa Thero Mawatha, Colombo 10.

Page 2 of 12

6. The Honourable Attorney General, Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12.

Respondents Before: Hon. Murdu N. B. Fernando, PC, J.

Hon. Janak De Silva, J.

Hon. K. Priyantha Fernando, J.

Counsel:

Pulasthi Hewamanna with Githmi Wijenarayana for the Petitioner

Rajitha Perera, D.S.G. for the Respondents

Written Submissions:

17.06.2020 and 09.10.2023 by the Petitioner

13.01.2021 and 25.10.2023 by the Respondents

Argued on: 25.09.2023

Decided on: 26.01.2024

Janak De Silva, J.

At all times material to this application, the Petitioner was an Assistant Sanitary Labourer

at the Ministry of Healthcare & Nutrition. He was attached to the District Hospital of

Kandana. By letter dated 08.12.2016 (P6), the 2nd Respondent transferred the Petitioner

to the North Colombo Base Hospital, Mulleriyawa due to administrative reasons. This

transfer was sanctioned by the then Acting Director General of Health Services (5R3a).

This application was filed on 12th May 2017. The salary of the Petitioner was not paid for

more than three months from the date of transfer to the date of filing.

Page 3 of 12

The Petitioner alleges that his transfer was arbitrary, capricious, irrational, tainted with

malice, ultra vires the powers of any one or more of the Respondents and constitutes an

infringement and continuous infringement of the fundamental rights guaranteed under

Article 12 (1) and 14 (1) (g) of the Constitution.

It is further alleged that the 2nd and 4th Respondents acted in contravention of sections

219, 220 and 221 of the Procedural Rules on Appointment, Promotion and Transfer of

Public Officers (PSC Rules).

Leave to proceed was granted only under Article 12 (1) of the Constitution.

According to the Petitioner, by letter dated 08.03.2015 [P2(a)], he made a request to the

1st Respondent for official quarters due to difficulties in travelling. Consequent to another

appeal made to the 1st Respondent, the Petitioner was informed that a committee will

convene on 30.11.2016 [P3] to assess requests made to provide quarters for applicants.

On or about 30.11.2016 [P4], the Petitioner attempted to submit his letter of request for

quarters. The security officer attached to the District Hospital Kandana forcibly read the

letter of request that the Petitioner had prepared to submit to the committee. After an

altercation with the Petitioner, the security officer, who himself is residing in one of the

official quarters deemed that the letter is averse to his interests and to the utter surprise

and dismay of the Petitioner, tore the letter.

The Petitioner complained of this conduct to the 1st Respondent. The 1st Respondent, by

letter dated 30.11.2016 [P5(a)], informed him that a complaint had been lodged by the

said security officer against the Petitioner alleging that the Petitioner had berated a female

patient who attended the hospital to receive medication. The Petitioner was directed to

provide reasons to exonerate himself from the allegations within three days. The

Petitioner submitted his reply by letter dated 01.12.2016 [P5(b)].

Page 4 of 12

Thereafter, the Petitioner received letter dated 08.12.2016 [P6] issued by the 2nd

Respondent informing him of his transfer to the Colombo North Teaching Hospital,

Ragama with immediate effect due to administrative reasons. Aggrieved by the sudden

and arbitrary transfer, the Petitioner sought redress by appealing to the 4th Respondent.

Consequently, the Petitioner was transferred to the Medical Supplies Division in Colombo

by letter dated 06.01.2017 [P7(b)].

Since commencing work in the Medical Supplies Division, the Petitioner has not been

assigned any work. According to the Petitioner, this is indicative that his services are not

required there.

Moreover, the Petitioner has been forced to report for work for four months, from

December 2016 till April 2017 without any pay. According to the Petitioner, in order for

him to receive his salary, his personal file needs to be released from his previous work

station in District Hospital Kandana to the Medical Supplies Division. The District Hospital,

Kandana comes under the supervision of the Colombo North Teaching Hospital of Ragama

and all the records of the Petitioners service are kept with the said Ragama Teaching

Hospital.

The Petitioner alleges that these records are under the direct purview of the 2nd

Respondent. It is alleged that the release of these records was requested by the 3rd and

4th Respondents [P7(a) and P7(b)]. It is further alleged that although the 5th Respondent

had directed the Petitioner to be reinstated at his previous work place at District Hospital,

Kandana [P8], the 2nd Respondent has failed to consider this direction. The Petitioner

claims that there is a history of animosity towards the Petitioner by the 2nd Respondent.

He goes onto specify details of it at paragraph 14 of the Petition.

Notices on all the Respondents were dispatched by registered post on 05.07.2015,

06.06.2018 and 17.08.2018. Objections have been filed only on behalf of the 5th

Respondent.

Page 5 of 12

According to the then holder of office of the 5th Respondent, there were several

complaints against the Petitioner made by the other staff members of the hospital in

relation to various incidents. The incident on 30.11.2016 and other related complaints

were considered by the District Medical Officer of the Kandana Hospital and a report

dated 03.12.2016 was submitted to the Director, Teaching Hospital, Ragama.

The Director, Teaching Hospital, Ragama, by letter dated 07.12.2016 [5R3] submitted a

copy of the report dated 03.12.2016 and another report dated 06.07.2015 to the Director

General of Health Services in relation to another complaint received against the Petitioner.

Thereafter, steps were taken to transfer the Petitioner by letters dated 07.12.2016 [5R3(a)]

and 08.12.2016 [5R3(b) and P6]. Due to appeals made by the Petitioner, the transfer

orders marked 5R3(a) and 5R3(b) were subsequently changed by letters dated 09.12.2016

[5R4(a)] and 19.12.2016 [5R4(b)] and the Petitioner was transferred to the Medical

Supplies Division.

According to letter dated 08.12.2016 (P6), the 2nd Respondent transferred the Petitioner

to the North Colombo Base Hospital, Mulleriyawa due to administrative reasons. Even the

letter dated 07.12.2016 [5R3(a)] sent by the then Acting Director General of Health

Services ordering the transfer of the Petitioner refers to administrative reasons as the

grounds for the transfer.

However, the PSC Rules do not contemplate a transfer of a public officer on administrative

grounds.

According to Rule 196 of the PSC Rules, transfers are four-fold. They are:

(i) Transfers done annually;

(ii) Transfers done on exigencies of service;

(iii) Transfers done on disciplinary grounds;

Page 6 of 12

(iv) Mutual transfers on requests made by officers.

Hence the impugned transfer of the Petitioner is per se flawed.

Nevertheless, in K. P. K. L. P. Maduwanthi v. S. M. G. K. Perera, District Secretary and

Others [S.C. (F/R) 23/2021, S.C.M. 18.11.2022] I restated the established principle that as

long as an authority has the power to do a thing, it does not matter if he purports to do it

by reference to a wrong provision of law, and the order can always be justified by reference

to the correct provision of law empowering the authority to make such an order. I went

on to hold that the PSC Rules provided for the transfer of the Petitioner in the

circumstances of that matter.

The Respondents categorically assert that the transfer of the Petitioner was not on

disciplinary grounds. Neither was it an annual transfer nor a mutual transfer on requests

made by public officers.

The Respondents submitted that the transfer was one made on exigencies of service.

According to Rule 218 of the PSC Rules, a Public Officer may be transferred on exigencies

of service by the Appointing Authority for any one of the following reasons:

(i) Where the services of an officer are no longer needed at his present station;

(ii) Where an officer is needed for service in another station or that particular

officer himself is needed;

(iii) Where it is found, due to administrative reasons, that the retention of an

officer in his present station is not suitable.

Page 7 of 12

In K. P. K. L. P. Maduwanthi v. S. M. G. K. Perera, District Secretary and Others (supra.),

the request to transfer the petitioner in that case was made to facilitate an investigation

into alleged misconduct. I held that the conduct of such an investigation is part of the

administrative functions of the Public Service and hence such a transfer was in accordance

with the PSC Rules.

I observe that the 2nd Respondent has, in letter dated 07.12.2016 [5R3] made a request to

the 5th Respondent to transfer the Petitioner to a place outside his purview. It is further

suggested that an inquiry be held in relation to several matters referred to therein

including the incident on 30.11.2016.

The Acting Director General of Health Services had made a minute dated 07.12.2016

thereon to transfer the Petitioner and hold an inquiry. Hence, it is arguable that the

transfer given to the Petitioner falls within Rule 218 (iii) of the PSC Rules.

Nevertheless, no such inquiry had commenced by the time this application was filed on

12th May 2017. The affidavit of the then holder of office of the 5th Respondent filed in this

case is dated 10th September 2019. It does not refer to any inquiry commenced or

concluded as suggested by the Acting Director General of Health Services.

Hence, I am inclined to accept the submission made by Ms. Wijenarayana, learned counsel

for the Petitioner that the transfer of the Petitioner was not to facilitate the conducting of

an inquiry into the allegations made against the Petitioner.

This finding is supported upon an examination of the specific and detailed allegations of

malice made against the 2nd Respondent by the Petitioner. The 2nd Respondent has failed

to file an affidavit responding to these allegations though notice was served on him and

being represented in the proceedings. This is further corroborated by the fact that the

minute made by the then Director General of Health Services in P8 [dated 02.01.2017],

directing that the Petitioner be reinstated at the previous hospital, has been disregarded.

Page 8 of 12

The Petitioner was deprived of his salary for nearly four months allegedly due to his

personal file not been sent to his new place of work. The salary arrears were paid only

after this application was filed. The then holder of office of the 5th Respondent has not

satisfactorily explained this except to claim that the matters referred to in P7(a) and P7(b)

are ordinary matters that are involved in any transfer situation. It is a tragedy if the public

service has fallen into such depths of inefficiency.

I can do no more than reiterate Rule 224 of the PSC Rules which reads as follows:

224. It shall be the responsibility of the former Head of the Department or Head

of the Institution, as the case may be, to duly transmit the following

documents regarding the officer to his new Head of Department or Head of

Institution within two weeks of the transfer of a Public Officer.

(i) Updated Personal File with the updated History Sheet;

(ii) Recommendation in respect of the period, from the date of the

officers last increment up to the date of implementation of the

transfer, regarding the payment of the officers next increment;

(iii) Performance Evaluation Report of the officer;

(iv) Leave particulars of the officer;

(v) Statement on Holiday Railway Warrants obtained by the officer;

(vi) Salary particulars of the officer;

(vii) Credit Balance Statement of the officer;

(viii) Report containing details of all foreign travel of the officer during his

service;

Page 9 of 12

(ix) Report containing the details of all study courses, workshops and

various conferences attended by the officer;

(x) Other important documents relating to the officer. (emphasis added)

The 2nd Respondent has failed to comply with this requirement. This failure lends further

credence to the specific allegations of malice made against him.

Moreover, the Petitioner was not provided with a copy of letter dated 07.12.2016 [5R3]

when he was transferred due to administrative reasons. At a minimum, he was not even

given sufficient details of the reasons leading to his transfer on exigencies of service. This

becomes significant in view of Rule 221 of the PSC Rules which reads as:

221. The Appointing Authority shall record in the relevant file clearly all the

factors that caused the transfer of an officer on exigencies of service. The

Appointing Authority shall convey the reasons to the officer concerned.

(emphasis added)

This is an important safeguard given to a Public Officer, and as the learned counsel for the

Petitioner Ms. Wijenarayana correctly submitted, it must be read and understood in the

context of Rules 230 and 231 of the PSC Rules which reads as follows:

230. In terms of Article 58 (1) of the Constitution any Public Officer aggrieved by

an order relating to a promotion or transfer made by an Authority with

Delegated Power in respect of the officer so aggrieved may appeal to the

Commission against such order.

231. A Public Officer making an appeal against an order relating to a transfer or

promotion to the Commission shall do so only as per Appendix 23. He shall

also submit certified copies of the documents in support of his

representation along with the appeal.

Page 10 of 12

Item 03 of Appendix 23 of the PSC Rules requires a Public Officer aggrieved by a transfer

to give reasons for making an appeal against the decision/order. Hence, in order to

exercise the constitutional right given to a Public Officer to appeal against a transfer order,

he must be made aware of the grounds of the transfer. Merely stating that it is made on

administrative grounds is untenable in law.

It is important that the Petitioner was at a minimum given sufficient details of the reasons

leading to his transfer on exigencies of service since the letter dated 07.12.2016 [5R3]

refers to other matters dating back to 2015 in addition to the incident that took place on

30.11.2016.

In Dayasena v. Bindusara, Director, National Blood Transfusion Service and Others

[(2003) 1 Sri.L.R. 222], Court was called upon to examine the legality of a transfer order.

Fernando J. held (at page 227):

While the 2nd Respondent had authority to transfer the Petitioner on one or more

of the grounds stated above, there is no proof that he did actually make a transfer

order. Even assuming that he did make a transfer order, there is no evidence as to

the basis on which he acted, and it cannot be assumed that it was on one of the

four permitted grounds. But even if I were to assume that he did act on one of those

grounds, yet that ground and the supporting reasons were not disclosed to the

Petitioner when the transfer order was made, and even when his appeals were

refused and that was a fatal flawIn the present case, not only the reasons but

even the ground had not been disclosed. I therefore hold that the Petitioner's

transfer was wrongful and arbitrary.

For all the foregoing reasons, I make declaration that the failure to inform the Petitioner

sufficient details to enable him to exercise his constitutional right of appeal against the

impugned transfer and the failure to pay his salary for nearly four months is violative of

his fundamental right to equality guaranteed under Article 12 (1) of the Constitution.

Page 11 of 12

When this matter was taken up for argument and in the post-argument written

submissions filed on behalf of the Petitioner, the learned counsel for the Petitioner

informed that the Petitioner has now got acclimatized to his present workplace.

Accordingly, we were informed that he does not wish to pursue the retransfer to the

District Hospital, Kandana. The Petitioner instead sought a declaration that the

Petitioners fundamental rights guaranteed to him under Article 12 (1) and any other

equitable relief under Article 126 (4) or relief to protect and advance the fundamental

rights of the Petitioner under Article 118 (b) read with Article 4 (d) of the Constitution

and/or compensation/costs that Court may deem fit.

The transfer of the Petitioner was made by the then Acting Director General of Health

Services who has not been made a party to this application. Hence, no order for

compensation can be made against him.

The objections filed by the then holder of office of the 5th Respondent shows that there

were serious concerns about the conduct of the Petitioner prior to the incident on

30.11.2016. Although these matters were brought to the attention of the Ministry of

Health, no action appears to have been taken. Taking into consideration all these matters,

I am not inclined to award any compensation for the infringement of Article 12 (1) due to

the failure to inform the Petitioner sufficient details to enable him to exercise his

constitutional right of appeal against the impugned transfer.

Nevertheless, such considerations do not apply to the failure to pay the Petitioner his

salary for nearly four months. This was brought about due to the failure on the part of the

2nd Respondent to comply with Rule 224 of the PSC Rules. I therefore order the 2nd

Respondent to pay the Petitioner a sum of Rs. 25,000/= as compensation from his

personal funds. This must be paid within one month of this judgment.

Page 12 of 12

Furthermore, the State shall pay Rs. 25,000/= as costs to the Petitioner within one month

of this judgment.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Murdu N. B. Fernando, PC, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

K. Priyantha Fernando, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court