==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 15

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal against

a judgment of learned Judges of

the High Court of Civil Appellate

Sabaragamuwa Province (Holden

in Kegalle) dated 28-08-2020,

under and in terms of section 5(c)

of the High Court of the Provinces

(Special Provisions) Amendment

Act No. 54 of 2006 read with Article

128 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic Sri

Lanka.

S.C. Appeal No: Brahmana Arachchilage Dingiri

135/2023 Amma alias Sumanawathi,

Nelundeniya, Maampita.

SC Case No: PLAINTIFF

SC/HCCA/LA/296/2020 Vs.

Civil Appellate Case No: Kuruppu Arachchilage

SP/HCCA.84/18(F) Thilakarathne,

Nelundeniya, Maampita.

DC Case No: DEFENDANT

DC/Kegalle/7342/L

AND BETWEEN

Kuruppu Arachchilage

Thilakarathne

Nelundeniya, Maampita.

DEFENDANT-APPELLANT

Page 2 of 15

Vs.

Brahmana Arachchilage Dingiri

Amma alias Sumanawathi

Nelundeniya, Maampita.

PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

Kuruppu Arachchilage

Thilakarathne,

Nelundeniya, Maampita.

DEFENDANT-APPELLANT-

APPELLANT

Vs.

Brahmana Arachchilage Dingiri

Amma alias Sumanawathi

Nelundeniya, Maampita.

PLAINTIFF-RESPONDENT-

RESPONDENT

Before : Janak De Silva, J.

: Menaka Wijesundera, J.

: Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

Counsel : J.M. Wijebandara with Dimithri Pandiwita

instructed by Dushmanthi Porogama for the

Defendant-Appellant-Appellant.

: D. Jayasinghe instructed by Ganga Disanayake for

the Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent.

Page 3 of 15

Argued on : 09-07-2025

Written Submissions : 17-04-2024 (By the Plaintiff-Respondent-

Respondent)

: 02-05-2024 (By the Defendant-Appellant-

Appellant)

Decided on : 03-11-2025

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

This is an appeal preferred by the defendant-appellant-appellant (hereinafter

referred to as the defendant) on the basis of being aggrieved of the judgment

pronounced on 28-08-2020 by the learned Judges of the Provincial High

Court of the Sabaragamuwa Province holden in Kegalle (hereinafter referred

to as the High Court), while exercising its civil appellate jurisdiction.

From the impugned judgment the High Court has affirmed the judgment

pronounced by the learned District Judge of Kegalle on 26-07-2018 in District

Court of Kegalle Case No. 7342/L, which was a judgment pronounced in

favour of the plaintiff in the said case.

When this matter was considered by this Court on 18-09-2023 for the purpose

of granting leave to appeal from the impugned judgment, this Court granted

leave on the questions of law as set out in paragraph 15(a), (b) and (h) of the

petition dated 09-10-2020.

The said questions of law read as follows,

1. Has the High Court of Civil Appeal erred in law in applying the

principle of estoppel against the defendant in the circumstances of

this case?

2. Has the High Court of Civil Appeal erred in law by holding that the

plaintiff could succeed without proving prayed licenseeship?

3. Has the High Court of Civil Appeal erred in law in coming to the

conclusion that plaintiff has proved title to obtain relief prayed for in

the plaint?

Page 4 of 15

At the hearing of this appeal, this Court had the privilege of listening to the

oral submissions of the learned Counsel for the defendant, and that of the

learned Counsel for the plaintiff-respondent-respondent. This Court also had

the opportunity to consider the written submissions tendered by the parties

in relation to their respective contentions in deciding this appeal.

The facts that led to the judgment of the High Court can be summarized in

the following manner.

The plaintiff-respondent-respondent (hereinafter referred to as the plaintiff)

instituted an action before the District Court of Kegalle by her plaint dated

24-08-2006. The plaintiff has prayed for a declaration of title to the effect that

she is the owner of the land morefully described in the schedule of the plaint

and also for a declaration that the defendant’s possession of the land is only

as a licensee caretaker.

It has also been prayed for the ejectment of the defendant from the land, as

well as for damages and other reliefs. The plaintiff has averred her title based

on number of deeds as stated in her plaint.

The defendant in his answer has denied the title pleaded by the plaintiff and

her claim that he is a licensee under her and her predecessors in title. The

defendant has pleaded a separate title to the land mentioned in the plaint

based on the deeds submitted by him, and also has claimed prescriptive title

to the same.

At the trial, there had been no admissions between the parties and the case

has proceeded to trial on 14 issues settled by the plaintiff, and the 15th to 25th

issue settled by the defendant.

The plaintiff has raised her 14th issue to identify the subject matter of the

action as the land shown in plan No. 2187 dated 22-11-2007, prepared for

the purposes of the action by the licensed surveyor K. Wijeratne.

After trial, pronouncing his judgment on 26-07-2018, the learned District

Judge has determined that although this is an action for a declaration of title,

this is also an action to eject a licensee from the land mentioned in the plaint.

Page 5 of 15

Having considered the corpus of the action, the learned District Judge has

determined that it is the land depicted in the earlier mentioned plan, which

has been marked and produced as ‘X’ for the purposes of the action.

The learned District Judge, having considered the title to the land as pleaded

by the plaintiff and also the contesting title by the defendant, has determined

that the plaintiff has proved her paper title to the land.

Having considered the prescriptive claim to the land preferred by the

defendant, it has been determined that the defendant has failed to prove the

prescriptive title as claimed. The learned District Judge has accepted the

evidence by the plaintiff that the nexus between the defendant and his

claimed predecessors and that of the plaintiff and her predecessors was that

of a licensor and a licensee.

Having considered the evidence in its totality as he should have, the learned

District Judge has decided that the plaintiff has proved her case in the

balance of probability and had granted reliefs as sought by her.

After having considered the appeal preferred by the defendant challenging the

said judgment of the learned District Judge, the High Court has pronounced

the impugned judgment on 28-08-2020. It has been determined that although

the learned District Judge has concluded that the action before the District

Court was primarily for the purpose of ejecting a licensee, it was not. It has

been decided that the action was in fact a rei vindicatio action.

The learned Judges of the High Court have agreed that the plaintiff has proved

her title to the land and the corpus has also been correctly identified.

Having considered the title pleaded by the defendant, it has been determined

that he has failed to establish the paper title and also prescriptive rights as

claimed by him. It has also been determined that the possession of the land

by the defendant has been on the basis of a licensee.

However, the learned Judges of the High Court have recognized that the

learned District Judge has failed to provide proper answers to the issues

framed before the District Court and has proceeded to re-answer the issues.

Page 6 of 15

Accordingly, the appeal preferred by the defendant has been dismissed on the

basis that it has no merit.

At the hearing of this appeal, the position taken up by the learned Counsel

for the defendant was that there had been no dispute that the subject matter

of this action is in the possession of the defendant. It was his contention that

there was no evidence before the Court to establish that the defendant was a

licensee as claimed by the plaintiff or that the said license was terminated. It

was submitted that the learned District Judge too has correctly determined

that there was no evidence as to the defendant being a licensee, but wrongly

decided the action in favour of the plaintiff.

It was also submitted that the paper title pleaded by the plaintiff had not been

established as claimed. It was the position of the learned Counsel that the

learned Judges of the High Court had failed to consider the evidence placed

before the District Court in its correct perspective when deciding to re-answer

the issues and dismiss the appeal preferred by the defendant.

The learned Counsel for the plaintiff took up the position that the claimed

predecessor in title of the defendant was a caretaker under the predecessor

in title of the plaintiff, and the plaintiff came to the Court for a declaration of

title and ejectment. It was his position that the plaintiff proved her title to the

land, whereas the defendant’s claimed paper title or the prescriptive title has

not been established to the satisfaction of the Court.

Arguing that there is no basis before this Court to disturb the findings of the

learned Judges of the High Court, as well as that of the learned District Judge

of Kegalle, the learned Counsel moved for the dismissal of the action.

Having considered the pleadings before the District Court, the facts, the

circumstances and the relevant law, I am in agreement with the view of the

learned Judges of the High Court that the action before the District Court was

in fact a rei vindicatio action, although the plaintiff has claimed that the

defendant was a licensee in the capacity of a caretaker.

Page 7 of 15

I am in total agreement with the said determination as it is manifestly clear

that the action of the plaintiff was an action to vindicate her title and to eject

the defendant from the land based on her title.

In this process, the plaintiff has averred as to the manner under which the

claimed predecessor of the defendant and the defendant are in possession of

the land. It is clear from the averments of the plaint that her intention had

been not to eject the defendant only on the basis of an over holding licensee.

When considering the evidence in that context, it is settled law that the person

who claims title must establish his title as well as the identity of the land to

which such a party claims title.

As correctly determined by the learned District Judge as well as the learned

Judges of the High Court, there had been no dispute as to the identity of the

land. Both the plaintiff and the defendant have claimed the same land as

stated in the schedule of the plaint, although there had been no admission as

such.

The evidence led before the Court has clearly established that the subject

matter of this action has been depicted in plan No. 2189 dated 22-11-2007

marked ‘X’, which is the plan prepared for the purposes of this action.

When it comes to the title to the said land, the plaintiff has claimed title based

on the deed marked P-01, namely deed No. 20394 dated 28-05-1920. In the

said deed of transfer, the transferor has recited his title as a title obtained

through the fiscal sale No. 10684 of Court of Request in Kegalle.

Based on the said title, the heirs of the said transferee, namely R. P. P.

Weerasooriya, have transferred their inherited rights by the deed marked P-

02 to R. C. P. P. Weerasooriya. The said Weerasooriya had transferred his

right to the land to Kapuralalage Dharmawardhana by the deed No. 2212

dated 07-10-1985 (the deed marked P-03). The said Dharmawardhana by

deed No. 3647 dated 06-02-2003 has transferred his acquired rights to the

plaintiff of this action. (the deed marked P-06). The said deed is a deed

executed subject to a pending partition action.

Page 8 of 15

The evidence adduced in the action has established that the said partition

action No. 27142 was an action instituted by Kuruppu Arachchilage

Manthriratna, who is a brother of the defendant, against the defendant in

order to partition the subject matter of this action. The earlier mentioned

Dharmawardhana, who was the predecessor in title of the plaintiff, has

intervened in the said partition action and has claimed the entirety of the land

sought to be partitioned based on his title deed. The said partition action has

been withdrawn on 31-07-2006, which has resulted in the dismissal of the

said action.

In view of the said dismissal, the plaintiff has claimed title to the subject

matter of this action based on the deed marked P-06 and for the ejectment of

the defendant as pleaded in her plaint.

As against this title, the defendant has claimed title through one Mohotti

Appuhami, who is his grandfather, and has claimed that he was born on the

land and lived there for more than 56 years. It has been claimed that the said

Mohotti Appuhami possessed the entire land and is the original owner. It has

been his position that upon his death, his father Appuhami, being the

youngest son of Mohotti Appuhami, held and possessed the entire land, and

he transferred his right to him and his brother Manthriratna by deed No. 119

dated 01-11-1995. The said deed has been marked as V-01(අ).

It has been stated that he obtained the rights of Manthriratna by deed No.

441 dated 17-03-2006 marked V-05. Although he has claimed that the

predecessors of the plaintiff have previously filed partition case No. 27142 and

it was dismissed, it is clear that the defendant has not told the truth to the

Court in that regard.

The documents marked and produced as P-04 and P-05 by the plaintiff

establish the fact that the said case was a partition action filed by Kuruppu

Arachchilage Manthriratna, the brother of the defendant, who executed the

deed marked V-05 in favour of him. The said case had been filed against the

defendant to get the land partitioned between themselves. I find that the

evidence of the plaintiff has established that the plaintiff of that action or the

Page 9 of 15

1st defendant, namely the defendant in this action, has failed to prosecute the

partition action, and the added defendant, the predecessor in title of the

plaintiff, has been allowed to proceed with the partition action.

The said action has been withdrawn because the said predecessor, namely

Kapuralalage Dharmawardhana, has claimed title to the entire land upon his

title deed which requires no partitioning of the land.

It is clear from the evidence of the defendant that he has claimed paper title

to the land. Although he has given evidence to the effect that he and his

forefathers had possession of the land for over 50 years, interestingly, he has

not given evidence claiming prescriptive title to the land. He has also failed to

give evidence as against whom and when the mentioned grandfather of him,

namely Mohotti Appuhami, started to possess the land adverse to the rights

of the actual title holder of the land.

Upon the perusal of the deed No. 119, where Appuhami has transferred the

land to the defendant and his brother Manthrirathna, it is clear that the said

vendor has not pleaded his title other than saying that he held and possessed

the land. The defendant’s evidence was to the effect that his father Appuhami

inherited the land from his father Mohotti Appuhami. However, it has been

admitted in evidence that Mohotti Appuhami had three sons, the defendant’s

father being the youngest. Therefore, even if it is to believe that Mohotti

Appuhami had any title to the land, the defendant’s father could have only

inherited an undivided 1/3rd of the land. Therefore, for him to transfer the

entire land to the defendant and his brother, he should spell out as to how he

became entitled to the entire land in the deed he executed in favour of his

sons.

The above factual matrix clearly shows that it was the plaintiff who had

established a clear title to the corpus of this action as against the claimed

rights of the defendant.

Page 10 of 15

The case of Leisa and Another Vs. Simon and Another (2002) 1 SLR 148

was a case where the plaintiff-appellants instituted action seeking declaration

of title and ejectment of the defendants from the premises in question. The

defendants claimed prescriptive rights. The plaintiff’s action was dismissed.

On appeal it was held:

1. The contest is between the right of dominium of the plaintiffs and

the declaration of adverse possession amounting to prescription by

the defendants.

2. The moment title is proved the right to possess it, is presumed.

…

5. For the Court to have come to its decision as to whether the plaintiff

has dominium the proving of paper title is sufficient.

…

7. Once paper title became undisputed the burden shifts to the

defendants to show that they had independent rights in the form of

prescription as claimed by them.

…

Per Wigneswaran, J.,

“Wille in his book ‘Principles of South African Law’ (3rd edition) at

page 190 states as follows:

“The absolute owner of a thing has the following rights in the

thing:

1. To possess it;

2. To use and enjoy it; and

3. To destroy; and

4. To alienate it.

In discussing the right to possession, he states, (…) “The absolute

owner of a thing is entitled to claim the possession of it; or, if he

has the possession he may retain it. If he is illegally deprived of

Page 11 of 15

his possession, he may by means of vindicatio or reclaim recover

the possession from any person in whose possession the thing is

found. In a vindicatory action the claimant need merely prove two

facts, namely, that he is the owner of the thing and that the thing

is in the possession of the defendant.”

His Lordship has discussed the effects of longstanding possession by a

defendant at page 157 in the following manner,

“As stated, earlier occupation from 1947 has no relevance.

Possession and occupation must be distinguished. What is referred

to as possession by the learned Counsel was in fact occupation by

the 1st defendant. So long as such occupation was as a brother of

the 1st plaintiff and therefore as a licensee of the 1st plaintiff, the

long period of occupation would not make it adverse possession

unless there had been an overt act of ouster as in the case of

prescription among co-owners.”

It is clear from the judgment of the learned District Judge that he was mindful

as to the principles of law that should be considered in a vindicatory suit. He

has well considered whether the claimed occupation of the land by the

defendant and his claimed predecessors would amount to an overt act, which

amounts to an ouster as required in law.

It is my considered view that executing deeds without referring to any title

would not amount to an overt act that ousts the title holder of a property. The

learned District Judge has found evidence where the plaintiff’s immediate

predecessor in title has enjoyed the fruits of the land after he became the

owner. As such, I am unable to find anything wrong in the learned District

Judge’s conclusion that the defendant and his claimed predecessors in title

were licensees under the plaintiff and her predecessors of title, and the

defendant had failed to establish that the said status has been changed so

that the defendant would succeed in proving prescriptive title, and the

defendant’s claimed paper title was also not proved.

Page 12 of 15

After the matter was argued in appeal before the learned Judges of the High

Court, it is clear that the learned High Court Judges too had considered the

paper titles pleaded by the parties as well as the claimed apparent prescriptive

title of the defendant. The High Court has drawn its attention to the fact that

the paper title claimed by the plaintiff commencing with the deed marked P-

01, which was a deed executed in 1920 by one Ukkubanda, and the argument

that since the said Ukkubanda has pleaded his title in relation to a fiscal sale

where there was no evidence that a fiscal’s conveyance had been executed,

and hence, no title would have been passed to the claimed original owner.

It has been decided that in view of the findings in the case of Abubucker Vs.

Fernando (1987) 2 SLR 225, although a fiscal’s conveyance may not have

been executed after the fiscal’s sale, there is clear evidence that the said

Ukkubanda held and possessed the land after the sale and it can be

reasonably inferred that he and his subsequent transferees of the land held

and possessed it and had acquired prescriptive title before alienating the same

to the plaintiff.

In the case of Abubucker Vs. Fernando (supra), it was determined that if a

fiscal’s conveyance is not executed in favour of the purchaser of a land at a

fiscal sale, no title passes. If, however, the purchaser enters into possession

after the sale and possessed the land for longer than the prescriptive period,

title by prescription is established.

I find that this was a correct determination, and hence, the learned Judges of

the High Court were correct in determining that the plaintiff had established

her title. The learned Judges of the High Court in the appellate judgment too

had well considered whether the claimed paper title of the defendant can be

accepted as a better title than that of the plaintiff in coming to a finding that

it was not, for which I have no reason to disagree as considered earlier.

The High Court judgment clearly shows that the learned Judges had

considered whether the defendant can succeed on the basis of prescription,

independently of his claim of paper title.

Page 13 of 15

It had been determined that in fact, the defendant’s status would be as a

licensee, as it had been clearly established that his father and grandfather

had been in possession of the land in such capacity after gaining possession

under the plaintiff’s predecessor in title, namely Weerasooriya, and they have

failed to establish an overt act which alters that status.

In the case of S.K. Chelliah Vs. M. Wijenathan 54 NLR 337, Gratiaen, J.

observed;

“Where a party invokes the provisions of section 3 of the Prescription

Ordinance in order to defeat the ownership of an adverse claimant to

immovable property, the burden of proof rests fairly and squarely on him

to establish a starting point for his or her acquisition of prescriptive rights.

If that onus has prima facie been discharged, the burden shifts to the

opposite party, to establish that by reason of some disability recognized

under section 13 prescription did not in fact run from the date on which

the adverse possession first commenced. Once that has been

established, the onus shifts once again to the other side to show that the

disability has ceased on subsequent date and that adverse possession

relied on had uninterruptedly continued thereafter for a period of 10

years.”

As considered correctly, the plaintiff’s immediate predecessor in title has given

evidence to establish the fact that he too enjoyed the produce of the land,

which showed that he had dominium over the land despite the fact that the

defendant being in occupation of the same.

The defendant’s own evidence shows that he had failed to establish any overt

act of his claimed predecessors in title other than stating that he is living on

the land from his birth. Therefore, I am in agreement with the findings of the

learned District Judge as well as that of the learned Judges of the High Court

that the defendant has failed to establish any character that can be

considered adverse to the rights of the plaintiff who has established her title

to the land.

Page 14 of 15

Another matter that has drawn the attention of the learned Judges of the High

Court had been the defendant’s and his brother Manthriratna’s role in the

partition action.

The said Manthriratna has initiated the partition action after having claimed

rights under the deed marked P-05. It has been established, as previously

stated by me, that both the plaintiff and the 1st defendant of the partition

action, being the two brothers who initiated it, have failed to prosecute the

same. This has resulted in the plaintiff’s immediate predecessor in title, who

intervened as the 2nd defendant of the action, proceeding with the action and

withdrawing it on the basis that he owns the entire land sought to be

partitioned and not the plaintiff and the 1st defendant in the said partition

case.

I am in total agreement with the learned Judges of the High Court that this

conduct of the defendant in abandoning the partition action in the manner it

occurred is also a clear indication of failure to maintain their prescriptive

claim as against the rights of the plaintiff’s immediate predecessor in title.

It is clear from the judgment of the learned District Judge that he has come

to a correct finding as to the evidence placed before the Court and the law

that should have been considered in that regard. I find that the learned

Judges of the High Court too had considered the matters placed before the

Court in its correct perspective by determining that they had no basis to

interfere with the judgment of the learned District Judge.

However, I find that as viewed correctly by the High Court, the learned District

Judge, after analyzing the evidence and the law correctly, has failed to answer

the issues before the Court in the proper manner.

I am of the view that the High Court has correctly exercised its powers granted

in terms of Article 139 of the Constitution where it has been stipulated as to

the powers in appeal of the Court of Appeal, which applies to the High Court

as well when exercising its appellate jurisdiction.

Page 15 of 15

The relevant Article 139(1) reads as follows:

139. (1) The Court of Appeal may in the exercise of its jurisdiction

affirm, reverse, correct or modify any order, judgment, decree or

sentence according to law or it may give directions to such court

of 1st instance, tribunal or other institution or order a new trial or

further hearing upon such terms as the Court of Appeal shall think

fit.

Accordingly, I find that re-answering of the issues was a thing necessary to

align the original Court’s findings and render it a proper judgment, which in

my view was the correct approach that should be adopted in deciding an

appeal by an appellate forum.

For the reasons as considered above, I will now proceed to answer the

questions of law under which the leave to appeal was granted in the negative.

The appeal is dismissed for want of merit.

The parties shall bear their own costs of the appeal.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Janak De Silva, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Menaka Wijesundera, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court