1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI

LANKA

In the matter of an application under Article 126 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. SC FR Application No.15/2010 1. Shanmugam Sivarajah 2. Sivarajah Sarojini Devi

Presently residing in Sagetrastrasse 12,3133 Belp, Switzerland. Petitioners Vs.

1. Officer in Charge, Terrorist Investigation Division, Chaithya Road, Colombo 01 2. Director, Terrorist Investigation Division, Police Headquarters, Chaithya Road, Colombo 01. 3. Deputy Inspector General of Police, Terrorist Investigation Division, Chaithya Road, Colombo 01.

2

4. Inspector Abdeen, Terrorist Investigation Division, Chaithya Road, Colombo 01. 5. Subair, Terrorist Investigation Division, Colombo 01. 6. Mr. Mahinda Balasuriya, Inspector General of Police, Police Head Quarters, Colombo 01. 6A. Mr. N.K.Illangakoon, Inspector General of Police, Police Headquarters, Colombo 1. 7. Secretary to the Ministry of Defence, Public Security and Law and Order, Ministry of Defence, Colomb o 02. 7A. Mr. B.M.U.D Basnayake Secretary to the Ministry of Defence, Public Security and Law and Order, Ministry of Defence, Colombo 2. 7B Eng. Karunasena Hettiarachchi, Secretary to the Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Defence, Colombo 2. 8. Mr. H. K. Balasuriya, Additional Secretary, Ministry of Defence, Public Security and Law and Order, Ministry of Defence, Colombo 02. 8A Mr. S.Hettiarachchi,

3

Additional Secretary, Ministry of Defence, Public Security and Law and Oder, Ministry of Defence, Colombo 2. 8B Mr. S.Hettiarachchi, Additional Secretary Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Defence,Colomb Colombo 2 9. Mr. Lalith Weerathunga, Secretary to His Excellency the President, Presidential Secretariat, Colombo 01. 9A P.B.Abeykoon, Secretary to His Excellency the President, Presidential Secretariat, Colombo 01. 10. The Honourable Attorney General, Department of the Attorney General, Colombo 12. Respondents. BEFORE: Priyasath Dep, PC, C J. B. P. Aluwihare, PC, J & Anil Gooneratne, J. COUNSEL: Saliya Pieris with Asthika Devendra and Thanuka Nandasiri for the Petitioners. Shanaka Wijesinghe, DSG for the Respondents. ARGUED ON: 13.03.2017 DECIDED ON: 27.07.2017

4

ALUWIHARE, PC, J The petitioners in this case seek a declaration that their fundamental rights

guaranteed by Article 12 (1) of the constitution have been infringed by the 1st

to the 10th respondents.

Leave to proceed was granted by this court for the alleged violation of Article 12

(1) of the Constitution, on 29-04- 2010.

The gravamen of the Petitioners’ complaint is that, the order of forfeiture of the

property owned by the petitioners, in terms of Regulation 7 (1) of the Emergency

(Proscription of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Elam) Regulations 2009 was made

without considering the relevant material, in violation of the rules of natural

justice and that the said order of forfeiture is unreasonable and unfair. The

Petitioners are seeking, by way of relief, an order from this court, a declaration

that the said order made by his Excellency the President in his capacity as the

Minister of Defence, is null and void and of no force in law.

The Regulations aforesaid (hereinafter referred to as Emergency Regulations),

were proclaimed by Gazette extraordinary bearing number 1583/12 of 7th

January 2009 and subsequently amended by Gazette extraordinary bearing

number 1606/12 of 18th June 2009.

Background :

Petitioners to the present application became the owners of the building in

question by a deed of transfer bearing No.7143 attested by Notary Public Mrs. S

Ganagatharan on 22nd of August 2005. The said premises originally bore the

assessment number 18/1, 1st Chapel lane, but presently bears three separate

assessment numbers 18/1,18/1-1/1 and 18/1-2/1, 1st Chapel Lane, Colombo 6.

The petitioners who are at present domiciled in Switzerland had executed a

special power of attorney in favour of Ms. Valarmathy Suntharalingam to act as

their attorney in order to, inter alia superintend, manage and control the said

5

premises and also to appear before any court in Sri Lanka, in all matters in

connection with the said property.

Petitioners had executed an additional power of attorney on the 12th.04. 2010, so

as to avoid any doubt regarding the previous power of attorney in favour of the

aforesaid Ms. Valarmathy Suntharalingam.

Initially, a Sivapragasm Vijayanesan, a cousin of the 2nd petitioner, had looked

after the premises in question. In 2006 Mr. Sivapragasam Vijayanesan had given

the 1st floor of the aforesaid premises on lease to an organization named “Centre

for Health Care”. Subsequent to the execution of the said lease, in 2008, Mr.

Vijayanesan had migrated to Australia. Thereafter, upon the request of the

petitioners, another cousin of the 1st petitioner, their present attorney Ms.

Valarmathy Suntharalingam had come into occupation of the ground floor of the

premises and further had collected the rent from the tenants on the other two

floors.

Petitioners had been informed by Ms. Suntharalingam, that on 26th June 2009,

several police officers attached to the Terrorist Investigation Division, including

4th and 5th Respondents had come to the said ‘Centre for Health Care’ and

arrested three Tamil persons who had been working for that Centre. The said

Respondents had also arrested the caretaker of the building, namely

Wigneshwaran Kandusami who had been employed by the Centre for Health

Care.

As per the reports filed by the 1st Respondent, the Centre for Health Care a non-

governmental organisation, was alleged to have been a front organisation for the

LTTE. On the very same day, Ms. Suntharalingam who had proceeded to the

Wellawatte Police station to lodge a complaint and she had been directed to the

Terrorist Investigation Division (hereinafter also referred to as the TID).

Ms. Suntharalingam, thereafter, on the advice of the petitioners had met the 1st

Respondent, the OIC-TID, on 28.072009 and had complained to him that the

6

premises concerned has been unlawfully occupied purportedly under the

authority of the OIC-TID. The 1st Respondent, however, had refused to entertain

the complaint on the ground that Ms. Suntharalingam has no right /authority

over the premises.

The Petitioners states that there was no justification for the1st Respondent’s action

as Ms. Suntharalingam as the holder of the power of attorney, is legally

empowered to act on their behalf who happened to be the holder of their power

of attorney.

There is ample material in documents filed by the Petitioners, to establish that the

Petitioners were the owners of the premises concerned at the time relevant to the

incident referred to in this application. The documents have not been challenged

by the Respondents other than to say that the “Centre for Health Care” was run

by the LTTE.

It was in this backdrop that his excellency the President, in his capacity as the

Minister of Defence, acting under the aforesaid Emergency Regulations made an

order forfeiting the premises in question, to the State.

By the document marked and produced as P10A, Additional Secretary (police) of

the Ministry of Defence, Law and Order had communicated to the Inspector

General of Police, that his excellency the President had authorised the forfeiture

of certain properties inclusive of the premises in question.

Interestingly, it’s the Additional Secretary (police) who had sought permission

from Secretary Defence to request his excellency the President to authorise the

forfeiture of property in terms of Regulation 7 (1), asserting that the IGP had

confirmed, that the Centre for Health Care was being run with the funding from

the LTTE. (Documents P10B).

The Secretary Defence, on the same document, had made an endorsement

addressed to his excellency the president seeking authorisation for the forfeiture,

7

(P10C). At the foot of that document, P10C, his excellency the president had

made an endorsement “approved” and had placed the signature.

In terms of Regulation 7 (1) of the Emergency (Proscription of the Liberation

Tigers of Tamil Eelam) Regulations, published in the Gazette dated 7th January

2009 bearing No.1583/2, power is vested with the Minister of Defence to

forfeit to the state, moneys, securities or credits which are being used or intended

to be used for the purposes of the proscribed organisation or any other

movable/immovable property belonging to such organization. The order must be

in writing, and is to be made only after such inquiry, as the Minister thinks fit.

The above Regulation had been amended by insertion of Regulation 7A by the

Gazette of 18-6-2009 bearing number 1606/23 and which, inter alia reads thus:

No Person shall-

(a)….

(b)…

(c) rent, lease or obtain or procure any movable or immovable

property, material or other thing:

(d)…

(e)…

On behalf of himself or any person or body of persons

(whether incorporated or unincorporated) in

contravention of the provisions of these regulations, with

to or for, the Organisation styled the “Liberation Tigers of

Tamil Elam” or any member of such organisation.

(2) Any person who acts in contravention of the provisions of

paragraph (1) of this regulation shall be guilty of an offence

8

and all property or money, which is the subject of such

offence shall be forfeited to the State.

In his recommendation to the 7th respondent (P10B), the Additional Secretary

claims, the Inspector General of Police has established after inquiries, that the

Centre for Health Care is a Non-Governmental Organisation run by the LTTE and

that the movable and immovable property had been used for the purposes of the

LTTE and that the Inspector General of Police had recommended that the

property referred to, in the Annexure A4 be forfeited.

Nowhere in 7th Respondent’s recommendation, (P10B) is it asserted that the

premises in question belongs to the LTTE.

Analysis of the Emergency Regulations aforesaid would be critical in my view in

deciding as to whether the decision to forfeit the property is arbitrary and

unreasonable and the forfeiture is illegal as claimed by the Petitioners, which

forfeiture in turn had infringed their fundamental rights.

It is clear that the applicable provision for the order of forfeiture in the instant

case is Regulation 7, in as much there is no evidence that any one had been

charged under Regulation 7A (1), the only other section under which forfeiture

can be affected.

Before an order for forfeiture can be made, however, it is imperative to establish

that the property concerned should belong to a proscribed organization, in the

instant case, the LTTE. It is a further requirement that the minister should hold

such inquiry as he thinks fit before the decision is made.

The petitioners complain that no such inquiry had been held and as they have

title to the property which could have been easily established through title deeds,

they were not given an opportunity to make representations. Furthermore, the

Centre for Health Care had leased only one of the floors of the premises in

question and in proof of that, a letter written on behalf of the Centre For Health

Care in 2007 had been marked and produced as P5. By the said letter Programme

9

Co-ordinator of Centre for Health Care had requested an extension of the lease of

the premises 18/1, Chapel lane. This letter was written much before the relevant

Emergency Regulations came into force.

I have given my mind to the objections filed on behalf of the 1st Respondent, the

Officer-in-Charge of the TID and the only objections filed on behalf of the

Respondents in this case. He asserts that the deed number 7143 was executed in

transferring the property in favour of the Petitioners at a time both Petitioners

were out of the country. This is a frivolous objection and shows the abysmal

ignorance of the law. The presence of the buyer (transferee) is not a requirement

to execute a deed of transfer and the absence of the Petitioners has no bearing on

the execution of the deed or its validity.

The issue that this court has to answer is, did the minister hold the inquiry as

required by the regulations and if so, did the minister go into the ownership of

the premises 18/1, 1 Chapel Road Wellawatte before making the order of

forfeiture.

Petitioners have, in these proceedings, furnished the title deed (P1), the survey

plans (P2 and P2A), certificate of registration of ownership, issued by the

Colombo Municipal Council (P2B1and P2B2) and statutory notice of assessment

(P2C1- P2E3) and had argued that the petitioners are the lawful owners of the

premises in issue. It was also contended on behalf of the Petitioners that as oppose

to the material furnished on behalf of the Petitioners, the Respondents have failed

to establish any nexus between the Centre for Health Care and the Petitioners,

nor is there any material to say that the acquisition of the property had been

financed by the LTTE.

In the objections filed on behalf of the 1st Respondent, it is pointed out that a sum

of Rs. 5.7 million had been paid from a joint account held by one Iyampille

Gunamalan and Karthigesu Sivanesharajah and the balance was paid in cash by

Sivapragasam Vijayanesan, implying that the money that was paid to the seller

did not come from the Petitioners. According to the Petitioners, however, the said

10

Vijayanesan is a cousin of the 2nd Petitioner who had been entrusted with the

property, the same to be looked after.

The basis, however, for the initial seizure of the property in issue, according to

the 1st respondent, had been the suspicion that the property was being used for

committing offences and for illegal activities. The 1st Respondent had averred in

his objections that “Since it came to light that the property was being used for

committing offences and for illegal activities the property was sealed as per the

gazette notification No.1 of 2005 dated 13-08-2005”.

The 1st Respondent, however, had not referred to what those offences are or

whether any person who had any association with the Centre for Health Care,

had been charged in a court of law. It is the assertion of the Petitioners that the

persons arrested by the TID have been discharged without any one of them being

firmly arranged. The Respondents have not refuted this position. When one

considers the objections filed on behalf of the Respondents, one gets the

impression that the respondents are implying that the monies that went into the

purchase of the property did not come from the Petitioners.

The material placed before us, there is nothing to indicate that the basic

requirements that the minister was required to adhere to under the Regulations

had been followed in the instant case. Specifically, the fact that an inquiry was

held by him. It was argued on behalf of the Petitioners that the 1st to the 6th

Respondents had failed to place relevant facts before the Minister and there was a

duty on the Respondents to appraise the President of the full facts of this matter

and the Petitioner contend that what can be deduced from these facts is that no

inquiry had been held.

The Emergency Regulation, no doubt impinges on the property rights of the

citizens and an order of forfeiture of property is purely an exercise of

administrative discretion. Therefore, the minister is required to hold an inquiry

in to the matter before a decision is taken in terms of the applicable Regulation.

11

House of Lords in the case of Padfield Vs, Ministry of Agriculture 1968 (A.C) 997

rejected the concept of unfettered executive discretion. Lord Denning signifying

the duty to exercise the discretion according to law, stated that “the discretion of

a statutory body is not unfettered. It is a discretion which is to be exercised

according to law. That means at least this: the statutory body must be guided by

relevant considerations and not by irrelevant.” It appears that in the instant case

number of relevant matters does not appear to have been considered. Specifically,

failure on the part of the Respondent to establish any nexus between the

Petitioners and the Centre for Health Care. When one peruses P10 C and P10E it

appears that the Minister (his excellency the President) had acted on the

unverified reports of the police and abdicating his authority had proceeded to

make an order of forfeiture that is nothing more than mechanical.

It was strongly urged on behalf of the Petitioners that the Respondents (Police)

had made wrong representations without a proper consideration of the materials

before him stating that the property in question was owned by the Centre for

Health Care, whereas the said property was owned by the petitioners on whose

behalf the 1st floor bearing the assessment 18/1 -1/1 was leased to the said

Centre for the Health Care.

It also appears that his Excellency the President (in his capacity as Defense

Minister) was misled by the 6th respondent in issuing an order to seize the

premises by convincing that 18/1 Chapel lane Wellawatte was owned by the

Center for Health Care. It was not disclosed to the President that the premises in

question was owned by the petitioners and that there are no allegations against

the petitioners of any involvement with the LTTE.

In view of the wording used in Regulation 7 (1) which specifically states that

“where the Minister is satisfied, after such inquiry as it thinks fit…..”, it is

imperative that minister holds an inquiry before making an order to forfeit any

property. Thus, the empowering Regulation requires the Minister to come to a

specific finding objectively, that the property in question belongs to the

proscribed organisation. In my view, it is important to consider whether an

12

inquiry was conducted by the Minster of Defense as per required by the

regulation 7 (1) of the Gazette No.1583/12 dated January 7th 2009. The above

regulation specifically states that “where the Minister is satisfied, after such

inquiry as it thinks fit…..”.

The legal definition of the term inquiry means the examination or investigation

of facts or principles. There is no established degree of inquiry required by the

Gazette. Also, the term “as it thinks fit” gives the discretion to the Minister to

decide as to the extent of the inquiry that should be conducted and that could be

varied from case to case.

In the material placed before this court there is nothing to say that the minister

has arrived at such specific finding, hence in my view, there had been an error

in the exercise of power by the minister in this instance.

In the case of The Manager, Government Branch Press Vs Beliappa AIR1979 SC

429, in interpreting Article 14 of the Indian Constitution, Justice Bhagawathi

held:- “In order to establish discrimination or denial of equal protection it is not

necessary to establish the due observance of the law in the case of others who

form part of that class in previous instances. The Rule of Law, which postulates

equal subjection to the law, requires the observance of the law in all cases.”

In the instance case the petitioners ought to have been afforded an opportunity to

be heard or place any material in their favour and in my view, the term

“inquiry” in Regulation 7 (1) postulates giving an opportunity to all parties that

may be affected by an order of forfeiture. This court had consistently held that

noncompliance of the rules of natural justice in particular the audi ultra partem

rule tantamount to an infringement of fundamental rights under Article 12 (1).

vide: Prassana Withanage V. Sarath Amunugama 2001 1SLR 391 and

Jayawardena V. Dharani Wijeyathilke 2001 SLR 132

As to the exercise of power by authorities, Justice Mark Fernando remarked in

the case of Bandara v. Premachandra 1994 1SLR 304 “Powers are conferred on

13

various authorities in the public interest….. and their exercise must be governed

by reason and not caprice; they cannot be regarded as absolute, unfettered, or

arbitrary, unless the enabling provisions compel such a construction”.

It would, in my view, pertinent to refer to the pronouncement made by His

Lordship Justice Wanasundera in the case Jayanetti v Land Reform Commission

1984 2 SLR 172 wherein his lordship said:

“Article 12 of our constitution is similar in content to Article 14 of the Indian

constitution. The Indian Supreme Court has held that Article 14 combines the

English Law Doctrine of the Rule of Law with the equal protection clause of the

14th amendment to the US Constitution. We all know that the Rule of Law was a

Fundamental principle of English Constitutional law and It was a right of the

subject to challenge any act of the state from whichever organ it emanated and

compel it is to justify its legality. It was not confined only to legalization, but

extended to every class and category of acts done by or at the instance of the

state. That concept is included and embodied in Article 12” Therefore, it is clearly

evident that there is a violation of Article 12 (1) as a Fundamental right of the

petitioners.

All attended facts and circumstances considered, I hold that the forfeiture of the

Petitioners’ property by the order (P10E) made by his excellency the President in

his capacity as the Minister of Defense has infringed the petitioner’s

fundamental right under Article 12(1) of the Constitution, and the said order

forfeiting the premises bearing assessment no. 18/1 Chapel Lane Wellawatte

Colombo 6 in terms of Regulation 7(1) of the Emergency(proscription of the

Liberation Tigers of Tamil Elam) Regulations 2009, is null and void and is hereby

quashed.

In the course of the hearing of this matter it was submitted on behalf of the

Petitioners that officers of the Terrorist Investigation Division of the police are

still in occupation of the building. I make a further direction to the 1st to the 3rd

Respondent and the 6B Respondent to take immediate steps to hand over vacant

14

possession of the premises aforesaid to the Petitioners, if this assertion is correct

and in any event not later than eight (08) weeks from the date of this judgement.

The 1st to 3rd Respondent and the 7th Respondent have acted in total disregard of

the essential requirements of justice in making the recommendation to His

excellency the President. However, this does not appear it to have been done with

any malicious intent against the Petitioners, hence I am of the view that, this is

not an instance where the Respondents should be called to pay compensation

personally.

I consider it is equitable to award the Petitioners a sum of Rupees five hundred

thousand, (Rs.500,00/=) as compensation and are entitled to the cost of this

application.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT.

Justice Priayasath Dep P.C

I agree

CHIEF JUSTICE

Justice Anil Gooneratne,

I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

15

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT