==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application under and intermsofArticles17and126 of theConstitution of the Republic.

1. EdirisingheMuhandiramAppuhamilageUresh Tharanga,No. 527, Thambakanda, Sandakalawa.

2. Rambukanna Liyanage Ranjith Premalal,

Savandana, Sandalankawa.

Supreme Court Application No:S.C. (F/R) 413/21PETITIONERS

Vs.

1. Geological Survey and Mines Bureau,

569, Epitamulla Road, Pitakotte.

1A. Sajjana De Silva

Director General,Geological Survey and Mines Bureau,569, Epitamulla Road, Pitakotte.

2. Central Environmental Authority,

No. 104, Denzil Kobbekaduwa Mawatha,Battaramulla.

2A. P.B. Hemantha Jayasinghe

Director GeneralCentral Environmental Authority

No. 104, Denzil Kobbekaduwa Mawatha,Battaramulla.

3. S.K.Lenaduwa,

1

Director,Provincial Environmental AuthorityNorth Western provincial Office,Dambulla Road, Kurunegala

4. Hon. Mahinda Amaraweera,

Minister of Environment,Ministry of Environment, “SobadamPiyasa”, 416/C/1, Robert GunawardanaMawatha, Battaramulla.

5. C.D. Wickramaratne,

Inspector General of Police,Police Headquarters, Colombo 01.

6. Upul Ariyaratne,

Officer In Charge,Pannala Police Station,Pannala.

7. Keerthi Sri Weerasinghe,

Chairman,Coconut Department Authority,45 B507, Colombo 05.

8. Medical Officer of Health,

Office of the Medical Officer of Health,Elabadagama,Pannala.

9. Water Resources Board,

Hector Kobbakaduwa Avenue,Colombo 07.

10.R.M.S.W Bandara,

Divisional Secretary,Divisional Secretariat,Pannala.

11. Ranjith Lansakara,

2

Chairman,Urban Council,Pannala.

12. A.N.S.K. Fernando,

St. Mary’s Road,Haldaduwana,Dankotuwa.

13. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

BEFORE:VIJITH K.MALALGODA, PC., J.KUMUDINI WICKREMASINGHE, J.JANAK DE SILVA, J.

COUNSEL :Dr. Ravindranath Dabare PC with S. D. Ponnamperuma andMs. Hansanie Imalka instructed by Arunditha Divisekara for the Petitioners.Parinda Ranasinghe, PC, ASG with Nayomi Kahawita for the 1st, 1A, 2A, 3rd -10th and 13th RespondentsRasika Dissayanake with Chandrasiri Wanigapura for the 11th RespondentSuraj Rajapakshe for the 12th Respondent

ARGUED ON:19.10.2022

WRITTEN SUBMISSION : Petitioners on 18.11.2022

As per Journal Entry dated 03.04.2024 Respondents have notsubmitted written submissions up to date

DECIDED ON : 05.04.2024

3

K. KUMUDINI WICKREMASINGHE, J.

This is a Fundamental Rights Application filed under Article 126 (1) of theConstitution by the Petitioners seeking, inter alia, a declaration that theirfundamental rights to equality before the law and equal protection of the lawguaranteed under Article 12 (1), 14 (1) (g) and 14 (1) (h) of the Constitution of SriLanka have been violated and/or are in imminent danger of being infringed and/orare being continuously violated due to the actions, omission, and/or failure to act/orneglect to perform the duty of/by the 1st to 11th Respondents.

On 24.03.2022, having heard the Learned Counsel in support of this applicationand the Learned Additional Solicitor General, for the Respondents, this courtgranted leave to proceed for the alleged violation of rights guaranteed under Article12 (1) of the Constitution.

Brief Facts of the Case

The Petitioners claim that for several months, gravel mining has been taking placein the Savandawatha and Thambakanda Grama Niladari Divisions of the DistrictSecretariat Division of Pannala, Sandalankawa in Kurunegala District, endangeringthe environment, water resources, soil resources, and destroying the mountainwater catchment areas, as well as the lives and livelihoods of the localcommunities, which comprise of about two thousand and five hundred families.Presently, these areas are highly exposed to mass destruction, thereby continuingthe heavy exploitation conducted by the minors in the said areas.

The Petitioners claim that numerous conditions issued by the ProvincialEnvironmental Authority's North Western Provincial Office have been severelyaffected. Numerous mining sites that are still in use have significantly deterioratedas a result of heavy exploitation that violates the terms of the permits that havealready been granted. Therefore, the Petitioners state that 1st to 4th Respondentsabove have failed to take cognisance of the said illegal actions of the miners and toperform their statutory duties imposed upon them under the terms of the NationalEnvironmental Act No. 47 of 1980 and Mines and Minerals Act No. 33 of 1992 asamended.

4

The said conditions issued by the North Western Provincial Office of theProvincial Environmental Authority have been annexed as “P2”.

The petitioners claim that the illegal actions have caused the groundwater in wells,water streams, springs, and reservoirs to dry up, depriving them of their right toaccess clean water because the parties who have obtained mining licences areacting in violation of the conditions stated in the said licence. Additionally, theremoval of trees from these areas has caused landslides that have destroyed theirproperties, including human habitats. The plantations have been destroyed as aresult, and the fertile soil needed for cultivation is now sterile. The Petitionersclaim that as a result, they believe that their fundamental rights, including the rightto choose their place of residence in Sri Lanka, are in imminent danger of beingrestricted and/or violated continuously.

Photographic evidence explaining the above situations have been marked as “P3”

In addition, due to the excessive movement of trucks loaded with gravel mining,the Petitioners claim that the infrastructure of the main roads are beingcompromised. As a result of this unstable and dilapidated condition, the Petitionersclaim that it denies their freedom of movement as it is difficult for vehicles andpersons travelling for their daily activities. Therefore, the Petitioners believe thatthere is an imminent infringement and/or continuous violation and/or violation oftheir Fundamental rights to move freely in the said area specially, for those who areliving in the said area.

Photographic evidence explaining the above situations has been marked as “P4.”

The Petitioners claim that the licence holders have failed to comply with themanner prescribed by either the National Environmental Act No.47 of 1980 orMines and Minerals Act No 33 of 1992 as amended because they have failed torestore and rehabilitate and/or re-level the topsoil in the land on which explorationor mining has been carried out. Hence, the petitioners further state that 1st and 1ARespondents are required to provide their supervision and perform their statutory

5

duties regarding such restoration, rehabilitation, and/or level of the land on whichexploration or mining had been carried out.

The Petitioners assert that they frequently use well water for agriculture anddrinking and that this situation has posed a serious threat to the ongoing waterdistribution project, resulting in a shortage of drinking water, water for daily use,and water for agriculture. Additionally, pollution raises the cost to consumersbecause it necessitates more water treatment to make contaminated water safe foruse in agriculture and human consumption. Furthermore, the Petitioners claim thatthe 9th to 11th Respondents have failed in their responsibilities by failing to takeappropriate action to address the problems faced by the neighbourhood, and byfailing to stop the groundwater pollution in the affected area.

The Petitioners assert that another problematic issue for the community as a resultof excessive mining is that the renowned Ma Oya is seriously in danger and ismore likely to dry up if the excessive mining continues without appropriate actionbeing taken. Ma Oya is the stream that supplies water to local communities inSandalankawa, Thambakanda, and the nearby local communities for drinking andagricultural needs. The majority of the local communities in Ma Oya have made aliving by cultivating crops, so the water in Ma Oya is primarily used for paddyfields and plantations. Therefore, it appears to the Petitioners that theirfundamental rights to engage in agriculture, their profession, and their right to livein a safe and secure place as their human habitation is imminently infringed upon,continuously violated, and/or violated.

The Petitioners also claim that numerous coconut groves have been destroyed byminers during extensive mining, which has negatively impacted many relatedindustries as well as coconut farming. The soil fertility for coconut plantations hasalso been impacted by soil erosion brought on by heavy exploitation. The annualdecline in the coconut harvest and the rise in the market price of coconuts are thusthe results of these irresponsible behaviours. The petitioners further assert thatextensive mining has resulted in the destruction of numerous coconut groves,which has had a detrimental effect on many related industries as well as coconutfarming. The Petitioners also claim that the 7th Respondent has not taken any

6

action to stop these miners' illegal activities or to stop them from continuing in thefuture.

The Petitioners argued that the fertile soil should not be permitted to shift and thatonce the gravel excavation is finished, it should be levelled again appropriately.However, the Petitioners claim that the License holders have not performed therestoration,rehabilitation,ortopsoillevellingexpectedinthisspecificcircumstance. As a result, the fertile soil needed for cultivation has been destroyed,which has caused great distress among the locals who were depending onagriculture for their livelihood.

The Petitioners state that the state must consult the public before approvingdevelopment projects. Although the Petitioners and the other inhabitants haveraised their voices against the aforementioned extensive gravel mining, andorganised a few protests emphasising the destructive effects on the water resources,agriculture, livelihoods of the inhabitants and the environment, no relevant actionhas ever been taken up to date. Most importantly, the Petitioners have informed therelevant governmental authorities, including the police department, who are dutybound under S63A of the Mines and Minerals Act.

Evidence of a copy of the letters sent by the Petitioners and the local community tothe Inspector General of Police and Divisional Secretary is marked “P5 (a) to P5(c)”, respectively.Evidence of a copy of the Affidavit given by some of the inhabitants living in andaround Sandakalawa, Thambakanda are marked “P6 (a)” to “P6 (e).”

Petitioners claim that severe environmental harm occurred during the miningperiod as a result of excessive exploitation in the mining locations. One of the mostserious environmental issues that residents face is the loss of biodiversity. Becausemining is frequently a significant industrial operation including road constructionand the use of heavy equipment, wildlife has been relocated and habitats have beenharmed or destroyed.

Petitioners claim that intensive exploitation has compelled them to leave theirhomes because the accumulation of dust and rubbish in the vicinity has worsened

7

environmental deterioration. Over-exploitation by miners has also harmed the localcommunity's health. The petitioners go on to say that they are entitled to 'access toclean water,' which is required for an appropriate level of living, but that theminers' harsh exploitation violated the circumstances required for an adequatestandard of living.

In light of the facts, the Petitioners assert that there is an imminent infringementand/or continuous violation and/or violation of their fundamental rights, such as theright to engage in agriculture, their profession, the right to live in a safe and secureplace as their human habitation, and the right to move freely within the country forthose who are lawfully residing within the country.

Hence, the Petitioners state that their fundamental rights guaranteed under Article12 (1), 14 (1) (g) and 14 (1) (h) of the Constitution have been violated and/or are inimminent danger of being infringed and/or are being continuously violated due tothe said action, omission, and/or failure to act and/or neglect to perform the dutyof/or by 1st to 11th Respondent. Since leave to proceed has been granted on thealleged violation of Article 12(1) of the constitution, only Article 12(1) has beenconsidered by this court.

The Petitioners claimed that since heavy exploitation has caused the contaminationof water, it has infringed their right to ‘access to clean water.’ The Petitionersstated that according to Article 27 (2) (c), 1st to 11th Respondents as state officials,have a public duty to ensure to all citizens ‘an adequate standard of living.’ Sincethe Petitioners have been deprived of accessing clean water, the Petitioners claimthat the 1st to 11th Respondents have failed to take full realisation of the saidArticle 27 (2) (c).

Furthermore, according to the Petitioners, extensive mining will result insignificant environmental harm for the duration of the mining period if appropriatesteps are not taken to stop it. As per Article 27 (14) of the Constitution, there is apublic duty imposed upon 1st to 11th Respondents to protect and preserve theenvironmentally sensitive ecological areas and a fundamental duty cast on everyperson including all the Respondents under Article 28 (f) of the Constitution, toprotect nature and to conserve its riches. Therefore, the Petitioners state it is the

8

duty of the 1st to 11th Respondents to take necessary steps under the law to protectenvironmentally sensitive areas and to prevent violations of the law otherwise, itwill amount to continuous violation of the said Directive Principles of State Policyand Fundamental Duties enunciated in the Constitution.

As a result, Petitioners contend that the aforementioned failures, omissions, andinaction on the part of one or more or all of the Respondents are arbitrary andunreasonable, as well as a violation of the public trust placed in them.

Before moving on to determine the Application of the Petitioners on its merits, Ihave to first consider the actions and/or omissions of the Respondents. Accordingto the written submissions submitted by the Petitioners, the 1st and 1ARespondents have granted seven licences, notwithstanding the fact that afundamental rights application has been filed in this regard.

Section 35 (4) (a) of the Mines and Mineral Act, No. 33 of 1992 as amended by theMines and Minerals (Amendment) Act, No. 66 of 2009 reads as follows;

“That the exploitation, mining, processing, trading in and export of mineralsauthorised by the licence shall not be conducted in a fraudulent, reckless, grosslynegligent or wilfully improper manner…”

Further, as per Section 63 (1) (a);

“Any person who explores for, or mines, processes, transports, trades in or exportsany mineral without a licence in that behalf issued under this Act shall be guilty ofan offence under this Act and shall on the conviction after the summary trial beforethe Magistrate be liable to a fine not exceeding five hundred thousand rupees andin the case of a second or subsequent offence, to a fine not exceeding one millionrupees or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or to both such andimprisonment.”

The effect of Section 35 (4) (a) and Section 63 (1) (a) as stipulated above is that theindividuals granting a licence for mining must carry out a thorough inspection prior

9

to granting the licence and any person who mines any minerals without a licenceshall be guilty of an offence, respectively.

Accordingly, the Petitioners contend in their written submissions that the 1st and1A Respondents have failed to carry out a thorough inspection before granting thelicence. In light of the expiry dates mentioned in the written submissions, it isevident that the 1st and 1A Respondents have failed in their responsibilities as perSection 35 (4) (a).

Referring to the circumstances set out above, the facts clearly illustrate the extentand seriousness of the damage caused to the environment due to the acts that havebeen committed.

These acts can be directly linked with the applicability of the public trust doctrine,the importance of which has been highlighted in many cases recently.

In the case of Environmental Foundation Limited and others Vs MahaweliAuthority of Sri Lanka and others SC 459/2008 (F/R), SC Minutes of17.06.2010 it was held that “The origins of Public Trust doctrine can be traced toJustinien’s Institutes where it recognizes three things common to mankind i.e. air,running water and sea, (including the shores of the sea). These common propertyresources were held by the rulers in trusteeship for the free and unimpeded use ofthe general public.

Under Chapter VI of the Constitution which deals with Directive principles of StatePolicy and fundamental duties in Article 27(14) it is stated that “The State shallprotect, preserve and improve the environment for the benefit of the community”.Although it is expressly declared in the Constitution that the Directive principlesand fundamental duties ‘do not confer or impose legal rights or obligations andare not enforceable in any Court or Tribunal’ Courts have linked the Directiveprinciples to the public trust doctrine and have stated that these principles shouldguide state functionaries in the excise of their powers.”

10

In the case of Bulankulama and Others Vs Secretary, Ministry of IndustrialDevelopment and Others (Eppawela Case) [2000] 3 SLR 243, Amerasinghe, Jobserved that;

“In my view, the human development paradigm needs to be placed within thecontext of our finite environment to ensure the future sustainability of the mineralresources and of the water and soil conservation ecosystems of the Eppawelaregion, and of the North Central Province and Sri Lanka in General …the cost ofthe environmental damage should, in my view, be borne by the party that causessuch harm, rather than being allowed to fall on the general community to be paidthrough reduced environmental quality or increased taxation in order to mitigatethe environmentally degrading effects of a project. This is a matter the CentralEnvironmental Authority must take into account in evaluating the proposed projectand in prescribing terms and conditions.”

In Illinois Central R. Co. v. Illinois, [1892], 146 U.S. 387, it was held that;

“The public being interested in the use of such waters, the possession by privateindividuals of lands under them could not be permitted except by licence of theCrown, which could alone exercise such dominion over the waters as would insurefreedom in their use so far as consistent with the public interest. The doctrine isfounded upon the necessity of preserving to the public the use of navigable watersfrom private interruption and encroachment -- a reason as applicable to navigablefresh waters as to waters moved by the tide.”

Furthermore, the Supreme Court of India in M.C. Mehta v. Kamal Nath [1977] 1S.C.C. 388, accepted the stand of the State of Illinois’s in the aforementioned caseand held that;

“It was a title held in trust - for the people of the State that they may enjoy thenavigation of the water, carry on commerce over them, and have liberty of fishingtheir in free from obstruction or interference of private parties.”

In Gould v Greylock Reservation Commission [1966] 350 Mass 410 , theSupreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts took the first major step in developing

11

the doctrine applicable to changes in the use of lands dedicated to the publicinterest. As per the judgment;

“...In addition to the absence of any clear or express statutory authorization of asbroad a delegation of responsibility by the Authority as is given by themanagement agreement, we find no express grant to the Authority or power topermit use of public lands and of the Authority's borrowed funds for what seems, inpart at least, a commercial venture for private profit.”

Based on the facts and the evidence mentioned above it highlights that thePetitioners, as inhabitants of Sandakalawa, Thambakanda, have a right to accessclean water for consumption and agricultural purposes. However, due to thelicences granted by the 1st and 1A Respondents permitting extensive mining, thewater bodies, particularly Ma Oya, have been contaminated, making themunsuitable for the said purposes. It is the duty of the 1st and 1A respondents toensure that thorough inspections and checks have been carried out. Nevertheless,by extending the licences without carrying out any standard inspections, the 1stand 1A Respondents have failed in their responsibilities.

Further, according to Section 23H (1) of the National Environmental Act No. 47 of1980 as amended by the National Environmental (Amendment) Act, No. 56 of1988;

“No person shall pollute any inland waters of Sri Lanka or cause or permit tocause pollution in the inland waters of Sri Lanka so that the physical, chemical orbiological condition of the waters is so changed as to make or reasonably expectedto make those waters or any part of those waters unclean, noxious, poisonous,impure, detrimental to the health, welfare, safety or property of human beings,poisonous or harmful to animals, birds, wildlife, fish, plants or other forms of lifeor detrimental to any beneficial use made of those waters.”

Section 23H (3) of the aforementioned Act states as follows;

“Every person who contravenes the provisions of subsection (1) shall be guilty ofan offence…”

12

Further, Section 23N (1) and (4) of the Act reads as follows;

“No person shall pollute or cause or permit to be polluted any soil or the surfaceof any land so that the physical, chemical or biological condition of the soil orsurface is so changed as to make or be reasonably be expected to make the soil orthe produce of the soil poisonous or impure, harmful or potentially harmful to thehealth or welfare of human beings, poisonous or harmful to animals, birds,wildlife, plants or all other forms of life or obnoxious or, unduly offensive to thesenses of human beings or so as to detrimental to any beneficial use of the land.(4) Any person who contravenes any of the provisions of this section shall be guiltyof an offence.

Also, under Section 10 of the National Environmental Act No.47 of 1980, theAuthority is duty bound to protect the destruction caused to the soil, inland waterand air that ultimately led to protecting the quality of the environment.

However, the Petitioners contend that the current state of the mining areas inSandakalawa and Thambankanda (as depicted in the photographic evidence as P3and P4) indicates that the licence holders, through excessive gravel mining, havecaused an environmental crisis that has resulted in the destruction of ecologicalquality, endangering the inhabitants' living habitations as well as their agriculture.

Therefore the Petitioners claim that since Sandakalawa and Thambakanda areecologically sensitive areas, the Central Environmental Authority has taken noaction or made any decisions to prevent the aforementioned environmentalpollution. As a result, the Respondents have failed to comply with Section 24B ofthe National Environmental Act which reads as follows;

(1) “ The Authority shall have the power to issue directives to any person engagedin or about to engage in any development project or scheme which is causing or islikely to cause, damage, or detriment to the environment, regarding the measuresto be taken in order to prevent or abate such damage or detriment, and it shall bethe duty of such person to comply with such directive.”

(2) “Where a person fails to comply with any directives issued under subsection(1), the Magistrate may, on an application made by the Authority, order the

13

temporary suspension of such project or scheme until such person takes themeasures specified in such directive.”

In the given circumstance, the Petitioners have identified that the CentralEnvironmental Authority, the 2nd and 2A Respondents are bound by theaforementionedduties.However,thePetitioners claim that the aforesaidRespondents have failed to comply with the above sections and have also failed topunish the wrongdoers, specifically, the licence holders who could not comply withthe provisions of the National Environmental Act.

As per Amerasinghe, J in Bulankulama and Others Vs Secretary, Ministry ofIndustrial Development and Others (Eppawela Case) [2000] 3 SLR 243;

“The cost of the environmental damage should, in my view, be borne by the partythat causes such harm, rather than being allowed to fall on the general communityto be paid through reduced environmental quality or increased taxation in order tomitigate the environmentally degrading effects of a project. This is a matter theCentral Environmental Authority must take into account in evaluating the proposedproject and in prescribing terms and conditions.”

According to the case of Ravindra Gunewardena Kariyawasam Vs. CentralEnvironmental Authority and Others SC FR Application No. 141/2015,decided on 4th April 2019, it was held,

“WIJEBANDAvs.CONSERVATORGENERALOFFOREST[atp.356]Tilakawardane J. stated “The constitution in Article 27 (14) of the directiveprinciples of state policy enjoins the state to protect, preserve and improve theenvironment. Article 28 refers to the fundamental duty upon every person in SriLanka to protect nature and conserve its riches.” In ENVIRONMENTALFOUNDATION LTD vs. MAHAWELI AUTHORITY OF SRI LANKA [2010 1 SLR 1at p.19], Ratnayake J observed “Although it is expressly declared in theConstitution that the Directive principles and fundamental duties ‘do not confer orimpose legal rights or obligations and are not enforceable in any Court ofTribunal’ Courts have linked the Directive principles to the public trust doctrineand have stated that these principles should guide state functionaries in the excideof their powers.”

14

Additionally, the Petitioners submitted that the National Environmental Authority,together with the Minister, the 4th Respondent, has failed to declare Sandakalawa,Thambakanda to be mentioned as ecologically sensitive areas under Section 24C ofthe National Environmental Act and take more steps to prevent further destructionto the biological system of the named areas. Section 24C (1) states as follows;

“The Minister may by Order published in the Gazette declare any area to be anenvironmental protection area…”

Moreover, as per Section 24D (2);

“So long as an Order under subsection (1) is in force, the Authority shall beresponsible for physical planning of such area in accordance with the provisions ofthis Act.”

It is important to note that the areas concerned were declared as ecologicallysensitive areas which placed an obligation on the Respondents to physically plansuch areas declared as environmental protection areas. The aim of the governmentin declaring such areas as environmental protection areas is to take further steps toprevent destruction to the biological systems of such areas which places a higherstandard of responsibility on the Respondents. However, the Respondents bygranting licences without proper inspection and carrying out standard surveys,have failed on such duty owed.

According to Section 31 (1) of the North Western Province Environmental StatuteNo.22 of 1990;

“No person shall pollute or cause or permit to be polluted or the surface of anyland…”

Further, Section 31 (4) states as follows;

“Any person who contravenes any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty ofan offence.”

The aforementioned provisions highlight that any person who pollutes or permitsthe surface of any land to be polluted shall be guilty of an offence. The Petitioners

15

in their written submission claim that the 3rd Respondent, namely the ProvincialEnvironmental Authority as per Section 31 is under a duty to prevent thedestruction caused to the soil and to declare anyone guilty of an offence whocontravenes any of the provisions of this section. Nevertheless, the Petitioners statethat the Provincial Environmental Authority has not taken action in relation to thesoil erosion that occurred in Sandalankawa, Thambakanda areas due to excessivegravel mining. Therefore, the Petitioners claim that the 3rd Respondent's negligencehas caused irreparable loss to the environment.

In the case of Dissayanake and Others [Uva Magnettetle] v Geological Surveyand Mines Bureau and Others [2011] 2 SRI L.R. at 361, Rohini Marasinghe J.observed that;

“The functions of the National Environmental Act are carried out by the“Authority” called the Central Environmental Authority (CEA). The powers andduties of the Authority are contained in Part II of the Act. According to section 26(1) the Authority may delegate any of its’ powers, duties and functions under theAct to any Government Department subject to the provisions contained in section26.”

Further, section 23 (a) of the North Western Province Environmental Statute No.22of 1990 states as follows;

“Where a licence has been issued to any person under Section 21 and such personacts in violation of any of the terms, standards and conditions of the licence orwhere since the issue of licence, the Provincial Authority considers the receivingenvironment no longer suitable for the continued discharge, deposit, or emission ofwaste or where it is not considered beneficial the Authority may suspend or cancelsuch licence.”

The aforementioned provision depicts that the Provincial Environmental Authorityissues a licence and considers that the environment is no longer suitable forcontinued mining and if the continuity of such mining is detrimental to theenvironment, the Authority has the discretion to suspend or cancel such licence.

It was held in the case of Jayawardena Vs Akmeemana Pradeshiya Sabha andOthers [1998] 1 Sri L.R. at page 317 that “The emission of dust and noise from

16

the mental crushing operation was licensed. A licence was issued to the petitionerbut it was subject to specified conditions. A person who does not comply with theconditions of a licence, acts as if he had no licence. Therefore the petitioner’soccupation, business or enterprise was unlawful in terms of Section 23A read withSection 23B of the National Environment Act.”

The facts of the above mentioned case are similar to the crux of the matter of thiscase. Based on the above, it is the accepted position in law that even though alicence had been granted, the violation of the special conditions specified in thatlicence is unlawful. Based on the evidence that has been provided by thePetitioners it is clear that the acts of the Respondents clearly violate the specificconditions set out in the licence which had been granted to them and as a resultdeeming such acts unlawful.

The Petitioners in their written submission state that “despite the massiveenvironmental degradation, including soil and inland water pollution, no officialattached to the Provincial Authority has taken steps to intervene in preventingillegal activities and punishing the relevant parties under the provisions.”According to the document submitted “P2” the 12th Respondent has been issuedcertain conditions to be followed by the Provincial Environmental Authority whenconducting mining activities.

Nonetheless, it is clear that the 12th Respondent violated these conditions, butmembers of the Provincial Environmental Authority failed to ensure that thespecified conditions were met. Therefore, the Petitioners allege that the ProvincialEnvironmental Authority has failed to implement any of the provisions of theNorth Western Province Environmental Statute No.12 of 1990.

The 13th Respondent has submitted a report provided by the Inspector General ofPolice where the Assistant Superintendent of Police of the Kuliyapitiya Divisionreports to the IGP about 6 arrests made in the Pannala area by the Pannala Police.The 06 arrests made are all drivers and heavy equipment operators who areemployees/agents under the control of the 12th Respondent. They were arrested fortransporting gravel in violation of conditions issued in the licence granted to the12th Respondent. The 13th Respondent contended that these arrests amount toaction the state has taken against the 12th Respondent. The arrest of drivers and

17

heavy equipment operators who were mere agents under the control of the 12thRespondent, is not the action that ought to have been taken in view of the damagecaused to an entire village due to the violation of the conditions of the licences. Aharsher action ought to have been taken against the 12th Respondent for theviolation of the conditions specified in the licences issued to him. Further,following the 06 arrests being made no update in relation to the same has beenprovided to this court up to date.

The Petitioners in their written submission have explained that Sandalankawa andThambakanda are mountainous areas and due to excessive gravel mining, severaltrees have been cleared out. As a result, topsoil has been rapidly eroded, resultingin soil being washed into Ma Oya along with other agrochemicals used by farmersin agricultural operations. As a result, Ma Oya's situation level has worsened,resulting in a decrease in capacity and, eventually, a severe environmental crisis.

ThePetitioners claim that excessive mining activities have contaminatedgroundwater levels in wells, water streams, springs, and reservoirs. As a result, thePetitioners claim that the 9th and 11th Respondents have failed to perform theirduties by failing to take relevant actions in issues confronting the local communityand to prevent pollution caused to the groundwater in the said areas.

In addition, the Petitioners also have referred to international conventions anddeclarations in which the Concepts and Principles of Environmental Law areenshrined,particularly,theConceptsofSustainableDevelopment,Inter-Generational Equity, Principle of Precautionary Action, Public Trust Doctrineand Polluter Pays Principle.

Under the concept of Sustainable Development, the Petitioners in their writtensubmission have correctly referred to Principle 4 of the Rio Declaration whichstates as follows;

“In order to achieve sustainable development, environmental protection shallconstitute an integral part of the development process and cannot be considered inisolation from it.”

Moreover, the Petitioners have correctly referred to the judgment in Watte GederaWijebanda v Conservator General of Forests and Others [2007] SLR 337, Vol

18

1 of 2009, where the courts emphasised the principles in Rio Declaration and howthe Rio Declaration constitutes as soft law. The judgment states as follows;

“Under the 'public trust doctrine' as adopted in Sri Lanka, the State is enjoined toconsider contemporaneously, the demands of sustainable development through the

efficient management of resources for the benefit of all the protection andregeneration of our environment and its resources.”

Per Shiranee Thilakawardena, J.

“Human kind of one generation holds the guardianship and conservation of thenatural resources in trust for future generations, a sacred duty to be carried outwith the highest level of accountability.”

“Although the international instruments and constitutional provisions cited aboveare not legally binding upon governments, they constitute an important part of ourenvironmental protection regime. As evidenced by the decision of this court inBulankulama v. Secretary, Ministry of Industrial Development, (6) they constitute aform of soft law, the importance and relevance of which must be recognized whenreviewing executive action vis-a.-vis the environment, In this case the SupremeCourt adverted to principle 1 of the Rio declaration that "Human beings are thecenter of concern for sustainable development. They are entitled to a healthy andproductive life in harmony with nature.”

Further, in relation to the Polluter Pay Principle, the Petitioners have correctlyreferred to the judgment of Ravindra Gunewardena Kariyawasam Vs. CentralEnvironmental Authority and Others SC FR Application No. 141/2015,decided on 4th April 2019 which was held;

“It is an oft-cited and applied principle of environmental law that the “PolluterPays”. This is reflected in Principle 16 of the Rio Declaration, which states“National authorities should endeavour to promote the internalization ofenvironmental costs and the use of economic instruments, taking into account theapproach that the polluter should, in principle, bear the cost of pollution, with dueregard to the public interest and without distorting international trade andinvestment.”

19

Therefore, it is in my opinion based on the above mentioned evidence that it iscorrectly argued by the Petitioners that their fundamental rights guaranteed underArticle 12 (1) of the Constitution of Sri Lanka which includes their right to live in asafe and secure place as their human habitation have been violated due to therecklessness and gross negligence of the Respondents.

In light of the above, it is in my opinion that the Respondents have failed tocomply with the said duties provided in the National Environmental Act. This isbecause they have failed to issue directives and punish the wrongdoers who did notcomply with the provisions of the National Environmental Act. Moreover, theyhave not prevented the deterioration of the soil, inland water, and air, whichinevitably leads to the protection of environmental quality.

Based on the foregoing reasons, I hold that the 12th Respondent by his actions hasviolated the Petitioner’s fundamental rights guaranteed under 12 (1) of theConstitution.

I direct the 12th Respondent to pay costs to the Petitioners.

Application allowed with costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court.

Vijith K. Malalgoda, PC., J.I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court.

Janak De Silva, J.I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court.

20