==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 18

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Special Leave to Appeal to the Supreme Court of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka under and in terms of Article 128 (2) of the Constitution read with Supreme Court Rules of 1990. Lt. Col. R.D. Gamini Ranwela, 404-A, Batuwatte, Ragama.

S.C. Appeal No. 99/2018 S.C. (SPL) L.A. 76/2016 C.A. (Writ) Application No. 830/08

PETITIONER

Vs.

1. Lt. Gen. Sarath Fonseka,

Commander of the Sri

Lanka Army, Army Headquarters,

Colombo.

2. Lt. Col. L.R. Illukkumbura, Army

Headquarters, Colombo.

3. Major.C.C. Weeraratne, Sri Lanka

Volunteer Force, Headquarters,

Battaramulla.

4. Capt.P.A.S. Wijesinghe, Regimental

Headquarters, Wijayabe Infantry

Regiment, Boyagane, Kurunegala.

Page 2 of 18

5. Major K.R.S.P.K. Kahagalle, 5th

Batallion, Sri Lanka Light Infantry

Army, Army Camp Nikaweva,

Welioya, Parakramapura.

RESPONDENTS

AND NOW BETWEEN

1. Lt. General Crishantha de Silva,

Former Commander of the Sri Lanka

Army, Army Headquarters, Colombo.

1(A) Mahesh Senanayake,

Present Commander of the Sri

Lanka Army, Army Headquarters,

Colombo.

1(b)Lieutenant General Lokugan

Hewage Shavendra Chandana Silva,

Commander of the Army,

Army Headquarters, Colombo.

2. Lt.Col.L.R. Illukkumbura Army

Headquarters, Colombo.

3. Major.C.C. Weeraratne

Sri Lanka Volunteer

Force Headquarters, Battaramulla.

Page 3 of 18

Before : Hon. Janak De Silva, J.

: Hon. Achala Wengappuli, J.

: Hon. Sampath K.B Wijeratne, J.

Counsel : Dr. Avanthi Perera DSG for the Respondents-Appellants.

Saliya Peiris, P.C. with Pasindu Silva, Nisal Dulmith and Andrea

Wijewansha for the Petitioner-Respondent.

4. Capt.P.A.S. Wijesinghe,

Regimental Headquarters, Wijayaba

Infantry Regiment, Boyagane,

Kurunegala.

Respondent-Appellants Vs.

Lt. Col.R.D. Gamini Ranwela,

404-A,

Batuwatte,

Ragama

Petitioner-Respondent

Major K.R.S.P.K. Kahagalle,

5th Batallion,

Sri Lanka Light Infantry Army,

Army Camp Nikaweva,

Welioya, Parakramapura.

5th Respondent-Respondent

Page 4 of 18

Argued on : 26.09.2025

Decided on : 30.01.2026

Janak De Silva, J.

At all times relevant to this application, the Petitioner-Respondent (Respondent) was

a Lieutenant Colonel (Temporary) of the Sri Lanka Army Volunteer Force. Consequent

to a Court of Inquiry (COI) findings, the Army Commander decided to make a

recommendation (P10) that the commission of the Respondent be withdrawn.

Aggrieved by this recommendation, the Respondent invoked the writ jurisdiction of

the Court of Appeal, impugning the vires of the COI proceedings, its findings and the

recommendation of the Army Commander.

The Court of Appeal issued a writ of certiorari quashing what it termed the decision of

the Army Commander. However, the prayer for a writ of certiorari to quash the

proceedings and findings of the COI was rejected.

Aggrieved by the judgement of the Court of Appeal, the Respondents-Appellants

(Appellants) sought and obtained special leave to appeal on the following questions of

law:

(i) Whether the Court of Appeal misdirected itself in law and in fact in failing

to consider that a recommendation for the withdrawal of a commission

by His Excellency the President need not necessarily be preceded by the

findings of a Summary Trial or a Court Martial?

(ii) Whether the Court of Appeal erred in failing to appreciate that

a recommendation by the Commander of the Sri Lanka Army to the

President to withdraw an officer’s commission does not amount to a

punishment as contemplated under the provisions of the Army Act?

(iii) Whether the Court of Appeal failed to give due consideration to the

statutory power vested in the Commander of the Sri Lanka Army to make

Page 5 of 18

recommendations to His Excellency the President regarding the removal

of the commission of any officer of the Army?

Version of the Respondent

The entire allegation levelled against the Respondent originated from a purported

complaint made to the Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka by the wife of one

Samantha Ranasinghe who was a soldier serving under his command. The complaint

alleged that the Respondent had forcibly granted leave without pay to the said

Samantha Ranasinghe and had compelled him to work at an estate owned by the

Respondent’s wife.

Pursuant to the said complaint, the Sri Lanka Corps of Military Police had conducted

what was described as an investigation, and based on the outcome thereof, a COI was

convened. The findings of that COI ultimately led to the decision of the Commander

of the Army. The entire sequence of events , beginning from the said complaint to the

consequential actions were tainted with mala fides and procedural irregularity.

Version of the Appellants

The evidence recorded at the COI revealed that the Respondent had abused his

powers as the Commanding Officer of the 5th Volunteer Battalion of the Sri Lanka Light

Infantry and had attempted to mislead the COI by giving false evidence on oath and

submitting unauthenticated documents.

The Army Commander is vested with the general responsibility for discipline in the Sri

Lanka Army and is responsible for ensuring that the rules of the Sri Lanka Army are

observed.

Considering the very serious nature of the breach of discipline, the Army Commander

was of the view that retaining the Respondent in the service of the Sri Lanka Army

would be detrimental to the best interests of the Sri Lanka Army. Accordingly, having

considered all the relevant material, the Army Commander took the decision to

Page 6 of 18

recommend to H.E. the President that the Respondent be requested to resign his

Commission.

The Court of Appeal, while granting relief on other grounds, did not find the COI itself

to be unlawful. Neither did it set aside its findings. Hence this appeal must be

determined on the footing that the findings of the COI are lawful.

Before examining the three questions of law on which special leave to appeal has been

granted, let me expound the pleasure principle enshrined in Section 10 of the Army

Act No. 17 of 1949 as amended (Army Act) since it forms an important component of

the case of the Appellants.

Pleasure Principle

This principle is reflected in the Latin maxim durante bene placito (during good

pleasure) or durante bene placito regis (during the good pleasure of the King).

The pleasure principle is part of the prerogative power of the State [Abeywickrema v.

Pathirana and Others (1986) 1 Sri LR 120 at 139; Chandrasiri v. The Attorney-General

(1989) 1 Sri LR 115 at 119].

The prerogative, in its classical form, referred to the special powers historically vested

in the English Crown: powers exercised uniquely by the sovereign in matters lying

beyond the reach of the ordinary common law. According to Lewis, the prerogative

includes the powers, duties, rights and immunities of the Crown.[Clive Lewis, Judicial

Remedies in Public Law, (South Asian, Sweet & Maxwell 2017), page 5]

As Blackstone famously described, the prerogative is “that special pre-eminence,

which the King has, over and above all other persons, and out of the ordinary course

of the common law, in right of his regal dignity.” [Commentaries on the Laws of

England (1765-1769), Sir William Blackstone, Book 1, Chapter 7: Of the King’s

Prerogative]

Page 7 of 18

“Prerogative' power is, properly speaking, legal power which appertains to the Crown

but not to its subjects. Blackstone explained the correct use of the term (Bl. Comm.

1.239). It signifies, in its etymology (from prae and rogo) something that is required or

demanded before, or in preference to, all others… it must be in its nature singular and

eccentrical; that it can only be applied to those rights and capacities which the king

enjoys alone, in contradistinction to others…”. [Wade and Forsyth, Administrative

Law (8th ed., Oxford University Press 2000, page 222); Joseph Chitty, A Treatise on the

Law of the Prerogatives of the Crown (1820) page 4].

Over time, common law has recognized the evolution of these prerogative powers into

a set of residual executive powers exercised for the public good, particularly in areas

such as war, defence, external affairs, and governance.

A comparative examination reflects the recognition by courts of the application of the

pleasure principle in relation to the civil and military service. The rationale is grounded

on public policy. Since such employment is for public good, it is essential for the public

good that it should be capable of being determined at the pleasure of the Crown,

except in exceptional cases where it has been deemed to be more for the public good

that some restriction should be imposed on the power of the Crown to dismiss its

servants [See Wade and Forsyth, Administrative Law, 11th ed., page 49].

In Dunn v. The Queen [(1896) 1 Q.B. 116] it was held that the servants of the Crown,

civil as well as military, except in special cases where it is otherwise provided by law,

hold their offices only during the pleasure of the Crown [See In re Poe (110 E.R. 942);

Dickson v. Viscount Combermere (176 E.R. 236); In re Tufnell (1876) 3 Ch.D. 164; Flynn

v. The Queen (1880) 6 V.L.R., L. 208; Shenton v. Smith (1895) AC 229].

Page 8 of 18

In Laker Airways Ltd. v. Department of Trade [(1977) Q.B. 643 at 705, (1977) 2 All E.R.

182 at 192], Lord Denning expounded the present constitutional position in England

on the justiciability of prerogative power when he observed that:

“The prerogative is a discretionary power exercisable by the executive

government for the public good, in certain spheres of governmental activity for

which the law has made no provision, such as the war prerogative (of

requisitioning property for the defence of the realm), or the treaty prerogative

(of making treaties with foreign powers). The law does not interfere with the

proper exercise of the discretion by the executive in those situations: but it can

set limits by defining the bounds of the activity: and it can intervene if the

discretion is exercised improperly or mistakenly. That is a fundamental principle

of our constitution.” (emphasis added)

The pleasure principle was first incorporated into the constitutional framework of Sri

Lanka (Ceylon as it was then) through Section 57 of the Ceylon (Constitution) Order in

Council of 1946 (Cap. 379). It formed part of the regulatory framework of the public

service in Sri Lanka and was recognized and given effect to in a long line of decisions

[See Vallipuram v Postmaster-General (50 N.L.R. 214); Silva v. Attorney-General (60

N.L.R. 14); Kodeswaran v. Attorney-General (70 N.L.R. 121 (SC), 72 N.L.R. 337 (PC);

Abeywickrema (supra)].

Nevertheless, there was no constitutional ouster of jurisdiction of Court to review

orders and decisions relating to the public service. The ouster came in the form of

Article 106(5) of the 1972 Constitution. Article 106(5) of the 1972 Constitution was

replaced by Article 55(5) of the 1978 Constitution. In Chandrasiri (supra. at page 121),

Fernando, J. held:

“The ouster clause was intended to give effect to the ‘pleasure principle’, and

not to whittle it down. The application of the ‘pleasure principle’ prevents the

ground of dismissal being questioned: the ouster clause complements that

Page 9 of 18

principle by taking away the jurisdiction of the courts to inquire into dismissal –

on other grounds, such as that rules and procedures had not been complied

with.”

However, the pleasure principle that applied to the public service was whittled down

in Sri Lanka. It does not vest unfettered power in the executive. Such power must not

be exercised in violation of fundamental and language rights. Any such violation

attracts the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 126 of the Constitution [See Elmore

Perera v. Jayawickrema (1985) 1 Sri. L.R. 28; Chandrasiri (supra. at page 120);

Bandara v. Premachandra (1994) 1 Sri.L.R. 301; Migultenne v. The Attorney-General

(1996) 1 Sri.L.R. 408; Trinita Perera v. Jayaratne (1998) 1 Sri.L.R. 372; Maithripala

Senanayake v. Gamage Don Mahindasoma (1998) 3 Sri.L.R. 333; Jayawardena v.

Dharani Wijayatilake (2001) 1 Sri.L.R. 132; Karavita and Others v. Inspector General

of Police (2002) 2 Sri. L.R. 287].

The pleasure principle in relation to the public service was removed by the 17th

Amendment to the Constitution.

The executive power of the executive presidency operates as the constitutional

successor to the prerogative powers of the Crown. Powers that once arose solely from

royal prerogative now derive their authority from explicit constitutional and statutory

allocation.

Some of the prerogative powers of the Crown has been absorbed, transformed, and

implanted within the constitutional framework of Sri Lanka through Articles 3 and 4(b)

of the Constitution and other laws. The President, as the repository of executive power

including defence, exercises some functions that are historically and conceptually

derived from prerogative power.

Page 10 of 18

For example, in terms of Article 33(g) of the Constitution, H.E. the President has the

power to declare war and peace. The proviso to Article 35(1) states that the Supreme

Court shall have no jurisdiction to pronounce upon the exercise of the powers of the

President under Article 33(g).

Other examples are found in Section 10 of the Army Act, Section 10 of the Navy Act

and Section 10 of the Air Force Act. All these three provisions provide that every

commissioned officer shall hold his appointment during the President's pleasure. In

Perera v. Attorney-General [(1985) 1 Sri.L.R. 156], G.P.S. De Silva, J. (as he was then)

held that the plaintiff, a commissioned Lieutenant in the Sri Lanka Volunteer Force,

held office during pleasure and hence his contract of service with the State was

terminable at will without any right to a prior hearing.

Courts in England, Canada and Australia have refrained from interfering in relations

between the Crown and the military service [See In re Poe (supra); Dickson (supra);

Dawkins v. Lord Rokeby (176 E.R. 800); Mitchell v. The Queen (1896) 1 Q.B. 121; Dunn

(supra), Leaman v. The King (1920) 3 K.B. 663; Bacon v. The King (1921) 21 Ex. C.R.

25; Mulvenna v. The Admiralty (1926) S.L.T. 568; Cooke v. The King (1929) Ex. C.R.

20; McArthur v. The King (1943) 3 D.L.R. 225; Fitzpatrick v. The Queen (1959) Ex. C.R.

405; Gallant v. The Queen in Right of Canada (91 D.L.R. (3d) 695); Flynn (supra)].

However, the Indian Supreme Court has taken a contrary view. In Union of India and

others v. Major S.P. Sharma and others [Civil Appeals Nos. 2951-57 of 2001, Decided

on March 6, 2014] it held that an order of termination passed against an army

personnel member in the exercise of the pleasure doctrine is subject to judicial review,

but that in doing so the court cannot substitute its own conclusion on the basis of

materials on record. It was further held that judicial review is limited to allegations of

mala fides or constitutional violation [See B.P. Singhal v. Union of India [(2010) 6 SCC

331].

Page 11 of 18

Admittedly, the Petitioner was commissioned in the rank of Second Lieutenant

pursuant to Section 9 of the Army Act which stipulates that officers shall be appointed

by commissions under the hand of H.E. the President.

Nevertheless, we are not called upon to examine the vires of the exercise of the

pleasure principle by H.E. the President pursuant to Section 10 of the Army Act. The

Respondent invoked the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal prior to H.E. the President

exercising power such power.

Hence, I reserve my position on the scope and application of the pleasure principle in

relation to officers of the armed forces in the present constitutional framework based

on the rule of law and whether the limitations this court has developed to the

application of the pleasure principle in relation to the public service as explicated

above applies with equal force to the pleasure principle enshrined in Section 10 of the

Army Act.

Question of Law Nos. 1 and 3

Both parties argued this appeal on a wider proposition, namely whether a court

martial or a summary trial must be held before any recommendation is made to H.E.

the President to consider the withdrawal of the commission of an officer. However, I

am of the view that this appeal must be determined on a narrower proposition,

namely whether in the circumstances of this case, a court martial or a summary trial

should have been held before any recommendation was made to H.E. the President to

consider the withdrawal of the commission of the Respondent.

Question of law No. 1 consists of two parts.

The first is whether a withdrawal of a commission is conditional upon the conduct of

a summary trial.

The short answer to this is found in Section 42 of the Army Act according to which a

summary trial can only be held in respect of persons holding ranks below that of

Lieutenant Colonel. At the material time, the Respondent held the rank of Temporary

Page 12 of 18

Lieutenant Colonel. Hence, a summary trial could not have been conducted against

the Respondent.

The other question is whether a court martial should have preceded the

recommendation to H.E. the President.

According to Section 56 of the Army Act, where three years have elapsed after the

commission of any offence by any person subject to military law, he shall not be tried

by a court martial for that offence unless it the offence of mutiny, desertion, or

fraudulent enlistment. As the misconduct occurred in 2002 and came to light only in

2005 after the complaint made by the wife of soldier Samantha Ranasinghe, a court

martial would have been time-barred as the misconduct did not amount to mutiny,

desertion or fraudulent enlistment.

The maxim lex non cogit ad imposssibilia (law does not compel the performance of

what is impossible) applies. There was no fault on the part of the authorities in failing

to take steps to conduct a court martial as they were not aware of the misconduct on

the part of the Respondent prior to the lapse of three years from the date of

misconduct.

Accordingly, I hold that in the circumstances of this case, there was no necessity to

conduct a summary trial or a court martial prior to any recommendation been made

to H.E. the President to consider the withdrawal of the commission of the Respondent.

I answer question of law No. 1 as follows:

(i) Whether the Court of Appeal misdirected itself in law and in fact in failing

to consider that a recommendation for the withdrawal of a commission

by His Excellency the President need not necessarily be preceded by the

findings of a Summary Trial or a Court Martial?

In the circumstances of this appeal, YES.

Page 13 of 18

Question of law No. 3 requires an examination of the powers of the Commander of

the Army to make a recommendation to H.E. the President for the withdrawal of the

commission of any officer of the Army.

At the outset, it must be emphasized that the power given to H.E. the President by

Section 10 of the Army Act is a power that he and he alone can exercise. He must form

his personal opinion whether the commission should be withdrawn. He cannot act

under dictation from the Commander of the Army or any other party.

However, as the executive head of the country with a significant number of armed

forces personnel, it is inconceivable that he will have personal knowledge of each of

them to be in a position to decide on the exercise of powers of withdrawal of

commission. He must rely on persons having knowledge to provide him the necessary

material to enable him to form his personal opinion.

The provisions of the Army Act and regulations made thereunder establish that the

Commander of the Army is the conduit through whom H.E. the President should be

made aware of the circumstances which may justify him exercising the powers vested

in him under Section 10 of the Army Act.

In Captain Ambawalage Dammika Senaratne De Silva v. Lt. General Jagath

Jayasuriya, Commander of Sri Lanka Army and Others [SC/FR 546/2012, S.C.M.

31.10.2023] it was held (at page 20) that in terms of Regulation 2 of the Army

Disciplinary Regulation 1950 read with Section 8 of the Army Act, the Commander of

the Army is vested with the responsibility of maintaining discipline in the Army and

has a paramount public duty to ensure that soldiers are commanded by fit and proper

persons.

Regulation 62(3) of the Sri Lanka Army (Volunteer Force and Volunteer Reserve)

Regulations 1985 states that:

“Upon the conclusion of a Court of Inquiry, the Commanding Officer shall

forward the copy of the proceedings together with his recommendations

Page 14 of 18

through the usual military channels to the Commander of the Army who shall

decide what further action should be taken.”

The Commander of the Army then has several options including the conduct of a court

martial or summary trial upon receiving the findings of a COI. However, both these

options were not available in the circumstances of this appeal as expounded earlier.

Following is some of the findings made by the COI on the conduct of the Respondent:

(1) Got soldier Samantha Ranasinghe to work on the estate owned by his wife;

(2) Lied on six (6) occasions to the COI;

(3) Tried to mislead the COI;

(4) Committed a fraud by getting soldier Samantha Ranasinghe to sign a document

acknowledging the receipt of a payment when no such payment was made;

(5) Abused his powers.

These are serious findings made after leading of evidence where the Respondent had

the right of cross examination. They go to the root of the suitability of the Respondent

to hold a commission as a senior officer in the Sri Lanka Army Volunteer Force. Should

the Army Commander have turned a blind eye to the findings of the COI as it was not

possible to conduct a summary trial or a court martial in the circumstances of this

appeal? No reasonable person will agree.

In Captain M.B.A. Dissanayake v. General Jagath Jayasuriya and others [S.C. Appeal

15/2021, S.C.M. 05.09.2023] my learned brother Samayawardena, J. held (at page 8)

that the Army Commander could not have taken a decision to withdraw the

commission of the petitioner. I am in respectful agreement that the Army Commander

does not have any power to withdraw the commission of any officer. Pursuant to

Section 10 of the Army Act, that is a decision that only H.E. the President can take.

Indeed, my learned brother Samayawardena, J. emphasizes (at page 8) that there the

Army Commander had ordered the withdrawal of the commission rather than

recommend or opine.

Page 15 of 18

However, in this appeal, P10 (page 4) clearly shows that having considered the findings

of the COI, the Army Commander made a recommendation (නිර්දේශ) to withdraw the

commission of the Respondent.

A recommendation, by its very nature, is not a determination of rights; it may contain

more than raw facts, yet it does not constitute a decision. It is an evaluative opinion

intended to assist H.E. the President in exercising his under Section 10 of the Army

Act.

The assessment of the facts by the Army Commander is shaped by his duty to preserve

discipline, efficiency, and the integrity of the Army, yet he is not empowered to

withdraw the commission of any officer on his own volition. His role is limited to

brining the material facts to the attention of H.E. the President, who alone may decide

how to act upon such material. The ultimate authority therefore remains firmly with

H.E. the President.

Learned President’s Counsel for the Respondent drew out attention to Regulation 38

of the Army Disciplinary Regulations, 1950, which provides that “where an officer

investigates a charge against a person subject to military law but does not himself

summarily try such person, he shall carefully refrain from expressing any opinion as

to the guilt or innocence of such person.” He contended that the Army Commander

had by P10 acted contrary to this regulation.

The short answer is that there was no charge against the Respondent before the COI,

as it is a fact-finding process and in any event the Army Commander did not investigate

the Respondent.

The Respondent relied on several decisions of the Court to Appeal to establish that the

Army Commander cannot, based upon a COI report, make a recommendation for the

withdrawal of the commission of the Respondent. The facts in all those cases are

distinguishable from the facts in this appeal.

Page 16 of 18

In Flying Officer R.H.M.K.A.K.B. Ratnayake v. Air Marshal Donald Perera [C.A. Writ

104/2005, C.A.M. 28.02.2007] the decision turned on two features absent in the

present case: first, the petitioner there had expressly requested that a court martial

be convened, and the respondent had affirmatively undertaken to do so, but

thereafter failed to fulfil that assurance. Second, in this case, it was not possible to

conduct a court martial or summary trial for the reasons more fully set out above. The

ratio in Ratnayake(Supra) therefore does not assist the Respondent.

In W.M. Ranjith Weerasinghe v. Lt. General Sarath Fonseka and Others [CA/Writ

Application 2148/ 2005, C.A.M. 23.07.2007] further disciplinary proceedings were

pending against the petitioner at the time the recommendation was made to

withdraw the commission, and the Court of Appeal held that the recommendation

should have awaited the conclusion of those proceedings. However, in the present

case, no such disciplinary proceedings were pending. Thus, the ratio in Weerasinghe

is of no assistance to the Respondent.

In Lieutenant Hetti Gamage Harischandra v. Commander of the Army and Others

[CA/WRIT/App/895/2007, C.A.M. 28.07.2009] the Army Commander decided to

discharge the petitioner from the Sri Lanka Army Volunteer Force based on the

findings of a COI. The Court of Appeal held the decision to be ultra vires. However, in

this appeal, the Army Commander only made a recommendation to H.E. the President.

Hence, this decision does not assist the Respondent.

The Court of Appeal as well as the Respondent placed much reliance on the decision

in Boniface Silva v. Lieutenant General Sarath Fonseka [C.A. 705/2007, C.A.M.

10.09.2009]. There it was held that a COI cannot be used as the basis for imposing a

punishment, as it is only a preliminary fact-finding step. The present appeal, however,

is materially different. In Boniface Silva, the Army Commander had recommended

three punishments based on the findings of a COI, whereas in this appeal no

punishment has been proposed. The Army Commander has only made a

recommendation to the President that the commission of the Respondent be

Page 17 of 18

withdrawn. The President is free to consider it or completely disregard it. In fact,

should H.E. the President simply adopt the recommendation without forming his

personal opinion, he will be acting under dictation. The ratio in Boniface Silva

therefore does not assist the Respondent.

In view of the gravity of the findings of the COI, I am of the view that the 1st

Respondent, as the Commander of the Army, was empowered in the circumstances of

this appeal to make a recommendation to the President to withdraw the commission

of the Respondent. Such a recommendation is consistent with the public policy

encapsulated in the pleasure principle contained in Section 10 of the Army Act.

In this context, it is apposite to refer to the decision in Major K.D.S. Weerasinghe v.

Colonel G.K.B. Dissanayake and others [SC/FR/Application No. 444/2009, S.C.M.

31.10.2017] where Malalgoda, P.C. J., held (at pages 5-6) as follows:

“Regulation 2 of the Army Disciplinary Regulations 1950 provides that “the

Commander of the Army shall be vested with the general responsibility for

discipline in the Army” and in the case in hand the Commander acting under the

above provision had sought a direction from His Excellency the President

regarding the further retention of the Petitioner.

As revealed before us, the above conduct of the Commander of the Army when

seeking a directive from His Excellency the President was an independent act

and was done for the best interest of the Army, in order to maintain the

discipline of the Army.

In the said circumstances it is clear that the decision to withdraw the

Commission and to dismiss the Petitioner from the Sri Lanka Volunteer Force

was taken by the then Commander of the Army by following the provision of the

Army Act No. 17 of 1949 and the Regulations framed there under and the said

decision was not reached, as alleged by the Petitioner in violation of the

Page 18 of 18

provisions of the Army Act No. 17 of 1949 and the Court of Inquiry Regulations

promulgated under the said Act.”

I answer question of law No. 3 as follows:

(ii) Whether the Court of Appeal failed to give due consideration to the

statutory power vested in the Commander of the Sri Lanka Army to make

recommendations to His Excellency the President regarding the removal

of the commission of any officer of the Army?

In the circumstances of this appeal, YES.

Question of Law No. 2 is premised on the wider proposition on which parties argued

this appeal. However, as I have stated previously, this appeal can be disposed on the

narrower proposition limited to the circumstances of this case. Hence, I see no reason

to address question of law No. 2.

For all the foregoing reasons, I set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal dated

24.03.2016.

Parties shall bear their costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Achala Wengappuli, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Sampath K.B Wijeratne, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT