IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

SC APPEAL NO: SC/APPEAL 218/2016

SC LA NO: SC/HCCA/LA/37/2016

CA NO: SP/HCCA/TA/24/2012 (F)

DC TISSAMAHARAMA NO: 175/2002/L

Sunnadeniyage Jayadasa,

Dehigahalanda,

Ambalantota.

Plaintiff

Vs.

1. Sudusinghage John Singho

(Deceased),

1A. Wimaladasa Sudusinghe,

Gemunupura, Tissamaharama.

Substituted 1st Defendant

2. Ramasundara Hettige Misinona

(Deceased)

2A. Wimaladasa Sudusinghe,

Gemunupura, Tissamaharama.

Substituted 2nd Defendant

3. Jasenthu Hewage Dharmadasa,

No. 1046, Nandimithra Mawatha,

Gemunupura, Tissamaharama.

2

SC/APPEAL/218/2016

4. Chaminda Sudusinghe,

Chaminda, Gemunupura,

Tissamaharama.

3rd and 4th Defendants

AND BETWEEN

Sunnadeniyage Jayadasa,

Dehigahalanda,

Ambalantota.

Plaintiff-Appellant

Vs.

1. Sudusinghage John Singho (Deceased),

1A. Wimaladasa Sudusinghe,

Gemunupura, Tissamaharama.

Substituted 1st Defendant-Respondent

2. Ramasundara Hettige Misinona

(Deceased),

2A. Wimaladasa Sudusinghe,

Gemunupura, Tissamaharama.

Substituted 2nd Defendant-Respondent

3. Jasenthu Hewage Dharmadasa,

No. 1046, Nandimithra Mawatha,

Gemunupura, Tissamaharama.

3

SC/APPEAL/218/2016

4. Chaminda Sudusinghe,

Chaminda, Gemunupura,

Tissamaharama.

3rd and 4th Defendant-Respondents

AND NOW BETWEEN

Sunnadeniyage Jayadasa,

Dehigahalanda,

Ambalantota.

Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant

Vs.

1. Sudusinghage John Singho (Deceased),

1A. Wimaladasa Sudusinghe,

Gemunupura, Tissamaharama.

Substituted 1st Defendant-Respondent-

Respondent

2. Ramasundara Hettige Misinona

(Deceased),

2A. Wimaladasa Sudusinghe,

Gemunupura, Tissamaharama.

Substituted 2nd Defendant-Respondent-

Respondent

3. Jasenthu Hewage Dharmadasa,

No. 1046, Nandimithra Mawatha,

Gemunupura, Tissamaharama.

4

SC/APPEAL/218/2016

Before: S. Thurairaja, P.C., J.

Kumuduni Wickremasinghe, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: W. Dayaratne P.C. with R. Jayawardena for the Plaintiff-

Appellant-Appellant.

Prabath de Silva with Madushani Kulerathna with Salome de

Silva for the Defendant-Respondent-Respondents.

Argued on: 26.09.2022

Written submissions:

by the Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant on 27.04.2017 and

21.11.2022.

by the Defendant-Respondent-Respondents on 09.05.2017

and 26.10.2022.

Decided on: 27.03.2023

Samayawardhena, J.

The plaintiff filed this action in the District Court of Tissamaharama

against the defendants seeking a declaration of title to the land described

in the schedule to the plaint on deed No. 1907 marked P5, ejectment of

the defendants therefrom and damages. The 1st and 2nd defendants filed

answer seeking a dismissal of the plaintiffs action, a declaration that they

are entitled to the property on prescriptive possession through Geetha

4. Chaminda Sudusinghe,

Chaminda, Gemunupura,

Tissamaharama.

3rd and 4th Defendant-Respondent-

Respondents

5

SC/APPEAL/218/2016

Chandanee Sudusinghe ( 1,2

) and a declaration that deed P5 is a nullity.

After trial, the District Judge dismissed the plaintiffs action and entered

judgment for the defendants. On appeal, the High Court of Civil Appeal in

Tangalle affirmed the judgment of the District Court and dismissed the

appeal. The plaintiff appealed to this Court against the judgment of the

High Court and this Court granted leave to appeal mainly on two questions

of law:

(a) Did the High Court of Civil Appeal err in law in affirming the

judgment of the District Court which decided that P5 is a forgery

relying entirely upon the report of the Examiner of Questioned

Documents?

(b) Did the High Court of Civil Appeal err in law in affirming the

judgment of the District Court which decided that upon the death

of Geetha Sudusinghe, the property devolves upon the 1st and 2nd

defendants being her natural parents?

At the trial, by way of formal admissions, it was inter alia accepted by the

defendants that:

(a) David Silva became the owner of the property by a partition decree

marked P1 and P2.

(b) David Silva gifted that property to his wife Podinona and Geetha

Sudusinghe by deed No. 1227 marked P3.

(c) Podinona gifted her share to Geetha Sudusinghe by deed No. 33

marked P4 (thereby Geetha Sudusinghe becoming the sole owner of

the property).

(d) Geetha Sudusinghe is the adopted child of David Silva and his wife,

Podinona.

6

SC/APPEAL/218/2016

(e) The 1st and 2nd defendants are the biological parents of Geetha

Sudusinghe.

The plaintiffs case was that Geetha Sudusinghe gifted the property to the

plaintiff by deed P5. This was challenged by the defendants on the basis

that P5 is a forgery and the District Court accepted the defendants

position. The contention of learned Presidents Counsel for the plaintiff is

that the District Court came to this conclusion solely on the evidence of

the Examiner of Questioned Documents (EQD) and on no other evidence

and this is against the well-established law.

The EQD gave evidence at the trial. He is an officer of the Government

Analysts Department. The report was marked V3. His evidence is that the

signature of Geetha Sudusinghe appearing on deed P5 is a forged one.

According to his evidence, Geetha Sudusinghes purported signature has

been created by tracing out her genuine signature on deed P5.

03. 1 1

. 1 1

.

04. 1 1

.

The expert witness is very confident on that finding as he says that he

used the latest advanced technology known as Video Spectral Comparator

(VSC) technology in this regard. This technology with advanced

characteristics for examination, comparison and authentication is a

complete digital imaging system used by (among many others) Examiners

of Questioned Documents for detecting variations on altered and

counterfeit documents. At the invitation of the defendants counsel the

expert witness produced his investigation results marked V5. The District

7

SC/APPEAL/218/2016

Judge accepted his evidence. The complaint of learned Presidents Counsel

for the plaintiff is based on the sentence found in the judgment of the

District Court where the learned District Judge says that to come to the

conclusion that deed P5 is a forgery, the evidence of the EQD itself is

sufficient. I accept that the District Judge cannot decide the genuineness

of P5 on the EQD report alone. The expert only expresses his opinion on

the matter. It is not conclusive. The Court will take the experts opinion

into careful consideration to form its independent opinion, which shall

ultimately prevail. The Court cannot blindly accept such evidence. Vide

Gratiaen Perera v. The Queen (1960) 61 NLR 522, Charles Perera v. Motha

(1961) 65 NLR 294, Fernando v. The State (1972) 75 NLR 315.

However I cannot accept the argument of learned Presidents Counsel for

the plaintiff that the District Judge entirely depended on the evidence of

the EQD to conclude that deed P5 is a forgery. The District Judge in the

judgment inter alia refers to the evidence of Seetin, an attesting witness to

the deed. His evidence is fragile and not convincing at all. Geetha

Sudusinghe was sick at that time but she is said to have gone to

Ambalantota by bus to execute the deed. Seetin also says that she died

about one week after the execution of the deed but according to P5 it was

executed on 10.01.2002. Geetha Sudusinghe died on 07.02.2002. He did

not know that he was signing as a witness to a deed but later came to

know that it was a deed. When suggested that they prepared a forged deed

his answer was that he does not know. Vide pages 419-420 of the brief.

The plaintiff did not call Sunil, the other attesting witness and/or the

notary to give evidence.

On the available evidence I do not think the District Judge was wrong to

have come to the conclusion that the due execution of the deed was not

proved and the signature of the donor is a forgery.

8

SC/APPEAL/218/2016

The next question is whether the District Judge was correct when he came

to the conclusion that Geetha Sudusinghe was brought up by David Silva

and Podinona but there is no evidence of adoption of her by David Silva

and Podinona (

.

), and therefore after the death of

Geetha Sudusinghe, her propery shall devolve on her natural parents and

siblings. This is a wrong finding. At the commencement of the trial, it was

recorded as an admission of the defendants ( ) that

Geetha Sudusinghe was adopted by David Silva and Podinona. (

)

According to section 58 of the Evidence Ordinance such formal admissions

recorded at the trial need no further proof unless the Court wants them to

be proved.

58. No fact need be proved in any proceeding which the parties

thereto or their agents agree to admit at the hearing, or which, before

the hearing, they agree to admit by any writing under their hands, or

which by any rule of pleading in force at the time they are deemed to

have admitted by their pleadings:

Provided that the court may, in its discretion, require the facts

admitted to be proved otherwise than by such admissions.

Section 31 of the Evidence Ordinance which enacts Admissions are not

conclusive proof of the matters admitted, but they may operate as estoppels

under the provisions hereinafter contained relates to informal admissions

mostly made out of Court.

Because of this formal admission, no issue was raised by either party

whether Geetha Sudusinghe was adopted by David Silva and Podinona

9

SC/APPEAL/218/2016

and rightly so. Nor did the Court want that fact to be proved by calling

witnesses. If it was the position of the defendants that Geetha Sudusinghe

was not legally adopted but only brought up by David Silva and Podinona,

there was no necessity for the defendants to record such admission at the

trial but instead it ought to have been raised as an issue at the trial. This

was not done.

In jurisdictions where adversarial system of justice is adopted such as Sri

Lanka, it is a rudimentary principle of law that the case shall be decided

by the judge as it is presented before him by the competing parties and

not in the way the judge thinks the case ought to have been presented

before him. Therefore the finding of the District Judge on that matter

cannot allowed to stand. The Court has to proceed on the basis that

Geetha Sudusinghe is the adopted child of David Silva and Podinona.

By way of further admissions quoted above, the 1st and 2nd defendants

have accepted that Geetha Sudusinghe became the owner of this land by

the two deeds of gifts marked P3 and P4 executed by David Silva and

Podinona. However in the answer and by way of issues the 1st and 2nd

defendants say that Geetha Sudusinghe became entitled to the land by

prescription. Issue 16 reads as follows:

, ,

?

The District Judge has answered this issue also in the affirmative. This is

meaningless. I cannot understand how and why and against whom Geetha

Sudusinghe had adverse possession to acquire the property by

prescription when she had the paper title by deeds P3 and P4 about which

there is no contest.

10

SC/APPEAL/218/2016

In any event, the plaintiff filed this action for declaration of title and

ejectment of the defendants from the land. That means the defendants are

in possession of the land. Merely because this Court sets aside the finding

of the District Court on the question of adoption, the plaintiff cannot enter

into possession of the land. This Court cannot express any legal opinion

as to what the parties should do to vindicate their rights, if they think they

have such rights.

The plaintiffs action in the District Court and the cross-claim of the

defendants shall stand dismissed. The appeal is formally dismissed

subject to the above findings. No costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

S. Thurairaja, P.C., J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Kumuduni Wickremasinghe, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court