1

E.A.G.R. Amarasekara J.

I had the advantage of reading in draft, the Judgment written by Honourable

Justice Surasena. With all due respect to his analysis of facts and

conclusions, I intend to dissent and come to a different conclusion with

regard to the facts revealed before us in this case. Since my brother Judge

has summarised the facts of this case, I need not repeat some of them here

again. My brother Judge has observed that many of the assertions made by

the Petitioner are based on hearsay material or mere speculation by the

Petitioner that cannot be given any evidential value. I also agree with that.

However, the fact that the Petitioner’s son Mariyadas Thevis Delrokson died

on 08.08.2012 at the Ragama Teaching Hospital while he was in the custody

of Prison authorities is not a disputed fact. Furthermore, the 4th Respondent,

the Commissioner General of Prisons in reply to paragraph 6 of the Petition

has stated that the deceased was remanded in Vavuniya Prison on

19.04.2010 and he had not complained of any assault by the CID. – Vide

paragraph 10 of the affidavit of the 4th Respondent dated 30.03.2015. The

document marked as R1 and tendered with the said affidavit also confirms

that the deceased had no serious health condition at the time he was

remanded.

Thus, the facts placed before this court establish;

• that the deceased was a remand prisoner,

• that he was handed over to Vavuniya Prison on 19th April 2010 in good

health and

2

• that he died while in prison custody at Ragama Teaching Hospital on

08.08.2012.

My brother judge Surasena, J. has referred to the Post Mortem Report and

the injuries found there in that report. He correctly observes that out of the

21 injuries listed on the 3rd page, the injuries Nos. 2, 3, 6, 7, 20 and 21 were

sustained before the deceased was admitted to the hospital. As per the

Judicial Medical Officer (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the JMO) who

did the autopsy, other injuries listed on the 3rd page of the Post Mortem

Report, namely injuries Nos.1,4,5 and 8 to 19 would have been sustained

during the hospital stay while the deceased was in an unconscious state.

However, commenting on the autopsy, the JMO, among other things, has

explained the following injuries revealed by the Bed Head Ticket, CT & MRI

Scans:

• A tram line contusion on the forehead (from the entries in the bed

head ticket)

• Cerebral oedema and Fracture in Zygomatic bone of right side of the

face (By CT Scan.)

• Shearing injuries in brain, (By MRI Scan.)

• Fracture in the distal part of left ulna. (By X-ray report)

Fracture in the left ulna is also found in the list given on the 3rd page of the

Post Mortem Report as injury No. 21. These findings indicate that the brain

of the deceased was swollen and fractures in bones have occurred on the

right side of the face as well as on the left forearm.

3

The JMO further states in his report that the autopsy revealed evidence of

diffuse axonal injuries and evidence of septicemia. The JMO further clarifies

‘diffuse axonal injury’ as follows;

“Diffuse axonal injury of the brain is used to describe a condition

characterised by immediate prolong coma (greater than 6 hours) occurring

after head trauma, not associated with intracranial haemorrhage or mass

lesion. This is produced by sudden acceleration-deceleration motion of the

head (assault, violent shaking of head or fall) which causes stretching and/or

shearing of nerve fibers. In diffuse axonal injury, the patient become

unconscious and survives for a long period in vegetative state and death

supervenes due to complications of the unconscious state. Fracture

zygomatic bone in right side of the face as indicated in CT scan and BHT

finding of tram line contusion on the forehead confirm that the deceased had

sustained head injury caused by blunt forces resulting diffuse axonal injury

before admit to the hospital.” (Sic)

As per the Post Mortem Report, death was caused due to Septicemia,

Prolonged Unconsciousness and Head Injury. – Vide comment of the JMO at

the last page of the Post Mortem Report.

Respondents have not taken up a position that a fall or an accident caused

those injuries. Injury No. 6 on the 3rd page of the Post Mortem Report refers

to a healing wound on the inner part of the left thigh. This injury suggests

that legs of the deceased were open towards the side the blow came from.

Fracture in the left ulna would have been caused while trying to cover or

protect him from a beating. Nevertheless, the Post Mortem Report confirms

4

that the death of the deceased was not due to a natural cause but due to

the injuries caused to the head of the deceased while he was in the custody

of the prison. The deceased was the son of the Petitioner, but the Petitioner

was not with the deceased at the Prison. Thus, what caused the injuries to

the deceased is not within the knowledge of the Petitioner, but the Prison

Authorities must have the knowledge with regard to the incident or

background or circumstances that caused the injuries. 1st to 4th Respondents

might not have been with or around the deceased always, but they have the

authority to collect information from the relevant officers and the related

books, records and journals maintained by the prisons. Thus, the

circumstances that caused the injuries and/or when and where the injuries

were inflicted were within the special knowledge of the prison officers, in

other words within the knowledge of the State through its officers.

It is true that the prison officers have authority even to use a degree of force

to maintain discipline in the prison- vide section 13 of the Prisons Ordinance.

Article 4(d) of the Constitution expects all the organs of the state to respect,

secure and advance fundamental rights of the people. In Kupugeekiyana

Vs Hettiarachchi & two others (1984) 2 Sri LR 153 it was held that

even a person on the blackest of criminal charges is entitled to his

fundamental rights.

Article 11 of the Constitution confirms freedom against torture, cruel and

inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment. The said Article is not

subject to any restriction under Article 15 of the Constitution. Thus, no

derogation of the rights guaranteed by the said Article is permissible for any

reason.

5

In Jayasinghe Vs. Samarawickrama SCFR 157/91, SCM

12.01.1994, (1994) 2 Sri L R 18 Kulatunge, J. commented as follows:

“At the time Petitioner was handed over to Police he had no injuries, and

when he was handed over to the hospital, he was a physical wreck and

comatose, and I, therefore, hold that allegation of torture had been

established.”

When a person is handed over to prison as a prisoner, it is expected that the

prison authorities would respect his fundamental rights. In the case at hand,

the deceased was handed over to the prison in good health, and after few

months he was admitted to Ragama hospital in an unconscious state, with

injuries including severe internal head injuries caused by blunt forces - vide

Post Mortem Report. As elaborated above, the prison authorities must have

the exclusive knowledge with regard to the circumstances that caused the

injuries and when and where they were inflicted or occurred. Unless there

is a proper explanation by the prison authorities the facts mentioned above

establish prima facie a high probability of an infringement of Article 11 since

there is evidence of assault while the deceased was in prison custody.

In reply to the application made by the Petitioner, two affidavits dated

23.06.2014 and 30.03.2015 have been filed in objection by the respective

officers who held the office of the 4th respondent. The affidavit dated

23.06.2014 was submitted by one Chandrarathne Pallegama, the

Commissioner General of Prisons as at that date. He has not denied the

averments in the petition and affidavit of the Petitioner but has stated that:

6

1. Consequent to a transfer of a prisoner to Boossa Prison as per an order

of the Vavuniya High Court, on or around 27.06.2012, several inmates

of the Vavuniya Prison engaged in a hunger strike.

2. In pursuance of their demand, on 28.06.2012, certain inmates of the

Vavuniya Prison took 3 prison guards as hostages and held those 3

prison guards and other prisoners captive within the said prison

premises.

3. Since negotiations to get the hostages released and regain the official

control of the Prison failed, with the assistance of the Special Task

force (STF), the Prison Authorities conducted a rescue operation on

the 29.06.2012, where they had to use a degree of force due to the

stiff resistance by the hostage-takers.

4. Subsequent to the rescue operation, fearing re-grouping, it became

necessary to split up the prisoners and transfer them to different

prisons.

5. Thus, they were transferred to Anuradhapura & Mahara Prisons while

taking prisoners requiring medical attention to hospitals. In that

process, the deceased was warded in the Ragama Hospital.

The affirmant of the said affidavit has tendered an inquiry report made in

relation to the aforesaid incident as R1 and certain statements made during

that inquiry by the Superintendent of Vavuniya Prison and the aforesaid

hostages as R2, R3A, R3B, and R3C. The affirmant does not state that he

was present in person when the aforesaid incident or transfer of prisoners

that followed took place. Therefore, most of the contents may have been

taken from the information he received and may be hearsay. No affidavit

7

is tendered in support of the contents of his affidavit from a person who was

present at the incident or to verify the contents of R1, R2, R3A to R3C by

the makers of such report or the statements. However, the gist of this

affidavit is to indicate that the deceased would have got injured during the

aforesaid incident and later on taken care by admitting him to Ragama

Hospital.

Manikka Badathuruge Rohana Pushpakumara, who appears to have

succeeded the affirmant of the previous affidavit dated 23.06.2014 as the

Commissioner General of Prisons, by the affidavit dated 30.03.2015, denies

the averments of the Petitioner’s affidavit. However, he also does not state

that he was present at the incident or when prisoners were transferred to

other prisons. He even in support of his objection does not annex any

affidavit from a person who has first-hand knowledge of the incident and/or

the steps taken afterwards. Thus, his affidavit may also contain unverified

hearsay evidence. Nonetheless, he, inter alia, states as follows in his

affidavit.

1. That the deceased was a LTTE suspect, who had 3 indictments

pending against him in the High Court of Vavuniya.

2. That the deceased was remanded in the Vavuniya Prison on

19.04.2010 and became an inmate of the Vavuniya Prison.

3. That on or around 26.06.2012 the inmates of the Vavuniya Prison,

including the deceased engaged in a hunger strike consequent to a

transfer of an inmate to the Boossa Detention Camp.

4. That before staging the hunger strike, the deceased and another

inmate met the Chief Jailor and demanded the return of the inmate

8

who had been transferred to Boossa and later on, the deceased and

several other prisoners vandalised the visitors’ area of the prison and

forced the inmates of the prison to stage the hunger strike.

5. That the inmates who staged the hunger strike took 3 prison guards

as hostages and held the said 3 prison guards and other prisoners

captive within the Vavuniya Prison.

6. That since all negotiations failed, the prison authorities had to seek the

assistance of Special Task Force (STF).

7. That during the night of 29.06.2012, the situation escalated into a

situation of a riot, and the STF had no choice but to force an entrance

into the prison premises. (It is pertinent to note that as per the

documents marked as R1, R2 and R3a to R3c with the affidavit dated

23.06.2014, the STF appears to have entered during day time just after

12 noon.)

8. That tear gas had to be used to dispel the rioters and a degree of force

had to be used in order to rescue the prison guards and other inmates

held hostage due to stiff and violent resistance by the perpetrators

who were armed with iron rods.

9. That subsequent to the rescue operation, it was necessary to transfer

all prisoners from the Vavuniya Prison and first they were sent to the

Anuradhapura prison. However, fearing regrouping of the

perpetrators, it was considered prudent to split up the prisoners and

have them placed in different prisons. As such, prisoners from

Vavuniya prison were transferred to Anuradhapura, Bogambara and

Mahara prisons.

9

10. That the deceased was among the prisoners, who were

transferred to Mahara Prison and the medical officers at Mahara Prison

examined all the injured persons and transferred the prisoners who

needed medical attention to Ragama Hospital. Consequently, the

deceased was admitted to the Ragama Hospital.

11. That any injury sustained by the deceased would have been

caused during the rescue operation – (vide paragraph 22 and 25 of the

said affidavit).

The affirmant of the said affidavit has tendered another set of documents

marked as R1, R2, R3a, R3b, R4a, R4b, R4c, R5, R6a, R6b, R7a, R7b and

R8. I have already referred to R1 which indicates that the deceased was in

good health when he was handed over to the prison. R3a, R3b, R4c, R6a,

R6b, R7a, R7b and R8 have been marked to explain the allegations made

with regard to the visits to see the deceased when he was warded in the

Ragama Hospital. R4a and R4b have been marked in reply to the allegation

that the deceased was chained to the bed when he was under treatment.

R5 is a report sent to the Human Rights Commission which also refers to the

riot that took place in the Vavuniya prison and the admittance of the

deceased to the Ragama Hospital for treatment. The said R5 does not

exactly state that the deceased received injuries at the riot mentioned above

or that he was immediately or as soon as possible given treatment for the

injuries. Since I intend to discuss the infringement of Article 11 of the

constitution with regard to the injuries caused and the medical attention

given, I do not expect to discuss matters concerning R2, R3a, R3b, R4a, R4b,

R4c, R6a, R6b, R7a, R7b, and R8.

10

However, the affidavits filed on behalf of the 4th Respondent take up the

positions that the injuries sustained by the deceased would have been or

may have been caused during the riot. When one uses ‘would have been

caused’ or ‘may have been caused’, the time of sustaining injuries is not

definite. It does not exclude the possibility of sustaining injuries after the riot

was quelled. However, it appears that the Petitioner and the Respondents

agree that there was a riotous situation within the prison and the deceased

was an inmate at that time. If the injuries were sustained after the riot, as

there is no explanation from the Respondents, there is a clear infringement

of Article 11 of the constitution. If the injuries were caused during the riot

even the use of excessive force may sometimes absolve the Respondents

from the responsibility, since the use of excessive force does not per se

amount to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, that would depend on

the person and the circumstances. [-vide Wijesiriwardena V Kumara

Inspector of Police, Kandy (1989) 2 SRI LR 312.]. In my view this

stance with regard to the time of sustaining injuries, that the injuries would

have been caused during the riot, is not a statement of a responsible officer

since the 4th Respondent and his department had the full authority to hold a

proper inquiry and his officers involved in the incident had the full knowledge

with regard to the incident and its background. They should be able to state

at least that injuries were caused before the deceased was transferred from

Vavuniya Prison and/or Anuradhapura Prison if the officers of the prison

department responsibly followed the provisions of the Prison Ordinance. Now

I prefer to refer to the relevant provisions from the Prison Ordinance.

11

Section 46.

“All prisoners, previously to being removed to any other prison,

shall be examined by the Medical Officer.”

Section 66.

“ The names of prisoners desiring to see the medical officer or

appearing out of health in mind or body shall be reported by the

officer attending them to the jailer, and the jailer shall without

delay call the attention of the medical officer to any prisoners

desiring to see him, or who is ill or whose state of mind or body

appears to require attention, and shall carry into effect the medical

officer's written recommendations respecting alterations of the

discipline or treatment of such prisoner.”

Section 67

“All recommendation given by the medical officer in relation to any

prisoner, with the exception of orders for the supply of medicines

or directions relating to such matters as are carried into effect by

the medical officer himself or under his superintendence, shall be

entered day by day in his journal, which shall have a separate

column, wherein entries shall be made by the Superintendent

stating in respect of each recommendation the facts of its having

or not having been complied with, accompanied by such

observations, if any, as the Superintendent thinks fit to make, and

the date of the entry."

12

Thus, it is the duty of the prison authorities to do a medical examination

before a prisoner is transferred to another prison (Section 46). Even if the

prisoner appears to be out of health in mind or body, the attending officer

must report him to the jailor, and the jailor shall, without delay, call the

attention of the medical officer.

The deceased had a fracture in the left ulna and a fracture in Zygomatic

bone of the right side of the face. Most probably the deceased would have

had a swollen face and a swollen left arm. The tram line contusion on the

forehead the deceased had could be visible to the naked eye. Diffuse axonal

injuries of the brain are described as a condition characterized by

immediate prolong coma occurring after head trauma which is produced

by sudden acceleration and deceleration motion of the head that causes

stretching and/or shearing of nerve fibres. (highlighting by bold letters is

mine).

The JMO further states in his report that the patient becomes unconscious

due to this type of injuries. If this injury was caused during the riot and if

the deceased did not fall into an immediate prolong coma as described by

the JMO, the deceased would have shown some symptoms that he was not

well and was not in good health. If the above injuries were caused during

the riot as assumed by the affidavits of the 4th Respondent, the attending

officer/s should have observed that the deceased was out of health and

reported to the relevant officer/s. On the other hand, if the medical officer

did the medical examination as per the section quoted above, the medical

officer should have observed that the deceased was out of health. Thus, it

is highly probable that, if the injuries were sustained during the riot, proper

13

medical attention was not given to the deceased until he was brought to the

Mahara Prison.

At this juncture, it is pertinent to note the contents of the statement of

Indrajith Udunuwara, Assistant Superintendent of Prison marked as R2 with

the 1st affidavit filed on behalf of the 4th Respondent. In that statement

relied by the Respondents, the said Assistant Superintendent of Prison had

stated that, at the Anuradhapura Prison, while preparing to transfer

prisoners to Mahara and Bogambara Prisons, he got the doctor of the prison

hospital to treat the injured persons at the main gate. He also had stated

that the injured who needed to be admitted to the hospital as per the

recommendation of the doctor were admitted to the hospital. He further

had revealed in that statement (R2) that he allowed taking police statements

from all the suspects on a request made by the ASP Senarathna of Vavuniya

Police. If entries relating to such medical examination in the doctor’s journal

or the police statements made at that time were submitted, it would have

been the best evidence to show that the deceased was not in a situation that

needed immediate medical care even when he was at Anuradhapura Prison

or the deceased had sustained injuries before him being transferred from

Anuradhapura.

Even if one assumes that it was not possible to do a medical examination

before transferring from Vavuniya to Anuradhapura due to the riotous

situation, non-production of the journal entries relating to medical

examination done at Anuradhapura before transferring to Mahara gives rise

to following assumptions.

14

1. That the said statement in R2 that proper medical attention was given

before transferring to Mahara and Bogambara is false. As such, the

prison authorities neglected to attend to the deceased prisoner as

required by Section 46 and/or 66 of the Prison Ordinance, which

sections are there to preserve the rights of the prisoners and their

health. Such negligence amounts to inhuman or degrading treatment;

or

2. That the result of such medical examination is not produced before

this court because it is adverse to the interests of the respondents due

to reasons such as follows;

(a) It reveals that the deceased was not in good health and needed

immediate medical attention which the prison authorities failed to

attend to which is indicative of inhuman or degrading treatment, or

(b) It reveals that the deceased was in good health, but the injuries

were sustained after the removal from Anuradhapura prison which

is indicative of torture, cruel and inhuman or degrading treatment

or punishment after the incident of the riot.

If a police statement was taken at Anuradhapura prison as stated in said R2,

it could have been tendered to show that the deceased was considerably in

good health to make a police statement and he did not ask for medical

attention. Non-production of such statement made to the police creates

doubts

a) as to the truthfulness of R2 and whether reference to making of such

statements by the prisoners is a lie to cover up the true story and to

15

propose that no medical attention was needed by the deceased at

Anuradhapura prison, and/or

b) that if such statement exists, the production of such statement is

adverse to the interests of the Respondents and supportive of the

stance of the Petitioner.

Section 21 of the Prison ordinance provides that on the death of a prisoner

the medical officer shall forthwith, among other things, record in writing the

followings:

(a) when the deceased was taken ill,

(b) when the medical officer was first informed of the illness.

(c) the nature of the disease

(d) when the prisoner died etc.

Though such entries should have been with the 4th Respondent, they were

not tendered to Courts. Such entries could have revealed when it was

reported for the first time that the deceased was not well.

I think it is correct to have an adverse inference against the respondents due

to the non - production of medical journals and entries maintained by the

medical officers.

As per the Section 26 of the Prison Ordinance, the jailer shall give immediate

notice of the death of a prisoner to the Magistrate having jurisdiction over

the area and Section 37(1) of the Criminal Procedure Code among other

things provides that when a person dies while in the custody of a prison, the

officer in charge of the prisoner or the officer who had the custody of the

16

prisons shall forthwith give information to the Magistrate whose jurisdiction

the body is found and the Magistrate shall view the body and hold an inquiry

into the cause of death. Thus, the Magistrate of the area where the body is

found has the power to hold an inquest with regard to death of a person

who was under prison custody. As per the Post Mortem Report, the autopsy

was done due to a request came from the Negombo Magistrate. As per the

Journal Entry dated 18.02.2013 the learned Deputy Solicitor General who

appeared that day had stated that the inquest proceedings would be

submitted to this Court in due course. For the reasons best known to the

State and the 8th Respondent, it has not been tendered to this Court. Thus,

this court is devoid of the advantage of perusing the proceedings of an

inquiry held before an impartial officer. As the inquest proceedings are not

in the possession of the Respondents, I do not intend to make any adverse

inference for not producing the inquest proceedings.

Facts and material placed before this court establish that the deceased who

was the son of the petitioner was handed over to prison by the C I D in good

health. After about four months, he died at Ragama hospital while in the

custody of the prison. Among the causes of death were head injuries. The

deceased also had two fractures, one in the left ulna and the other in the

zygomatic bone on the right side of the face. There was a contusion on the

forehead. In addition, the Injuries Nos.2,3,6,7 and 20 would have been

sustained while the deceased was in Prison custody. The above are not

injuries caused by natural causes. The Respondents have not taken a stance

that they were caused by an accident. Thus, the injuries confirm that the

deceased was assaulted while in prison custody. Those facts prima facie

17

establish a case of torture, cruel and inhuman and degrading treatment

caused while in the prison custody unless there is an acceptable explanation

by the prison authorities that the assault was needed for a reason such as

the maintenance of discipline and law & order within the prison premises or

among prisoners. The explanation given is that the injuries would have been

caused during a riot that took place on 29.06.2012 at Vavuniya prison. This

explanation only suggests how and when it happened but does not give a

definite explanation as to how and when the injuries were inflicted since it

does not exclude the possibility of sustaining injuries after the riot. It should

be noted that the circumstances, incidents and background that caused the

injuries are within the exclusive knowledge of the prison authorities and not

with the petitioner. The petitioner may not know even who were the other

inmates at the time the assault took place and when and where it took place.

As such it is up to the prison authorities to establish those circumstances.

If the assault had taken place after the riot was quelled, it amounts to

torture, cruel and inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment. If it

took place during the riot, the issue is whether the prison authorities took

steps to give proper and timely medical treatment to the injuries caused

during the actions taken to control the riot. If the entries made by medical

officers, which should be with the Respondents, were produced such entries

could have clearly exposed the medical condition of the deceased prior to

him being transferred to Mahara Prison. Non-production of such entries has

to be considered against the Respondents.

As per the Post Mortem Report, ‘Defuse Axonal Injuries of the Brain’ describe

a condition characterised by immediate prolong coma. Thus, I am of the

18

view it is highly probable that the prison authorities should have observed

that the deceased was in a condition that required immediate medical

attention before he was brought to the Mahara Prison if the assault took

place at the riot in Vavuniya Prison. The fractures and the external injuries

on the forehead should have taken the attention of the medical officers

before he was transferred to Mahara Prison and even the attendant prison

officers would have observed the medical condition of the deceased before

he was transferred to Mahara Prison If the injuries were inflicted during the

riot. As such, it is my considered view that the prison neglected to give

proper and timely medical treatment and attention if the injuries were caused

during the riot. Not attending to the medical needs of a prison inmate by

the relevant prison officers, amount to cruel & inhuman and degrading

treatment.

It is true that there is no evidence to say that the named Respondents in the

caption are directly involved in the infringement, but it is clear that the

infringement took place and the State is liable. Not naming the exact officer

or officers involved in the infringement as respondents is not a bar to grant

relief since the relief is principally granted against the State. {vide

Gunawardena V. Perera (1983) 1SLR 305, Mariyadas Raj v Attorney

General FRD (2) 397, Vivienne Goonewardena v. Perera FRD (2)

426}

The Petitioner has stated that the deceased victim, the Petitioner and his

family members have suffered immense mental agony and loss by the

torture and the death of the deceased victim, his son in violation of rights

guaranteed under Article 11 of the Constitution. I also observe that there is

19

no specific denial of the allegations made under paragraph 19 of the petition

and the corresponding paragraph in the affidavit of the Petitioner.

The counsel for the Petitioner in his written submissions has dealt with denial

of timely medical care which I cannot recollect him emphasizing during the

oral submissions but the state was given a time to file written submissions

in reply after four weeks from the date given to file written submissions of

the Petitioner. No written submissions were filed by the Respondents. —Vide

Journal Entries dated 31.01.2019,15.02.2019 and 22.03.2019.

Therefore, I hold that rights granted under Article 11 were infringed by the

officers of the State and order to pay Rs. 200000/= as compensation to the

Petitioner.

Had any assault taken place after the riot was controlled it may constitute a

serious criminal offence since it caused the death of a prisoner at the end.

Entries made by the relevant medical officers should provide necessary

information in this respect. Thus, I bring the attention of the 5th and 8th

respondents as it is within their scope to hold necessary investigations.

……………………………………………

E.A.G.R. Amarasekara J.

Judge of the Supreme Court.

20