IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Chrisani Suweenetha Mariel

Lilian Karunaratne,

No. 4, Victoria Gardens,

Hokandara South,

Hokandara.

Plaintiff

SC APPEAL NO: SC/APPEAL/17/2015

SC LA NO: SC/HCCA/LA/463/2013

HCCA COLOMBO NO: WP/HCCA/COL/257/2008/F

DC COLOMBO CASE NO: 9643/RE

Vs.

P.R. Kotalawela,

No. 32-1/2 Castle Street,

(Dudley Senanayake Mawatha),

Colombo 8.

Defendant

AND BETWEEN

Chrisani Suweenetha Mariel

Lilian Karunaratne,

No. 4, Victoria Gardens,

Hokandara South,

Hokandara.

Plaintiff-Appellant

2

Vs.

P.R. Kotalawela,

No. 32-1/2 Castle Street,

(Dudley Senanayake Mawatha),

Colombo 8.

Defendant-Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

Chrisani Suweenetha Mariel

Lilian

Karunaratne,

No. 4, Victoria Gardens,

Hokandara South,

Hokandara.

Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant

Vs.

P.R. Kotalawela,

No. 32-1/2 Castle Street,

(Dudley Senanayake Mawatha),

Colombo 8.

Defendant-Respondent-Respondent

Before: P. Padman Surasena, J.

Achala Wengappuli, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

3

Counsel: Romesh de Silva, P.C., with Palitha

Kumarasinghe, P.C., for the Plaintiff-Appellant-

Appellant.

Maura Gunawansha, P.C., with Madhawa

Wijayasiriwardena for the Defendant-

Respondent-Respondent.

Argued on: 25.03.2021

Decided on: 30.04.2021

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The Plaintiff filed this action seeking ejectment of the

Defendant, whom the Plaintiff said was her tenant, from the

premises in suit in terms of section 22(2)(bb)(ii) read with

section 22(6) of the Rent Act, No.7 of 1972, as amended. The

Plaintiff also claims damages from the Defendant from the

date of termination of the tenancy until she is quieted in

possession.

The said section of the Rent Act permits a landlord, who is

the owner of not more than one residential premises, to seek

ejectment of the tenant of any residential premises the

standard rent of which for a month exceeds one hundred

rupees, upon depositing with the Commissioner of National

Housing a sum equivalent to five years’ rent payable to the

tenant, and with six months’ notice in writing of the

termination of the tenancy being given to the tenant.

The Defendant filed answer categorically stating that he was

not the tenant of the Plaintiff and that he did not attorn to the

Plaintiff upon the death of his previous landlord, i.e. the

4

father of the Plaintiff. The Defendant refused to attorn to the

Plaintiff and pay rent to her despite repeated requests made

in writing to do so. Instead, the Defendant deposited rent at

the Rent Department of the Colombo Municipal Council in

the name of the deceased landlord or his estate. He

continued to do so even after the institution of the action

whereby the Plaintiff clearly pleaded her title to the premises,

which was accepted by the District Court in its Judgment.

There is no necessity to go into detail on these matters as the

Defendant admits that he is not the tenant of the Plaintiff and

that he did not pay rent to the Plaintiff.

It is correct to say that the Defendant rests his case entirely

on what he refers to as the statutory bar contained in section

22(7) of the Rent Act. He sought dismissal of the Plaintiff’s

action in limine on this basis. According to section 22(7)(b)(ii),

no action can be instituted under section 22(2)(bb)(ii) if the

ownership of such premises was acquired by the landlord on

a date subsequent to the specified date by purchase,

inheritance or gift other than inheritance or gift from a parent

or spouse who had acquired ownership of such premises on a

date prior or subsequent to the specified date by inheritance

or gift from a parent or spouse. It is the position of the

Defendant that the averments in the plaint itself demonstrate

that the Plaintiff’s mother, who alienated the premises to the

Plaintiff, acquired title to the premises not from her parents

or spouse but from her son and therefore the Plaintiff is

statutorily barred from instituting this action.

The trial commenced with the raising of issues. After the

issues of the Defendant, the Plaintiff raised a consequential

issue, i.e. issue No.19, to say that in view of the fact that the

5

Defendant in his answer disputes the Plaintiff’s ownership of

the premises (and thereby denies tenancy), the Defendant is

disentitled to the protection of the Rent Act. This is the

crucial issue in this case. The Defendant’s reliance on the

aforesaid statutory bar becomes relevant only if this issue is

answered against the Plaintiff.

The learned District Judge in his Judgment answered this

issue against the Plaintiff. As seen from pages 15 and 16 of

the Judgment, the learned District Judge did so on the

ground that the protection of the Rent Act is attached to the

premises and not to the tenancy. On this basis, he applied

the statutory bar contained in section 22(7) of the Rent Act to

dismiss the action of the Plaintiff. This is the fundamental

mistake committed by the learned District Judge.

It is settled law that the entire protection of the Rent Act is

attached to the contract of tenancy and not to the premises in

suit despite the premises being technically governed by the

Rent Act. If there is admittedly no valid contract of tenancy

between the Plaintiff and the Defendant, the Defendant

cannot shelter behind the protection of the Rent Act. This is

what the Divisional Bench of the Supreme Court

authoritatively held in Imbuldeniya v. De Silva [1987] 1 Sri LR

367, which has been followed by subsequent Supreme Court

decisions including Weerasena v. Perera [1991] 1 Sri LR 121.

The Plaintiff thereafter appealed against the Judgment of the

District Court. The Judgment of the High Court of Civil

Appeal running into 66 pages is confusing. It is a

reproduction of the extensive written submissions filed by

both parties without any analysis. The learned High Court

Judge first says the Defendant, having denied tenancy, is

6

disentitled to the protection of the Rent Act and therefore the

District Judge was wrong to have answered issue No.19

against the Plaintiff (pages 60 and 61 of the Judgment), but

thereafter says the Defendant is entitled to the benefit of

section 22(7) of the Rent Act, and therefore the District Judge

was right in dismissing the Plaintiff’s action (page 65 of the

Judgment). These two findings upon which the Judgment

rests are clearly contradictory and irreconcilable. If the

Defendant is disentitled to the protection of the Rent Act, how

can he be granted the protection contained in section 22(7) of

the Act? As I will explain below, section 22(7) has been

enacted to protect “the tenant”. If the Defendant himself

declares he is not the tenant, how can he claim the advantage

of section 22(7)? Ultimately, the High Court of Civil Appeal

affirmed the Judgment of the District Court and dismissed

the Plaintiff’s appeal with costs.

This Court granted leave to appeal to the Plaintiff

predominantly on the question whether the High Court of

Civil Appeal erred in law when it dismissed the appeal of the

Plaintiff despite having determined that the Defendant is not

entitled to the protection of the Rent Act. I have already

answered this question in favour of the Plaintiff.

When the Defendant expressly states in his answer or in his

evidence that there is no tenancy agreement between him and

the Plaintiff, he disqualifies himself from seeking relief under

the Rent Act. In such circumstances, the Rent Act is wholly

inapplicable and the Court is absolved from applying any of

the fetters enumerated in section 22, which have been

introduced to protect tenants and not mere occupants or

trespassers of rent-controlled premises. The Rent Act

7

becomes applicable if and only if there is a contract of

tenancy between the Plaintiff and the Defendant. In the

absence of such an agreement, the Court has no right, either

legitimate or moral, to impose tenancy on the Defendant to

the detriment of the Plaintiff who is almost always the owner

of the premises.

The High Court, having first correctly decided that the

Defendant is disentitled to the protection of the Rent Act due

to the denial of tenancy, was in error when it ultimately held

that the Defendant was entitled to the protection afforded to a

tenant under section 22(7) of the Rent Act.

A Divisional Bench of the Supreme Court presided over by

Sharvananda C.J. in Ranasinghe v. Premadharma [1985] 1 Sri

LR 63 at 70 (with Wanasundera J. dissenting) held:

When the Defendant disclaims the tenancy pleaded by

the Plaintiff he states definitely and unequivocally that

there is no relationship of landlord and tenant between

the Plaintiff and him to be protected by the Rent Act.

The rationale of the above principle appears to be that a

Defendant cannot approbate and reprobate. In cases

where the doctrine of approbation and reprobation

applies, the person concerned has a choice of two rights,

either of which he is at liberty to adopt, but not both.

Where the doctrine does apply, if the person to whom the

choice belongs irrevocably and with full knowledge

accepts one, he cannot afterwards assert the other; he

cannot affirm and disaffirm. Hence a Defendant who

denies tenancy cannot consistently claim the benefit of

the tenancy which the Rent Act provides. For the

8

protection of the Rent Act to be invoked the relationship

of landlord and tenant, between the Plaintiff and him

which is governed by the Rent Act should not be

disputed by the Defendant.

In the instant case the District Court held that the Plaintiff is

the owner of the premises. The Defendant does not dispute

this finding. Nor does the Defendant claim to be the tenant of

the Plaintiff. The Plaintiff as the owner is entitled in law to

occupy the premises. The burden of proof is then on the

Defendant to show that he is in lawful possession. (Beedi

Johara v. Warusavithana [1998] 3 Sri LR 227, Gunasekera v.

Latiff [1999] 1 Sri LR 365 at 370) The Defendant attempted to

justify his possession through the application of section 22(7)

of the Rent Act whilst at the same time denying any contract

of tenancy with the Plaintiff, which the law does not allow

him to do.

Learned President’s Counsel for the Defendant strenuously

submits that the Plaintiff had two choices in seeking to eject

the Defendant, one under common law and the other under

the Rent Act, and having selected the latter, the Plaintiff

cannot now abandon that course of action and seek to eject

the Defendant under common law. This was raised as a

question of law to be decided by this Court.

In my judgment, based on the facts and circumstances of this

case, this question shall be answered against the Defendant.

It is true that the Plaintiff came before the District Court

seeking ejectment of the Defendant under the Rent Act. But

by his own conduct the Defendant ruled out the application

9

of the Rent Act. The Defendant has only himself to blame for

his predicament.

I would have agreed with the learned President’s Counsel in

this regard if the Plaintiff had on her own attempted to

present at the trial a case materially different from that

pleaded in the plaint and which the Defendant was prepared

to meet. That is not permissible.

It is settled law that no party can be allowed to make at the

trial a case materially different from what he has placed on

record. (Hildon v. Munaweera [1997] 3 Sri LR 220, YMBA v.

Abdul Azeez [1997] BLR 7, Gnananathan v. Premaardane

[1999] 3 Sri LR 301, Ranasinghe v. Somawathie [2004] 2 Sri

LR 154) Explanation 2 to section 150 of the Civil Procedure

Code reads:

The case enunciated must reasonably accord with the

party's pleading, i.e., plaint or answer, as the case may

be. And no party can be allowed to make at the trial a

case materially different from that which he has placed

on record, and which his opponent is prepared to meet.

And the facts proposed to be established must in the

whole amount to so much of the material part of his case

as is not admitted in his opponent’s pleadings.

I must add that this principle is applicable not only at trial

but also on appeal. An Appellant cannot present on appeal a

case materially different to what was presented before the

trial Court, unless the appeal is based on a pure question of

law and not on a question of fact or mixed question of fact

and law. (Candappa nee Bastian v. Ponnambalampillai [1993]

1 Sri LR 184, Talwatte v. Somasunderam [1996] BLR 14,

10

Janashakthi Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Umbichy Ltd. [2007] 2 Sri LR

39) Questions of fact or mixed questions of fact and law

cannot be taken up for the first time on appeal. (Hameed

alias Abdul Rahman v. Weerasinghe [1989] 1 Sri LR 217,

Simon Fernando v. Bernadette Fernando [2003] 2 Sri LR 158,

Piyadasa v. Babanis [2006] 2 Sri LR 17 at 24, Leslin

Jayasinghe v. Illangaratne [2006] 2 Sri LR 39 at 47)

If I may recap, what happened in the instant case was when

the Plaintiff sued the Defendant under the Rent Act on the

basis that the Defendant was her tenant, the Defendant in

his answer denied tenancy thereby eliminating the

application of the Rent Act. It is against this backdrop that

the Plaintiff was constrained to raise a consequential issue

seeking the same relief, i.e. ejectment and damages, under

common law. The Defendant did not object to it at that time.

In any event, the Defendant could not have objected to it

because the Plaintiff is entitled to raise consequential issues

arising out of the Defendant’s issues. What the Plaintiff did

was not unusual. There are ample authorities to support the

course of action adopted by the Plaintiff. However, learned

President’s Counsel submits that in those cases, unlike in the

instant case, the Plaintiffs had come to Court seeking

ejectment not under the Rent Act but under common law by

way of rei vindicatio actions. I am unable to agree. Let me

refer to a few of these cases.

In Gunapala v. Babynona [1986] 2 Sri LR 374, the Plaintiff

filed a rent and ejectment action seeking ejectment of the

Defendant on the basis that after the death of the original

landlord, the Defendant having attorned to the Plaintiff

refused to pay rent. The Defendant in the answer denied

11

tenancy between herself and the Plaintiff and further pleaded

that the Plaintiff did not call on her to attorn. Both the

District Court and the Court of Appeal dismissed the

Plaintiff's action on the ground that the Defendant had not

been made aware of the existence of the Deed by which the

Plaintiff claimed the premises and hence was not bound to

attorn to the Plaintiff. The Supreme Court allowed the appeal

and in the course of the Judgment Sharvananda C.J. stated

as follows at page 376:

It is true that the Plaintiff had framed this action on the

basis that the Defendant attorned to him and had

thereby become his tenant. But significantly the issues

framed by him in this case departed from his pleadings

and converted the action into a rei vindicatio action. The

issues were raised by the Plaintiff on the basis that he

claimed to be a co-owner of the premises and on the

cessation of Simon’s life-interest, the Defendant’s

possession was wrongful possession of the premises.

The Defendant did not object to the issues framed by the

Plaintiff. The case must be decided on the issues raised

in the action.

The Divisional Bench decision of the Supreme Court in

Ranasinghe v. Premadharma (supra) is also a rent and

ejectment case in which the Plaintiff filed action to eject the

Defendants from premises admittedly governed by the Rent

Act on the ground of arrears of rent. The Defendants in their

answer denied tenancy as well as the receipt and validity of

the notice to quit pleaded by the Plaintiff. After trial, the

District Court held that the Defendants were in arrears of

rent and entered Judgment for the Plaintiff. The District

12

Court further held that as the Defendants disclaimed tenancy

under the Plaintiff it was not necessary in law for the Plaintiff

to have given notice of termination of tenancy. The Court of

Appeal set aside the order of ejectment of the Defendants and

allowed the appeal. The decision of the Court of Appeal was

founded on the ground that since the Defendant was a tenant

under the Plaintiff in a rent-controlled premises, the Plaintiff

could succeed in obtaining a decree for ejectment on the

ground of arrears of rent, only if she established the

requirements of sections 22(3) and 22(6) of the Rent Act, and

since the Plaintiff had failed to establish that she had given

three months’ notice of the termination of the tenancy to the

Defendants, the Court had no jurisdiction to grant the relief

of ejectment notwithstanding the tenant had repudiated the

contract of tenancy and did not claim the benefit of the Rent

Act.

The Supreme Court set aside the Judgment of the Court of

Appeal and restored the Judgment of the District Court and

held:

The tenant is not entitled to notice because he had

repudiated his tenancy. In such a case the landlord need

not establish any one or more of the grounds of

ejectment stipulated in section 22 of the Rent Act No. 7 of

1972 for success in his suit for ejectment.

The same conclusion was arrived at in the Supreme Court

case of Kanthasamy v. Gnanasekeram [1983] 2 Sri LR 1,

which was relied upon by Sharvananda C.J. in Ranasinghe v.

Premadharma (supra). In Kanthasamy’s case the Plaintiff

sued the Defendant for ejectment under the Rent Act on the

ground of reasonable requirement. The Defendant in the

13

answer denied tenancy. The Plaintiff then raised an issue

whether a writ of ejectment could be granted against the

Defendant upon the Defendant’s denial of tenancy. The

District Judge held that the Defendant was a tenant under

the Plaintiff but, in view of the repudiation of tenancy, the

Defendant was liable to be ejected. The Court of Appeal and

the Supreme Court affirmed this decision.

In the instant case, the learned District Judge held that the

Defendant is a tenant under the Plaintiff and the Plaintiff is

entitled to seek ejectment of the Defendant in terms of section

22(2)(bb)(ii) of the Rent Act. However the learned District

Judge refused to enter Judgment for the Plaintiff by

application of section 22(7) of the Rent Act despite the

Defendant’s denial of tenancy. This is erroneous.

Sharvananda C.J. in Ranasinghe v. Premadharma (supra) at

page 71 elaborated:

Where the Defendant by his conduct or pleading makes

it manifest that he does not regard that there exists the

relationship of landlord and tenant between the Plaintiff

and him, it will not be reasonable to include him in the

concept of “tenant” envisaged by section 22 of the Rent

Act although the court may determine, on the evidence

before it, that he is in fact the tenant of the Plaintiff.

Since such a person had by his words or conduct

disclaimed the tenancy which entitles him to the

protection of the Rent Act, it will be anomalous to grant

him the protection of a tenancy, which, according to him,

does not exist.

The tenant cannot question the landlord’s ownership of the

premises; he has no right to do so. (Section 116 of the

14

Evidence Ordinance, Pathirana v. Jayasundara (1955) 58 NLR

169 at 173) In the instant case, the Defendant, by paragraphs

7, 8 and 12 of the answer, admits that: (a) the Plaintiff’s

father was his landlord; (b) upon the death of the Plaintiff’s

father, testamentary proceedings were instituted; and (c) he

received P9 (by which the executor through an Attorney-at-

Law informed him that the Plaintiff is the new owner of the

premises and directed him to attorn to her). The content of P9

was repeated in several letters including P10 and P14. Hence

the Defendant has no right to insist on copies of deeds to

prove the Plaintiff’s ownership of the premises and on that

basis to refuse attornment and refuse payment of rent to the

Plaintiff. If he does so, he becomes a trespasser. The

Defendant is a trespasser from the time he refused to attorn

to the Plaintiff.

In the plaint, the Plaintiff sought damages at the rate of Rs.

25,000 per mensem from the date of termination of the

tenancy. The premises are situated at Castle Street, Colombo

8. The Defendant made a bare denial of this averment in the

answer. The Defendant elected not to give evidence at the

trial. The Plaintiff also gave specific evidence on this relief in

her testimony, which was not challenged by the Defendant at

all. Hence the Court can safely accept this uncontroverted

evidence to hold that the said matter has been proved before

Court. (Edrick de Silva v. Chandradasa de Silva 1967) 70 NLR

169 at 174, Sudu Banda v. The Attorney-General [1998] 3 Sri

LR 375 at 378-379) The learned District Judge has not drawn

any attention to this in the Judgment, although he

perfunctorily answered issue No.8 against the Plaintiff

presumably because of the misapplication of section 22(7) of

the Rent Act.

15

The Judgment of the District Court insofar as it decided to

dismiss the Plaintiff’s action by application of section 22(7) of

the Rent Act, and the Judgment of the High Court of Civil

Appeal which affirmed the same are set aside and the appeal

of the Plaintiff is allowed. The District Judge is directed to

enter Judgment as prayed for in paragraphs (a)-(c) of the

prayer to the plaint. The Plaintiff is entitled to costs in all

three Courts.

Judge of the Supreme Court

P. Padman Surasena, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Achala Wengappuli, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court