IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

DFCC Bank,

No. 73/5,

Galle Road,

Colombo 01.

Petitioner

SC/APPEAL/33/2019

SC/HCCA/LA/448/2018 Vs.

WP/HCCA/COL/155/2017/LA

DC COLOMBO NO: DSP/241/14 Warnakulasuriya Chandima Prasad

Rajitha Fernando,

Sarani Aquarium

No. 297,

Kolinjadiya West,

Wennappuwa.

Respondent

AND BETWEEN

Warnakulasuriya Chandima Prasad

Rajitha Fernando,

Sarani Aquarium

No. 297, Kolinjadiya West,

Wennappuwa.

Respondent-Petitioner

Vs.

2

SC/APPEAL/33/2019

DFCC Bank,

No. 73/5, Galle Road,

Colombo 01.

Petitioner-Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

DFCC Bank,

No. 73/5, Galle Road,

Colombo 01.

Petitioner-Respondent-Appellant

Vs.

Warnakulasuriya Chandima Prasad

Rajitha Fernando,

Sarani Aquarium

No. 297, Kolinjadiya West,

Wennappuwa.

Respondent-Petitioner-Respondent

Before: Hon. Chief Justice Jayantha Jayasuriya, P.C.

Hon. Justice Achala Wengappuli

Hon. Justice Mahinda Samayawardhena

Counsel: Nigel Hatch, P.C. with Siroshni Illangage for the Petitioner-

Respondent-Appellant.

L.P.A. Chithrangani for the Respondent-Petitioner-

Respondent.

Argued on: 09.02.2023

3

SC/APPEAL/33/2019

Written Submissions:

By the Petitioner-Respondent-Appellant on 12.03.2019 and

10.04.2023

By the Respondent-Petitioner-Respondent on 24.04.2019

and 10.03.2023

Decided on: 26.02.2024

Samayawardhena J.

The short matter to be decided on this appeal is whether a right of appeal

lies against an order made under section 16 of the Recovery of Loans by

Banks (Special Provisions) Act, No. 4 of 1990. Section 16 provides for the

delivery of possession of the property. In the impugned order dated

19.11.2018, the High Court of Civil Appeal of Colombo, for the first time,

determined that a right of appeal lies against such an order. Hence this

appeal by the appellant bank.

In Sunpac Engineers (Private) Limited v. DFCC Bank and Others

(SC/APPEAL/11/2021, SC Minutes of 13.11.2023) a Seven Judge Bench

of this Court held that the Recovery of Loans by Banks (Special

Provisions) Act, No. 4 of 1990, is a special Act passed by Parliament

aiming at revitalising the countrys economy by facilitating speedy

recovery of debts by non-judicial sales and the Act applies to any property

mortgaged to the bank as security for any loan in respect of which default

has been made irrespective of whether the mortgagor is the borrower or

a third party. There is no need to highlight that this is a special Act and

is a departure from the established law and procedure because it is

expressly stated in the Act itself. Where there are provisions in a special

Act which are inconsistent with the general law and procedure, the

general law and procedure must yield to the provisions of the special Act.

4

SC/APPEAL/33/2019

I must state at the outset that if the view of the High Court of Civil Appeal

is to be accepted, the purpose of the legislation and the intention of the

legislature will seriously suffer. The mortgagor against whom an order for

delivery of possession is made, will resort to ordinary appellate procedure

jeopardizing the early finality of the litigation.

Section 16 of the Recovery of Loans by Banks (Special Provisions) Act

reads as follows:

16(1) The purchaser of any immovable property sold in pursuance of

the preceding provisions of this Act shall, upon application made to

the District Court of Colombo or the District Court having jurisdiction

over the place where that property is situate, and upon production

of the certificate of sale issued in respect of that property under

section 15, be entitled to obtain an order for delivery of possession

of the that property.

(2) Every application under subsection (1) shall be made and shall

be disposed of, by way summary procedure, in accordance with the

provisions of Chapter XXIV of the Civil Procedure code; and on all

documents filed the purpose of each such application and on all

proceedings held thereupon, stamp duties and other charges shall

be payable at the respective rates payable under any written law

for the time being in force on applications for, and proceedings

connected with, or incidental to, the execution of a decree of a District

Court for the delivery of possession of any immovable property of the

same value as the property to which such application relates.

(3) Where any immovable property sold in pursuance of the

preceding provisions of this Act in the occupancy of the borrower or

some person on his behalf or of some person claiming under a title

created by the borrower subsequently to the mortgage of the

5

SC/APPEAL/33/2019

property to the bank the District Court shall order delivery to be

made by putting the purchaser or any person whom he may appoint

to receive possession on his behalf, in possession of the property.

(4) Where any immovable property sold in pursuance of the

preceding provisions of this Act is in the occupancy of tenant or other

person entitle to occupy the same, the District Court shall order

delivery to be made by affixing a notice that the sale has been taken

place, in the Sinhala, Tamil and English languages, in some

conspicuous place on the property, and proclaiming to the occupant

by beat of tom-tom or any other customary mode or in such manner

as the court may direct, at some convenient place, that the interest

of the borrower has been transferred to the purchaser. The cost of

such proclamation shall be fixed by the court and shall in every case

be prepaid by the purchaser.

(5) Every order under subsection (3) or subsection (4) shall be

deemed, as the case may be, to be an order for delivery of

possession made under section 287 or section 288 of the Civil

procedure Code, and may be enforced in like manner as an order so

made, the borrower and the purchaser being deemed, for the

purpose of the application of any provisions of that Code, to be the

judgment-debtor and judgment-creditor, respectively.

Under section 16(1), the Court is not expected to have a full trial or full

inquiry and make an order on the merits of the substantive case, if any.

The Court makes a perfunctory order for delivery of possession upon

production of the certificate of sale. The intervention of the Court is

sought at this stage primarily to prevent the breach of peace in the

execution of a non-judicial order.

6

SC/APPEAL/33/2019

The main contention of the respondent is that section 23 of the

Judicature Act, No. 2 of 1978 as amended by Act No. 37 of 1979 provides

for the right of appeal against any order or judgment of the District Court.

Hence, a right of appeal is available against orders made under section

16 of the Recovery of Loans by Banks (Special Provisions) Act as well.

This is not a novel argument taken up for the first time in this appeal.

23. Any party who shall be dissatisfied with any judgment, decree,

or order pronounced by a District Court may (excepting where such

right is expressly disallowed) appeal to the Court of Appeal against

any such judgment, decree, or order from any error in law or in fact

committed by such court, but no such appeal shall have the effect of

staying the execution of such judgment, decree, or order unless the

District Judge shall see fit to make an order to that effect, in which

case the party appellant shall enter into a bond, with or without

sureties as the District Judge shall consider necessary, to appear

when required and abide the judgment of the Court of Appeal upon

the appeal.

It is trite law that section 23 of the Judicature Act provides for a right of

appeal only in respect of judgments and orders of the District Court made

in the exercise of its ordinary civil jurisdiction and has no application

when the Court exercises special jurisdiction unless the specific statute

conferring such special jurisdiction expressly provides for an appeal. The

right of appeal is a creature of a statute. It is not an inherent right.

Without a statutory provision explicitly creating such a right the

aggrieved party is not entitled to file an appeal. It cannot be assumed,

implied, or inferred. If there is no right of appeal, there is no room for

leave to appeal because, when leave is granted, it transforms into an

appeal. Nevertheless, revision remains unaffected.

7

SC/APPEAL/33/2019

In the leading Supreme Court case of Bakmeewewa, Authorised Officer of

Peoples Bank v. Konarage Raja [1989] 1 Sri LR 231 at 237-238, Justice

G.P.S. de Silva (as His Lordship then was) made this abundantly clear in

the following terms.

Section 23 of the present Judicature Act is similar to the provisions

contained in section 73 of the repealed Courts Ordinance. Section 23

occurs in Chapter IV of the Judicature Act which spells out the civil

jurisdiction of the District Courts. In my opinion section 23 of the

Judicature Act provides for a right of appeal in respect of judgments

or orders of the District Court made in the exercise of its ordinary,

general, civil jurisdiction and has no application to the special

jurisdiction conferred on the District Court as in the instant case. As

already stated, the jurisdiction exercised by the District Court in

terms of sections 72(7) and 72(8) of the Act is the jurisdiction of a

Court of execution in respect of an extra judicial order. It is basically

not different from the jurisdiction exercised by the Magistrates Court

in proceedings for the recovery of taxes in default under the Income

Tax Ordinance. It is settled law that there is no right of appeal from

an order made by a Magistrates Court in such proceedings vide

Commissioner of Income Tax vs. De Vos (35 NLR 349) and De Silva

vs. Commissioner of Income Tax (53 NLR 280, 282). The fact that

there is no right of appeal does not mean that an aggrieved party is

left without a remedy, for revision is available.

In Martin v. Wijewardena [1989] 2 Sri LR 409 at 419, the Supreme Court

made a similar pronouncement in the invocation of the appellate

jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal under Article 138 of the Constitution.

Similar to section 23 of the Judicature Act, Article 138 of the Constitution

should also be understood subject to limitations.

Article 138(1) of the Constitution reads as follows:

8

SC/APPEAL/33/2019

The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise subject to the provisions

of the Constitution or of any law, an appellate jurisdiction for the

correction of all errors in fact or in law which shall be committed by

the High Court, in the exercise of its appellate or original jurisdiction

or by any Court of First Instance, tribunal or other institution and

sole and exclusive cognizance, by way of appeal, revision and

restitutio in integrum, of all causes, suits, actions, prosecutions,

matters and things of which such High Court, Court of First Instance,

tribunal or other institution may have taken cognizance:

Justice Jameel with the agreement of Chief Justice Ranasinghe and

Justice Amarasinghe stated at page 419:

In the light of these authoritative statements it is not possible to

accept the contention that there is implied in Article 138 an

unfettered RIGHT OF APPEAL to the Court of Appeal. Nor, is it

possible to accept the contention that this alleged RIGHT OF

APPEAL under this Article 138 is only fettered to the extent provided

for in the Constitution or other Law. An Appeal is a Statutory Right

and must be expressly created and granted by statute. It cannot be

implied. Article 138 is only an enabling Article and it confers the

jurisdiction to hear and determine appeals to the Court of Appeal.

The right to avail of or take advantage of that jurisdiction is governed

by the several statutory provisions in various Legislative

Enactments. That is to say, for appeals from the regular courts, in

the Judicature Act, and the Procedural Laws pertaining to those

courts. For the various Tribunals and other Quasi-Judicial Bodies, in

the respective statutes that created them. For these reasons the

question formulated by the Court of Appeal is answered in the

Negative. Section 18 of the Agrarian Services Act, No. 58 of 1979

does not provide for nor does it create a Right of Appeal in a tenant

9

SC/APPEAL/33/2019

cultivator, who is aggrieved by the Order of the Commissioner to pay

up his arrears to the Landlord before a stipulated date. Further,

Article 138 of the Constitution does not confer on such a tenant

cultivator a Right of Appeal.

Martin v. Wijewardena has consistently been followed in later decisions.

Vide Gamhewa v. Maggie Nona [1989] 2 Sri LR 250, Gunaratne v.

Thambinayagam [1993] 2 Sri LR 355, Malegoda v. Joachim [1997] 1 Sri

LR 88, Bandara v. Peoples Bank [2002] 3 Sri LR 25, The Peoples Bank

v. Camillus Perera [2003] 2 Sri LR 358.

In Jayawardena v. Sampath Bank [2005] 2 Sri LR 83 at 84-85, Justice

Amaratunga applied the above principles of law in the invocation of

jurisdiction of the District Court under section 16 of the Recovery of

Loans by Banks (Special Provisions) Act.

The Act No. 4 of 1990 had been passed in order to permit the Banks

defined in it to resort to parate execution to recover the loans granted

by those Banks. The Act does not contain a provision bringing in the

provisions of the Civil Procedure Code to cater to situations not

covered by the provisions of the Act. Section 16 enables a purchaser

to apply to the District Court to obtain an order for the delivery of

possession. That is the only instance under the Act where recourse

to ordinary courts is permissible. Section 16 or any other provision

of Act No. 4 of 1990 do not provide that an appeal, direct or with

leave, is available against an order made under Section 16. A right

of appeal must, be specifically provided for. Such a right cannot be

implied. Martin vs. Wijewardana [1989] 2 Sri LR 409. In the absence

of a specific right of appeal given by Act No. 4 of 1990 and in the

absence of any provision in Act No. 4 of 1990 incorporating the

provisions of the Civil Procedure Code, there is no right to make an

application for leave to appeal.

10

SC/APPEAL/33/2019

Dismissing the application for leave to appeal, in Dassanayake v.

Sampath Bank [2002] 3 Sri LR 268, Justice Nanayakkara at 269-270

stated:

The question at issue is whether the petitioner is entitled to come by

way of leave to appeal seeking redress, which he has prayed for in

his petition against an order made by the District Judge under

section 16 of the Recovery of Loans by banks (Special Provisions)

Act, No. 4 of 1990.

A careful analysis of the provisions of the said Act makes it evident

that the jurisdiction exercised by the District Court under the

Recovery of Loans by Banks (Special Provisions) Act, No. 4 of 1990,

is in the nature of special jurisdiction created by the Act.

As far as section 16(1) of the said Act is concerned, it provides for

expeditious mode of recovery of the property, which has already

been vested in the purchaser by an issuance of certificate of sale in

terms of the provisions of the said Act. The right of appeal is a

statutory right; unless it is expressly created and provided by the

Statute, it cannot be implied or inferred.

Quoting with approval the above dicta, in Raj Motha v. Hatton National

Bank (CA/APPEAL/495/2001, CA Minutes of 30.09.2004) Justice Imam

stated:

The Recovery of Loans by Banks (Special Provisions) Act No. 4 of

1990 which is a special law does not provide for a right of appeal to

any forum.

In Jayasundera v. Hatton National Bank (CA/1479/2004, CA Minutes of

05.08.2005), Justice Somawansa stated:

11

SC/APPEAL/33/2019

[Under section 16 of Act No. 4 of 1990] the District Court is vested

with special jurisdiction to deliver vacant possession of property

referred to in the certificate of sale. Once a certificate of sale is issued

by the board of directors of the licensed commercial bank the

procedure in entertaining the disposing of such application is by way

of summary procedure as set out in the Civil Procedure Code. Thus

it is seen that only certain sections of the Civil Procedure Code which

deals with the execution of the decree are applicable in respect of

execution of such order. In the circumstances with reference to

section 16 of the Act No. 4 of 1990 the District Court is vested with

special jurisdiction to execute an extra judicial act done by the board

of directors of a bank which is not a function of the District Court in

exercising its ordinary civil jurisdiction of a District Court.

Unfortunately for the respondent-petitioner provisions of section 16

or any other connected section in the aforesaid special law do not

create a right of appeal to any person aggrieved by the order of the

learned District Judge.

The question whether appeal is available against an order of the District

Court made under section 16 of the Recovery of Loans by Banks (Special

Provisions) Act was authoritatively answered in the negative by the

Supreme Court in Hatton National Bank v. Thejasiri Gunethilake [2016] 1

Sri LR 276. In that case Justice Anil Gooneratne with the agreement of

Chief Justice Dep and Justice Abeyratne held at 284-285:

G.P.S. de Silva J. (a former Chief Justice) in Bakmeewewa,

Authorised Officer of Peoples Bank Vs. Konarage Raja [1989] 1 Sri

LR 231 held in a case under the Finance Act that the jurisdiction

exercised by the District Court is a special jurisdiction. Case

discussed therein is very similar to the case in hand and held further

that Section 72(7) and 72(8) of the said law provide for a speedy

12

SC/APPEAL/33/2019

mode of obtaining possession of premises, which have already

vested in the Bank by virtue of the vesting order. He further held that

an application made to the District Court and the provisions of

Chapter 24 of the Civil Procedure Code are invoked solely for the

purpose of executing an extra judicial order. To make it very clear a

distinction has been made by G.P.S. de Silva J. and he observes that

Section 23 of the Judicature Act provides for a right of appeal in

respect of Judgment of the District Court made in the exercise of its

ordinary, general, civil jurisdiction and has no application to the

special jurisdiction conferred on the District Court.

In the above circumstances the Petitioner Bank is entitled to execute

the writ notwithstanding the notice of appeal. Act No. 4 of 1990 has

not provided for a right of appeal against an order made by the

District Court in terms of Section 16 of the said Act. Martin Vs.

Wijewardena [1989] 2 Sri LR 409 at 420 Jameel J. held an appeal

is a statutory right and must be expressly created and granted by

statute. It cannot be implied. The law is clear and I would say it is

trite law on the point as in Section 16(1) of the said Act. The method

followed by the Petitioner Bank to regain possession of the land in

dispute cannot be faulted in any respect.

Section 16(1) of the Act no doubt provides, upon production of the

certificate of sale issued in respect of that property under Section 15,

entitle the Petitioner Bank to obtain an order for delivery of

possession of that property. Wording in Section 16(1) is almost

similar to Section 72(7) of the Finance Act No. 16 of 1973. Both

statutes require the production of the vesting order or the certificate

of sale as the case may be. Both statutes in this way provides for

delivery of possession of property and so enacted by the legislature

to expedite such delivery of possession. Certificate of sale is

13

SC/APPEAL/33/2019

conclusive proof in respect of that property and as regards its sale

being duly complied with in terms of the Act. As such the certificate

of sale cannot be challenged, if and when it is issued in terms of the

said Act.

The law as contemplated in Act No. 4 of 1990, and as amended,

need to be strictly interpreted. The words employed by the said

statute cannot be given any extended meaning other than to achieve

the purpose of the statute. As such as observed in this Judgment the

intention of the legislature was to expedite debt recovery under a

special jurisdiction exercised by the District Court.

When the law was well-settled that (a) section 23 of the Judicature Act

provides for a right of appeal only in respect of judgments and orders of

the District Court made in the exercise of its ordinary civil jurisdiction

and has no application in instances where the District Court exercises

special jurisdiction unless a right of appeal is expressly provided for in

the Act; (b) the District Court exercises special jurisdiction in making

orders for delivery of possession under section 16 of the Recovery of

Loans by Banks (Special Provisions) Act; (c) the summary procedure is

adopted in this process solely for the purpose of executing an extra

judicial order; and (d) the Act does not provide for a right of appeal against

an order made by the District Court in terms of section 16 of the Act,

there is absolutely no justification in accordance with the doctrine of

stare decisis for the High Court to give a different interpretation to the

statutory provisions and come to a conclusion that is opposite to the well-

settled law which stands to reason.

As held by a Five Judge Bench of this Court in Indrani Mallika v.

Siriwardena (SC/APPEAL/160/2016, SC Minutes of 02.12.2022) stare

decisis is an abbreviation of the Latin phrase stare decisis et non quieta

movere (to stand by precedent and not to disturb settled points). This

14

SC/APPEAL/33/2019

doctrine is not a rule of statute but a concomitant of judicial comity. The

main object of stare decisis is to ensure the uniformity, consistency,

certainty and predictability of the law. Let the law be stable rather than

perfect is the rationale of this doctrine.

As Timothy Endicott, Hafsteinn Dan Kristjnsson and Sebastian Lewis

state in the recent book titled Philosophical Foundations of Precedent

(Oxford University Press, 2023) at page 2:

The unity that legal systems tend to impose on themselves offers a

crucial initial step in a justification of following precedent in law. The

legal unification of judicial agency may involve a hierarchy, and may

allow dissenting judgments, but it secures finality and a non-

contradictory form of ordering. In that unification of agency, judges

tend not to be free to disregard what other judges have done. The

judges who serve on a court tend to act as representatives of a

single, institutional agency. That tendency generates expectations

that the court will act consistently, and a sense of responsibility on

the part of judges to do so. The decision of the court is seen as an

action of the same agency that reached a decision yesterday, or

years ago. Adherence to precedent not only makes the system look

unified; it tends to make the system look timeless, conferring the

stability, reliability, and consistency that are crucial elements in the

rule of law.

Nevertheless, there are exceptions to this doctrine. One such exception

is the previous decision being given per incuriam. A decision per incuriam

is one given in ignorance or forgetfulness of the law laid down in a statute

or binding precedent, which, if considered, would have resulted in a

different decision. It is important to bear in mind that a decision will not

be regarded as per incuriam merely because a subsequent Court believes

that the law had been misinterpreted in the previous decision. For the

15

SC/APPEAL/33/2019

previous decision to be regarded as per incuriam, the fault must derive

from ignorance of statutory law or binding authority.

In the instant appeal, the High Court does not state that superior Courts

have decided that there is no right of appeal against the orders of section

16 of the Recovery of Loans by Banks (Special Provisions) Act, in

ignorance of relevant statutory provisions or binding precedent but rather

on the basis that the statutory provisions have not been correctly

interpreted and applied. Although the High Court does not use the term

per incuriam, it has decided the appeal on that basis. I do not think that

in the previous decisions, the statutory provisions have been

misinterpreted. They have been correctly interpreted in line with the

purpose of the Act and the intention of the legislature. Even if the said

statutory provisions have not been correctly interpreted by the Superior

Courts, High Court could not have come to a different conclusion as the

judgments of the Superior Courts bind the lower courts in accordance

with the doctrine of stare decisis. The High Court of Civil Appeal has

exceeded its jurisdiction.

The High Court states that section 16 of the Act does not lay down a

special procedure but provides for the application of summary

procedure and therefore there is a right of appeal to the dissatisfied

party. Firstly, the High Court may have conflated special jurisdiction

alluded to by Justice G.P.S. de Silva in Bakmeewewa with special

procedure. Secondly, the Superior Courts, particularly Justice

Somawansa in Jayasundera v. Hatton National Bank and Justice Anil

Gooneratne in Hatton National Bank v. Thejasiri Gunethilake held that the

entire chapter XXIV of the Civil Procedure Code on summary procedure

is inapplicable and the limited function of the District Court in this

instance is to act as a court of execution in respect of an extra judicial

order made by the Board of Directors of the bank.

16

SC/APPEAL/33/2019

This Court granted leave to appeal to the appellant bank on the following

questions of law:

14(a). Has the High Court erred in law in disregarding and/or failing

to apply the fundamental legal principle that no right of appeal lies

unless expressly conferred by statute which said legal principle has

been followed in Sri Lanka for almost a century?

14(b). Has the High Court erred in law in disregarding and/or failing

to follow and apply the case law decided by the Court of Appeal that

no right of appeal has been conferred against an Order made under

Section 16 of the Recovery of Loans by Banks (Special Provisions)

Act No. 4 of 1990 (as amended)?

14(c). Has the High Court erred in law in failing to judicially consider

and/or misdirected itself in law in applying the case law cited by

the Petitioner which have held that the Recovery of Loans by Banks

(Special Provisions) Act No. 4 of 1990 (as amended) is a special law

and does not provide for a right of appeal?

14(d). Has the High Court erred in law in failing to take cognizance

of the legislative intention of Parliament which provided for a right of

appeal in the Debt Recovery (Special Provisions) Act No. 2 of 1990

(as amended) but did not provide for a right of appeal in the Recovery

of Loans by Banks (Special Provisions) Act No. 4 of 1990 (as

amended) which establishes that there is no right of appeal under

Act No. 4 of 1990?

14(e). Has the High Court erred in law in disregarding and/or failing

to follow the principle of stare decisis where the High Court of the

Western Province Holden in Colombo (exercising appellate

jurisdiction) is bound by the decisions of the Court of Appeal and

Supreme Court?

17

SC/APPEAL/33/2019

14(f). Has the High Court erred in law in analyzing the case law and

drawing a distinction between special and ordinary jurisdiction

exercised by the District Court and holding that no right of appeal

exists from an Order made by the District Court exercising special

jurisdiction unless expressly conferred by statute and in doing so

completely disregarding the case law cited which specifically held

that the District Court exercises special jurisdiction under the

Recovery of Loans by Banks (Special Provisions) Act No. 4 of 1990

(as amended) which does not confer a right of appeal?

The respondent raised the following question of law:

Has the legislature introduced the principle that prohibitions must

not be presumed under section 23 of the Judicature Act with regard

to the right of appeal?

The appellants questions of law are answered in the affirmative. The

respondents question of law is answered in the following manner:

Section 23 of the Judicature Act is applicable when the District Court

pronounces judgments and orders in the exercise of its ordinary civil

jurisdiction and not in instances where it exercises special jurisdiction.

The impugned order of the High Court of Civil Appeal is set aside. The

preliminary objection raised by learned Presidents Counsel for the

appellant bank that, the application for leave to appeal filed against the

order of the District Court made under section 16 of the Recovery of

Loans by Banks (Special Provisions) Act No. 4 of 1990 is misconceived in

law, is upheld. There is no right of appeal against an order of the District

Court made under section 16 of the aforesaid Act. The application for

leave to appeal shall stand dismissed. The appellant is entitled to costs

in all three courts.

18

SC/APPEAL/33/2019

As agreed, the parties in the connected case No. SC/APPEAL/34/2019

will abide by this judgment.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Jayantha Jayasuriya, P.C., C.J.

I agree.

Chief Justice

Achala Wengappuli, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court