1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application under

and in terms of Article 17 and 126 of

the Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Lt. Col. Samitha Manojith Hewa Imaduwage,

46/4, Senanayake Avenue,

Nawala, Rajagiriya.

S.C. (F/R) Application No. 291/2016 Petitioner

Vs

1. Lieutenant General A. W. J. C. De Silva,

Commander of the Army,

Army Headquarters,

Colombo 03.

1A. Lieutenant General Mahesh Senanayake,

Commander of the Army,

Army Headquarters,

Colombo 03.

2. Major General N. J. Walgama,

Military Secretary,

Army Headquarters,

Colombo 03.

2

2A. Major General C. W. B. Wijesundera,

Military Secretary,

Army Headquarters,

Colombo 03.

3. Brigadier K. B. R. De Abrew,

Assistant Military Secretary,

Army Headquarters,

Colombo 03.

3A. Brigadier S. K. Eshwaran,

Assistant Military Secretary,

Army Headquarters,

Colombo 03.

4. Brigadier A. L. S. K. Perera,

Director Personal Administration,

Premier Pacific Building,

No. 28, R. A. De Mel Mawatha,

Colombo 04.

5. Major General K. R. P. Rowel,

Colonel Commandant,

Sri Lanka Signal Corps,

Regiment Centre,

Army Cantonment,

Panagoda.

5A. Major General B. H. M. A. Wijesinghe,

3

Colonel Commandant,

Sri Lanka Signal Corps,

Regiment Centre,

Army Cantonment,

Panagoda.

6. Brigadier K. A. D. S. L. Perera,

Director Pay and Records,

Army Cantonment,

Panagoda.

6A. Colonel L. Wijesundara,

Director Pay and Records,

Army Cantonment,

Panagoda.

7. Lieutenant Colonel B. D. Fernando,

5th Commanding Officer,

Sri Lanka Signal Corps,

Regiment Centre, Army Cantonment,

Panagoda.

8. Jagath Dias,

Director General of Pensions,

Department of Pensions,

Colombo 10.

9. Karunasena Hettiarachchi,

Secretary to the Ministry of Defence,

Ministry of Defence,

15/5, Baladaksha Mawatha,

4

Colombo 03.

9A. Kapila Waidyaratne PC,

Secretary to the Ministry of Defence,

Ministry of Defence,

15/5, Baladaksha Mawatha,

Colombo 03.

10. Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondents

Before: Buwaneka Aluwihare PC J.

Priyantha Jayawardena PC J.

L. T. B. Dehideniya J.

Counsel: Asthika Devendra with Upeksha Devinuwara for the

Petitioner.

Dr. Avanti Perera, SSC for the Attorney General

Argued On: 24. 07. 2018

Decided On: 20. 02. 2020

5

JUDGEMENT

Aluwihare PC J.,

1. The Petitioner, an Officer of the Sri Lanka Army, complained of the infringement

of his rights under Article 12(1) of the Constitution, for not being granted the

promotion to the rank of Lieutenant Colonel with his contemporary intake and

not being granted the promotion to the rank of Colonel. The Petitioner claims

that although he is entitled to be granted the said promotions, he has been

retired as a Lieutenant Colonel.

Facts

2. The Petitioner had joined the Sri Lanka Army in 1990 with Intake 33A as a

Second Lieutenant. During his tenure in the Army he had served in the conflict

areas and claims that he sustained injuries in the course of an attack by the

terrorists in the year 2000, while engaged in duty in the Forward Defense Lines

in Chavakachcheri. In recognition of his acts of gallantry in the theatre of war,

he had been awarded the ‘Rana Sura Padakkama’ (RSP) in 2002 and ‘Desha

Putra Sammanaya’ in 2004. The Petitioner is also a recipient of the ‘United

Nations Medal’ for the service rendered as a member of the military of the

United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.

3. After sustaining injuries in the battleground in the year 2000, the Petitioner had

been categorized as a ‘battle casualty’ by a medical board. Although he had the

option of retiring from service after being categorized as a battle casualty the

Petitioner had opted to continue in service. In January 2016 the Petitioner had

been promoted to the rank of Lieutenant Colonel on a temporary basis with

effect from 10th November 2009.

6

4. Consequent to a decision taken by the Cabinet of Ministers on 21st July 1982

(‘P2’), members of the Armed Forces or Police Officers who are compelled to

retire due to medical reasons attributable to injuries received while in action or

due to terrorist attacks or while enforcing the law, became entitled to be paid

their salary and other allowances they were being paid at the time of sustaining

injuries, until the age of 55. Further, such persons were to be granted all salary

increments they would have been entitled to, had they been in active service. The

Petitioner states that the ‘Public Administration Circular No. 22/93 (iv)’ (‘P3’)

confirms the abovementioned decision and that it provides inter alia for the

computation of pensions according to the salary which the Officer would be

entitled to at the age of 55. Subsequently, ‘Army Routine Order No. 90/2009’

(‘P4’) had been implemented in respect of the promotions of Officers injured due

to terrorist attacks. According to the said Routine Order (‘P4’) all battle casualties

of the Sri Lanka Army were divided into 4 categories which are as follows;

Category No. 1

Officers capable of further serving their mother regiment and attending to their

normal duties were placed in Category 1 and promotions were to be given under

the normal procedure based on the vacancies available.

Category No. 2

Officers not capable of attending to their normal duties but capable of attending

to other duties in their mother regiment or another regiment are placed in

Category 2 with promotions to be awarded under the normal procedure based

on the vacancies available.

Category No. 3

Officers who cannot be placed in Categories 1 and 2 due to their disability but

are not willing to retire are placed in Category 3. Officers in Category 3 are to be

placed in a super numeric cadre and promoted according to the Army Routine

7

Order without prejudice to the seniority of the immediate senior Officers serving

in the normal cadre.

Category No. 4

Officers who cannot be placed in Categories 1 and 2 but are not opting to

remain in service further under Category 3 are placed in Category 4. Officers

who choose to retire under this Category will not be entitled to promotions after

retirement but are entitled to be placed in the relevant salary steps of the

promotions which they should be given from time to time provided in the said

Army Routine Order.

5. Following the end of the war, by letter dated 13th March 2013 (‘P5’) issued by

the Adjutant General, officers who were serving regardless of their disabilities

have been allowed to retire from active service on medical grounds upon their

requests. If a Board of medical officers does not recommend the relevant officer

for further service in the Sri Lanka Army such officer should be retired and

provided with the benefits/ entitlements set out in ‘P2’.

6. The Petitioner states that after he was injured in 2000 he was considered a battle

casualty and that after ‘P4’ came into operation in 2009 he was placed in the

Category 1 aforesaid of ‘P4’ and that, he could have continued in service, until a

request is made by him, to retire from active service.

7. In 2014 the Petitioner had been appointed the Military Coordinator of the

Disaster Management Centre. The Petitioner states that during his tenure at the

Centre, he brought irregularities that had taken place in the ‘Disaster

Management Communication and Response Capacity Building Project’ to the

attention of the authorities. The Petitioner alleges that after he revealed these

irregularities the Officers of the Ministry of Disaster Management and the

Respondents began to ill-treat him. The 2nd Respondent, by communication dated

30th October 2015 (‘P7H’) had appointed another Officer, in place of the

8

Petitioner, to the Disaster Management Centre with effect from 2nd November

2015, without discharging the Petitioner from the duties. The Petitioner had

been discharged from the Disaster Management Centre later by communication

dated 14th January 2016 (‘P7I’) and attached to the Regiment Centre with effect

from 3rd November 2015.

8. The Petitioner contends that there was no rational basis to have him discharged

from the post of Military Coordinator with effect from 3rd November 2015 when

in fact he served in the said post until 14th January 2016, other than as an

encouragement to cause him to retire. On the other hand, the Respondents,

however, maintain that the Petitioner was removed from the appointment to the

Disaster Management Centre due to a report made by the Director of the Centre

complaining of misconduct and behavior on the part of the Petitioner that is

unbecoming of an Officer. The said report dated 23rd October 2015 had been

produced marked ‘1R7’. It states that the Petitioner’s “conduct, behavior and

actions during working environment tend to create divisions in the organization,

hence deem to destroy the peace and tranquility within the staff members of the

DMC”.

9. It appears that there had been another development concerning the Petitioner. In

2013, a Court of Inquiry had been held in respect of the Petitioner, regarding an

incident where the Petitioner was alleged to have employed soldiers to work at

the construction site of the house the Petitioner was building. In fact the

Petitioner has admitted having employed military personnel to assist in the

construction of his house. The Petitioner’s explanation is that, having

commenced the construction of the house in 2008, he had hired a contractor in

2013 to complete the construction as he had not been able to complete it due to

his professional commitments. The Petitioner states that he had been compelled

to find another contractor, upon the contractor defrauding the Petitioner.

Therefore, he had requested a Signalman, who was a skilled mason, to direct him

to another contractor. The Signalman, however, had proposed to complete the

9

construction himself together with his colleagues who were on leave, to which

the Petitioner had agreed. On 13th March 2013 officers of the Military Police

had come to the site of construction of the Petitioner’s house and had arrested

the soldiers who were working there.

10. The Petitioner’s contention is that no adverse findings were made at this Court of

Inquiry and that he was not informed of any further steps regarding the same,

leading him to believe that he had been exonerated. However, the Respondents

have produced documents to the contrary and shown that the Court of Inquiry

in question had been conducted according to the Army Courts of Inquiry

Regulations, 1952. An extract from the Court of Inquiry (‘1R9’) reveals that

several adverse observations had been made against the Petitioner and based on

the proceedings of the Court of Inquiry, the Army Commander’s decision

(‘1R10’) had been that disciplinary action should be taken against the Petitioner

as he has also been found guilty of acquiring a vehicle belonging to his wife in

contravention of the relevant guidelines as Unit Commanding Officer of the Sri

Lanka Signal Corps and using the said vehicle for the purposes of the

construction of his private house while utilizing Sri Lanka Army’s fuel and

drivers, in addition to employing soldiers of the Sri Lanka Army in the

construction of his house and approving leave for the soldiers for the days that

they were deployed in the construction. It has been further recommended that,

the fact that he had committed these offences while he was being considered for

confirmations or promotions should be taken into account. The Respondents

state that accordingly, the Petitioner had been warned and subjected to a

probationary period of one year as evidenced by the letter ‘1R11’ dated 07th May

2014.

11. While the inquiry was pending, in February 2014 the Petitioner’s confirmation

in the rank of Lieutenant Colonel also had come up for consideration by Army

Board No. 2 (‘1R3’). The Regimental Council of the Sri Lanka Signal Corps had

not recommended the Petitioner for rank confirmation due to pending

10

Investigations against the Petitioner and therefore the Board had decided to

temporarily supersede him, concluding that his career is to be determined based

on the findings of the investigations.

12. While the probation period per ‘1R11’ was running, on 09th January 2015 the

Petitioner had completed the maximum permissible period in the substantive

rank of Major. Despite this, the Petitioner had been granted an extension of

service until 09th January 2016 upon an application to that effect by the

Petitioner. Even so, the Petitioner’s substantive rank had remained as that of

Major.

13. During the probation period itself the Petitioner’s confirmation in the rank of

Lieutenant Colonel was considered for the second time on 05th February 2015 by

Army Board No. 2 (‘1R4’). The Petitioner again had not been recommended for

rank confirmation by the Regimental Council, Sri Lanka Signal Corps on this

occasion as well, since the Petitioner was under observation until 07th May 2015

due to the pending Court of Inquiry against him. Considering these facts, the

Board had not recommended the Petitioner for rank confirmation and decided

that he should be retired from the Army with pension and gratuity at the end of

the service extension. On 26th May 2015 the Petitioner had been informed of

this decision, a fact which is admitted by the Petitioner.

14. The Petitioner’s position however is that he had been summoned by the 5th

Respondent on 26th May 2015 and been informed that he had been kept under

observation for a period of one year from 06th May 2014 to 07th May 2015. The

Petitioner states that in order to keep an officer in the rank of Lieutenant Colonel

under observation such officer should be tried in a Court Martial on the

recommendation of the report of a Court of Inquiry or, such officer should be

summoned before the Colonel Commandant (the 5th Respondent in respect of the

Petitioner) and informed of the same. The Petitioner asserts that neither of these

steps had been resorted to against the Petitioner. The Petitioner, however, has not

11

substantiated the procedural position referred to, by reference to any legal

provision. The Petitioner had been further informed that the Petitioner’s service

in the Sri Lanka Army would end on 09th January 2016 since the maximum

permissible period in the rank of Major would expire on that date. The Petitioner

contends that this statement has no merit and that his service was not superseded

(brought to an end) on that date despite being informed thus, and that he was

allowed to continue serving in the Sri Lanka Army. Presumably, this may have

been the reason for placing the Petitioner in the rank of Temporary Lieutenant

Colonel in January 2016.

15. The Petitioner had argued that the period of probation that was imposed ended

before his effective retirement date in April 2016 and that therefore the decision

to supersede him should have been revised and the Petitioner should have been

promoted.

16. It has been submitted on behalf of the Petitioner that he ought to have been

promoted to the rank of Lieutenant Colonel while he was in service on three

alternative grounds;

• The Petitioner should have been promoted to the rank of Lieutenant

Colonel with his contemporary intake in 2008.

• The Petitioner is entitled to be promoted to the rank of Lieutenant Colonel

as he has exceeded the maximum years permissible in the rank of Major

at the time of retirement or had he been promoted to the rank of

Lieutenant Colonel with his peers, he would have had exceeded the

maximum years in the rank of Lieutenant Colonel by the time he ended

his service in August 2016 and ought to have been promoted to the rank

of Colonel.

• The Petitioner is entitled to be promoted to the rank under the circular

‘P4’ as he is a battle casualty.

12

The issue of time bar

17. The Respondents on the other hand assert that the Petitioner had not at any time

challenged the decision taken by the 2nd Army Board on 5th February 2015, to

supersede him (‘1R4’) despite being aware of the decision at least by 26th May

2015. However, this contention does not appear to be correct as the Petitioner, in

exercise of his right of appeal to the Commander of the Army as provided for by

Section 32 of the Army Act No. 14 of 1949, has appealed against the decision by

the Redress of Grievance (ROG) to the 1st Respondent (‘P8’). The 1st Respondent

has admitted the receipt of the ROG in paragraph 28 of his Affidavit filed on 5th

June 2017.

18. Thereafter, upon being informed on 12th May 2016 that his appeal was not

favourably considered by the Commander of the Army, the Petitioner had

preferred an appeal to the President on 2nd July 2016 (‘P15’), as further provided

for by Section 32 of the Army Act. The Petitioner has asserted that even at the

time of filing written submissions on his behalf in the instant application on 12th

September 2018; the Petitioner had received no response to his appeal to the

President. Further, it has been brought to the notice of the court that although

the maximum period of service in the rank of Major had come to an end and

that by then a decision had been taken to permanently supersede the Petitioner,

he was granted a final service extension of 3 months in the substantive rank of

Major with effect from 11th January 2016 on “extreme compassionate grounds”

(‘1R14’).

19. In Gamaethige v Siriwardena and Others 1988 1 SLR 384 it has been held that

“While the time limit is mandatory, in exceptional cases on the application of the

principle lex non cogit ad impossibilia, if there is no lapse, fault or delay on the

part of the petitioner, this Court has a discretion to entertain an application

made out of time.” Therefore, due to the above reasons I am of the opinion that

13

the preliminary objection of the application being time barred can be overruled,

as there is no apparent lapse, fault or delay on the part of the Petitioner in failing

to invoke the jurisdiction of this Court in time, as he was awaiting a response to

the appeal that he had forwarded to the President.

Petitioner’s entitlement to be promoted

20. The Petitioner had not satisfied the criteria for a promotion to the rank of

Colonel in terms of Regulation 12 of ‘1R1’. Regulation 12(1) of the ‘Army

Officers Service Regulations (Regular Force) 1992’ states that promotion to the

rank of Colonel and above shall be by selection and that promotions to the rank

of Colonel shall be awarded only to such substantive Lieutenant Colonel as is

considered best qualified for such rank and appointment. Regulation 12(2) states

that the Officer’s past record of service and whether the promotion is clearly in

the best interests of the Army shall be considered. As per Regulation 17(5) of

‘1R1’ an officer of the substantive rank of Major may be promoted to the

temporary rank of Lieutenant Colonel, if selected for an extra regimental

employment carrying such rank. As brought to the notice of the court by the

Learned Senior State Counsel on behalf of the Respondents, when an officer in

the Army retires, the practice is to grant the promotion to the next rank, at the

point of retirement. If the said practice of the Army, with regard to granting of

promotions is to be considered, an officer who is in the rank of Lieutenant

Colonel while in service is eligible to be promoted to the rank of Colonel at the

point of retirement. As pointed out by the Respondents, the past disciplinary

record affects the promotional prospects of even those officers who are deemed

unfit for service on grounds of disability.

21. For the purposes of this judgment it would be useful to reproduce in full,

Regulation 19(1) of ‘1R1’.

14

“19. (1) An officer who is overlooked for promotion may be superseded

temporarily or permanently. If permanently superseded he shall be so informed.

(2) An officer shall be permanently superseded if he does not qualify for

promotion before the expiry of the appropriate period referred to in Regulations

11 and 15: Provided that he shall not be permanently superseded where his

failure to pass the appropriate examination is due to causes beyond his control,

as determined by the Commander of the Army.”

22. In the case of the present Petitioner he had been temporarily and then

permanently superseded as he was overlooked for promotion. It is in accordance

with Regulation 19(1), since it was due to the Petitioner’s failure to obtain

confirmation in the rank of Lieutenant Colonel in the normal course of

promotions that he lost the opportunity of being promoted to the rank of Colonel

prior to retirement.

23. Following the meeting with the 5th Respondent on 26th May 2015 the Petitioner

had directed a ROG dated 04th June 2015 (‘P8’) to the 1st Respondent seeking

redress against the decisions informed by the 5th Respondent. In ‘P8’ the

Petitioner had maintained that he was not confirmed in the present rank with

contemporary intakes due to being placed under observation for a period of one

year ending on 7th May 2015 by the Colonel Commandant. Since the Petitioner

as a battle casualty was in any event entitled to retire from service if found

permissible by a Medical Board, the Petitioner had thereafter decided to retire

from the Sri Lanka Army. By the ROG dated 27th January 2016 (‘P9’) forwarded

to the 1st Respondent, the Petitioner had sought to retire from active service.

24. Thereafter, by message dated 14th March 2016 (‘P10’) the Petitioner had been

summoned before a Board of Medical Officers who recommended that the

Petitioner can be retired on medical grounds on the conclusion that he was unfit

for active service. The Petitioner has brought to the notice of this court by

15

Seniority List of the Sri Lanka Army as at 12th February 2016 (‘P11’) that officers

who belonged to Intake 33 have, on 10th April 2014, been confirmed in the rank

of Lieutenant Colonel with effect from 9th January 2008 and that officers who

belonged to Intake 33A have, on 27th January 2016, been confirmed in the rank

of Lieutenant Colonel with effect from 1st July 2008. The Petitioner asserts that

from the 4 officers who joined with Intake 33A, only the Petitioner and

Lieutenant Colonel J. S. Weerakoon were in active service at that time.

25. Although officers in the contemporary intakes of 33 and 33A have been

promoted to the rank of Lieutenant Colonel with effect from 2008 the Petitioner

had not been confirmed in the rank of Lieutenant Colonel with his contemporary

intake. The Petitioner therefore states that he is entitled to be confirmed in the

rank with effect from 1st July 2008, the same date that the officer of the 33A

intake Colonel J. S. Weerakoon was confirmed in the rank of Lieutenant Colonel.

The Petitioner has pointed out that the said Officer Weerakoon had been

temporarily superseded by the first Army Board No. 2 marked ‘IR3’ (at page 15)

due to not being qualified at the Annual Physical Fitness Test. As the said Officer

had again failed to qualify at the Physical Fitness Test the second Army Board No.

2 marked ‘IR4’ (at page 11) had temporarily superseded him and recommended

that if the Officer fails to become medically fit before the end of his 1st service

extension until 09th January 2016, he should be retired at the end of the said

period. The Petitioner complains that although he too was on his 1st service

extension running up to the same date i.e. 09th January 2016, he had been

permanently superseded thereby unequally treating two equals. The Petitioner

and the said Officer Weerakoon cannot be considered equals merely because

they were both in their 1st service extension of the same duration. In the case of

the Petitioner there were ongoing disciplinary proceedings against him at the

time, whereas Officer Weerakoon had been overlooked due to his failure to pass

the Annual Physical Fitness Test. Being subjected to disciplinary proceedings and

failure to attain the required physical fitness cannot certainly be considered as

identical or equal situations.

16

26. The Petitioner has further referred to the promotion of one Lieutenant Colonel

Kithsiri Munasinghe. The said Officer had been confirmed in the rank of

Lieutenant Colonel and retired by Extraordinary Gazette No. 1991 dated 28th

October 2016 (marked ‘X1’ and submitted with the Written Submissions on

behalf of the Petitioner) the same Gazette by which the Petitioner had been

retired. Thereafter, by Extraordinary Gazette dated 13th January 2017 (marked

‘X2’ and submitted with the Written Submissions on behalf of the Petitioner) the

said Officer’s confirmation in the rank of Temporary Lieutenant Colonel and

retirement had been revoked and he had been then promoted to the rank of

Lieutenant Colonel and retired. In the absence of any information as to whether

any one or more of the officers referred to above by the Petitioner were subjected

to disciplinary proceedings, this court is not in a position to conclude that the

Petitioner falls into the same class as them.

27. The Petitioner states that when an officer serving in a temporary rank is

concluded to be unfit for active service, the normal practice followed by the Sri

Lanka Army is to confirm the Officer in the rank with his contemporary intake

and to grant the next promotion prior to the retirement. The Petitioner refers to

the promotion of one Lieutenant Colonel Nilupul Wedaarachchi who had been

serving in the rank of temporary Major and had opted to retire on medical

grounds. He had been confirmed in the rank of Major with his contemporary

intake and promoted to the rank of Lieutenant Colonel with effect from 06th July

2015 and retired from active service with effect from 07th July 2015.

28. The Petitioner’s contention is that upon being considered unfit for active service

by the medical board in March 2016 the Petitioner should be automatically

placed in Category 3 set out in ‘P4’ and should have been promoted to the rank

of Colonel after a 5-year period in the rank of Lieutenant Colonel. The Petitioner

contends that since the Petitioner ought to have been confirmed in the rank of

Lieutenant Colonel with effect from 01st July 2008 with his contemporary intake,

17

he should have been promoted to the rank of Colonel with effect from 01st July

2013 according to the provisions of ‘P4’.

29. The Petitioner refers to one Colonel S. S. K. Jayawickrama, a Temporary

Lieutenant Colonel who had been placed in Category 3 of ‘P4’ in 2008. He had

been confirmed in the rank of Lieutenant Colonel along with his contemporary

intake with effect from 16th June 2006 and then promoted to the rank of Colonel

with effect from 2013 along with his contemporary intake. The Petitioner states

that he had been reliably informed that Colonel S. S. K. Jayawickrama is to be

promoted to the rank of Brigadier prior to his retirement, for which he had had

forwarded the request at the time of filing the application.

30. By a ROG dated 04th April 2016 (‘P12’) the Petitioner had requested the 1st

Respondent to confirm the Petitioner in the rank of the Lieutenant Colonel with

his contemporary intake and further to promote him to the next rank of Colonel.

By message dated 11th May 2016 (‘P13B’) the 4th Respondent had informed the

Petitioner that the Ministry of Defence had approved his retirement on medical

grounds with monthly salary and other benefits upto the age of 55. Although

the Petitioner had been permitted to be retired on medical grounds by message

dated 12th May 2016 (‘P14’) the Petitioner’s requests for the promotions by ‘P12’

had not been granted. It was then that the Petitioner had, exercising the statutory

right granted under Section 32 of the Army Act, appealed to the President of his

predicament by ‘P15’ and requested that he be confirmed in the rank of

Lieutenant Colonel with his contemporary intakes and that he be promoted to

the next rank of Colonel.

31. Subsequently, by message dated 29th July 2016 (‘P16’) the Petitioner had been

informed that the President had approved his confirmation in the rank of

Lieutenant Colonel with effect from 01st April 2016 (not with his contemporary

intake which had been confirmed in 2008) and to retire the Petitioner with

effect from 02nd April 2016.

18

32. Extraordinary Gazette No. 562/11 of 15th June 1989 (‘P18’) sets out the

maximum permissible periods of time an officer can hold in each respective rank

from the rank of Lieutenant. The Petitioner contends that according to ‘P18’ he is

entitled to be promoted to the rank of Colonel on 1st July 2016 on which date he

completed the maximum permissible period of 8 years in the rank of Lieutenant

Colonel. Such a simplistic view cannot be adhered to as the Gazette does not state

that promotions should be awarded mandatorily to every officer who completes

the maximum permissible period in a particular rank. 3(1)(b) in ‘P18’ reads to

the effect that;

3(1)(ආ) උපකරණ පාලක නිලධරයකු හ ෝ හකටිකාලීන කාරක අධිකාරි ලත්

නිලධරයකු හ ෝ හනාවන්නාවූ නිලධරයකු ස්වකීය ස්ිර නිලහයහි රැඳී සිටින

කාලසීමාව තුළ ඊළඟ ඉ ල නිලයට උසස් කරනු හනාලැබුවහ ාත් ප ත

නියම කර ඇති පරිදි උසුලන ස්ිර නිලහේ කාලසීමාව අවසානහේදී විශ්‍රාම

ගත යුතුය.

ස්ිර නිලය - කාලය අවුරුදු

ලුතිනන්- 06

කපිතන්- 11

හේජර්- 10

ලුතිනන් කර්නල්- 08

කර්නල්- 05

බ්‍රිහේඩියර්- 04

33. At the time, the Petitioner was in the rank of Temporary Lieutenant Colonel

having been promoted to the temporary rank in 2009. According to ‘P18’, on the

completion of the maximum permissible period in any of the specified ranks an

Officer can be promoted only to the rank immediately above the substantive

19

rank held by such officer and not the rank immediately above the temporary

rank held by an officer. Accordingly, the substantive rank of the Petitioner at the

time being ‘Major’ the Petitioner can be promoted to the rank of Lieutenant

Colonel and not to the rank of Colonel.

34. Until the service of ‘P16’ the Petitioner had been engaged in active service up to

the 5th of August 2016. In addition to carrying out his ordinary responsibilities

the Petitioner has served as an invigilator in the ‘Captain to Major promotion

(Regular) 2016 Examinations’ held on 22nd June 2016 and 08th July 2016

respectively. The Petitioner argues that if the Petitioner is to be retired with effect

from April 2016 his role in the Examinations could be brought into question.

The allowances that were granted to the Petitioner during the 4 months from

April too would be in question. The Petitioner states that even in the service

report dated 28th July 2016 carrying the names of the officers in active service at

the time includes his name.

35. The Respondents contend that although the Petitioner’s retirement was to take

effect from 02nd April 2016 he had been allowed to report to work until August

even past the lapse of his last extension of service on 09th April 2016 purely due

to routine administrative delays that take place in the processing of retirement

papers of all officers of the Army and also because several appeals had been

made to backdate his rank confirmation by the Petitioner. The Respondents

further submit that the Petitioner has been paid all his employment dues

covering the period that he reported to work beyond the effective date of

retirement.

36. The Petitioner contends that the decision to retire the Petitioner with effect from

02nd April 2016 has been taken maliciously to deprive the Petitioner from being

promoted to the rank of Colonel, as there is no other logical explanation to retire

the Petitioner on 02nd January 2016 when he served in uniform until 2nd August

2016. Due to the decision to confirm the Petitioner in the rank of Lieutenant

20

Colonel with effect from 01st April 2016 the Petitioner had been prevented from

obtaining the concessionary vehicle permit which is available to officers who

have minimum service of six years (confirmed in the said rank) in the rank of

Lieutenant Colonel or above.

37. The Petitioner challenges the decisions in ‘P14’ and ‘P16’ as actions and/or

inactions of an administrative and executive nature in the circumstances

referred to and alleges the infringement of his fundamental rights under Article

12(1) of the Constitution. The Petitioner prays for the Court to direct that the

Petitioner be confirmed in the rank of Lieutenant Colonel with effect from 01st

July 2008 and be promoted to the rank of Colonel with effect from 01st July

2016.

Conclusions

38. The Petitioner is not similarly situate as his peers because the Petitioner’s

promotion/rank confirmation was rejected on both occasions it came up for

consideration. At the time of the decision to retire the Petitioner, he was holding

the substantive rank of Major. Therefore, if he was granted promotion to the

rank of Colonel, as well as promotion to/rank confirmation as Lieutenant

Colonel it would have resulted in two promotions being awarded to an officer

whose promotion had been rejected twice.

39. Promotion to rank of Colonel on the other hand, is not awarded merely due to

serving in the Army for a set period of time, but upon meeting the criteria set out

in Regulation 12, which the Petitioner has failed to meet due to issues in his past

disciplinary conduct.

40. I wish to cite with approval the pronouncement made in the case of Wijesinghe

v Attorney General 1978-1979-1980 1 SLR 102, where the court held;

21

“This Court is undoubtedly the guardian and protector of the

fundamental rights secured for the people and our powers are

given in very wide terms; but our authority is not absolute for

these powers are subject to certain well defined principles and we

have to concede that there are limits which we cannot transgress,

however hard and unfortunate a case may be. We have to take

cognizance of the distinction between ordinary rights and

fundamental rights, and it is only a breach of a fundamental right

that calls for our intervention.” (at page 105)

“The judicial decision must of necessity depend on the facts and

circumstances of each particular case and what may superficially

appear to be an unequal application of the law may not

necessarily amount to a denial of equal protection of law unless

there is shown to be present in it an element of intentional and

purposeful discrimination. (see per Stone, C.J. in Snowden v:

Hughes, (supra))” (at page 106).

Even in the instant case the Petitioner has failed to establish that there

had been purposeful discrimination against the Petitioner by the

Respondents; and the Petitioner had not been granted the promotions

that he had sought due to the shortcomings in the manner he had

discharged his duties as a officer of the Armed Forces.

41. For the reasons set out above I am of the view that the Petitioner had

failed to establish that his fundamental right enshrined in Article 12(1)

had been violated by any of the Respondents and as such the Petitioner

cannot succeed in this application. Accordingly, this Application is

dismissed.

22

Application Dismissed

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

JUSTICE PRIYANTHA JAYAWARDENA PC

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

JUSTICE L.T.B DEHIDENIYA

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT