==== BLOCKS ==== 

[SC Rule 06/2023] - Page 1 of 9

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

In the matter of a Rule in terms of

Section 42 of the Judicature Act No.

02 of 1978, against Aruna Deepada

De Silva, Attorney-at-Law.

Nishan Chandima Abeywardena,

Acting Head of Air Navigation Services,

Airport and Aviation Services Sri Lanka

(Pvt) Ltd.,

Bandaranaike International Airport,

Katunayake.

Complainant

-Vs-

Aruna Deepada De Silva,

145/3A,

Park Road,

Colombo 05.

Respondent

Before: P. PADMAN SURASENA J,

ACHALA WENGAPPULI J,

MAHINDA SAMAYAWARDHENA J.

Counsel: Dr. Romesh de Silva PC for the Respondent,

Rohan Sahabandu PC with Ms. S. Senanayake for the Bar Association of Sri Lanka,

Dileepa Pieris SDSG with Ms. Sabrina Ahmed SC for the Attorney General.

SC Rule No. 06/2023

[SC Rule 06/2023] - Page 2 of 9

Inquiry on: 22-01-2024

Decided on: 15-03-2024

P. Padman Surasena J

The Rule dated 14-07-2023 under the hand of the Registrar of this Court has been issued against

the Respondent Attorney-at-Law. When the court took this matter up for inquiry, Dr. Romesh De

Silva PC appearing for the Respondent Attorney-at-Law, Mr. Dileepa Pieris Senior Deputy Solicitor

General appearing for the Attorney General and Mr. Rohan Sahabandu PC appearing for the Bar

Association of Sri Lanka, concurred that the Court can proceed with this inquiry on the available

material in the brief.

Moreover, the learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General Mr. Dileepa Pieris confirmed to us that it

would not be necessary to lead oral evidence of any witness, as the basic facts pertaining to the

background under which the instant Rule has been issued are not disputed by the parties.

Pursuant to this agreement, the court proceeded to hear the extensive submissions made by Dr.

Romesh De Silva PC appearing for the Respondent Attorney-at-Law. Dr. Romesh De Silva PC

made this submission in order to show cause (as directed in the Rule) as to why this Court should

not affirm this Rule issued against the Respondent Attorney-at-Law. Subsequent to Dr. Romesh

De Silva PC’s submissions, Court proceeded to hear the submissions made by the learned Senior

Deputy Solicitor General Mr. Dileepa Pieris who appeared for the Attorney General and the

submissions made by Mr. Rohan Sahabandu PC who appeared for the Bar Association of Sri

Lanka. Thereafter, the Court reserved the order and hence this order.

At the outset, it must be noted that when this case was taken up in Court on 14-07-2023, the

learned counsel who appeared for the Complainant had informed Court that the Complainant

named in this Rule has no objection to the application made on that day by Dr. Romesh De Silva

PC (who appeared for the Respondent Attorney-at-Law), to have this proceeding terminated

without holding the inquiry. The Court having decided that there was no legal basis to terminate

this proceeding at that stage, had then read out the Rule against the Respondent Attorney at

Law on that day subsequent to which the learned President’s Counsel appearing for the

[SC Rule 06/2023] - Page 3 of 9

Respondent Attorney-at-Law had informed Court that the Respondent Attorney-at-Law has a

cause to show as per the direction in the Rule issued against the Respondent Attorney-at-Law by

this Court. It was thereafter that the Court had fixed the inquiry for 06-12-2023. As the bench

was not properly constituted on 06-12-2023, the Court could not commence the inquiry on that

date. Consequently, the Court had re-fixed the inquiry for 22-01-2024.

When the Court commenced the inquiry on 22-01-2024, the learned President’s Counsel who

appeared for the Respondent Attorney-at-Law addressing Court, adduced reasons as to why this

Court should discharge the Rule issued against the Respondent Attorney-at-Law. I observe that

the Rule issued against the Respondent Attorney-at-Law has alleged breaches of Rule 60 and

Rule 61 of the Supreme Court (Conduct of and Etiquette for Attorneys at Law) Rules 1988. As

per the Rule, there are several acts which the Respondent Attorney-at-Law has allegedly

committed in this instance. According to the Rule, it is those acts committed by the Respondent

Attorney-at-Law which have rendered the Respondent Attorney-at-Law unfit to remain as an

Attorney-at-Law of the Supreme Court in terms of the Supreme Court (Conduct of and Etiquette

for Attorneys at Law) Rules 1988. The Rule has enumerated the said acts in the following manner:

A. He had entered the Bandaranaike International Airport (“BIA”) premises on 02

June 2022 at or around 1215 hrs with a day pass to enter the Navigational

Service Complex (“NSC”) of the BIA,

B. He had thereafter proceeded to enter the office of the Complainant

accompanying the Fiscal Officer of the Commercial High Court of the Western

Province (Exercising Civil Jurisdiction) Holden in Colombo (“the Commercial High

Court”),

C. He had, upon entering the office of the Complainant, proceeded to interrupt the

telephone conversation that the Complainant was engaged in with the Director

General of Civil Aviation (“DGCA”),

D. He had at that stage, upon the Fiscal Officer of the Commercial High Court

serving the enjoining order dated 02 June 2022 of the case No.

CHC/126/2022/MR on the Complainant, without giving the Complainant

sufficient time to study the aforesaid enjoining order, drawn the Complainant’s

[SC Rule 06/2023] - Page 4 of 9

notice to the last two paragraphs of pages 2 and 3 of the enjoining order and

misrepresented to the Complainant that the enjoining order was binding on the

Complainant and further willfully suppressed the fact that the enjoining order

was not issued against the Complainant,

E. He had thereafter informed and impressed upon the Complainant that if the

Complainant delayed the immediate implementation of the aforesaid enjoining

order, the Complainant would be in Contempt of Court.

I observe at the outset, that the conduct of the Respondent Attorney-at-Law which the Rule has

alleged to be a conduct unworthy of an Attorney-at-Law, revolves around the act of serving an

enjoining order on the Acting Head of Air Navigation Services of the Airport and Aviation Services

of Bandaranaike International Airport, Katunayake. Thus, let me first examine the relevant

enjoining order. The learned Judge of the Commercial High Court in his order dated 02-06-2022,

had issued the enjoining order as prayed for in paragraphs D and G of the Plaint dated 31-05-

2022. For the purpose of evaluating the submissions made by the learned Counsel for all the

parties, it would be necessary to examine these two prayers of the Plaint dated 31-05-2022. They

are as follows:

“D. An Enjoining Order until the determination of the application for interim

injunction, restraining and preventing the 1st Defendant from and/or the 1st

Defendant’s servants, agents, assigns and/or those authorized to permit the 1st

Defendant from permitting the 1st Defendant to, operate (whether commercially or

otherwise), handle, use, take off ground and/or fly the Aircraft described in the

Schedule hereto, pending the constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal pursuant to

Request for Arbitration marked “P24” and an Award by the Arbitral Tribunal

regarding the delivery and possession of the said aircraft,

G. An Enjoining Order until the determination of the application for interim

injunction, restraining and preventing the 1st Defendant and/or its servants,

agents, assigns from removing any aircraft documentation (including certificates;

aircraft log, records, books or manuals) or any parts, equipment components,

systems or modules from the Aircraft described in the Schedule hereto, pending

[SC Rule 06/2023] - Page 5 of 9

the constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal pursuant to Request for Arbitration marked

“P24” and an Award by the Arbitral Tribunal in that regard.”

As pointed out by Dr. Romesh De Silva PC, I observe that the Plaintiff has prayed for, the enjoining

order as per prayer (D) of the Plaint dated 31-05-2022 against two categories of persons. The

said two categories of persons are as follows:

1. The 1st Defendant and/or the 1st Defendant’s servants, agents, assigns and/or;

2. Those authorized to permit the 1st Defendant from permitting the 1st Defendant to,

operate (whether commercially or otherwise), handle, use, take off ground and/or

fly the Aircraft described in the Schedule.

A close scrutiny of this prayer would show clearly that it is not correct to say that the enjoining

order issued by the learned Commercial High Court Judge on 02-06-2022 has only been issued

against the 1st Defendant of the case in the Commercial High Court. The said enjoining order has

been prayed for against the 2nd Defendant of the case also because, it was the 2nd Defendant

who was the Acting Head of Air Navigation Services of the Airport and Aviation Services Sri Lanka

(Pvt) Ltd. of Bandaranaike International Airport, Katunayake who could have permitted the 1st

Defendant’s servants, agents or assigns to take off the ground and fly, the aircraft described in

the schedule to the Plaint.

In addition to the above, I also observe that while there are only two Defendants named in the

Plaint, the 1st Defendant is Public Joint Stock Company “Aeroflot – Russian Airlines”, Arbat Str.,

build 10, Moscow 119002, Russia. Thus, as the address indicates, the 1st Defendant is an entity

based in Moscow, Russia who could not have any authority over the affairs of the Air Navigation

Services of Bandaranaike International Airport, Katunayake. This fact also indicates that it was

the 2nd Defendant who was the Acting Head of Air Navigation Services of the Airport and Aviation

Services Sri Lanka (Pvt) Ltd. of Bandaranaike International Airport, Katunayake who was

responsible for implementing the said enjoining order by denying the permission for the aircraft

described in the schedule to the Plaint to take off the ground and/or fly.

The above position that the enjoining order dated 02-06-2022 has been issued against the 2nd

Defendant of the case as well, would in my view, render, the allegation in the Rule that the

Respondent Attorney-at-Law had misrepresented to the Acting Head of Air Navigation Services

[SC Rule 06/2023] - Page 6 of 9

that the said enjoining order was binding on him as well, untenable. It also renders the position

that the Respondent Attorney-at-Law had willfully suppressed that the enjoining order was not

issued against the said Acting Head of Air Navigation Services, untenable.

When the Court took this case up for inquiry on 22-01-2024, Mr. Dileepa Pieris Senior Deputy

Solicitor General appearing for the Attorney General brought to the notice of Court that Nishan

Chandima Abeywardena (the Head of Air Navigation Services of the Airport and Aviation Services

of Bandaranaike International Airport, Katunayake who stands as the Complainant in this Rule),

has passed away on 12-12-2023. This has left only the affidavits filed by him before Court. While

I do not intend to proceed to discuss about their admissibility in Court in his absence, I wish to

advert only to the maximum impact that the said affidavits can have on the case against the

Respondent Attorney-at-Law.

In doing so, let me observe that the Head of Air Navigation Services of the Airport and Aviation

Services of Bandaranaike International Airport, Katunayake (the Complainant), in his affidavit

dated 5th June 2022 submitted to the Commercial High Court, has declared and affirmed inter alia

to the followings:

a. At or about 12 noon on the 2nd of June 2022 a person who identified himself as the

Additional Registrar of the Commercial High Court of Colombo named K. A. C Perera

called him and instructed him to stop the aircraft departing citing the enjoining

order issued by the Commercial High Court Colombo;

b. He had informed the said caller that he would require a copy of the said enjoining

order to bring the said enjoining order to the notice of the Director General of Civil

Aviation (DGCA) who is the relevant regulating authority;

c. While he was on a telephone call with the DGCA, a Fiscal Officer who identified

himself as from Commercial High Court and Attorney-at-Law Mr. Aruna De Silva

entered the Bandaranaike International Airport (BIA) premises with a day pass to

enter the Navigational Service Complex (NSC) area, around 1215 hrs on 2nd June

2022 and proceeded to enter his office;

d. The said aircraft was scheduled to take off at 12.50PM on 2nd June 2022;

[SC Rule 06/2023] - Page 7 of 9

e. The said Attorney-at-Law without providing him an opportunity to consult the

appropriate regulatory authority who is the DGCA, also conveyed that if I delay the

implementation of the Enjoining Order that he would be in Contempt of Court.

Thus, the complainant also in his affidavit has admitted that the Respondent Attorney-at-Law has

entered the Bandaranaike International Airport premises with a day pass. Therefore, one cannot

say that the Respondent Attorney-at-Law had entered the airport unlawfully. Moreover, the

following two factors would shed more light on the purpose of Fiscal’s visit to the Complainant’s

office. These two factors are: the fact that the Additional Registrar of the Commercial High Court

of Colombo had called the Complainant and instructed him to stop the aircraft departing citing

the enjoining order issued by the Commercial High Court Colombo; the fact the Complainant

himself had required from the Additional Registrar of the Commercial High Court of Colombo, a

copy of the said enjoining order. Thus, the Complainant could not have been surprised at all to

see the Fiscal of the Commercial High Court Colombo at his office at the relevant time.

Even according to the afore-said affidavit of the Head of Air Navigation Services of the Airport

and Aviation Services of Bandaranaike International Airport Katunayake: the relevant aircraft was

scheduled to take off at 12.50 PM on 2nd June 2022; about 12 noon on the 2nd June 2022 an

Additional Registrar of the Commercial High Court of Colombo had called him and instructed him

to stop the aircraft departing citing the enjoining order issued by the Commercial High Court

Colombo; the Respondent Attorney-at-Law had entered the Bandaranaike International Airport

premises with a day pass around 1215 hrs. on 2nd June 2022. These facts clearly indicate that

there was definitely a need for the immediate implementation of the relevant enjoining order

which was to prevent the air craft taking off the Bandaranaike International Airport. This is so in

view of the fact that there was no gainsaying that the Commercial High Court had by that time

issued an enjoining order to that effect.

I also observe that a Partner of the Firm which stood as the instructing Attorney for the Plaintiff

in the relevant case, in her affidavit dated 01st July 2022, has affirmed to the fact that the

Respondent Attorney-at-Law was specifically directed by the Firm to accompany the Fiscal in a

vehicle provided by the Firm to Bandaranaike International Airport Katunayake. The said Partner

of the Firm has also affirmed to two more important things: the fact that the said step was taken

[SC Rule 06/2023] - Page 8 of 9

to ensure that the Fiscal serves the papers on the correct person; the fact that the Respondent

Attorney-at-Law had acted in this instance on behalf of the Firm. Therefore, one cannot conclude

that the acts attributed to the Respondent Attorney-at-Law are acts solely planned, designed and

executed on the sole decision of the Respondent Attorney-at-Law by himself.

As pointed out by Mr. Rohan Sahabandu PC, the warning given by the Respondent Attorney-at-

Law, to the said Acting Head of Air Navigation Services that if he delayed the immediate

implementation of the relevant enjoining order, he would be in contempt of Court can also be

viewed as a warning, the Respondent Attorney-at-Law has thought it fit to have given in good

faith. Having regard to the factual circumstances of this case, I have no basis to disagree with

the submissions made by Mr. Rohan Sahabandu PC that such warning may indeed have been in

the best interest of the said Acting Head of Air Navigation Services. Thus, I am unable to hold

that the act of the Respondent Attorney-at-Law to inform and impress upon the Acting Head of

Air Navigation Services that he would be in Contempt of Court if he delayed the immediate

implementation of the aforesaid enjoining order, as necessarily an act of interfering with the

official functions and/or duties of the Complainant or a conduct the manner of which would

necessarily render the Respondent unworthy of an Attorney-at-Law thereby rendering him unfit

to remain as an Attorney-at-Law.

One has to also bear in mind that the Respondent Attorney-at-Law had not entered the

Complainant’s office alone but had gone there representing the Firm which stood as the

instructing Attorney, to accompany the Fiscal in order to ensure that the Fiscal serves the papers

on the correct person. Having regard to the above, and in view of the factual background of this

case, the allegation that the Respondent Attorney-at-Law had entered the office of the Acting

Head of Air Navigation Services, interrupting the telephone conversation the said Acting Head of

Air Navigation Services was engaged in with the Director General of Civil Aviation, in my view

would not amount to acts which would necessarily bring the Respondent Attorney-at-Law culpable

under Rule 60 or Rule 61 of the Supreme court (Conduct of and Etiquette for Attorneys at Law)

Rules 1988.

Moreover, I cannot forget the stance taken up by the learned President’s Counsel who

represented the Bar Association of Sri Lanka. It was his submission that the Bar Association of

[SC Rule 06/2023] - Page 9 of 9

Sri Lanka would not consider the conduct of the Respondent Attorney-at-Law in this instance, as

a conduct unworthy of an Attorney-at-Law and hence the Bar Association of Sri Lanka would not

accept that the Respondent Attorney-at-Law had committed a breach of the afore-said Rule 60

or Rule 61.

For the foregoing reasons, I accept the submissions made by Dr. Romesh De Silva PC who

appeared for the Respondent Attorney-at-Law, as well as submissions made by Mr. Rohan

Sahabandu PC who appeared for the Bar Association of Sri Lanka. I hold that the Respondent

Attorney-at-Law has not committed any act of deceit, malpractice and/or offence as set out in

Section 42(2) of the Judicature Act No. 02 of 1978 read with the Supreme Court (Conduct of and

Etiquette for Attorneys-at-Law) Rules 1988. I also hold that the Respondent Attorney-at-Law has

not committed any act which would amount to a conduct unworthy of an Attorney-at-Law which

would render him unfit to remain as an Attorney-at-Law under any Rule of the Supreme court

(Conduct of and Etiquette for Attorneys at Law) Rules 1988.

For the foregoing reasons, I decide to discharge the Rule dated 01-07-2023 issued against the

Respondent Attorney-at-Law.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

ACHALA WENGAPPULI J

I agree .

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

MAHINDA SAMAYAWARDHENA J

I agree .

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT