IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA.

In the matter of an Appeal under and in terms of Section 5C of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990 as amended by High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) (Amendment) Act No. 54 of 2006 read with Article 138 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. .

Athauda Arachchige Patrine Dilrukshi Dias Wickremasinghe, No. 377/2, Thalawathugoda Road, Hokandara South.

Plaintiff

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024 SC/HCCA/LA No. 165/2022 Vs. HCCA Case No.WP/HCCA/Col/137/22(LA) D.C. Colombo Case No.DMR 3675/21.

01. Mr. Dharmasena Dissanayake, No.21/1, Dr. Sydney Premithirathne Mawatha, Seeduwa. 02. Dr. Prathap Ramanujam, No.12/2, Vihara Mawatha, Kolonnawa.

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

2

03. Mrs. V. Jegarajasingam, Kandy Road, Krishnapuram 10, Trincomalee. 04. Mr. G.S.A. de Silva, No. D ½ , Charles Apartments, De Silva Cross Road, Kalubowila. 05. Mr. S. Ranugge, No.34A, Wijaya Road, Kolonnawa. 06. Mr. D. Laksiri Mendis, No.7A, Cambridge Place, Colombo 07. 07. Mr. Sarath Jayathilaka, No.117/30, Ananda Rajakaruna Mawatha, Colombo 10. 08. Mrs. Sudharma Karunarathna, No. 93/1, Elhena Road, Maharagama. Defendants AND Dr. Prathap Ramanujam, No.12/2, Vihara Mawatha, Kolonnawa. 2nd Defendant-Petitioner

Vs.

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

3

Athauda Arachchige Patrine Dilrukshi Dias Wickremasinghe, No. 372/2, Thalawathugoda Road, Hokandara South.

Plaintiff-Respondent

01. Mr. Dharmasena Dissanayake, No.21/1, Dr. Sydney Premithirathne Mawatha, Seeduwa. 03. Mrs. V. Jegarajasingam, Kandy Road, Krishnapuram 10, Trincomalee. Correct Address No.1/3, 265/115, Torrington Hague Residencies, Torrington Avenue, Colombo 05. 04. Mr. G.S.A. de Silva, No. D ½ , Charles Apartments, De Silva Cross Road, Kalubowila. Correct Address 4G, 189 Residencies, Baseline Road, Colombo 09. 05. Mr. S. Ranugge, No.34A, Wijaya Road, Kolonnawa. 06. Mr. D. Laksiri Mendis,

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

4

No.7A, Cambridge Place, Colombo 07. Correct Address B/10/4, Empire Residencies, 51, Braybrooke Place Colombo 02. 07. Mr. Sarath Jayathilaka, No.117/30, Ananda Rajakaruna Mawatha, Colombo 10. 08. Mrs. Sudharma Karunarathna, No. 93/1, Elhena Road, Maharagama. Correct Address No.63/1, Elhena Road, Maharagama Defendant-Respondents AND NOW BETWEEN

Athauda Arachchige Patrine Dilrukshi Dias Wickremasinghe, No. 372/2, Thalawathugoda Road, Hokandara South. Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant

Vs.

Dr. Prathap Ramanujam, No.12/2, Vihara Mawatha, Kolonnawa. 2nd Defendant-Petitioner-Respondent

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

5

01. Mr. Dharmasena Dissanayake, No.21/1, Dr. Sydney Premathirathne Mawatha, Seeduwa. 03. Mrs. V. Jegarajasingam, Kandy Road, Krishnapuram 10, Trincomalee. Correct Address No.1/3, 265/115, Torrington Hage Residencies, Torrington Avenue, Colombo 05. 04. Mr. G.S.A. de Silva, No. D ½ , Charles Apartments, De Silva Cross Road, Kalubowila. Correct Address 4G, 189 Residencies, Baseline Road, Colombo 09. 05. Mr. S. Ranugge, No.34A, Wijaya Road, Kolonnawa. 06. Mr. D. Laksiri Mendis, No.7A, Cambridge Place, Colombo 07. Correct Address B/10/4, Empire Residencies, 51, Braybrooke Place Colombo 02.

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

6

07. Mr. Sarath Jayathileka, No.117/30, Ananda Rajakaruna Mawatha, Colombo 10. 08. Mrs. Sudharma Karunarathna, No. 93/1, Elhena Road, Maharagama. Correct Address No.63/1, Elhena Road, Maharagama Defendant-Respondent-Respondents BEFORE : HON. E.A.G.R. AMARASEKARA,J.

HON. ACHALA WENGAPPULI,J.

HON. MAHINDA SAMAYAWARDHENA,J.

COUNSEL : Romesh de Silva, PC with Thishya Weragoda with

Dulmini De Alwis instructed by Sanath Wijewardane

for the Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant.

Nerin Pulle. PC ASG with Ishara Madarasinghe, SC for

the 1st, 3rd, 4th and 8th Respondent-Respondent-

Respondents.

Chamantha Weerakoon Unamboowe, PC with

Tersha Nanayakkara Instructed by Chithra Jayasinghe

for the 2nd Defendant-Petitioner-Respondent.

Uditha Egalahewa PC with Tharushi Buddhadasa

instructed by H. Chandrakumara de Silva for the 5th

Defendant-Respondent-Respondent.

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

7

Dr. Sunil F.A. Cooray instructed by Tissa Bandara for

the 6th Defendant-Respondent-Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 11th October, 2024

DECIDED ON : 04th June, 2025

HON. ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

These two appeals stem from an action, instituted by the Plaintiff in the

District Court of Colombo (Case No. DMR/3675/2021) on 21.09.2021, against the

1st to 8th Defendants. In that action, the Plaintiff claimed damages in a sum of Rs.

1,000,000,000.00, individually as well as jointly from the Defendants. The Plaint

of the Plaintiff was presented to the District Court on the basis that the

Defendants, while functioning as members of the Public Service Commission

(hereinafter referred to as the “PSC”) and, in the excise of disciplinary control

over her, have acted negligently/wrongfully/illegally/ ultra vires/ mala fide/

maliciously and, thereby were in breach of duty of care they owed her, resulting

in

a. interrupting her career as a public servant and,

b. depriving legitimate entitlements of her, including salary,

which, in turn had culminated in the deprivation her of opportunities for career

progression, and thereby causing her an injuria, a “delictual wrong”, due to which

she suffered damages personally, socially and professionally.

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

8

Upon being served with summons of Court and notice of interim relief, the

1st, 3rd to 8th Defendants filed their Statement of Objections on 22.10.2021, through

their Attorney. In that Statement of Objection, the Defendants have raised an

objection to the assumption of jurisdiction by that Court. Their objection was

primarily based on the provisions of Article 61A of the Constitution of the

Republic. They claimed that Article 61A effectively deprived the District Court of

any jurisdiction to adjudicate upon a “decision” or an “order” made by the Public

Service Commission (hereinafter referred to as the “PSC”).

The District Court, after conducting an inquiry into the said objection, and

by its order delivered on 21.02.2022, overruled same. The District Court was of

the view that the Defendants, being members of the PSC, were not conferred

with any “immunity” ( uqla;sh ) akin to what was conferred on the President of the

Republic or on the members of the Judicial Service Commission and therefore

that Court is not barred from proceeding with the action of the Plaintiff.

The 2nd Defendant, thereupon moved the High Court of Civil Appeal by

seeking Leave to Appeal against the said order, in Case No.

WP/HCCA/137/2022/LA. The High Court of Civil Appeal, by its order dated

26.05.2022, whilst granting Leave to Proceed, also permitted the trial Court to

proceed with the action instituted by the Plaintiff, after denying the Defendants

of the interim relief of a stay of proceedings.

Consequent to the delivery of the said order of the High Court of Civil

Appeal, the 2nd Defendant moved this Court seeking Leave to Appeal against the

said order in case No. SC/HCCA/LA/144/2022 by his petition tendered to the

Registry on 15.06.2022. The Plaintiff too, in case No. SC/HCCA/LA/165/2022,

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

9

moved this Court on 05.07.2022, seeking Leave to Appeal against the said order

of the High Court of Civil Appeal.

His Lordship the Chief Justice was pleased, by a direction issued on

30.01.2024, to nominate a bench to hear these two applications. When both these

matters were taken up before the nominated bench, for consideration of Leave to

Appeal on 03.07.2024, all the contesting parties invited this Court to consider the

following question of law, which the Court thereupon accepted:

“Can the Plaintiff have maintained this action in view of the Article 61A of the

Constitution ?”.

Consequent to the granting of Leave to Appeal by this Court to the 2nd

Defendants as well as to the Plaintiff, against the order of the High Court of Civil

Appeal on the said common question of law, Case No. SC/HCCA/LA/144/2022

was re-numbered as SC Appel No. 88 of 2024, whereas Case No.

SC/HCCA/LA/165/2022 too was re-numbered as SC Appeal No. 89 of 2024,

respectively. Hon. Chief Justice made another nomination on 29.08.2024,

constituting the present bench, which proceeded to hear the two appeals on

11.10.2024, after consolidating them with the consent of the parties. They further

made the undertaking to Court that they would abide by the determination of

this Court on the question of law, common to both appeals.

Since both the Plaintiff as well as the 2nd Defendant are now ought to be

considered as appellants before this Court, they shall be continued to be referred

to in their respective status before the original Court in this judgment, purely for

the purpose of convenience in its presentation.

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

10

It is already noted that the Plaintiff was successful in convincing the

District Court that it had jurisdiction over the eight Defendants, who functioned

as members of the Public Service Commission, on the claim that they allegedly

have acted mala fide in breach of duty of care owed to her.

Learned President’s Counsel for the Plaintiff, during the hearing of the

appeals, has presented his primary contention that the Article 61A only confers,

what he termed only a “qualified immunity” (as opposed to an absolute immunity)

on the members of the PSC, who therefore cannot claim any privilege that had

been afforded by the Constitution, creating an exception to the fundamental right

of equality, guaranteed to her under Article 12(1), if they act mala fide.

Learned Additional S.G., who represented the 1st, 3rd, 4th and 8th

Defendants, and the other learned President’s Counsel, who represented the 2nd

and 5th Defendants, in replying to the said contention, have collectively

submitted that the Constitutional provisions contained in the Article 61A, in

itself is indicative of the intended purpose of Legislature had in its mind, when

that Article was enacted, and accordingly it should not be taken as an Article

conferring any ‘immunity’ on the members of the PSC, but should be taken in as

an “ouster clause”, by which the Parliament had deliberately taken away the

jurisdiction of certain Courts of its power to adjudicate upon any “orders” and

“decisions” made by the PSC.

Since there are many different contentions that were advanced before this

Court by the learned President’s Counsel on behalf of the Plaintiff, in addition to

his primary contention referred to in the preceding paragraph, for the purpose of

determining the question of law on which these appeals were argued, each of

these contentions had to be considered in a more descriptive manner as we

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

11

proceed along with this judgment. Therefore, before proceeding any further, it is

proposed to make a brief reference at this stage of the judgment to the different

and diverse contentions that were advanced on behalf of the Defendants by their

Counsel, seeking to counter the contentions that were advanced by the Plaintiff.

Learned Additional SG, who appeared for the 1st ,3rd, 4th and 8th

Defendants, during his submissions traced the origins of the Constitutional

ouster clauses, which led to the incorporation of Article 61A, when the 17th

amendment to the Constitution was brought in, and thereby altering the status

ante that prevailed under Article 55(5). He also referred to the decision of the

Court of Appeal in Katugampola v Commissioner General of Excise and Others

(2003) 3 Sri L.R., where the difference between the ouster clauses of Articles 55(5)

and 61A was considered by this Court, which it held to include “any type of

decision so long as it was made pursuant to a power conferred or imposed on such body”

into its jurisdiction. He also invited our attention that the 17th amendment

repealed Article 59 and replaced same in the present form after establishing a

dedicated body, namely the Administrative Appeals Tribunal, after conferring it

with power to alter, vary or rescind any order or decision made by the PSC.

Learned Additional S.G., strongly contended that the Article 61A is not an

article that confers an immunity on the members of the PSC, who made orders

and decisions on behalf of that Commission, but only an ouster clause, that

meant to oust the jurisdiction of the Courts, which they otherwise would possess,

to inquire into adjudicate on such orders and decisions.

The submissions of the learned President’s Counsel, who represented the

2nd Defendant, is aimed at to counter the contention of the Plaintiff, that she only

sought to challenge the decision making of the members on their individual

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

12

capacities before the District Court and not to challenge the validity of an order

or decision made by the PSC. Learned President’s Counsel, in support of her

submissions, pointed out the instances where the Plaintiff described the

decisions made by the PSC in her Plaint, in setting out her claim against the

Defendants. Paragraphs 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 21, 22, 23, 25, 26, 27 and 31 of the Plaint

were particularly referred to by the learned President’s Counsel as instances

where it is clearly stated that the “decisions” of the PSC, which the Plaintiff

expects the District Court to adjudicate upon, coupled with a “few vague

allegations of mala fide”.

Learned President’s Counsel then referred to the decision-making process

of the PSC in terms of the relevant Articles and submitted that, in view of the

intricacies involved in the said process, there is no question of individual liability

that could be imposed on a member of PSC and consequently there is no

question of any immunity. She also added that the Plaintiff had already sought

intervention of AAT in terms of the Constitutional provisions to challenge the

‘decisions’ of the PSC and succeeded.

It is the submissions of the learned President's Counsel for the 5th

Defendant that the ouster of jurisdiction imposed by Article 61A is far wider than

the ouster clause in Section 22 of the Interpretation Ordinance, as it ousts even

judicial review under Articles 140, 141, being a remedy available to any affected

party under that Section. He further submitted that, in terms of the

Constitutional provisions, the fora in which PSC decisions could be challenged

are limited to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal and the Supreme Court. Since

the Courts and Tribunals that are referred to in Article 61A, includes the District

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

13

Court in terms of Article 105(2), the Parliament could abolish its powers by

enacting legislation to that effect, which it did in enacting Article 61A.

Learned President’s Counsel for the 5th Defendant particularly invited our

attention to the decision-making process of the PSC as set out in Article 61, as the

learned President’s Counsel for the 2nd Defendant did, and stressed upon the

point that the decisions of the PSC are taken, only if the members vote either in

unanimity, or by majority and, with a casting vote by Chairman of the PSC, in

case of equal votes. This was highlighted to impress upon the fact that any

individual decision of the membership could not be considered as “order” or a

“decision” of the PSC. He further submitted that the attempt made by the Plaintiff

to question the “orders” or “decisions” of the PSC through the instant action is

clearly an instance where she tries to do something which she cannot do directly,

but by indirect means.

Having referred to the gist of the contentions in the preceding paragraphs

that were presented by Counsel, over the description that ought to be given to

Article 61A, it is proposed to commence the examination of these, commencing

with a detailed description of the primary contention presented by the learned

President’s Counsel for the Plaintiff during the hearing of these consolidated

appeals.

Learned President’s Counsel for the Plaintiff contended that, generally the

nature of an immunity conferred by a statue could be divided into two classes.

Then he cited the instances of conferring “absolute immunity” and instances of

conferring “qualified immunity” in support of that contention. It was pointed out

that certain categories of persons enjoy “absolute immunity” for life, in respect of

certain categories of acts/omissions. The utterances and the acts of the Members

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

14

of Parliament, made within the Parliament, are cited as examples for conferment

of absolute immunity. He also referred to the immunity conferred on Judges,

when they perform their duties, as instances that protects the person concerned,

by conferring an “absolute immunity”.

Learned President’s Counsel further submitted that, on the other hand, a

“qualified immunity” means that certain persons or institutions would enjoy

immunity in a qualified manner and invited attention of Court to following

instances, in support of his proposition.

a. A President, whose immunity is restricted to his term of office, and

therefore the immunity conferred on him is qualified by time,

b. The immunity conferred on the decisions of some persons is qualified

by the fact that they have to act in good faith.

Learned President’s Counsel for the Plaintiff thereupon proceeded to build

his argument by adding that, in the instances where there is an element of mala

fide, the privilege of a qualified immunity is not made available to such a person.

In order to illustrate the point, it was submitted that, even if a Member of

Parliament acts maliciously within the Chamber of the Parliament, he is protected

by an “absolute immunity”, whereas a person entitled only to a “qualified

immunity”, is not so protected by such immunity, if he acts mala fide.

After inviting attention of Court to the marginal note of Article 61A, where

it states, “Immunity from Legal Proceedings”, learned President’s Counsel

proceeded on to submit that although that Articles seems to provide ‘immunity’

to members of the PSC, as described in the marginal note, it does not however

confer any immunity, if the member acts mala fide. After a comparison made with

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

15

the two groups of immunity clauses contained in the Articles 104A, 111K, and

also in the Articles 41, 153E and156B, learned President’s Counsel contended

that, similar to the situations where no such immunity is conferred on the

individual members of different Commissions that are created and established

by these Articles, no immunity could be claimed by the individual members of

the PSC, for an act done mala fide and/or maliciously, which is a question of fact,

that must be determined by a trial Court, that too after a proper evaluation of the

evidence.

Learned President’s Counsel, who appeared on behalf of the 5th Defendant,

termed the Plaintiff’s contention on Article 61A that it confers only a “qualified

immunity” to the members of the PSC, as a “devious” endeavour to characterise

that Article to the provisions contained in Articles 35 and 111K. It was contended

by the learned President’s Counsel for the 5th Defendant, by drawing a parallel to

Articles 35 and 111K, which confers immunity to the President of the Republic

and to the members of the Judicial Service Commission as a Constitutional

provision that only provides limited protection, and adding that Article 61A too

provides a similar type of protection to the members of the PSC, is totally a

wrong proposition in law. According to the learned President’s Counsel for the

5th Defendant, an immunity clause is a provision by which the Parliament

exempts certain individuals, entities or certain actions from legal proceedings,

under specified circumstances, whereas a jurisdictional ouster clause is a

provision of law that specifically limits or removes the authority of a Court or a

tribunal to hear or determine a particular class of disputes or issues. Therefore,

such clauses operate as effective procedural barrier to the very act of initiation of

any adjudication process against such disputes or issues and this is achieved by

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

16

declaring certain class of disputes or issues being non-justiciable or by vesting

exclusive jurisdiction over such matters in an alternative forum.

In this regard, it was further submitted that, unlike an immunity clause,

which pertains to the liability or personal responsibility of a party or an

individual, a jurisdictional ouster clause is aimed at restricting judicial oversight

and thereby guiding the dispute over to a designated authority, if any, which is

conferred with jurisdiction for the purpose of resolving that dispute.

Learned Additional S.G. also presented his contention adopting a similar

line of reasoning and submitted that Article 61A could be better characterised as

an “ouster clause”, rather than an “immunity clause”, particularly in view of the

fact that it does not make the members of the PSC, ‘immune’ from any legal

proceedings, but rather seeks to oust the jurisdiction of all Courts or tribunals,

preventing initiation of any litigation against them, except to the conferment of

jurisdiction on the AAT (under Article 59(2)) and on the apex Court (under

Article 126), before which a “decision” or an “order” of the PSC, could be

impugned by an aggrieved party.

Since the core issue revolves around the issue of the nature of the

protection afforded by Article 61A to “decisions” or “orders” made by PSC made

on a public officer, in the exercise of its power of disciplinary control, it is helpful

if a brief reference is made with regard to the nature of the evolving relationship

between the disciplinary control over public service and the standing of the PSC

in that respect.

The origins of present public service could be traced back to the officers,

who were appointed by British India Company in 1802, to govern the affairs of

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

17

the coastal areas brought under its control in 1796. With the establishment of

Civil Service in 1833, the public service continued to function, firstly under the

Constitution in 1948 as “Ceylon Civil Service”, until its transformation to “Sri

Lanka Administrative Service”, which came along with the adoption of the 1st

Republican Constitution in 1972.

Section 57 of the Ceylon (Constitution) Order in Council issued on

15.05.1946 states that “[S]ave as otherwise provided in this Order, every person holding

office under the Crown in respect of the Government of the Island shall hold office during

Her Majesty’s pleasure.” The Public Service Commission established under that

Constitution, in terms of Section 58(1), was vested with the powers to appoint,

transfer, dismissal and disciplinary control of public officers under Section 59(1).

After the adoption of 1st Republican Constitution in 1972, the public

officers were referred to as “State Officers” and in terms of Section 106(1), the

power to make their appointments, transfers, dismissals and disciplinary control

was vested in the Cabinet of Ministers. Importantly, Section 106(5) of that

Constitution states:

“ [N]o institution administering justice shall have the power or jurisdiction

to inquire into, pronounce upon or in any manner call into question any

recommendation, order or decision of the Cabinet of Ministers, a Minister,

the State Services Advisory Board, the State Services Disciplinary Board,

or a State officer regarding any matter concerning appointments, transfers,

dismissals or disciplinary matters of State officers.”

The present Constitution, when it adopted by the Parliament in 1978, and

with the creation of the PSC, in terms of Article 56(1), included the following

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

18

provisions contained in sub-Article 55(5), where it states that “ [S]ubject to the

jurisdiction conferred on the Supreme Court under paragraph (1) of Article 126, no

Court or tribunal shall have power or jurisdiction to inquire into, pronounce upon or in

any manner call in question, any order or decision of the Cabinet of Ministers, a

Minister, the Public Service Commission, or of a public officer, in regard to any matter

concerning the appointment, transfer, dismissal or disciplinary control of a public

officer.”

With the 17th amendment made to the Constitution, a new Article 61A, was

introduced. The said Article reads:

“[S]ubject to the provisions of paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4) and (5) of Article

126, no court or tribunal shall have power or jurisdiction to inquire into, or

pronounce upon or in any manner call in question any order or decision

made by the Commission, a Committee, or any public officer, in pursuance

of any power or duty conferred or imposed on such Commission, or

delegated to a Committee or public officer, under this Chapter or under any

other law.”

This Article was once more amended with the adoption of the 19th

Amendment made to the Constitution. The amendment was replacement of the

words “subject to the provisions of paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4) and (5) of Article 126”

contained in that Article, with the words “subject to the provisions of Article 59 and

of Article 126”, as it currently reads.

The issue, whether the Article 61A should be taken as an instance of

conferring immunity (either absolute or qualified in its extent) against the

decisions or orders made by the PSC or as an instance of a Constitutional ouster

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

19

that effectively takes away the jurisdiction of the Courts and tribunals against

adjudicating upon decisions or orders made by the PSC, had already been

argued and considered by the superior Courts.

One of the earliest of these instances, in which the Courts had to consider

the provisions that are similar to that of Article 61A, arose in Migultenna v The

Attorney General (1996) 1 Sri L.R. 408. In that instance, a public officer, who was

dismissed from the public service during the operation of the 1972 Constitution,

had instituted an action before the District Court, challenging his dismissal on

the basis of mala fide on the part of the defendants, who functioned as members

of the PSC. In appeal, it was contented before this Court on his behalf, that

Section 106(5) of the Constitution (1972) and Article 55(5) of the present

Constitution should be harmoniously construed, so as to give effect to both,

justifying the action instituted before the District Court.

Mark Fernando J, who delivered the judgment was not impressed with that

contention and held (at p.419) that “ … the comparison with Article 55(5) is not valid

, because that Article expressly preserves a significant area of judicial review through the

fundamental rights jurisdiction, from the fact that Article 55(5) permits review, in the

exercise of that jurisdiction by the highest Court, it does not follow that Section 106(5)

permits review by way of a declaration in the District Court.”

It is of significance to note that the term that his Lordship used in this

instance in relation to the provisions contained in Section 106(5) of the 1972

Constitution is “ouster clause”, which in effect acts as a bar to the institution and

continuation of the plaintiff’s action before the District Court. In Ratnasiri and

Others v Ellawala and Others (2004) 2 Sri L.R. 186, the petitioner invoked

jurisdiction conferred on the Court of Appeal under Article 140, in seeking to

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

20

review an order made by the Transfer Appeal Board. The respondents raised a

preliminary objection in terms of Article 61A, claiming that the said Article

prevented the Court of Appeal from looking into the validity of the impugned

order made by that Board, in the exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 140.

After making a detailed analysis on comparative Constitutional provisions

and, in view of the evolution of the impact of the ‘pleasure principle’ on the

appointments, transfers, disciplinary control and dismissals of public officers,

Marsoof J, P/CA concluded that (at p. 189);

“[I]n view of the elaborate scheme put in place by the Seventeenth

Amendment to the Constitution to resolve all matters relating to the public

service, this Court would be extremely reluctant to exercise any

supervisory jurisdiction in the sphere of the public service. I have no

difficulty in agreeing with the submission made by the learned State

Counsel that this Court has to apply the preclusive clause contained

in Article 61A of the Constitution in such a manner as to ensure that the

elaborate scheme formulated by the Seventeenth Amendment is given effect

to the fullest extent.”

In this instance too, the Court of Appeal used the term “preclusive clause” to

describe the effect of the provisos contained in Article 61A (Articles 59 and 126),

rather than treating same as a Constitutional provision that had conferred a

blanket immunity on the PSC. In delivering the judgment of this Court in

Ratnayake v Administrative Appeals Tribunal and Others (2013) 1 Sri L.R. 331,

Marsoof J used the more elaborate term “Constitutional ouster of jurisdiction” in

making a reference to Article 61A. His Lordship stated (at p.333) as follows: “…

the above provision of the Constitution, which constitutes a Constitutional ouster of

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

21

jurisdiction, does not apply to the impugned decision of AAT, it being specifically

confined in its application to the orders or decisions of the Public Service Commission,

…”. The description attributed to the provisions of Article 61A as an ‘ouster

clause’ had been the consistently adopted and used in several instances,

whenever Judges were called upon to deal with that Article. The judgments of

Wijayananda v Post Master General and Others (2009) 2 Sri L.R. 318,

Katugampola v Commissioner General of Excise and Others (2003) 3 Sri L.R. 207,

Gunaratne and Others v IGP and Others (2012) 1 Sri L.R. 185, Weeraratne v

Chairman, Public Service Commission and Others ( CA Writ application No.

410/2009 – decided on 03.05.2019), Peiris and Others v Commissioner General of

Excise and Others (2020) 1 Sri L.R. 135, Dharmasiri v Weerasinghe,

Commissioner General of Agrarian Development and Others ( CA Writ

application No. 322/2014 – decided on 28.01.2019), Lokuge v Dr. Dayasiri

Fernando and Others ( CA Writ application No. 160/2013 – decided on

16.10.2015), Ovitigama v Inspector General of Police and Others ( CA Writ

application No. 1009/2008 – decided on 05.03.2019) described Article 61A as a

“ouster clause” and not a provision that conferred immunity on the PSC.

Similarly, in several instances where the superior Courts had to deal with

the statutory provisions that conferred an immunity on someone or on an entity,

those instances too were clearly recognised as such, and that too after

distinguishing them from ouster clauses.

The conferment of immunity on the President of the Republic by Article 35

of the Constitution which states “[W]hile any person holds office as President of the

Republic of Sri Lanka, no civil or criminal proceedings shall be instituted or continued

against the President in respect of anything done or omitted to be done by the President,

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

22

either in his official or private capacity.” is one such provision that had been

considered by this Court in several of its judgments. It is also one of the Articles

that the Plaintiff relied on in support of her contention of an instance of a

“qualified immunity”. Hence, it is of relevance to the question of law, we are

called upon to determine.

In Mallikarachchi v Shiva Pasupati, Attorney General (1985) 1 Sri L.R. 74,

a divisional bench of this Court stated that, in terms of the Article 35(1) (as it

stood at that point in time), it “… confers on the President during his tenure of office

an absolute immunity in legal proceeding in regard to his official acts or omission and

also in in respect of his acts or omissions in his private capacity.” The judgment of

Karunathilaka and Another v Dayananda Dissanayake, Commissioner of

Elections and Others (1999) 1 Sri L.R. 157, also is an instance where this Court

adopted the view (at p. 176) that “ [T]he immunity conferred by Article 35 is neither

absolute nor perpetual. While Article 35(1) appears to prohibit the institution or

continuation of legal proceedings against the President, in respect of all acts and

omissions (official and private), Article 35(3) excludes immunity in respect of the acts

therein described.” In Senerath v Chandraratne, Commissioner of Excise and

Others (1995) 1 Sri L.R. 209, this Court stated (at p. 210): “[A]rticle 35 of the

Constitution provides for the personal immunity of the President during his tenure of

office. It bars the institution of proceeding, against him in any Court. The reference is to

proceedings in which some relief is claimed, or liability is alleged, by way of an action or a

prosecution.”

Not only the President of the Republic is conferred with immunity, of

course subject to the certain limitations, there are certain other individuals and

public bodies too who were granted such immunities by specific statutory

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

23

provisions enacted for the said purpose. Article 111K conferred immunity to the

members of the Judicial Service Commission and several others, who are

specified in that Article, from any legal proceedings by stating that no suit or

proceeding shall lie against them for any lawful act done in good faith in the

performance of their duties. Similarly, the judicial acts too are made immune

from litigation process, as in the case of Divalage Upalika Ranaweera Vs. Sub-

Inspector Vinisias and Others (SC Application No. 654/2003, decided on

13.05.2008), this Court held:

"Under the Roman Dutch Law, which is the Common Law of Sri Lanka, a

Judge enjoys complete immunity from civil liability for the acts done in the

exercise of his judicial functions. ‘No action lies against a judge for acts

done or words spoken in honest exercise of his judicial office’ - R.W. Lee,

An Introduction to Roman Dutch Law 5th Edition page 341. Section 70 of

the Penal Code extends the same protection against criminal liability. Since

judicial acts do not fall within the ambit of Article 126 of the Constitution,

a Judge is not liable for the violation of fundamental rights arising from a

judicial act"

This pronouncement was re-iterated once more in the case of Gammanpila

v Gunathilake, Inspector of Police and Others (2016) 1 Sri L.R. 233. The rationale

behind the conferment of such an immunity for judicial acts was clarified by

Colin Thome J, in Leo Fernando v. Attorney General (1985) 2 Sri L.R. 341, ( at

p.357):

"Within the framework of our Constitution there is a fundamental reason

for excluding judicial action from review under the procedure provided for

in Article 126. Articles 138 and 139 invest the Court of Appeal with an

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

24

appellate jurisdiction for the correction of all errors in fact or in law which

shall be committed by any Court of First Instance, tribunal or other

institution. Under Article 128 an appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court

from any final order, judgment, decree or sentence of the Court of Appeal in

any matter or proceedings, whether civil or criminal which involves a

substantial question of law. In the circumstances there is no basis for a

collateral jurisdiction in respect of such action under Article 126.”

Other than the Constitution, there are several other statutes that confer

immunity on certain statutory bodies, created and established by such statutes.

Those statutes confer such immunity with a specific statutory provision being

enacted to that effect and incorporated into the relevant piece of legislation. This

is generally achieved with insertion of the words in a Section to read “[N]o civil or

criminal proceedings shall be instituted or maintained or continued, against ….” such

body or individuals. In the judgment of Wickremasinghe v The Monetary Board

of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka and another (1989) 2 Sri L.R. 230, the Court of

Appeal observed that “[T]his is the traditional formula by which immunity from

CIVIL AND CRIMINAL LIABILITY has been conferred from time immemorial” and

referred to Section 33 of the Co-operative Employees Commission Act, No. 12 of

1972 and Section 18 of the Criminal Justice Commission Act, No. 14 of 1972

(emphasis original).

The refences made in this judgment to multiple instances, where the ouster

clauses and immunity clauses were dealt with by the superior Courts, are meant

for the purpose of stressing upon the point that the Courts have already

identified the significant differences that exists between these two legal concepts

that are enacted by the Legislature to cater for different situations. Of course, in

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

25

spite of the fact that several differences that exists between them, these two

‘instruments’ in law, could not be totally separated from each other by dividing

them with a clearly defined and an impermeable boundary, in view of certain

other innate characteristics that are identifiable within them.

It is in this backdrop I now turn to consider the wording of the Article 61A

in order to assess whether it is a Constitutional ouster of the jurisdiction of the

Courts, or an instance of a ‘qualified immunity’ conferred on the PSC, as

contended by the learned President’s Counsel for the Plaintiff. This endeavour is

made, despite the fact that it had already been referred to as such in several

judgments already pronounced by this Court, that are referred to above. This

became a necessary exercise in this instance, primarily due to contention

advanced by the Plaintiff that it confers only a ‘qualified immunity’ on PSC and

therefore, proper classification of Article 61A became a central to the question of

law that is to be decided and answered by this Court.

I wish to begin that task by first looking at the text of the Article 61A.

Article 61A reads in Sinhala as follows:

“59 jk jHjia:dfõ iy 126 jk jHjia:dfõ úêúOdkj,g hg;aj lñgqjla úiska fy`

hï rcfha ks,Orhl= úiska fï mrsÉfÂoh hgf;a fy` fjk;a hï rS;shla hgf;a ta

fldñIka iNdj fj; mejrS we;s fy` mekù we;s" ke;fyd;a lñgqj fj; fy` rdcH

ks,Orhd fj; mjrd oS we;s" hï n,hla fy` ld¾hhla m%ldr lrk ,o hï kshuhla

fy` ;SrKhla úNd. lsrSug fy` ;Skaÿjla oSug fy` ljr jQ fy` wdldrhlska ta ms<sn|

m%Yak lsrSug lsisu wêlrKhlg fy` úksYaph wêldrhlg n,h fy` wêlrK n,h

fkdue;af;ah”

English translation of the said Article reads;

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

26

“[S]ubject to the provisions of Article 59 and of Article 126, no Court or

tribunal shall have power or jurisdiction to inquire into, or pronounce upon

or in any manner call in question any order or decision made by the

Commission, a Committee, or any public officer, in pursuance of any power

or duty conferred or imposed on such Commission, or delegated to a

Committee or public officer, under this Chapter or under any other law.”

Plain reading of the said Article in the context of the instant appeal, the

phrase “… lsisu wêlrKhlg fy` úksYaph wêldrhlg n,h fy` wêlrK n,h fkdue;af;ah”

immediately caught my attention. The words “… lsisu wêlrKhlg fy` úksYaph

wêldrhlg n,h fy` wêlrK n,h fkdue;af;ah” and the words that appears in the

English translation as “… no Court or tribunal shall have power or jurisdiction” are

clear in what they meant. Upon plain reading of the said Article, it is clear that

the jurisdiction of the Courts or tribunals “… to inquire into or pronounce upon or in

any manner call in question any order or decision made by the Commission, a

Committee, or any public officer, in pursuance of any power or duty conferred or imposed

on such Commission, or delegated to a Committee or public officer, under this Chapter or

under any other law,” was effectively and explicitly taken away by this

Constitutional provision.

The words “jurisdiction of Courts or tribunals” that used in the Article 61A,

indicate that what exactly the Parliament intended by the enactment of that

Article. The said Article was to intended to prevent the Courts or other

institutions established under the Constitution from adjudicating upon any

“orders or decisions” made by the PSC, after assuming jurisdiction conferred on

them under Constitutional provisions and other Statutes. This declared intended

purpose was achieved by taking away the jurisdiction already conferred on the

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

27

Courts and other such institutions, which otherwise enabled those institutions to

inquire into such matters.

The Court, in which the Plaintiff instituted an action against the

Defendants, being the District Court, is one of the Courts established under

Section 2 of the Judicature Act No. 2 of 1978, as amended. The District Court had

its jurisdiction clearly demarcated by provisions contained in Chapter IV of that

Act, which in turn referable to the conferment of jurisdiction from Article

105(1)(c). Article 105(1)(c) is an Article by which the Parliament had ordained

and established the Courts of First Instance, through Section 2 of the Judicature

Act, as institutions created for the administration of justice, which protect,

vindicate and enforce the rights of the People. The District Court, is included in

that as such an institution.

The relevant part of the Article 105(2) that relates to the instant appeal

states that “[A]ll Courts, tribunals and institutions created and established by existing

written law for the administration of justice and for the adjudication and settlement of

industrial and other disputes, … shall be deemed to be Courts, tribunals and institutions

created and established by Parliament. Parliament may replace or abolish, or amend the

powers, duties, jurisdiction and procedure of, such Courts, tribunals and institutions.”

Thus, when the Parliament amended Article 61A, with the adoption of the

19th Amendment made to the Constitution, to read in its current form, it was

exercising the power conferred by Article 105(2) as it “… may replace or abolish, or

amend the powers, duties, jurisdiction and procedure of, such Courts, tribunals and

institutions” and thereby effectively taken away the jurisdiction it had originally

conferred on that Court, but restricted it only in relation to “orders and decisions”

made by the PSC.

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

28

It is clearly an instance of a Constitutional ouster of the jurisdiction of the

Courts from instituting actions before them, seeking to adjudicate upon the

“orders” and “decisions” made by the PSC. Article 61A, not only ousts the

jurisdiction of the Courts of First Instance, but also ousts the jurisdiction

conferred on the Court of Appeal under Article 140, as that Court, although a

superior Court of record, must exercise that jurisdiction subject to the provisions

of the Constitution. The case of Ratnasiri and Others v Ellawala and Others

(supra) was decided on this very point.

In contrast to an ouster of jurisdiction, when the Constitution conferred

immunity on a person or an institution, different wordings are used in the

relevant Article to denote such a conferment. Sinhala text of the Article 35(1) of

the Constitution reads:

“ckdêm;sjrhd f,i Oqrh orkd ljr jQ fy` ;eke;a;l= úiska fm!oa.,sl ;;ajfhys

,d fy` ks, ;;ajfhys ,d fy` lrk ,o fy` fkdlr yrsk ,o lsisjla iïnkaOfhka

Tyqg úreoaOj lsisu wêlrKhl fy` úksYaph wêldrhl lsisu kvq lghq;a;la

mejrSu fy` mj;ajdf.k hdu fkdl< hq;a;f;ah( ”

When one considered the phrases contained in the Article 61A and 35, i.e.,

“… lsisu wêlrKhlg fy` úksYaph wêldrhlg n,h fy` wêlrK n,h fkdue;af;ah”, after

juxtaposing with the phrase “úksYaph wêldrhl lsisu kvq lghq;a;la mejrSu fy`

mj;ajdf.k hdu fkdl< hq;a;f;ah ”, this distinction becomes clearer. The Article 61A

undoubtedly takes away the jurisdiction of the Courts to entertain any actions

against the orders and decisions made by PSC whereas the Article 35 prevents a

person from instituting any proceedings in a Court of law against the President

of the Republic, but without restricting the jurisdiction of that Court, which had

already been conferred by law to entertain any such action.

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

29

In view of the rival contentions presented before this Court over the

proper description of Article 61A, I wish to reproduce an observation made by

Menon CJ in the judgment of Nagaenthran v Public Prosecutor and another

[2019] SGCA 37. Whilst dealing with an issue on the immunity conferred on the

decisions made by the public prosecutor, his Lordship notes that (at para 47) “[I]t

is crucial here to differentiate between clauses that oust or exclude the Court’s

jurisdiction or authority to act in a matter, and clauses that immunise parties from suit

or liability” as “[L]ike ouster clauses, immunity clauses may be worded differently.

Unlike ouster clauses however, they do not exclude the Courts’ jurisdiction or authority

to act in a matter”.

Menon CJ, then proceeds to identify three characteristics that distinguishes

immunity clauses from ouster clauses (at para 50), which are listed as follows:

“… statutory immunity clauses share certain characteristics. First, they are

exceptional in that they preclude claims being brought against certain

classes of persons under prescribed conditions where ordinarily such

persons might otherwise be subject to some liability. Second, statutory

immunity clauses commonly seek to protect persons carrying out public

functions. It is on account of the responsibilities that burden the exercise of

such public functions and the desire not to hinder their discharge that such

immunity clauses are commonly justified …Third, and as a corollary to

this, such immunity generally would not extend to the misuse or abuse of

the public function in question; nor would the immunity typically apply

where its beneficiary exceeded the proper ambit of the functions of his

office”.

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

30

In Karunathilaka and another v Dayananda Dissanayake, Commissioner

of Elections and Others (1999) 1 Sri L.R. 157 (case No. 1), Mark Fernando J, in the

context of immunity conferred on the President of the Republic, observed that

the (at p. 177) “[A]rticle 35 only prohibits the institution (or continuation) of legal

proceedings against the President while in office; it imposes no bar whatsoever on

proceedings (a) against him when he is no longer in office, and (b) other persons at any

time. That is a consequence of the very nature of immunity: immunity is a shield for the

doer, not for the act” (emphasis added). This observation was quoted in the

judgment of Victor Ivan v Hon. Sarath N. Silva and Others (2001) 1 Sri L.R. 309,

whilst dealing with the very nature of the immunity conferred on the President

of the Republic by Article 35(1) once more, (at p. 324).

In view of the reasoning contained in the preceding paragraphs and

despite the obvious conclusion that could conveniently be reached thereupon on

this issue, I wish to refer to one last factor that should be dealt with in this

context, before moving on any further.

In support of his contention that Article 61A is an immunity clause,

learned President’s Counsel for the Plaintiff also relied on the description

provided to that Article in the marginal note, which reads as “[I]mmunity from

Legal Proceedings”. It is correct that the draftsmen of the Constitution may have

opted to use the word “immunity” and inserted same in the marginal note to that

Article. This Article was introduced to the Constitution for the first time, and that

too after the adoption of the 17th amendment to the Constitution. This was done

by substituting an entirely a new Chapter IX, after repealing all the provisions

contained in that Chapter up to that point in time. The said amendment was

made effective from 10.03.2001.

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

31

In view of this contention, a question necessarily arises whether the

marginal note “[I]mmunity from Legal Proceedings” should be taken as the

determinant indicator of the legislative intent which is sought to be achieved by

the Legislature by enacting that Article.

Ordinarily, the marginal note and title of an Act of Parliament would not

be taken into account in the interpretation of provisions contained in a Section

contained in that Act. Marginal notes are considered to be editorial inclusions

added into the text of the enactment passed by the Parliament. Maxwell, in

dealing with the topic of marginal notes in his work Interpretation of Statutes

(12th Ed, at p. 10) cited Lord Reid from the judgment of House of Lords in

Chandler v DPP (1964) A.C. 763, where it was observed (at p. 789) that “ [I]n my

view side notes cannot be used as an aid to construction. … Side notes in the original Bill

are inserted by the draftsman … so side notes cannot be said to be enacted in the same

sense as the long title or any part of the body of the Act.” Bindra in Interpretation of

Statues (9th Ed, at p. 95) offers a slightly different view by stating that “[T]hey

form the basis of any index dealing with the Act. Although, there are decisions of Courts

purporting to disregard them, they should not be considered trivial or unimportant, since

most people are likely to accept the guidance of a marginal note. Moreover, the marginal

note, though it forms no part of the Section, is of some assistance, inasmuch as it shows

the drift of the Section.” These statements are in line with the approach taken by

this Court in Toyota Lanka (Pvt) Ltd., and another v Jayathilaka and Others

(2009) 1 Sri L.R. 276, (at p. 288) in observing that “[O]rdinarily, marginal notes and

the title would not be taken into account in interpreting the provisions of a Section since

they are considered to be editorial inclusions”.

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

32

Even if we are to ignore these rules of interpretation momentarily, a

comparison made between the marginal notes of these two Articles, in itself

would suffice to provide a definitive answer to the issue currently under

consideration. The marginal note of Article 61A, in Sinhala text reads “kvq lghq;+

j,ska uqla;sh” whereas the marginal note of Article 35 reads “ckdêm;sjrhdg úreoaOj kvq

mejrsh fkdyels nj”. In addition to these two Articles, there are several other

instances where the Constitution, contain ouster clauses and immunity clauses,

conferred on certain public institutions it had created. Marginal note of Article

111K reads that the Judicial Services Commission is conferred with and the

marginal note in Sinhala also reads “kvq lghq;+ j,ska uqla;sh”, with its English

translation “immunity from legal proceedings” as did the marginal note of Article

35.

Marginal notes to Articles 153E and 155C indicate that the said Articles

confer the Audit Services Commission and National Police Commission of “ksS;s

lD;Hj,ska uqla;sh” ( with the English translation “immunity from legal proceedings”)

respectively. Different wordings are used in respect of the Elections Commission,

as the marginal note of Article 104A reads “;SrKj, wjidkd;aulNdjh iy kvq lghq;+

j,ska uqla;sh” (translated into English as “finality of decisions and immunity from

suit”).

Learned Additional S.G., strongly contended that the Article 61A is not an

article that confer an immunity, whether qualified or otherwise, on members of

the PSC.

What was meant by the draftsmen of the Constitution by inserting the

marginal notes that reads “kvq lghq;+ j,ska uqla;sh” or “immunity from legal

proceedings” could easily be understood, if one makes a comparison of marginal

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

33

note of the Article 61A with that of Article 35, which reads in Sinhala

“ckdêm;sjrhdg úreoaOj kvq mejrsh fkdyels nj” and in English as “[I]mmunity of

President from suit”. The difference between the marginal notes of Articles 35 and

111K and the others which were referred to above is obvious. The Sinhala text of

the phrase contained in Articles 35 that reads “Tyqg úreoaOj lsisu wêlrKhl fy`

úksYaph wêldrhl lsisu kvq lghq;a;la mejrSu fy` mj;ajdf.k hdu fkdl< hq;a;f;ah” with

the English translation “… no civil or criminal proceedings shall be instituted or

continued against the President…” clearly speaks of an instance of immunity

conferred on the President of the Republic. Similarly, Article 111K too carries the

almost identical words in the Sinhala text “… Tyqg úreoaOj lsisu wêlrKhl fy` úksYaph

wêldrhl lsisu kvq lghq;a;la mjrkq fkd,eìh hq;a;f;ah”, with the English translation

that “… no civil or criminal proceedings shall be instituted or continued against …”

and thereby conferring the members and certain officials of the Judicial Service

Commission referred to therein with an immunity from legal proceedings

against them.

However, the common and almost identical phrase that appears in Articles

153E and 155C that “… lsisu wêlrKhlg fy` úksYaph wêldrhlg n,h fy` wêlrK n,h

fkdue;af;ah” is clear in its meaning that it must be taken as an instance of

effectively taking away the jurisdiction of Courts, subject to the Constitutional

provisions contained therein. Article 104A(a) confers immunity to the members

of the Election Commission while imposing a Constitutional ouster of

jurisdiction by Article 104A(b).

In view of the above considerations, it is my considered view that the

marginal note that reads “kvq lghq;+ j,ska uqla;sh” or “immunity from legal

proceedings” does not indicate the position that the Article 61A was intended to

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

34

confer any ‘immunity’ on the PSC as such, but only imposes a Constitutional

ouster of jurisdiction of Courts to adjudicate upon its decisions and orders which

was sought to be achieved by taking away the jurisdiction already conferred by

law on such Courts. If it was the intention the draftsmen of the Constitution to

indicate that Article 61A meant to confer immunity on the PSC, they could have

used the marginal note as they used in Article 35, namely, “[I]mmunity of … from

suit” (“úreoaOj kvq mejrsh fkdyels nj”) in that Article as well, instead of the marginal

note that has commonly been used in respect of other public institutions referred

to above conferring with only an ouster of jurisdiction.

If the Legislature intended to protect a person or a public body from any

form of litigation, such objective is achieved by conferment of an immunity on

that entity by enactment of a positive provision of law to that effect. The words

“… no civil or criminal proceedings shall be instituted or continued …”, that generally

found in such provisions that confer immunity, are clear in what they mean. In

must also be noted that the Article 61A, however, does not leave the Plaintiff

high and dry without providing an alternative and effective legal remedy to the

grievance suffered by her, consequent to a decision or order of the PSC.

The orders and decisions made by the PSC are made subject to the

appellate powers of the Administrative Appeals Board (hereinafter referred to as

the “AAT”). In terms of Article 59(2), the AAT is conferred with powers to “ …

alter, vary and rescind any order or decision made by the Commission.” In addition,

Article 61A itself made it open to challenge the legality of the orders and

decisions made by the PSC by invoking the fundamental rights jurisdiction of

this Court, which has expanded its jurisdiction over the years by judicial

activism, even to capture the instances of “Constitutional Torts”, per the judgment

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

35

of Janath Vidanage and Others v Pujith Jayasundara and Others (SC/FR

Application No. 163/2019 – decided on 12.01.2023).

The judgment of Ratnayake v Administrative Appeals Tribunal and

Others (2013) 1 Sri L.R. 331, dealt with a situation where a contention was

advanced in support of a preliminary objection taken on behalf of the AAT,

against an application that invoked the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal under

Article 140. It was contended that, in view of the establishment of the said

tribunal in terms of Article 59(1) and in terms of Section 8(2) of the

Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act No. 4 of 2002, which states “ [A] decision

made by the Tribunal shall be final and conclusive and shall not be called in question in

any suit or proceedings in a Court of law”, the Constitutional ouster of jurisdiction

conferred in terms of Article 61A, made the decision of the AAT not reviewable

by the Court of Appeal. On this contention, Marsoof J held that “… the Court of

Appeal did possess jurisdiction to hear and determine the application filed before it. AAT

is not a body exercising any powers delegated to it by the PSC, and is an appellate

tribunal constituted in terms of Article 59(1)” and therefore ouster of jurisdiction

conferred by Article 61A on decisions and orders made by the PSC “… does not

apply to the impugned decision of the AAT, it being specifically confined in its

application to the orders and decisions of the Public Service Commission, …”.

Thus, a public officer who is aggrieved by an order or a decision of the

PSC has the remedy of challenging same by preferring an appeal to the AAT and

if that option too was proved unsuccessful, he could still invoke the jurisdiction

conferred on the Court of Appeal under Article 140 against the decision made by

the appellate body. Article 61A itself recognised another, perhaps equally

effective, if not more, remedy to such a public officer by providing that he could

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

36

invoke fundamental rights jurisdiction of this Court under Articles 17 and 126(1),

but within the mandatory time period Article 126(2) had stipulated.

In view of the above process of reasoning, I am fortified in my view that

Article 61A distinctly bears the characteristics of a Constitutional ouster clause

rather than a provision that confers immunity, as the provisions contained in

Article 35 has the three characteristics referred to by Menon CJ in Nagaenthran v

Public Prosecutor and another (supra) that are found in the case of conferment of

an immunity and, accordingly acts as a shield from litigation to the doer, unlike

in Article 61A which only takes away the jurisdiction of Courts and tribunals,

they otherwise possess, in terms of the statutory law. Thus, whilst respectfully

agreeing with the findings already made by this Court through its multiple

pronouncements on the scope of Article 61A, I too would proceed to term the

effect created by the Article 61A on the general jurisdiction of the District Court,

as a Constitutional ouster of the jurisdiction of that Court, over maintaining

litigation into any decision or order made by the PSC and not as a clause that

confers any immunity over such decisions or orders.

It is already referred to the fact that the Plaintiff invoked the appellate

powers conferred on the AAT by preferring an appeal against the decisions of

the PSC. The AAT, by its decision dated 14.07.2021 and also with an amended

decision dated 22.07.2021 (document marked as “X” in the bundle of documents

marked as “P7” in SC Appeal No. 88/24), made following orders:

a. “Rescinded the PSC order made on 06.04.2021 to continue to keep

the appellant under compulsory leave until the Formal Disciplinary

Inquiry is completed,

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

37

b. Direct the PSC to revoke the order made on 19.10.2020 sending the

appellant on compulsory leave and allow her to resume duties in the

post of Solicitor General with immediate effect,

c. Retire the appellant on 30.07.2021 on her reaching compulsory age

of retirement …

d. Take steps to conclude the formal disciplinary inquiry against the

appellant in terms of P.A. Circular 30/2019 dated 30.09.2019

expeditiously.”

With the amended order of the AAT, both the decisions made by the PSC,

for which the Plaintiff claimed damages as decisions taken mala fide, were

rescinded by the AAT. In the absence of any challenge to that decision of the

AAT on the part of the PSC, the legal validity of those two decisions does not

arise for consideration in these proceedings. However, this fact becomes relevant

in view of a particular contention advanced by the Plaintiff.

In response to a contention advanced by the Defendants and, perhaps in

an attempt to divert the adverse impact that might result from the direct

application of the provisions contained in Article 61A on the action instituted by

the Plaintiff, learned President’s Counsel submitted that, it was not the Plaintiff’s

intention to challenge any “decisions” made by the PSC by her action instituted

before the District Court. What she in fact intended to bring before that Court

was that the conduct of the individual Defendants in acting mala fide which then

resulted in the deprivation of her career progression.

In support of his submission, learned President’s Counsel presented this

Court with an equation, which was formulated by him with a view to set out the

causal chain of arriving at decisions made by each of the individual Defendants,

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

38

during the process within which they have allegedly acted with “mala fide,

maliciously and illegally” and thereby committing a “delictual wrong”.

The formula relied on by the learned Counsel in order to impress upon

this Court of the proposition that the individual decision so arrived at by each

member “is only a part of the causal chain”, is as follows:

i. Defendants act maliciously,

ii. Consequent to that malicious action, decisions are made,

iii. Consequent to the decisions, the Plaintiff suffers damages.

Since this equation deals with the important phases of the decision-making

process by which each of the Defendants, being members of the PSC, said to

have arrived at their respective individual decisions with minds tainted with

malice, it is pertinent to examine the nature and scope of the powers conferred

on the PSC, in relation to the Plaintiff, as the first step and the manner in which it

is expected to exercise such powers as the second step.

But before proceeding to the first step in the said process, it is of great

relevance to make at least a passing reference to a factor that the learned

President’s Counsel for the 2nd Defendant, thought it fit to invite our attention.

Paragraph 31 of the Plaint, in which the Plaintiff sets out her complaint to

the original Court, reads as follows:

“[T]he Plaintiff states that the Defendants by interdicting the Plaintiff

and/or interdicting the Plaintiff without pay and/or paying the Plaintiff

half salary and/or placing the Plaintiff on Compulsory Leave, jointly and/or

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

39

severally, negligently and/or wrongfully and/or illegally and/or acting

ultra vires and /or mala fide and/or maliciously;

(a) interrupted the Plaintiff’s career as a public servant,

(b) deprived the Plaintiff of her legitimate entitlements including her

salary.”

It is clear from that averment that the action instituted before the District

Court by the Plaintiff was founded primarily on two specific events that had

already taken place namely, her interdiction from the public service and the

subsequent placement of her under compulsory leave. If the causal chain of

events, that culminated with the actual carrying out of her interdiction and

placing her on compulsory leave, is traced in its reverse sequence, starting from

the point of implementation, then they could be lined up as follows.

It was the Attorney General, who in fact carried out the decisions of the

PSC to interdict the Plaintiff and placed her on compulsory leave, as the head of

that Department, in which she served. In doing so, he was merely carrying out

the decisions made by the PSC, which communicated to him, through the

Secretary to the Ministry of Justice, to affect its compliance. It is therefore

reasonable to conclude that the act of interdiction and the subsequent placement

of her on compulsory leave were the direct results of carrying out decisions taken

by the PSC to that effect. It is also important to note that the Attorney General

has no disciplinary control over the Plaintiff, who functioned as the Solicitor

General of the Republic during the relevant time period, and therefore had no

statutory power either to place her on interdiction or to place her on compulsory

leave.

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

40

In this factual scenario and, in view of the formula invented and relied on

by the learned President’s Counsel for the Plaintiff, it is imperative for this Court

to undertake an inquiry into the contribution made by the individual members of

the PSC, who voted in favour of or in opposition to the said two decisions, which

allegedly disrupted career progression of the Plaintiff. But before venturing into

consider those two aspects, it would be pertinent to consider albeit briefly the

decision-making process of the PSC, as envisaged by the Constitutional

provisions.

After the creation of PSC in terms of Article 51(1), the Constitution

thereupon confers a statutorily demarcated set of powers and functions on that

Commission by Article 55(3). Article 55(3) states that the appointments,

promotions, transfers, disciplinary control and dismissals of public officers shall

be vested in the PSC. It further states that the PSC is to exercise its functions and

powers conferred by that Article, subject to the provisions of the Constitution.

Article 55(1) and (2) set out the powers and functions of the Cabinet of Ministers

it could exercise over the PSC under Article 55(3).

Admittedly, the involvement of the PSC regarding the Plaintiff, who

served as a senior public officer during the relevant period of time, is confined to

an instance of exercising of disciplinary control it had over her, a power

conferred on that Commission by the Constitution itself. The Plaintiff, either in

her pleadings before this Court or in her submissions, did not dispute the power

of disciplinary control the PSC had over her. What she claimed before this Court

was that the impugned decisions were taken by the members of the Commission

mala fide and maliciously, whilst participating in the decision-making process of

the PSC.

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

41

In terms of Articles 55(1) and 55(3), the PSC is required to make its orders

and decisions, in line with the policies laid down by the Cabinet of Ministers

over the appointment, promotion, dismissal, and disciplinary matters of public

officers. The manner of exercising such powers is set out in Article 61. Article

61(3) states that “[A]ll decisions of the Commission shall be made by a majority of votes

of the members present at the meeting. In the event of an equality of votes, the member

presiding at the meeting shall have a casting vote” while Article 61(1) sets out the

required quorum for a meeting of the PSC. Moreover, Article 61(2) sets out the

manner in which the decisions of the PSC should be reached when it stated that

all such “… decisions shall be made by a majority of votes of the members present at the

meeting.”

The “Public Service Commission” is not conferred with a juristic personality

by the Constitution and its “decisions” are therefore made consequent upon

reaching unanimity or obtaining majority of votes of the members of the

Commission. The Article also expects the members of the PSC to cast their

individual votes on a particular course of action to be taken on a public officer, in

terms of its mandate, during a meeting of the Commission and in the presence of

each other.

Thus, it could then be reasonably deduced from Article 61(3) that the acts

of each individual member in casting his vote, either in agreement or in

opposition of a proposed course of action, is a necessary pre-requisite for the

validity of the decision or an order of the PSC and, it is upon satisfying that pre-

requisite only that such individual decisions, would thereupon transforms itself

into a collective decision or an order, in the form of an “order” or “decision” made

by the PSC. Clearly, the decision of each member of the PSC, taken individually,

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

42

could not be the accepted as an “order” or a “decision” of the PSC. Such an

individual decision, taken by that particular member, either to vote in favour or

in opposition to the suggested course of action, therefore would have no impact

on a public officer, in respect of whom that particular course of action was

suggested. On the other hand, the Attorney General could not have interdicted

the Plaintiff nor could he place her on compulsory leave, on any individual

decision made by the membership of the PSC.

It is only after the PSC makes an “order” or a “decision”, either in unanimity

or in majority vote of members, who are present at its meeting and subject to the

quorum, in terms of Article 61(3), such a “decision” would have any impact on

the concerned public officer. Therefore, the individual acts of voting by each

member of PSC are relevant only, in so far as, to determine the number of votes

in favour of the order or the decision for it qualify as an “order” or a “decision” of

that Commission.

It was the position of the learned President’s Counsel that the Plaintiff did

not challenge the validity of any “decision” of the PSC, but she complained only

of the mala fide acts of each Defendant, in taking their respective individual

decisions to arrive at the “decision” which had an adverse impact on the career of

the Plaintiff. If I understood the learned President’s Counsel’s submissions

correctly, the Plaintiff therefore confines her action only to the stage at which

each member had taken his individual decision before voting, and not after the

stage at which those individual decisions assume the character and status of a

“decision” of the PSC, upon being accepted either in unanimity or in the majority

of votes.

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

43

Thus, the Plaintiff thereby seeks to isolate a single component, that she had

picked up from the decision-making process of the PSC and relies on same to

claim a breach of duty of care on the basis of mala fide.

In view of this reasoning, it appears to me that the Plaintiff, in instituting

action before the District Court, was acting under a mistaken perception that it

was the individual decisions of the Defendants (which she alleges as taken in

mala fide) that resulted in her interdiction from the public service and the

eventual placement of her on compulsory leave, which, in my opinion, could be

not be accepted as a correct proposition both factually and legally.

Thus, I regret for my inability to accept the formula invented by the

learned President’s Counsel on behalf of the Plaintiff which sets out the

causation chain to illustrate the process of decision making by identifying three

consequential steps:

i. that the Defendants act maliciously

ii. consequent to malicious action, a decision is made

iii. consequent to the decision, the Plaintiff suffers damage.

The reason being, of these three components of causative equation

identified by the Plaintiff, the second component, ‘consequent to malicious action, a

decision is made’, necessarily speaks of an individual decision-making process that

passes through in each member’s mind. It is at that stage the Plaintiff claimed

that the malice, already harboured in the minds of the members of the PSC,

makes a contribution to the decision, tainting that decision, whereas that decision

should have been taken by them upon adoption of a process of logical reasoning.

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

44

The last component in that causative equation, which is termed as,

‘consequent to the decision, the Plaintiff suffers damage’, necessarily pre-supposes the

fact that it was due to the individual decision of the member, that made the

Plaintiff to suffer damage, whereas it clearly is not the case. There is clearly an

intermediate step in between that separates the second component of the said

causative equation from the third. It is already noted that the individual

member’s decision would transform itself into a collective decision by assuming

the character of a decision made by the PSC, only upon receiving either

unanimity or majority of votes. After that point in time, it is no longer the

individual decision of the membership of the Commission but, it is the decision

of the PSC in terms of Article 61(2). It is undoubtedly the decision made by the

PSC that caused the interruption to the progression of the Plaintiff’s career and

not the decision of each member that had taken individually to vote in favour to

the proposed course of action, in order to reach unanimity or majority.

There is one point, among many others, that were stressed upon by the

learned Additional S.G., that needs further consideration in relation to the

contention of the Plaintiff that she only challenges the mala fide actions of the

individual Defendants and not the decision or order of the PSC before the

District Court. During his submissions, learned Additional S.G. submitted that

the Plaintiff’s act of making an appeal to the AAT, consequent to which the

tribunal made an order rescinding the impugned decisions of the PSC, is in itself

an admission that the decision that interrupted her career was taken not by any

individual member of the PSC but by the PSC itself.

In its order, the AAT stated that it was of the view that the grievance

presented before that tribunal was in relation to an instance where “… the exercise

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

45

of discretion of the PSC in the capacity of the disciplinary authority of the appellant was

at issue”. Placing reliance on this statement made by the AAT, learned

Additional S.G. submitted that it also confirms the impugned decisions were in

fact had been accepted by the Plaintiff as decisions made by the PSC and no one

else, although she made a futile attempt before the District Court to present a

case, in total contradiction to her position taken before this Court and to the

finding made by AAT.

This particular submission demands a consideration of relevant

Constitutional provisions that applies to Administrative Appeals Tribunal, since

it was made in the context of the act of the Plaintiff, in submitting herself to the

jurisdiction of that tribunal after conceding its jurisdiction, that contradicts her

claim taken up before the District Court. The AAT too had its powers and

functions spelt out by the Constitution itself. Article 59(1) establishes the

Administrative Appeals Tribunal, while Article 59(2) confers that tribunal with

powers to “… alter, vary or rescind any order or decision made by the Commission”,

making a direct reference to the “orders” or “decisions” made by PSC.

Thus, a public officer, who is issued with an order or a decision made by

the PSC, if aggrieved with that order or decision, could thereupon prefer an

appeal to AAT, seeking its intervention. The Plaintiff too had availed herself of

this opportunity when she tendered her Petition of Appeal to the AAT, which

she subsequently amended on 07.12.2020 ( marked as “X6” in “P7” by the

Plaintiff, in her application to this Court seeking leave to appeal in

SC/HCCA/LA/165/2022, now SC Appeal No. 89/2024) claiming that she had

appealed to that tribunal “ … in relation to an order made by the Public Service

Commission … wherein the PSC had authorised the Appellant to be paid only half-salary

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

46

with effect from 12.08.2020.” Interestingly, the reference to an “order” dated

12.08.2020, made in the Plaintiff’s petition of appeal, was in relation to one of the

decisions she had attributed to the PSC in that petition, was re-described in her

Plaint, as a collective outcome of a mala fide acts committed by each of the

Defendants.

The other decision, challenged by the Plaintiff before the AAT, was in

relation to the decision of the PSC relating to her interdiction dated 25.09.2019,

which she herself admitted to being “… conveyed to the Appellant by the Attorney

General by letter dated 25.09.2019” by the PSC. The said letter is briefed in SC

Appeal No. 88/2024 at “P2” of “P7”. Perusal of its contents reveals that the

Plaintiff was interdicted with immediate effect on the “orders” (“… ksfh`. lr we;”),

issued by the PSC, by its letter dated 24.09.2019.

Thus, it is clear that the Plaintiff herself had accepted that both her

interdiction and the subsequent placement on compulsory leave, were due to

specific “orders” or “decisions” made by the PSC to that effect. She thereby

conceded that the two decisions are “decisions” made by the PSC, when she

invoked the appellate jurisdiction conferred on the AAT by Article 59(2). The

stance taken by the Plaintiff before this Court, by claiming that what she

complained to the District Court is not the “decisions” made by the PSC, but the

individual acts of the Defendants who collectively decided to vote in favour for

the purpose of arriving at those decisions of the PSC, is consistent with the one

she had taken in her Plaint. The Plaintiff accused the Defendants, who

functioned as members of the PSC, in doing so, have acted mala fide and

committed a “delictual wrong”. This particular aspect of the Plaintiff’s contention,

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

47

concerning the ‘acts’ and ‘decisions’ has already been dealt with in this

judgment.

In view of the Plaintiff’s own admission that she was interdicted and

placed on compulsory leave by a “decision” made by the PSC to that effect,

Learned Additional S.G. submitted that the Plaintiff should not be allowed to do

what she cannot do directly, by indirectly. He invited attention of this Court to a

pronouncement made by this Court in Bandaranaike v Weeraratne and Others

(1981) 1 Sri L.R. 10, and relied on the principle it had re-iterated, in support of the

said submission.

This judgment dealt with a situation where the petitioner, by way of a Writ

of Certiorari, sought to quash an adverse finding made against him by a Special

Presidential Commission upon which it made recommendation to take away her

civic rights. Subsequent to a resolution effected by the then Prime Minister with

the approval of the Cabinet of Ministers, the said recommendation was passed

by the Parliament with 2/3rd majority.

The respondents raised a preliminary objection to the maintenance of the

application. The petitioner’s submission was that if the recommendations of the

Commission are void for the reasons alleged in her petition, and therefore the

resolutions passed by the Parliament too would become invalid. However, in this

instance, it must be noted that when the matter was taken up for hearing before

this Court, the Speaker of the Parliament, upon the said resolution being

approved by the Parliament, already certified that the said resolution was duly

passed by the Parliament, in terms of Article 81. Accordingly, the preliminary

objection was raised in terms of Article 81(3).

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

48

This Court, having considered the relevant Articles, upheld the

preliminary objection raised by the respondents. Relevant part of Article 81(3), as

it stood at that point in time, reads as follows:

“[E]very such certificate shall be conclusive for all purposes and shall not

be questioned in any Court, and no Court or tribunal shall inquire into, or

pronounce upon or in any manner call in question the validity of such

resolution on any ground whatsoever”.

In view of the Constitutional provisions contained in Article 81(3) this

Court stated that (at p. 16) “[T]he issue of a writ quashing the findings and

recommendations of the Special Presidential Commission would amount to a decision

that one of the necessary conditions for passing a resolution did not in fact exist. If the

validity of the resolution was capable of being called in question, one way of doing it is to

show that a necessary condition for passing the resolution did not in fact exist. It is true

that in this application what the petitioners seek to quash are the findings and

recommendations of the Special Presidential Commission but the granting a writ would

necessarily imply that the resolution was invalid”

Dealing further with this situation, the Court held (also at p. 16) that, in

view of the “… general rule in the construction of Statutes that what a Court or person

is prohibited from doing directly, it may not do indirectly or in a circuitous manner.”

Then it went on to add that “[B]ut quite apart from such general rule of construction,

there is in this preclusive clause itself express words to indicate this.”

The process of legal reasoning adopted by this Court in Bandaranaike v

Weeraratne and Others (supra) in arriving at the above quoted conclusion on the

preliminary objection had consistently been followed by superior Couts in

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

49

similar situations, as indicative from the judgments of Senerath v Chandraratne,

Commissioner of Excise and others (1995) 1 Sri L.R. 209, Eksath Kamkaru

Samitiya v Ceylon Printers Ltd., and Others (1996) 2 Sri L.R. 317 and Omalpe

Sobhita v Dayananda Dissanayake and another (2008) 2 Sri L.R. 121. The only

two instances that I have come across in which this Court did not act on that

principle are the judgments of Sirisena Cooray v T.D. Bandaranayake and

Others (1999) 1 Sri L.R. 1 and Wijayapala Mendis v Perera and Others (1999) 2

Sri L.R. 110.

In Sirisena Cooray v T.D. Bandaranayake and Others (ibid) is an instance

where the petitioner sought to challenge the validity of recommendations made

by a Special Presidential Commission, established under the Special Presidential

Commissions of Inquiry Law No. 7 of 1978. In delivering the judgment,

Dheeraratne J declared that the Writ jurisdiction conferred under Article 140 on

the Superior Courts is “unfettered” by any statutory provisions which were

enacted by the Parliament to limit or oust that jurisdiction. However, his

Lordship stressed the point that (at p.14) “[W]e are here certainly not inquiring into,

pronouncing upon, or in any manner calling in question, the validity of the SPCI

Amendment Act No. 4 of 1978 as contemplated by Articles 80 (3)” and attributed the

reason for making that qualification to the principle that “[T]he Constitutional

provision must prevail over normal law.”

In relation to the appellate powers conferred on the AAT over the orders

and decisions made by PSC was considered earlier on in this judgment in the

context of the Constitutional ouster and the availability of statutorily created

legal remedies to a person who is affected by that ouster.

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

50

Mark Fernando J, delivering judgment in Wijayapala Mendis v Perera and

Others (ibid), in relation to an instance where a similar objection was taken in

respect of an application seeking a Writ against a recommendation made by a

Special Presidential Commission, held that (at p. 162) that “[T]he application now

before us is a legitimate invocation of the jurisdiction of this Court to review the findings

and recommendations of the Commission; it seeks relief only in an area in which

Parliament has no jurisdiction, and it seeks no order or relief in respect of what

Parliament has done or may do”. His Lordship held that view after distinguishing

the matter before that Court, with the facts of the case of Bandaranaike v

Weeraratne and Others (supra), as in that instance, by the time the application

was taken up for hearing before Court, the Parliament had already passed the

resolution based on the recommendations of the Commission, unlike in the

situation presented in Wijayapala Mendis v Perera and Others (ibid).

After undertaking a careful consideration of the multiple factors that were

referred to in the preceding paragraphs, I have arrived at the firm conclusion that

the Plaintiff’s claim presented on the basis that the individual acts of each

member of the PSC, in arriving at their individual decisions on the Plaintiff, who

alleged to have acted with malice and, in that, have acted in breach of the duty of

care owed to her, could not be accepted as a legally valid proposition to maintain

an action in the District Court, in view of the Constitutional ouster clause

contained in Article 61A.

This claim of mala fide acts of each member of the PSC, being the

fundamental premise on which her action was founded, could be termed as a

clever attempt to circumvent the otherwise an insurmountable legal obstacle,

namely the Constitutional ouster clause, contained in Article 61A. The Plaintiff,

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

51

in taking up such a stance, made an attempt to attribute the detrimental impact

caused to her by the decisions of the PSC, by driving a wedge into the decision

making process, as envisaged by Article 61, and thereby seeking to separate the

individual decisions of each member of the PSC to vote in favour of such

decisions and the eventual “decision” reached by the PSC, which in itself consists

of the unanimous or majority vote of the individual members.

With this contention, the Plaintiff also seeks to attach undue weightage to

the individual acts of the members of the PSC, who voted in favour of those

decisions, by alleging that they were motivated by malice, rather than to the

actual “decisions” of the PSC, that had been carried out by the Attorney General

and once again, allegedly caused a detrimental effect on her career.

Learned Additional S.G. has termed the Plaintiff’s act of filing action

before the District Court, and claiming damages from the members of the PSC,

also as an endeavour to find an alternative legal remedy, being motivated by the

realisation that her alleged grievance, which she could have been adequately

remedied if she petitioned this Court by invoking its jurisdiction under Articles

17 and 126(1), as provided for by the Article 61A itself, was already time barred.

It is his submission that the Plaintiff’s decision to institute action in the District

Court was made only when the Administrative Appeals Tribunal decided to

rescind the impugned decisions of the PSC and hence the claim of mala fide was

invented to facilitate that course of action.

In conclusion, and in view of the fact that where the Parliament had

provided several alternatives to a person who may have suffered an injustice but

was deprived of a legal remedy due to an ouster clause, an ouster clause of

jurisdiction must be given its full effect. In Migultenna v The Attorney General

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

52

(supra) Fernando J made the following observation in relation to a contention

presented that the Constitutional ouster contained in Article 55(5) is inclusive of

an implied exception, (at p. 419);

“ … the contention that ouster clauses in the Constitution should be

strictly interpreted, restricting the ambit of the ouster, can be far more

readily accepted where the Constitution itself contains other indications of

an intention to permit review, such as entrenchment of the fundamental

rights and other jurisdictions of this Court, and the Writ jurisdiction of the

Court of Appeal. It is difficult, however, to read in an implied exception

into an ouster clause in the Constitution by reference to general provisions

in ordinary laws governing the jurisdiction of the Courts; the maxim,

generalia specialibus non derogant, would apply with much greater force

when the special provisions are found in the Constitution itself”

(emphasis added).

Having rejected that contention, his Lordship proceeded on to hold (at p.

419) “ … the fact Article 55(5) permits review, in the exercise of that jurisdiction by the

highest Court, it does not follow that Section 106(5) permits review by way of declaration

in the District Court.” In this instance too, the action instituted by the Plaintiff

against the Defendants, who for “… all times material to the action, … were the

members of the Public Service Commission”. They were being sued on the following

grounds after alleging they have acted;

a. in breach of their duty of care,

b. negligently,

c. and/or unlawfully,

d. in breach of their duties,

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

53

e. ultra vires,

f. mala fide in law,

g. with malice in law,

h. in failure to duly and properly discharge their duties.

The effect of Article 61A is to restrict the adjudication of the decisions and

orders of the PSC only under the jurisdiction conferred on the apex Court by

Articles 17 and 126 and the AAT. The apparent conflict between the jurisdiction

so conferred on this Court which described as the “ jurisdiction for the protection of

fundamental rights” by Article 118(b) and the Constitutional ouster imposed by

Article 61A on the Courts, tribunals and institutions created and established law,

in relation to decisions and orders of the PSC, had already been given due

recognition by the Constitution and was effectively mitigated by the Parliament

by making such decisions and orders, subject to the jurisdiction of this Court in

terms of Article 126(1) and also of the AAT.

Having dealt applicable Constitutional provisions and the relevant

jurisprudence that had developed around them in relation to the question of law

this Court must determine, it is time that a reference is made to the judgments of

the Courts below and consider its validity, based on the above determinations.

Upon being served with summons of the instant action, issued by the

District Court, the 2nd Defendant filed a Motion in that Court on 22.10.2021,

wherein an objection to the invocation of the jurisdiction of Court was raised

under Article 61A. The 1st and 3rd to 8th Defendants too have tendered their

Statement of Objections dated 16.11.2021. They have specifically pleaded that the

impugned decisions were taken as ‘decisions’ of the PSC and the District Court

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

54

has no jurisdiction to inquire into or pronounce upon or in any manner call in

question any such order or decision.

The District Court, after an inquiry into the objection raised on its

jurisdiction, made an order rejecting the said objection. The rejection of the said

objection was primarily made on the footing that no “immunity”, as conferred on

the President of the Republic or on the members of the Judicial Service

Commission, was conferred on any of the members of the PSC and, since the

“immunity” conferred on the members of the Election Commission is limited to

the acts done in good faith, in this instance too, an action could be instituted and

maintained against the Defendants, when the cause of action against them is

founded on breach of duty of care, for acting negligently, wrongly, illegally, in

excess of powers, and mala fide.

The Defendants have thereupon moved the High Court of Civil Appeal

and sought its leave, in order to appeal against the said order. That Court, while

granting leave, also permitted the action of the Plaintiff, that was pending before

the District Court to proceed with, in terms of Section 757(5) of the Civil

Procedure Code.

Since the answer to the question of law, upon which the two appeals were

argued, namely “Can the Plaintiff have maintained this action, in view of Article

61A of the Constitution ?” will itself determine the legal validity of these two

orders, I shall therefore proceed to determine the said question of law.

It has already been decided that the Article 61A acts as a Constitutional

ouster of jurisdiction of the Courts and tribunals, barring the jurisdiction of this

Court conferred under Article 126, and that the actions of the individual

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

55

members of the PSC have no impact on the career of a public officer since it is the

unanimous or majority “decision” of the PSC only that would make an impact.

This is because only the PSC, being the body that conferred with powers to

determine the appointment, transfer, dismissal and disciplinary control over the

public service, could make an “order” or a “decision” on any of these matters on

an individual public officer.

Having reached the final section of this judgment, it is necessary to refer to

another interesting contention advanced by the learned President’s Counsel for

the Plaintiff, by which he sought to add another perspective to the already

referred legal principle on which the instant action was founded before the

District Court, and thereby seeking to justify her action. In addition to the

position already taken up that no immunity conferred on the Defendants in

terms of Article 61A, learned President’s Counsel also contended that the action

instituted by his client was also premised on an allegation of violation of her

common law rights, which in turn gave rise to imposition of delictual liability on

those Defendants for causing a “delictual wrong”.

Due to this reason, learned President’s Counsel contended that the said

action should not be ruled as an action being barred by Article 61A. He added

that, in this particular instance what the Plaintiff claimed from the District Court

is not a declaration from that Court of a violation of her fundamental rights, but

a remedy for the injurious conduct on the part of the Defendants. This is a

violation of her rights, which she is entitled to enjoy under the common law, and

therefore falls outside the scope of the jurisdiction conferred on this Court, under

Articles 17 and 126(1). According to learned President’s Counsel, only the

District Courts are conferred with the jurisdiction to adjudicate such complaints

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

56

and to award adequate compensation, if it was found that the allegation is

substantiated.

There cannot be any dispute over the contention of the Plaintiff that she is

entitled to the full enjoyment of the bundle of rights conferred on her under the

common law, in addition to her entitlement to the rights conferred under

Chapters III and IV of the Constitution, described therein as fundamental rights

and language rights. However, as a consequence of the said contention, the

nature of the dispute presented before this Court is slightly modified and

therefore should be described as, whether the instant action instituted by the

Plaintiff, on the basis of a violation to her common law rights, could be

maintained in the District Court, in view of the Constitutional ouster of the

jurisdiction of that Court, explicitly made by Article 61A.

In making her complaint to the District Court, the Plaintiff alleged in her

Plaint that it was the actions or decisions that are attributed to the Defendants

taken mala fide to interdict her and to place her on compulsory leave only

resulted in a “delictual wrong”, when it interrupted her career progression. The

legal validity of that complaint was examined in the preceding part of this

judgment and I have already arrived at the conclusion that it was not due to

actions and decisions of the Defendants, but due to the “decisions” or “orders”

made by the PSC that resulted in the said interruption to her career progression,

if any.

What Article 61A deprives the District Court is, its jurisdiction to “ …

inquire into, or pronounce upon or in any manner call in question any order or decision

made by the Commission, …”. It is relevant to note in this context that the Plaintiff

did not make any allegation that the PSC has acted mala fide in arriving at the

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

57

decisions it did, but it was the members of that Commission who did act with

malice. The alleged violation of her common law rights was undoubtedly

consequent to a “decision” made by the PSC. Thus, with the direct application of

the Constitutional ouster of jurisdiction of the District Court, it cannot entertain

any such action. With regard to the contention of the Plaintiff that the complaint

made by her to the District Court was only to seek a remedy in relation to a

violation of her common law rights, which could not be adjudicated by this

Court since that violation falls outside the jurisdiction conferred on this Court by

Articles 17 and 126(1), but is well within the general jurisdiction of that Court, it

could well be that the said contention is founded upon the observation made by

Mark Fernando J Saman v Leeladasa and Another (1989) 1 Sri L.R. 1, (at p. 23) that

“[U]nder our Constitution, if the infringement is by ‘executive or administrative action’.

the remedy is by petition under Article 126; if it is not by ‘executive or administrative

action’, the common law or statutory remedies are available.”

When the Constitution itself affords a remedy to a person who was

aggrieved by a decision or order made by the PSC, and explicitly ousts the

jurisdiction of other Courts to adjudicate on such matters, it is apposite to quote

Mark Fernando J once more from the judgement of Migultenna v The Attorney

General (supra), where his Lordship stated that (at p. 419) “ [I]t is difficult,

however, to read an implied exception into an ouster clause in the Constitution by

reference to general provisions in ordinary laws governing the jurisdictions of the

Courts; the maxim, generalia specialius non derogant, would apply with much greater

force when the special provisions are found in the Constitution itself.”

Therefore, in view of the unambiguous Constitutional provision which

expressly ousts the jurisdiction of the Courts and tribunals, inclusive that of the

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

58

Court of Appeal, in adjudicating upon the orders and decisions made by the

PSC, it must therefore be given full effect and thus, the said question of law on

which these two consolidated appeals were argued, is answered in the negative

and against the Plaintiff.

It is of relevance at this point to quote Wadugodapitiya J, in Victor Ivan v

Hon. Sarath N. Silva and Others (supra) where his Lordship made a pertinent

observation in respect of a matter, somewhat similar to the one presented before

this Court, in this instance. His Lordship stated (at p. 327) “[I] am constrained to

say that what the Petitioners are asking this Court to do, is in effect to amend, by judicial

action, Article 35 of the Constitution, by ruling that the immunity enjoyed by the

President is not immunity at all. This, of course, it is not within the powers of this Court

to do. In the guise of judicial decisions and rulings Judges cannot and will not seek to

usurp the functions of the Legislature, especially where the Constitution itself is

concerned” (emphasis added).

In terms of Article 61A, the District Court is clearly deprived of its

ordinary jurisdiction to maintain the Plaintiff’s action against the members of the

PSC and the question of the legality of the said action proceeding along

notwithstanding the fact that leave was granted on the question of jurisdiction

too must be determined against her. If the District Court has no jurisdiction to

entertain such an action, there is no question of continuing with the same, even if

the High Court of Civil Appeal directed the original Court to do so. In any case, I

do not think the High Court of Civil Appeal acted correctly in that instance,

when it made the direction under Section 755(5) of the Civil Procedure Code, as

that Section caters to a totally different scenario.

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

59

Moreover, the District Court, in providing an interpretation to Article 61A

that it does not confer the members of the PSC with an “immunity” from

litigation, when the plain reading provided an obvious answer, it had either

wittingly or unwittingly made a transgression on to the exclusive domain of this

Court, completely ignoring the provisions contained in Article 125(1).

Therefore, the order of the District Court in overruling the objection to its

jurisdiction based on Article 61A and the order of the High Court of Civil

Appeal, directing that original Court to proceed with the action of the Plaintiff

are hereby set aside. The Plaint of the Plaintiff too is rejected/dismissed owing to

the reason that the original Court had no jurisdiction to entertain such a Plaint.

In conclusion, it is apt to re-produce the observation of Samarawickrame J in

Bandaranaike v Weeraratne and Others (supra) where his Lordship stated (at p.

17) that:

“I am conscious of the fact that this decision means that without going into

the factual aspects of the petitioners' complaints, because of a preliminary

legal objection the petitioners are declared disentitled to a remedy in a

matter in which each of them rightly or wrongly feels that he or she has a

serious grievance to place before Court. We are faced, however, with a

provision of the fundamental law, the Constitution. This Court has been

given the sole jurisdiction to interpret the Constitution. This Court is also

vested with jurisdiction in respect of fundamental rights granted by the

Constitution and certain other matters arising under the Constitution.

There is, therefore, a peculiar duty resting on this Court to uphold and give

effect to a provision of the Constitution, and we have no alternative but to

give proper effect to the preclusive clause in Article 81 (3).”

S.C. Appeal No.89/2024

60

Similarly, in this instance too this Court must give proper effect to the

ouster clause contained in Article 61A, in fulfilling its Constitutional duty.

Therefore, the appeal of the 2nd Defendant in SC Appeal No. 88/2024, is

allowed and consequently the appeal of the Plaintiff in SC Appeal No. 89/2024

stands dismissed.

This Court records its appreciation of the assistance offered by all Counsel,

in the determination of the question of law, on which these two consolidated

appeals were heard.

Parties will bear their costs of these appeals.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

HON.E.A.G.R. AMARASEKARA,J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

HON. MAHINDA SAMAYAWARDHENA,J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT