Page 1 of 13

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for leave to appeal to

Supreme Court under and in terms of the Section 5

(c) of the High Court of the Provinces Act No. 19 of

1990 as amended by Act No. 54 of 2006.

Natchan Chandraras alias Kaththan

Natchchan Chandroo

No. 187, Mahinda Mawatha, Nuwara Eliya.

Plaintiff

Vs.

D. Nihal Rupasinghe,

No. 25, Hill Street, Nuwara Eliya.

(Deceased)

Defendant

Lillie Rupasinghe

No. 25, Hill Street, Nuwara Eliya.

Substituted Defendant

AND

Lillie Rupasinghe

No. 25, Hill Street, Nuwara Eliya.

Substituted Defendant- Appellant

SC Appeal No. 67/ 2025

SC/HCCA/LA No. 399/2022

CA/HCCA/Kandy No. FA 158/2019

DC/Nuwaraeliya Case No. L/1353/08

Page 2 of 13

Vs.

Natchan Chandraras alias Kaththan

Natchchan Chandroo

No. 187, Mahinda Mawatha, Nuwara Eliya.

Plaintiff- Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

Lillie Rupasinghe

No. 25, Hill Street, Nuwara Eliya.

Substituted Defendant- Appellant- Appellant

Vs.

Natchan Chandraras alias Kaththan

Natchchan Chandroo

No. 187, Mahinda Mawatha, Nuwara Eliya.

Plaintiff- Respondent- Respondent

Before: P. Padman Surasena J. (as His Lordship the Chief Justice was then)

Sobhitha Rajakaruna J.

Menaka Wijesundera J.

Counsel: Samantha Ratwatte, PC with Ms. Lalanika Kankanamge for the Substituted

Defendant- Appellant- Appellant.

K.V.S. Sri Ganesharajan with Ms. Vithusha Loganathan for the Plaintiff-

Respondent- Respondent

Page 3 of 13

Argued on: 03.04.2025

Decided on: 04.09.2025

Sobhitha Rajakaruna J.

The Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the Plaintiff)

instituted action, upon an Agreement marked P2, in the District Court of Nuwaraeliya

against one D. Nihal Rupasinghe, who was the original Defendant in the said case. After

the demise of the said Nihal Rupasinghe (original Defendant), the Substituted

Defendant-Appellant-Appellant (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the Defendant)

was substituted in place of the said original Defendant. The Defendant in her Amended

Answer made a Claim in Reconvention. The learned District Judge delivering the

Judgement dismissed the action as well as the Claim in Reconvention. Being aggrieved by

the said Judgement, the Defendant lodged an appeal in the High Court of Nuwaraeliya,

whereas there was no appeal from the Plaintiff. The learned High Court Judge affirmed

the Judgement of the District Court, subject to a variation.

Thereafter, the Defendant and the Plaintiff filed separate leave to appeal applications

bearing Case Nos. SC/HCCA/LA/399/2022 and SC/HCCA/LA/403/2022

respectively, in this Court. When such matters were taken up for consideration of granting

of leave, both the above cases were amalgamated. Having considered the submissions of

learned counsel, the Court decided to grant leave to appeal in respect of the questions of

law set out in paragraphs 26(1),26(2) and 26(4) in the Petition dated 20.12.2022 filed in

the said Case No. SC/HCCA/LA/399/2022.

Consequently, on the same day, in terms of the Proviso to Rule 16(1) of the Supreme Court

Rules (1990), this Court proceeded to hear the instant Appeal forthwith, with the consent

of the Attorneys-at-Law of all the parties.

Surrounding Circumstances

The Plaintiff has averred in the Plaint that the original Defendant became the owner of the

subject property morefully described in its 1st Schedule by way of the Deed of Transfer No.

Page 4 of 13

8505 marked Pa 1. The said subject property which is in extent of A:00 R:00 P:17.8

includes a two-story building-premises bearing assessment No. 24 and No.25. Moreover,

the Plaintiff alleges that the original Defendant agreed to sell the ground floor of the said

subject property for a consideration of Rs. 2,700,000 and accordingly, he entered into the

said Agreement, dated 02.11.2006, marked Pa 2, with the original Defendant and the

Substituted Defendant-Appellant-Appellant. As per the terms and conditions of the said

Agreement, the Defendant, together with her husband (the original Defendant), accepted

a sum of Rs. 500,000 on the same date as partial payment of the total purchase price. The

above averments of the Plaint have been admitted by the Defendant in her Amended

Answer.

The Plaintiff, in view of the said Agreement marked Pa 2, undertook to pay the balance

purchase price (Rs. 2,200,000) on or before 25.03.2007. In terms of Clause 9 of Pa 2, the

Defendant is entitled to cancel the Agreement with notice in writing in the event the

Plaintiff breaches any of its terms or conditions. Similarly, it is stipulated that 25% of the

advance payment will be forfeited should the Plaintiff fail to comply with the Agreements

obligations. The said Agreement marked Pa 2 contains several spelling mistakes or

typographical errors, but its contents remain comprehensible upon plain reading.

The Plaintiff states that he moved into the downstairs unit of the said premises on the same

day the Agreement Pa 2 was signed. According to the Defendant, the Plaintiff was

permitted to occupy the said downstairs unit purely upon the confidence placed in him,

although the Defendant was only obliged to transfer the possession of the said premises

after the conditions of the said Agreement were fully met. It is noted that there is no

specific provision in the said Agreement which permits the Plaintiff to occupy the premises

until he fulfils his obligations under the Agreement. Despite making several subsequent

payments to the Defendant, the Plaintiff did not complete, as agreed, the total transaction

by 25.03.2007. As such the Defendant has not taken steps to transfer the property to the

Plaintiff. Accordingly, in the District Court, the Plaintiff has prayed for an order of the

court compelling the Defendant to transfer possession of the property upon receipt of the

outstanding balance of Rs. 1,200,000.

The Defendant states that the subject premises were duly gifted to her by her husband

through the Deed of Gift No.10165, attested by S. Daimanuwan Notary Public, on

24.11.2000. As a result, the learned District Judge in his Judgement dated 21.02.2019

Page 5 of 13

noted that the original Defendant no longer held title to the property at the time of

instituting the action and that the Plaintiff failed to explain why the wife of the original

Defendant (now the Substituted Defendant-Appellant-Appellant) was substituted. In those

lines, the learned District Judge decided that the Plaintiff was not entitled to the relief as

prayed for in the prayer of the Plaint, specifically because the said Substituted Defendant-

Appellant-Appellant was the rightful owner of the subject premises. Anyhow, the learned

District Judge transitioning to another area has decided that the Plaintiff has a right to

occupy the premises until the Defendant repays the sum of Rs.1,500,000.

The District Court dismissed both the Plaintiffs action and the Defendants Claim in

Reconvention. In the appeal, the High Court has affirmed the judgment of the District

Court, subject to a variation in the said Judgement concerning the granting of jus retentionis

(Latin legal term that translates to right of retention) to the Plaintiff until the Defendant

repays the said amount of money.

Questions of Law

This Court, considering the applications filed by the Defendant and the Plaintiff

challenging the aforementioned Judgement of the High Court, granted leave to appeal on

the following questions (outlined in paragraphs 26(1),26(2) and 26(4) in the Petition dated

20.12.2022):

(1) Have the learned High Court Judges failed to appreciate that the

Respondent was a licensee of the original Defendant?

(2) Is ownership of a licensor irrelevant to eject an overholding licensee?

(3) Should the High Court have granted the relief of ejectment of the

Respondent as a lesser relief in all?

Have the learned High Court Judges failed to appreciate that the Respondent was a licensee of

the original Defendant?

It is abundantly clear that the Plaintiff instituted the said action in the District Court of

Nuwaraeliya on the footing of the said Agreement marked Pa 2 which established a

contractual relationship between the parties. It is a cardinal obligation on the part of the

Page 6 of 13

Plaintiff to complete the payment of the total purchase price on or before 25.03.2007, a

condition which the Plaintiff has not fulfilled. Anyhow, at the time of instituting the

action, the Plaintiff expresses through his plaint dated 08.04.2008 that he is prepared to

pay the balance of Rs.1,200,000 to the Defendant at any moment. The stand taken by the

Defendant was that no steps were taken to transfer the ownership to the Plaintiff as the

Plaintiff did not complete the payment of the total purchase price by the deadline of

25.03.2007.

It is undisputed that the Plaintiff failed to complete the transactions in terms of the

provisions of the said agreement Pa 2, leading to a prima facie assumption that the

Plaintiff breached the said Agreement. As noted above, the Defendant was not obliged in

terms of the provisions of the said Agreement to transfer the possession of the subject

premises on the date the Agreement was signed. No substantial reasons were given in

evidence during the trial by the Plaintiff to explain or justify the failure to pay or the delay

in settling the remaining balance.

The learned District Judge has correctly observed that the Substituted-Defendant-

Appellant-Appellant became the owner of the subject premises by virtue of the said Deed

of Gift No.10165 (marked Vi 2) even before instituting the action in the District Court.

One of the purported grounds for the learned District Judge to dismiss the action was that

the Plaintiff sought relief only against the original Defendant, rendering the Plaintiff

ineligible to enforce the Agreement Pa 2 (Vide - issue No. 15,16 and 18 framed at the

Trial). The judgment of the District Court focused on the Plaintiffs failure to directly sue

the true owner at the time the action was filed, emphasising that the Plaintiff neglected to

name the Substituted Defendant-Appellant-Appellant as the original Defendant, thus

omitting necessary parties at the outset. Nonetheless, I take the view that the learned

District Judge has arrived at such findings regarding the necessary parties without

providing any rationale. The learned High Court Judge has not intervened in the relevant

portion of the Judgement of the District Court.

The learned District Judge, in addition to his above conclusion, dismissed the said Claim

in Reconvention, citing the Defendants failure to substantiate the loss allegedly caused to

the building with evidence. In the claim raised in reconvention by the Defendant, a sum

of Rs. 2,000,000 is sought from the Plaintiff for the alleged damages caused to the house,

particularly the staircase providing access to the upstairs unit from within the property.

Page 7 of 13

The learned District Judge, answering the respective issues, decided that the Defendant

did not prove such damages. Upon perusal of the evidence adduced during the

examination in chief of the Defendant in the Trial Court, it is observed that the Defendant

submitted only 5 documents. Three of those documents are complaints made to the Police,

whereas the other document is the aforesaid Deed No.10165 (Vi 2). Besides the

documentary evidence, the Defendant has not supported her claim with additional

independent evidence or witnesses. Consequently, I agree with the learned District Judge

that the Defendant has not met the burden of proof to establish the alleged damages on a

balance of probability. The learned High Court Judge has not interfered with the findings

of the District Court regarding the loss and harm allegedly caused to the Defendant.

Having dismissed the Plaintiffs action, the learned District Judge has arrived at another

finding that the Plaintiff is entitled to remain in possession of the subject premises until the

Defendant repays a sum of Rs. 1,500,000 (being the calculated amount of money accepted

by the Defendant upon the Agreement Pa 2). I am unable to identify any specific issue

formulated by the District Court to support these findings. However, the High Court

determined that the findings of the District Court on jus retentionis were erroneous. The jus

retentionis denotes the right of an individual to hold onto another persons property until a

debt or obligation tied to that property is fulfilled. Unlike certain liens, it generally does

not provide the authority to sell the property, only to keep possession of it. Moreover, the

High Court set aside the portion of the District Courts judgment that had granted the

Plaintiff jus retentionis. The learned High Court Judge, placing reliance on the judgment of

Surangi v Rodrigo 2003 3 Sri LR 35, decided that the grant of jus retentionis was

unsustainable in both fact and law. The learned High Court Judge noted that the Plaintiff

had neither sought such relief in the Plaint nor raised it as an issue during the trial.

Furthermore, he opined that such relief was not permissible in view of the findings of the

learned District Judge on issues bearing Nos. 14th - 16th and 27th - 30th.

Nevertheless, the learned High Court Judge noted that neither the original Defendant nor

the Substituted Defendant-Appellant-Appellant sought any relief in their Answer or

Amended Answer on the grounds that the Plaintiff occupied the disputed property under

the leave and license of the original Defendant. Further, the learned Judge of the High

Court has taken the view that the original Defendant was not legally entitled to any relief

on such strange grounds as this claim was neither raised through pleadings nor

addressed by framing a specific issue during the proceedings. The Defendant argues that

Page 8 of 13

both the original Defendant and the Substituted Defendant-Appellant-Appellant

consistently viewed the Plaintiff as a licensee. The Defendant contends that, due to the

Plaintiffs failure to meet the conditions of Agreement Pa 2 or complete the sale as

stipulated, the leave and license granted to the Plaintiff were automatically revoked. The

Defendant asserts that an individual who takes possession under an agreement to sell

holds the status of a licensee. Consequently, the Defendant claims that the learned High

Court Judge erred in both law and fact.

It is important to note that no specific issue has been framed at the trial to determine

whether the Plaintiff occupied the subject premises under a leave and license granted by

the Defendant. However, the issue No.23 framed on behalf of the Defendant queries

whether the Plaintiff has the legal right to remain on the subject property, to which the

learned District Judge responded that the Plaintiff does have a legal right. It is a puzzle

how the Trial Judge dismissing the Plaintiffs action answered the said issue No.23 in

favour of the Plaintiff. As previously stated, the Plaintiff fails to offer sufficient justification

for his right to continue occupying the property, given that he breached the conditions

outlined in Agreement Pa 2. The prescriptive title is not an issue in the action before the

District Court, but the whole claim of the Plaintiff derives from the Agreement marked

Pa 2. I am of the view that there is no additional evidence which provides the Plaintiff

potential legal entitlement to possess the property beyond the contractual relationship

outlined in Agreement Pa 2.

Notably, no evidence was presented during the trial to suggest that the Plaintiffs

possession was based on any basis other than the Agreement marked Pa 2. On the other

hand, there is no mutual acknowledgement between the Defendant and the Plaintiff, who

are in occupation of each others rights and duties for the period until the contractual

obligations under Pa 2 are fully and effectively fulfilled. It is observed that the said

agreement cannot now be enforced in law due to the failure of the Plaintiff to meet the

conditions therein. The evidence led by the Defendant at the Trial stating that he allowed

the Plaintiff to occupy the premises on trust has not been effectively contradicted by the

Plaintiff. Hence, I take the view that the learned High Court Judge has failed to consider

the factual circumstances surrounding the permission granted by the original Defendant

(or the Substituted Defendant-Appellant-Appellant) for the Plaintiff to enter in to the

possession of the ground floor unit of the subject premises on the day of the said

Agreement. In the circumstances, I take the view that the Plaintiff has no legal right to be

Page 9 of 13

in possession of the subject property, given that he has admittedly failed to meet the

conditions of the said Agreement. Therefore, the issue No.23 formulated during the Trial

should be answered by concluding that the Plaintiff has no right to remain in possession

of the property.

Thus, I take the view that the learned High Court Judges conclusion that the issue of leave

and license was strange to the case was deemed a legal error because it failed to consider

evidence tied to Agreement Pa 2. It misapplies or misinterprets the law in reaching a

decision on leave and licence as well as on the principles relating to approbation and

reprobation (the terms used by the learned High Court Judge). Based on the foregoing

reasons, I agree only with the analysis regarding jus retentionis and the corresponding

portion of the High Court Judgment that varied the District Courts decision. However, I

am unable to accept the other component of the Judgement of the High Court, particularly

its conclusions regarding whether the Plaintiff occupied the property under a leave and

license granted by the Defendant. Considering the totality of evidence and circumstances,

I answer the 1st question of law in the affirmative.

Is ownership of a licensor irrelevant to eject an overholding licensee?

The learned District Judge recognized that the Defendant was the true owner of the subject

premises by the time the action was filed in the District Court. The title to the said property

was established by the Defendant through the said Deed No. 10165 marked Vi 2, which

the Plaintiff did not contest.

Shirani Bandaranayake J. in the aforesaid Reginald Fernando v Pabilinahamy and Others

(substituted) (2005) 1Sri LR 31, observed that a long line of cases had considered the above

question and the ruling by the majority decision in De Alwis v. Perera 52 NLR 433 had been

consistently followed in subsequent decisions. Discussing the question of lack of any 'ius

in re' in Landlord and Tenant (Lake House Publishers, pp. 215-223), Prof. G. L. Peiris states

that 'no real right in the premises need be claimed by the landlord'. Furthermore, the

Plaintiff has placed reliance on the dicta of the Judgements in M.M.M. Ashar v T.H.

Kareem SC/Appeal/171/2019, SC Minutes of 22.05.2023 and Mohamadu Abu Sali v Ummu

Kaldun SC/Appeal/225/2014, SC Minutes of 30.01.2024. In the said case of M.M.M. Ashar,

His Lordship Justice Mahinda Samayawardhena held:

Page 10 of 13

In a declaration of title action which is not a rei vindicatio proper and which is filed against

a defendant such as a licensee or a tenant to recover possession, the plaintiff need not prove

title to the land against the defendant. In such actions, the title is presumed to be with the

plaintiff.

Put differently, the defendant in such actions cannot frustrate the plaintiff's action on the basis

that the plaintiff is not the owner of the property.

The present action is not a rei vindicatio action proper but a declaration of title action. Hence,

the High Court is clearly wrong to have set aside the judgment of the District Court on the

basis that the plaintiff does not have title to the entirety of the land but only to 11/12 shares

of the land.

Once the Court decides that the defendant is a licensee of the plaintiff, and his prescriptive

title is unsustainable, whether the plaintiff is the owner of the entire land or part of it or has

no title at all is irrelevant.

The Supreme Court in the said Mohamadu Abu Sali case decided that:

The lessee cannot question the lessor's right, title or interest in the premises for the latter to

lease it out to him. The reason being that a person need not necessarily be the owner of the

premises to enter into such an agreement with another. Even in the absence of ownership,

these agreements establish valid legal relationships such as landlord and tenant, lessor and

lessee, licensor and licensee between the parties, although they may not be binding on the

actual owner. (Professor George Wille, Landlord and Tenant in South Africa, 4th Edition,

page 20; Dr. H.W. Tambiah, Landlord and Tenant in Ceylon, page 48; Imbuldeniya v. De

Silva (1987] 1 Sri LR 367 at 372, 380, Gunasekera v. Jinadasa |1996] 2 Sri LR 115 at 120;

Pinona v. Dewanarayana [2004] 2 Sri LR 11)

His Lordship Justice Mahinda Samayawardhena in the above case has referred to the

following paragraph in the Court of Appeal Judgement of Ruberu and Another v

Wijesooriya (1998) 1 Sri LR. 58:

whether it is a licensee or a lessee, the question of title is foreign to a suit in ejectment against

either. . The effect of the operation of section 116 of the Evidence Ordinance is that if

a licensee desires to challenge the title under which he is in occupation he must, first, quit the

land. The fact that the licensee or the lessee obtained possession from the plaintiff-appellant is

Page 11 of 13

perforce an admission of the fact that the title resides in the plaintiff. No question of title can

possibly arise on the pleadings in this case, because, as the defendant-respondent has stated in

his answer that he is a lessee under the plaintiff-appellant, he is estopped from denying the

title of the plaintiff-appellant. It is an inflexible rule of law that no lessee or licensee will ever

be permitted either to question the title of the person who gave him the lease or the licence or

the permission to occupy or possess the land or to set up want of title in that person, i.e. of the

person who gave the licence or the lease. That being so, it is superfluous, in this action, framed

as it is on the basis that the defendant-respondent is a licensee, to seek a declaration of title.

Drawing on the precedents set forth in the referenced judgments, it is firmly established

that when a claimant initiates an action based on a leave and license or landlord-tenant

relationship, and proves that he is the licensor or landlord while the other party is his

licensee or tenant, the claimant is entitled to eject the said other party in possession,

regardless of whether he owns the property. Thus, I will answer the 2nd question of law in

the affirmative.

Should the High Court have granted the relief of ejectment of the Respondent as a lesser relief in

all?

The Defendant contends that the learned High Court Judge should have at least granted

the lesser relief of ejectment, even if the declaration of title sought in the Amended

Answers prayer was not awarded for some reason. The Defendant further argues that the

High Court should have allowed the ejectment of the Plaintiff, as the Defendants

crossclaim was premised on the leave and license granted to the Plaintiff. The Defendant,

in seeking a declaration of title, contends that such a declaration does not confer additional

rights on the licensor but is rooted in the contractual relationship, confirming that the

licensee cannot dispute the licensors title that permitted possession.

In the Amended Answer under the heading Cross Claim, the Defendant averred that the

Plaintiff has been demanded to vacate the premises through her lawyers by a notice dated

09.05.2008, a date prior to filing the Answer by the original Defendant. Although the

Defendant did not present this notice as evidence during the Trial, an issue (particularly

issue No. 26) was formulated to confirm that the Defendant had sent an eviction notice as

referenced in paragraph 7(h) of the Amended Answer. Similarly, in the Prayer of the

Page 12 of 13

Amended Answer, the Defendant has prayed for a declaration of title and an order to eject

the Plaintiff from the subject premises. The final issue (issue No. 31) framed in the District

Court addressed whether the Defendant was entitled to the reliefs prayed for in the

Amended Answer if one or more of the Defendants issues were answered in favour of the

said Defendant. The learned District Judge answered the above issue No.26 in favour of

the Defendant, but answered the said issue No. 31 against her.

As mentioned previously, the Plaintiff has failed to establish under what authority he

remains in possession. These circumstances envisage that the Defendant granted the

Plaintiff leave to possess the property upon grounds not limited to the contractual

relationship under Pa 2. The Plaintiff was not successful in denying or disputing such

mode of leave and license granted to him, including the demand of the Defendant

terminating such leave and license, with adequate material. Therefore, I am compelled to

arrive at the conclusion that the Plaintiff remains in possession under leave and license,

not strictly limited to the provisions of Pa 2, and he has not adequately countered the

eviction demand raised as an issue during the trial. Having answered the 2nd question of

law in the affirmative and also based on the findings in this Judgement, I hold that the

Defendant is entitled to the relief in respect of eviction as prayed for in the Amended

Answer, allowing the Plaintiffs eviction from the subject premises. For the reasons set

forth above, I will answer the 3rd question of law in the affirmative.

Conclusion

In the above circumstances, I proceed to affirm the judgment of the District Court, except

for its findings on issue No. 23, which should be answered as concluding that the Plaintiff

has no legal right to remain in the subject premises. Due to the observations I made

previously, I have my reservations about the reasons given by the District Court for

deciding to dismiss the action. Anyhow, taking into account the entirety of the evidence

and circumstances, along with the fact that the Plaintiff did not file an appeal, I concur

with the District Judges decision to dismiss the action. Furthermore, the Judgment of the

District Court should be varied in respect of issue No. 31 to reflect that the Defendant is

entitled to the relief as prayed for in the Prayer of the Amended Answer, but only to the

extent of dismissing the action and ordering the eviction of the Plaintiff. The High Courts

judgment is hereby partially upheld, except for the obiter remarks made by the learned

Page 13 of 13

High Court Judge concerning the issues of (i) leave and license and (ii) approbation and

reprobation.

In addition to the above, I must draw my attention to the journal entries dated 15.03.2024

and 03.04.2025, in which it has been recorded that the Defendants commitment to repay

a sum of Rs. 1,500,000 to the Plaintiff in the event of the Plaintiffs eviction from the

premises in suit. Considering such undertaking of the Defendant, the Court, with the

concurrence of the learned Counsel of both parties, terminated the proceedings of the Case

No. SC/HCCA/LA/403/2022. Therefore, this Court directs the Defendant to comply

with such undertaking once a decree is entered into by the District Court in accordance

with the determinations of this Judgment. Accordingly, the Appeal is allowed without

cost.

Judge of the Supreme Court

P. Padman Surasena, CJ.

I agree.

Chief Justice

Menaka Wijesundera J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court