1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal under Article 128 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. SC Appeal No: 13/2019 HC Appeal No: HCALT 40/2016 LT Application No: 13/52/2013

R.A. Dharmadasa, No. 72/2/C ‘Sandamali,’ Parakandeniya Road, Pahala Imbulgoda, Imbulgoda. APPLICANT Vs. Board of Investment of Sri Lanka, World Trade Centre, 26th Floor, West Tower, Bank of Ceylon Mawatha, Colombo 1. RESPONDENT And between Board of Investment of Sri Lanka, World Trade Centre, 26th Floor, West Tower, Bank of Ceylon Mawatha, Colombo 1. RESPONDENT – APPELLANT Vs. R.A. Dharmadasa, No. 72/2/C ‘Sandamali,’ Parakandeniya Road, Pahala Imbulgoda, Imbulgoda.

2

APPLICANT – RESPONDENT And Now Between R.A. Dharmadasa, No. 72/2/C ‘Sandamali,’ Parakandeniya Road, Pahala Imbulgoda, Imbulgoda. APPLICANT – RESPONDENT – APPELLANT Vs. Board of Investment of Sri Lanka, World Trade Centre, 26th Floor, West Tower, Bank of Ceylon Mawatha, Colombo 1. RESPONDENT – APPELLANT – RESPONDENT Before: E.A.G.R. Amarasekara, J A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J Arjuna Obeyesekere, J Counsel: Dulindra Weerasuriya, PC, for the Applicant – Respondent – Appellant

Janaprith Fernando with D.D.P. Dissanayake and Namal Rajamuni for the Respondent – Appellant – Respondent Argued on: 24th January 2022 Written Tendered on behalf of the Applicant – Respondent – Appellant on 10th Submissions: July 2019 and 7th March 2022 Tendered on behalf of the Respondent – Appellant – Respondent on 23rd October 2019 and 7th March 2022 Decided on: 16th June 2022

3

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

The Applicant – Respondent – Appellant [the Appellant] joined the Board of Investment

of Sri Lanka – i.e. the Respondent – Appellant – Respondent [the Respondent], on 2nd July

1985 as a Management Trainee. He was confirmed in service on 1st April 1986, and

received several promotions thereafter, including to the post of Accountant (Grade M3)

in October 1990, Accountant (Grade M2) in April 1994 and Senior Manager, Internal Audit

(Grade 1) in March 2000. In February 2003, the Appellant had been assigned to the

Regional Economic Development Commission [REDC]. By letter dated 7th October, 2003,

he had been appointed as the Director (Corporate Services) of the Regional Office of the

Respondent situated in the North Western Province with effect from 10th October 2003.

The claim of the Appellant that he had an unblemished record of service until this

appointment has not been disputed by the Respondent.

Interdiction, the issuance of a charge sheet and termination of services

By letter dated 28th July 2005, the Appellant was placed under interdiction due to

irregularities that the Appellant is said to have committed with regard to his claim for the

rent allowance, use of the official vehicle, the tender relating to the provision of transport

services to employees of the North Western Provincial Office of the Respondent and

encashment of cheques issued to the provider of the said transport services. The

Appellant had thereafter been issued with a charge sheet on 19th September 2005. While

the first seven charges were in relation to the above incidents, the last two charges were

whether the Respondent has lost trust and confidence in the Appellant and whether the

Appellant has brought disrepute to the Respondent, as a result of the irregularities which

were the subject matter of the first seven charges.

Pursuant to the response of the Appellant to the said charge sheet, the Respondent had

initiated a domestic inquiry in relation to the above charges and appointed as Inquiry

Officer a person recommended by the Ministry of Public Administration. Having

requested several postponements, the Appellant had informed the Inquiry Officer that he

would not be participating in the inquiry as he believed that it was not being conducted

in an impartial manner. The inquiry had thereafter proceeded ex parte. Upon the

4

Appellant being found guilty of all charges, his services had been terminated by letter

dated 13th March 2008.

Application to the Labour Tribunal and appeal to the High Court

Aggrieved by the said decision, the Appellant had filed an application before the Labour

Tribunal in terms of Section 31B(1)(a) of the Industrial Disputes Act [the Act]. While the

Respondent had led the evidence of five witnesses, the Appellant had given evidence on

his own behalf. By its order delivered on 6th July 2016, the Labour Tribunal had held that

the charges against the Appellant have not been proved and therefore, the termination

of the services of the Appellant was unjustified. The Labour Tribunal, while not ordering

reinstatement due to an ambiguity with regard to the age of retirement, had directed the

Respondent to pay the Appellant a sum of Rs. 3,627,900 as compensation.

On appeal, the Provincial High Court of the Western Province, holden at Colombo set

aside the said order of the Labour Tribunal. This appeal arises from the said judgment of

the High Court.

Questions of Law

On 9th January 2019, this Court granted the Appellant leave to appeal on the following

questions of law:

(1) Can a learned High Court Judge in an appeal from the judgment/order of a Labour

Tribunal made on a just and equitable basis taking all the circumstances relevant to

the issue, reverse and set aside the same on a technical issue strictly interpreting

one document without considering the circumstances on which the said document

came into existence?

(2) Is the judgment of the High Court in an appeal against the judgment of a Labour

Tribunal valid without giving reasons for the same?

5

While the first question of law relates to Charge No. 1 preferred against the Appellant,

the second question of law would apply in respect of all charges.

During the course of the hearing, the learned President’s Counsel for the Appellant

submitted that a Labour Tribunal is required to take into consideration all the

circumstances of the case and make an order which is just and equitable, and that in doing

so, a Labour Tribunal has a wide discretion with the relief that it could grant an employee.

He stated further that for this reason, (a) an appeal against an order of a Labour Tribunal

lies only on a question of law – vide Section 31D(3) of the Act – (b) the High Court, in

exercising its appellate jurisdiction must not interfere with the findings of fact reached by

the Labour Tribunal. The learned President’s Counsel for the Appellant however did

concede that an order of the Labour Tribunal can be set aside where the findings of fact

are perverse, but submitted that it was not the case in this appeal, and that the High Court

erred when it set aside the order of the Labour Tribunal.

Just and equitable jurisdiction of a Labour Tribunal

In terms of Section 31C(1) of the Act, “Where an application under section 31B is made to

a Labour Tribunal, it shall be the duty of the tribunal to make all such inquiries into that

application and hear all such evidence as the tribunal may consider necessary, and

thereafter make not later than six months from the date of such application, such order

as may appear to the tribunal to be just and equitable” [emphasis added].

While S.R. de Silva, in his book titled ‘The Law of Dismissal’ (3rd ed., 2018) has noted at

pages 279-80 that the phrase just and equitable does not lend itself to precise definition,

in Peiris v Podi Singho [78 CLW 46 at 48] it was held that, “the test of a just and equitable

order is that those qualities would be apparent to any fair-minded person reading the

order”. In Ceylon Transport Board v Ceylon Transport Workers Union [71 NLR 158 at

163], Tennekoon, J (as he then was) referring to Section 31C(1) stated as follows:

“This section must not be read as giving a labour tribunal a power to ignore the

weight of evidence or the effects of cross-examination on the vague and

insubstantial ground that it would be inequitable to one party so to do. There is no

6

equity about a fact. The tribunal must decide all questions of fact “solely on the facts

of the particular case, solely on the evidence before him and apart from any

extraneous considerations” (see R. v. Manchester Legal Aid Committee Ex parte

Brand & Co. Ltd. [(1952) 1 All ER 480]). In short, in his approach to the evidence he

must act judicially.”

In The Caledonian (Ceylon) Tea and Rubber Estates Ltd. v J.S. Hillman [79 (1) NLR 421 at

430] Sharvananda, J (as then was) observed as follows:

“In the course of adjudication, a Tribunal must determine the ‘rights’ and ‘wrongs’

of the claim made, and in so doing it undoubtedly is free to apply principles of justice

and equity, keeping in view the fundamental fact that its jurisdiction is invoked not

for the enforcement of mere contractual rights, but for preventing the infliction of

social injustice. The goals and values to be secured and promoted by Labour

Tribunals are social security and social justice. The concept of social justice is an

integral part of Industrial Law, and a Labour Tribunal cannot ignore its relevancy or

norms in exercising its just and equitable jurisdiction. Its sweep is comprehensive as

it motivates the activities of the modern welfare state. It is founded on the basic ideal

of socio-economic equality. Its aim is to assist in the removal of socio-economic

disparities and inequalities. It endeavours to resolve the competing claims of

employers and employees by finding a solution which is just and fair to both parties,

so that industrial disputes can be prevented…”

Although Labour Tribunals have a wide discretion in the relief that they could grant, this

Court has consistently cautioned that such discretion must be exercised within the four

corners of the law. T.S. Fernando, J, in Richard Pieris & Co. Ltd. v Wijesiriwardena [62

NLR 233 at 235] observed that, “In regard to the power of the Tribunal to make such

order as may appear to it to be just and equitable there is point in Counsel’s submission

that justice and equity can themselves be measured not according to the urgings of a kind

heart but only within the framework of the law.”

7

In The Ceylon Estates Staffs’ Union v The Superintendent, Meddecombra Estate,

Watagoda and Another [73 NLR 278 at 282] Weeramantry, J stated that, “In the making

of a just and equitable order one must consider not only the interest of the employees but

also the interest of the employers and the wider interest of the country, for the object of

social legislation is to have not only contended employees but also contended employers.”

It is therefore clear that while Section 31C(1) has circumscribed the role of a Labour

Tribunal, it has drawn a nexus that the Tribunal must maintain between the material that

is placed before it and the just and equitable award that it would eventually make.

In Ceylon Transport Board v Gunasinghe [72 NLR 76 at 83], Weeramantry, J, while

recognising that a Labour Tribunal must act judicially, went onto hold that Labour

Tribunals do not have:

“… a free charter to act in disregard of the evidence placed before them. They are, in

arriving at their findings of fact, as closely bound to the evidence adduced before

them and as completely dependent thereon as any Court of law. Findings of fact

which do not harmonise with the evidence underlying them lack all claims to

validity, whatever be the Tribunal which makes them.

Proper findings of fact are a necessary basis for the exercise by Labour Tribunals of

that wide jurisdiction given to them by statute of making such orders as they consider

to be just and equitable. Where there is no such proper finding of fact the order that

ensues would not be one which is just and equitable upon the evidence placed before

the Tribunal, for justice and equity cannot be administered in a particular case apart

from its own particular facts. I am strengthened in the conclusion I have formed by

a perusal of the judgment already referred to, of my brother Tennekoon [Ceylon

Transport Board v. Ceylon Transport Workers' Unions (1968) 71 NLR 158; 75 CLW

33], who has observed that it is only after the ascertainment of the facts upon a

judicial approach to the evidence that a Labour Tribunal can pass on to the next

stage of making an order that is fair and equitable having regard to the facts so

found” [emphasis added].

8

A similar requirement to make an award as may appear to him just and equitable has

been imposed by Section 17(1) of the Act on an arbitrator appointed in terms of Section

4(1). In Municipal Council Colombo v Munasinghe [71 NLR 223 at 225] Chief Justice

H.N.G. Fernando held that:

“… when the Industrial Disputes Act confers on an Arbitrator the discretion to make

an award which is ‘just and equitable,’ the Legislature did not intend to confer on an

Arbitrator the freedom of a wild horse. An award must be ‘just and equitable’ as

between the parties to a dispute; and the fact that one party might have

encountered ‘hard times’ because of personal circumstances for which the other

party is in no way responsible is not a ground on which justice or equity requires the

other party to make undue concessions. In addition, it is time that this Court should

correct what seems to be a prevalent misconception. The mandate which the

Arbitrator in an industrial dispute holds under the law requires him to make an

award which is just and equitable, and not necessarily an award which favours an

employee. An Arbitrator holds no licence from the Legislature to make any such

award as he may please, for nothing is just and equitable which is decided by whim

or caprice or by the toss of a double-headed coin.”

This position has been upheld by this Court in Standard Chartered Grindlays Bank Limited

v The Minister of Labour [SC Appeal No. 22/2003; SC Minutes of 4th April 2008] and Singer

Industries (Ceylon) Limited v The Ceylon Mercantile Industrial and General Workers

Union and Others [2010 (1) Sri LR 66]. In the latter case, it was held at page 84 that:

“It is a cardinal principle of law that in making an award by an arbitrator there must

be a judicial and objective approach and more importantly the perspectives both of

employer as well as the employee should be considered in a balanced manner and

undoubtedly just and equity must apply to both these parties.”

Thus, it is clear that in the guise of making a just and equitable order, the Labour Tribunal

cannot discriminate between the parties. It must consider the cases put forward by both

parties in a balanced manner, and its decision must be supported by evidence. It is only

then that the order of a Labour Tribunal would be truly just and equitable.

9

The jurisdiction of the High Court in respect of appeals from the Labour Tribunal

While in terms of Section 31D(2) of the Act, “an order of a labour tribunal shall be final

and shall not be called in question in any court,” this is subject to the provisions of Section

31D(3) of the Act which reads as follows:

“Where the workman who, or the trade union which, makes an application to a

labour tribunal, or the employer to whom that application relates is dissatisfied with

the order of the tribunal on that application, such workman, trade union or employer

may, by written petition in which the other party is mentioned as the respondent,

appeal from that order on a question of law, to the High Court established under

Article 154P of the Constitution, for the Province within which such Labour Tribunal

is situated” [emphasis added].

It would therefore be important to understand what is a question of law, in the context

of the provisions of the Act. In The Caledonian (Ceylon) Tea and Rubber Estates Ltd. v

J.S. Hillman [supra; at 425], it was held as follows:

“Under Section 31D(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, an appeal to the Supreme Court

lies from an order of a Labour Tribunal only on a question of law. Parties are bound

by the Tribunal’s findings of fact, unless it could be said that the said findings are

perverse and not supported by any evidence. With regard to cases where an appeal

is provided on questions of law only, Lord Normand in Inland Revenue v. Fraser,

[(1942) 24 Tax Cases p. 498], spelt the powers of Court as follows:

‘In cases where it is competent for a Tribunal to make findings of fact which are

excluded from review, the Appeal Court has always jurisdiction to intervene if it

appears… that the Tribunal has made a finding for which there is no evidence, or

which is inconsistent with the evidence and contradictory of it.’

In this framework, the question of assessment of evidence is within the province of

the Tribunal, and, if there is evidence on record to support its findings, this Court

10

cannot review those findings even though on its own perception of the evidence this

Court may be inclined to come to a different conclusion. ‘If the case contains anything

ex facie which is bad in law and which bears upon the determination, it is, obviously,

erroneous in point of law. But, without any misconception appearing ex facie, it may

be that the facts found are such that no person acting judicially and properly

instructed as to the relevant law could have come to the determination under

appeal. In those circumstances too, the Court must intervene’ – per Lord Radcliffe in

Edwards v. Bairstow (1956) 3 All ER 57. Thus, in order to set aside a determination

of facts by the Tribunal, limited as this Court is only to setting aside a

determination which is erroneous in law, the appellant must satisfy this Court that

there was no legal evidence to support the conclusion of facts reached by the

Tribunal, or that the finding is not rationally possible and is perverse having regard

to the evidence on record. Hence, a heavy burden rested on the appellant when he

invited this Court to reverse the conclusion of facts arrived at by the Tribunal”

[emphasis added].

In Ceylon Transport Board v Gunasinghe [supra; at 80] it was held that, “Where a statute

makes an appeal available only in respect of questions of law, the Appellate Court is not

without jurisdiction to interfere where the conclusion reached on the evidence is so clearly

erroneous that no person properly instructed in the law and acting judicially could have

reached that particular determination [Edwards, Inspector of Taxes v. Bairstow another

(1955) 3 All ER 48]. It is true that Courts will be more ready to find errors of law in

erroneous inferences from facts than in erroneous findings of primary fact, but it has been

repeatedly held that a Tribunal which has made a finding of primary fact that is wholly

unsupported by evidence has erred in point of law [De Smith, Judicial Review of

Administrative Action, pp. 86-7].”

In Jayasuriya v Sri Lanka State Plantations Corporation [(1995) 2 Sri LR 379; at 391]

Amerasinghe, J. considered a long line of jurisprudence on this matter, and held as

follows:

“The Industrial Disputes Act No. 43 of 1950 states in section 31D that the order of a

Labour Tribunal shall be final and shall not be called in question in any Court except

11

on a question of law. While appellate courts will not intervene with pure findings of

fact (e.g. Somawathie v. Baksons Textile Industries Ltd [(1973) 79(1) NLR 204],

Caledonian (Ceylon) Tea and Rubber Estates Ltd v. Hillman [(1977) 79(1) NLR 421],

Thevarayan v. Balakrishnan [(1984) 1 Sri LR 189], Nadarajah v. Thilagaratnam

[(1986) 3 CALR 303]), yet if it appears that the Tribunal has made a finding:

 wholly unsupported by evidence (Ceylon Transport Board v. Gunasinghe

[(1973) 72 NLR 76], Colombo Apothecaries Co. Ltd v. Ceylon Press Workers’

Union [(1972) 75 NLR 182], Ceylon Oil Workers’ Union v. Ceylon Petroleum

Corporation [(1978-9) 2 Sri LR 72]), or

 which is inconsistent with the evidence and contradictory of it (Reckitt &

Colman of Ceylon Ltd v. Peiris [(1978-9) 2 Sri LR 229]), or

 where the Tribunal has failed to consider material and relevant evidence

(United Industrial Local Government & General Workers’ Union v. Independent

Newspapers Ltd [(1973) 75 NLR 529]), or

 where it has failed to decide a material question (Hayleys Ltd v. De Silva

[(1963) 64 NLR 130]), or

 misconstrued the question at issue and has directed its attention to the

wrong matters (Colombo Apothecaries Co. Ltd v. Ceylon Press Workers’ Union

[supra]), or

 where there was an erroneous misconception amounting to a misdirection

(Ceylon Transport Board v. Samastha Lanka Motor Sevaka Samithiya [(1964)

65 NLR 566]), or

 where it failed to consider material documents or misconstrued them

(Virakesari Ltd v. Fernando [(1965) 66 NLR 145]), or

12

 where the Tribunal has failed to consider the version of one party or his

evidence (Carolis Appuhamy v. Punchirala [(1963) 64 NLR 44], Ceylon Workers’

Congress v. Superintendent, Kallebokke Estate [(1962) 63 NLR 536]), or

 erroneously supposed there was no evidence (Ceylon Steel Corporation v.

National Employees’ Union [(1969) 76 CLW 64]),

the finding of the Tribunal is subject to review by the Court of Appeal” [emphasis

added].

The judgment in The Caledonian (Ceylon) Tea and Rubber Estates Ltd. V J.S. Hillman

[supra] has been consistently followed by this Court – see Hatton National Bank v Perera

[(1996) 2 Sri LR 231], Shanthi Sagara Gunawardena v Ranjith Kumudusena Gunawardena

and Others [SC Appeal No. 89/2016; SC Minutes of 2nd April 2019] and Kotagala

Plantations Ltd. and Lankem Tea and Rubber Plantations (Pvt) Ltd. v Ceylon Planters

Society [(2010) 2 Sri LR 299]. In the latter case, Chief Justice J.A.N de Silva held as follows

at page 303:

“An appeal lies from an order of a Labour Tribunal only on [a] question of law. A

finding on facts by the Labour Tribunal is not disturbed in appeal by an Appellate

Court unless the decision reached by the Tribunal can be considered to be perverse.

It has been well established that for an order to be perverse the finding must be

inconsistent with the evidence led or that the finding could not be supported by

the evidence led (vide Caledonian Estates Ltd. v. Hillman 79 (1) NLR 421)” [emphasis

added].

Thus, even though a Labour Tribunal has been conferred with a wide discretion and is

required to make an order which is just and equitable, that does not mean that it has the

freedom of a wild horse and could make any order at its whim and fancy. The order of a

Labour Tribunal must be based on the evidence placed before it and its conclusions must

be supported by the said evidence. Although the jurisdiction of the appellate Court to

interfere with an order of a Labour Tribunal has been limited by Section 31D(3) to

questions of law, the long series of judicial decisions referred to by me have justified

13

intervention with an order of a Labour Tribunal where its findings inter alia have been

reached without considering the evidence placed before it, or where its findings are not

supported by such evidence.

I am therefore of the view that while the appellate Court can engage in a review of the

evidence, it should exercise caution:

(a) when analysing the evidence and findings of a Labour Tribunal so as to ensure that

it does not substitute its views with that of the Labour Tribunal;

(b) in determining whether its analysis should culminate in reversing the findings of fact

reached by a Labour Tribunal.

This being the present legal position, I shall now consider the evidence placed before the

Labour Tribunal in respect of each charge, whether the Labour Tribunal has correctly

understood the gravamen of each charge, the findings of the Labour Tribunal in respect

of such charge and whether its findings are supported by the material before it. I shall

thereafter consider the findings of the High Court, in order to determine if the High Court

acted within its jurisdiction when it set aside the order of the Labour Tribunal.

Charge No. 1

The Appellant was appointed as the Director (Corporate Services) of the Regional Office

of the Respondent situated in the North Western Province by letter dated 7th October,

2003. The said letter of appointment provided inter alia that, “you are required to reside

within [a] 15 km radius to the Office of the North Western Regional Office in view of your

appointment to the above post.”

Charge No. 1 which is centered on the above condition, reads as follows:

“Tn jhU m%dfoaYsh ldhH_d,fha wOHCI ^wdh;ksl fiajd& jYfhka m;a lruska YS% ,xld wdfhdaPk

uKav,fha iNdm;s$wOHCI Pkrd,a jsiska Tn fj; ksl=;a lr we;s wxl BiS$mS$wdra$517 iy 2003.10.07 jk osk orK m;ajSfuS ,smsfha 04 jk fPaoh wkqj Tn jhU m%dfoaYsh ldhH_d,fha isg lsf,da uSgra 15

14

la we;=<; mosxps jS isgsh hq;= jqj;a" tfia mosxps jS fkdisg" m;alsrSfus n,Orhdf.a jsOsu;a mQraj wjirhla ,nd fkdf.k fiajd ia:dkhg lsf,da uSgra 35 la fyda Bg wdikak oqr m%udKhla msysgs l+,S

ksjil mosxpsjS isgSfuka m;ajSfuS ,smsfha 04 jk fPaofha i|yka fldkafoaish lv lsrSu” [emphasis

added].

The essence of Charge No. 1 is that the Appellant did not take up residence at a place

situated within 15 km from the North Western Regional Office, as required by the letter

of appointment, and that the Appellant had thereby breached the condition stipulated in

his letter of appointment.

In his response to the charge sheet, the Appellant admitted that he did not take up

residence as stipulated by the letter of appointment, but pleaded not guilty to Charge No.

1. In his evidence before the Labour Tribunal, he stated that although this condition was

imposed on all those appointed to Regional Offices, the said condition was not practical

as it was difficult to find a house within the said distance for the rent allowance that was

paid, and for that reason, the said requirement was not enforced by the Respondent.

The Appellant has stated that representations were made to remove this condition and

that at a meeting held on 27th June 2005 with the Director General of the Respondent,

the following decision was taken:

“North East Region raised the question over the compulsory rule of BOI Staff residing

within 15 km radius.

Director General stated that it is practically not happening. As such that condition to

be treated as withdrawn. Director General further stated that the Government

Regulation of 40 km maximum distance will apply to the Regional Offices too in

addition to the Head Office.”

The minutes of the above meeting were marked by the Appellant and is the document

that forms the basis for the first question of law raised in this appeal.

The Respondent, while admitting that the above decision was taken, submitted that:

15

(a) Disciplinary proceedings had commenced by the time the said decision was taken;

(b) The said decision was prospective and that the breach of the said condition on the

part of the Appellant remained.

Having considered the above, the Labour Tribunal held as follows:

(a) The Respondent, by changing the requirement in June 2005, has acknowledged that

the said requirement imposed in the letter of appointment is not practical;

(b) The said decision is silent with regard to the date from which it is to apply, and

therefore, it applies with retrospective effect;

(c) The Appellant is therefore not guilty of the matters referred to in Charge No. 1.

The High Court has pointed out that a decision, once taken, applies with prospective

effect, and that there is no necessity to state that it applies with retrospective effect,

unless that is the intention of the decision maker. The High Court has gone on to hold that

in view of the admission by the Appellant that the place of residence was outside the 15

km radius, it is clear that the Appellant has breached the condition stipulated in the letter

of appointment, and is therefore guilty of Charge No. 1. It is perhaps significant that even

though the Labour Tribunal had ignored the admission by the Appellant and misconstrued

the issue before it, in the written submissions filed before this Court, the Appellant has

stated that, “If at all the High Court could have held that when the Appellant did not reside

within 15 km of his office as per his letter of appointment, disciplinary action could have

been taken for violating a condition of his letter of appointment.” This is exactly what the

Respondent has done in Charge No. 1.

The Appellant has not left the High Court with any other option but to arrive at a finding

that the Appellant is guilty of Charge No. 1, by virtue of his admission that he has not

adhered to the terms of the letter of appointment. I therefore agree with the conclusion

reached by the High Court that the Appellant has breached the aforementioned condition

in his letter of appointment.

16

What remains to be considered is whether the mitigatory circumstances pleaded by the

Appellant can be accepted.

Even if I accept the position of the Appellant that the requirement imposed by the letter

of appointment is not practical, the fact remains that the Appellant, as a Senior Officer

with almost 20 years of service with the Respondent and who had at one time functioned

as the Senior Manager of Internal Audit, ought to have made representations in that

regard and sought permission to reside outside the 15 km requirement. The position of

the Appellant that this was an issue that affected all those serving in the Regional Offices

of the Respondent means that this was common knowledge among the employees of the

Respondent and would therefore have been known to the Appellant at the time of the

appointment. The Appellant could therefore have refused to accept the said appointment

or else, made representations prior to accepting the same, or sought a waiver of that

condition while informing the Respondent that not being resident within the said distance

would not affect the discharge of his duties. Not having done any of these, I am of the

view that the Appellant cannot now shield himself by stating that the said condition is not

practical and must therefore face the consequences of his actions.

The next question to be considered is whether the aforementioned decision should apply

with retrospective effect. If it was the intention of the Director General of the Respondent

that the said condition should apply with retrospective effect, then, there should have

been a specific reference to that effect, which is not the case. The fact that it is “practically

not happening” or is not being adhered to, does not mean that its withdrawal is

retrospective. In my view, there was no evidence before the Labour Tribunal that would

have enabled the Labour Tribunal to arrive at the conclusion that the decision was

retrospective, and hence, it is clear that the Labour Tribunal misdirected itself when it

held so.

There is one other matter that I must refer to. In a memorandum dated 20th December

2005, the Acting Secretary General of the Respondent had recommended to the Director

General that no further inquiry is needed in this regard against the Appellant in view of

17

the above decision of 27th June 2005. The Director General, having considered the

preliminary inquiry report and the said recommendation, had decided that the inquiry

must proceed and that the Respondent must act on the findings of the Inquiry Officer.

This, together with the fact that the Appellant was interdicted only after the above

decision was taken on 27th June 2005 is to my mind, a confirmation that the said decision

was to apply with prospective effect, and that the said decision did not affect the

culpability of the Appellant, a fact which the Labour Tribunal has not considered. Taking

into consideration all of the above circumstances, I agree with the findings of the High

Court that the said decision was to apply with prospective effect.

This brings me to the question of whether the High Court acted in terms of Section 31D(3)

of the Act when it overruled the decision of the Labour Tribunal on Charge No. 1. To start

with, the Labour Tribunal has completely lost sight of the gravamen of the charge, and

has failed to consider the admission of the Appellant that he did not reside within the 15

km requirement, thereby misdirecting itself and misconstruing the issue before it. In

considering the explanation of the Appellant, the Labour Tribunal has forced itself to state

that the decision was retrospective, when not only was there was no evidence to support

such a finding, but such a finding was contrary to the evidence that was before it. The

findings of the Labour Tribunal are therefore perverse. In these circumstances, I am

satisfied that the High Court has not exceeded its jurisdiction when it set aside the findings

of the Labour Tribunal on Charge No. 1.

Taking into consideration all the circumstances relating to Charge No. 1, I would answer

the first question of law – i.e., “Can a learned High Court Judge in an appeal from the

judgment/order of a Labour Tribunal made on a just and equitable basis taking all the

circumstances relevant to the issue, reverse and set aside the same on a technical issue

strictly interpreting one document without considering the circumstances on which the

said document came into existence?” – as follows:

“The High Court can set aside a judgment of a Labour Tribunal on a question of law, as

provided by Section 31D(3) of the Act and as interpreted by this Court on previous

occasions. In this appeal, the High Court has proceeded on the basis of the admission to

18

the charge, and has rejected the explanation given in mitigation, for the reasons which I

have already adverted to. The judgment of the High Court is based on the totality of the

evidence led in respect of Charge No. 1. Its findings are not based solely on the minutes

of the meeting held on 27th June 2005, nor can it be said that the High Court has set aside

the findings of the Labour Tribunal on a technicality. I am therefore of the view that the

decision of the High Court is correct and is in terms of the law.”

Charge No. 2

I shall now consider Charge No. 2, which flows from Charge No. 1.

The Respondent states that in order to facilitate the aforementioned requirement that

the Appellant should take up residence within a distance of 15 km, the Appellant was

entitled to the payment of a rent allowance of 30% of his basic salary. Accordingly, by an

internal memorandum dated 6th April 2004, the Appellant informed the Executive

Director of the North Western REDC that he has taken on rent a house at Nelundeniya at

a monthly rental of Rs. 8500, and sought reimbursement of a sum of Rs. 51,000 being the

rental advance of six months that the Appellant claimed he had paid the landlord, who

incidentally was an employee of the Respondent.

Charge No. 2 reads as follows:

“Tn by; fpdaokd wxl 01 ys i|yka jsIudjdr l%shdj isoqlr" Tn mosxps ia:dkh yd jhU m%dfoaYsh ldhH_d,h w;r" wdikak oqr m%udKh i|yka fkdfldg f.j,a l=,s jYfhka 2004.04.02 isg

2005.03.21 osk olajd re. 102,000/- ^tla ,CI fooyi& l uqo,la Y%s ,xld wdfhdaPk uKav,fhka ,nd

.ekSu'”

The basis of Charge No. 2 is that even though the Appellant had claimed the rent

allowance, he had not disclosed the distance between the place of residence and the

Office at the time he made his claim by the aforementioned memorandum. I must stress

at this stage that the charge was not that the Appellant had claimed the said allowance

fraudulently or that the said claim was not in terms of the Circular issued by the

19

Respondent relating to the payment of a rent allowance, a fact which the Labour Tribunal

has lost sight of.

The aforementioned internal memorandum submitted by the Appellant, which was

available to the Labour Tribunal, was accompanied by a printed form consisting of twelve

questions. While the Appellant had declared his permanent residence and the distance

therefrom to Kurunegala, he had refrained from specifying the distance from the rented

house to the REDC office at Kurunegala. The Appellant has admitted in his evidence

before the Labour Tribunal that he had not disclosed this information in his application.

In the written submissions filed on his behalf, the Appellant, while conceding that he kept

the space blank, has taken up the position that he did convey this information over the

telephone to the Director (Administration). While this is reflected in the aforementioned

memorandum of the Secretary General of the Respondent, no evidence was elicited

before the Labour Tribunal in this regard. Even though the Appellant had not duly

completed his formal request for reimbursement, the claim had been approved by the

Director (Administration) and payment made, with an endorsement that “the application

and connected papers are in order.”

The Labour Tribunal has conceded that the failure to disclose the distance is a lapse on

the part of the Appellant. The Labour Tribunal has however concluded that the

Respondent could not have had any issue with it, for two reasons. The first is that the

claim has been approved by the Director (Administration). The second is that if the

granting of approval was irregular, the Respondent should have issued a warning letter

to the said Director (Administration) who approved the claim.

Having observed that the above findings of the Labour Tribunal are biased, the High Court

has gone on to hold that, by not duly completing the form, the Appellant has suppressed

the fact that the place taken on rent is situated outside the 15 km distance, a matter

which the Labour Tribunal has chosen to ignore.

In my view, the non-declaration of the said distance cannot be passed off as a mere

omission on the part of the Appellant. The failure to disclose the distance is significant,

when one considers the requirement in the letter of appointment to live within a distance

20

of 15 km, and the position of the Respondent that the entitlement to the rent allowance

is linked to the said requirement. It is clear that the Appellant refrained from specifying

the distance in the claim form he submitted, knowing fully well that if he does so, he

would not be paid the rent allowance. In these circumstances, I am in agreement with the

finding of the High Court that the Labour Tribunal has misinterpreted the documents and

has misunderstood the nature of the allegation contained in Charge No. 2.

The next issue that I must consider is whether the High Court acted in terms of Section

31D(3) of the Act when it overruled the decision of the Labour Tribunal on Charge No. 2.

The moment the Appellant admitted that he had not declared the distance, Charge No. 2

was proved. The Labour Tribunal, while acknowledging that this is a lapse on the part of

the Appellant, has taken into consideration matters which were irrelevant to the charge

in deciding that the Appellant is not guilty of the charge. The Labour Tribunal has

misdirected itself and misconstrued the issue before it, thereby compelling the High Court

to intervene and set aside its findings. Taking into consideration all of the above

circumstances, I am in agreement with the findings of the High Court and hold that the

High Court has not exceeded its jurisdiction when it set aside the findings of the Labour

Tribunal on Charge No. 2.

Charge No. 3

Charge No. 3 preferred against the Appellant reads as follows:

“Tnf.a ;k;=rg wod<j fuu uKav,h u.ska Tng imhd oS ;snqK wxl 325-0010 orK ks,r:h Tn ldhH_d,hg meusKsug iy kej; ldhH_d,fhka msgj hdug fndfyda oskl mdjspsps fkdlr ta ioyd uKav,fhka f.jkq ,nk bkaOk osukd yd rshoqre oSukdj ,nd .eksu'”

While the Labour Tribunal has found that the Appellant is not guilty of the said charge,

the High Court has not considered the said charge in its judgment, prompting the learned

President’s Counsel for the Appellant to submit that the High Court has failed to give

reasons – vide the second question of law raised in this appeal. In this background, the

findings of the Labour Tribunal on Charge No. 3 shall stand.

21

Charge Nos. 4, 5, 6 and 7

The next four charges relate to the tender for the provision of transport services to

employees of the North Western Provincial Office of the Respondent and the depositing

of six cheques issued to the provider of the said transport services in the personal bank

account of the Appellant.

According to the evidence of Sarathchandra Munasinghe, Senior Deputy Director of the

Respondent who was attached to the North Western Provincial Office, a tender board

comprising of the Appellant, himself and another had been appointed to select suitable

persons to provide transport services to those employed at the said Office of the

Respondent. This included a passenger bus service from Colombo to Kurunegala.

Accordingly, tenders had been called in June 2004. Bids were received from three

persons, including from a lady by the name of Ariyawathie, who had offered to provide

bus bearing registration no. 61 – 2725 or 60 – 9443, and from her husband Jayaratne, who

had offered another vehicle.

All bids had been referred to a Technical Evaluation Committee [TEC]. The TEC had invited

bidders to produce their vehicles for inspection, but only Ariyawathie had complied by

producing the bus bearing registration no. 61 – 2725. Having examined the said bus, the

TEC had rejected it as there were certain shortcomings with it. The report of the TEC had

been considered by the Tender Board who had decided to request Ariyawathie to rectify

the shortcomings and supply the required service. Ariyawathie had later substituted the

said bus with another bus bearing registration no. 62 – 8260, for which the

recommendations of the TEC had not been obtained.

Monthly payments for the said services had been made by six cheques drawn in favour of

Ariyawathie, in sums ranging from Rs. 70684 to Rs. 88820, for the period of October 2004

to March 2005. All except one cheque contained the signature of the Appellant. While

two of the cheques were payable to Ariyawathie or its bearer, the other four cheques had

been crossed as ‘account payee only’ which meant that the cheques had to be cleared

through an account maintained at a bank. Ariyawathie’s subsequent request to cancel the

crossing had been acceded to by the Respondent, with the Appellant being a signatory to

22

the said amendment. These six cheques had thereafter been deposited in account no.

191986, which was maintained in the name of the Appellant at the Borella Branch of the

Bank of Ceylon. The Respondent had led the evidence of an Officer of the said branch who

had confirmed that all six cheques were deposited in the said account of the Appellant, a

fact which the Appellant too had admitted.

The four charges that relate to the above transaction [i.e., Charge Nos. 4 – 7] are re-

produced below: “4. fld<U isg l=reKE., yd l=reKE., isg fld,U w;r jhU m%foaYsh ldraH_d,fha ldrah uKav,h m%jdykh lsrSu ioyd jdyk iemhsu msKsi jq fgkavra m;% leojSfus oekajSu wkqj fgkavra m;%hla bosrsm;a fkdl, wxl 62-8260 ork niar:h ldrahH_d, uKav, m%jdykh ioyd fhod .ekSu u.ska fgkavra fldkafoais W,a,x>kh fkdjk njg Tn jsiska jsOdhl wOHCI ^jhU m%foaYsh ldhH_d,h& fj; jeros Wmfoia ,ndosu' 5. fld<U isg l=reKE., yd l=reKE., isg fld,U w;r jhU m%dfoaYsh ld ldhH_d,fha ldrah uKav,h m%jdykh lsrSu ioyd jq fgkavrfha iemhqusldrsh jq wdra'ta' wdrshj;S uy;aush ;udg “wdodhlhdf.a .sKqug muKhs” hkqfjka fraLKh lr ksl=;a lrk ,o my; oelafjk fplam;a j, ish,q fraLKhka wj,x.= lr ,xld nexl=fjs Tng wh;a mqoa.,sl .sKqul ;ekam;a lsrsu' fplam;a wxlh ksl=;a l, oskh uqo, 723546 2004.10.14 re. 81,937.00

732861 2004.11.05 re. 71,250.00

732934 2004.12.14 re. 87,081.75

806842 2005.01.04 re. 88,820.25 6. fld<U isg l=reKE., yd l=reKE., isg fld,U w;r jhU m%dfoaYsh ldhH_d,fha ldrah uKav,h m%jdykh lsrSu ioyd fgkavrfha iemhqusldrsh jq wdra'ta' wdrshj;S uy;aush ;udg ksl=;a lrk ,o my; oelafjk fplam; fndre,af,a ,xld nexl=fjs Tnf.a wxl 191986 orK mqoa.,Sl .sKqfus ;ekam;a lsrSu' fplam;a wxlh ksl=;a l, oskh uqo, 806909 2005.02.03 re. 72,200.00

816274 2005.03.03 re. 70,684.75 7. by; wxl 05 yd 06 fpdaokdj, olajd we;s mrsos lghq;= lsrsu ;=,ska Tn Tnf.a mqoa.,Sl lghq;= yd rdPldrs lghq;= w;r .egSus we;sjk wdldrhg l%shd lsrsu'”

23

Charge No. 4 was in relation to the tender process itself, and alleged that the Appellant

has provided wrong advice to the Executive Director with regard to obtaining the services

of a bus in respect of which there was never a bid. The Labour Tribunal has correctly

pointed out that the Executive Director was never called as a witness, and that the said

charge has not been proved. I have examined the evidence led before the Labour Tribunal

and concur with its findings. The High Court has not interfered with the findings of the

Labour Tribunal that the Appellant is not guilty of this charge. In the absence of any finding

in this regard by the High Court, I agree with the finding of the Labour Tribunal; it would

suffice to state that the decision to permit Ariyawathie to substitute the bus was in

violation of tender procedure except that such a decision had been taken due to the

exigency that had arisen, i.e., the non-availability of a suitable bus to provide the said

transport service.

Charge Nos. 5 and 6 related to the depositing of the cheques issued to Ariyawathie in the

personal account of the Appellant. As acknowledged in the written submissions of the

Appellant, the thrust of Charge Nos. 5 and 6 is Charge No. 7. Charge No. 8 alleged that the

Appellant has breached the trust placed in him by the Respondent, by committing the

irregularities set out in Charge Nos. 1 – 7, and is consequential to the said charges.

It must be noted that the Respondent did not allege in the above charges that the

Appellant had benefitted from the said transactions, although in cross-examination, it

was suggested that the Appellant had acted fraudulently. In his explanation to the charge

sheet, which was also the position taken up before the Labour Tribunal, the Appellant had

admitted that the said cheques were in fact deposited in his account, thereby conceding

to the matters alleged in Charge Nos. 5 and 6. The Appellant’s defence to Charge No. 7

[and also 8] was that as Ariyawathie and her family are from the same village as he is and

are part of the congregation [“odhl iNd”] of the village temple, he had agreed to the said

cheques being cleared through his account as Ariyawathie had informed him that she

does not have a bank account. The function of the Labour Tribunal therefore was to

consider whether the circumstances pleaded in mitigation were acceptable.

24

The learned Counsel for the Respondent has raised four issues with this explanation,

which he submitted the Labour Tribunal has failed to consider. The first is, the Appellant

should not have served on the Tender Board if Ariyawathie was known to him, or else, he

should have declared that fact, in order to avoid a conflict of interest. It is admitted that

the Appellant did neither. The second is, two of the cheques had not been crossed as

‘account payee only’ and were payable to Ariyawathie or the bearer. Hence, these two

cheques could have been encashed across the counter as opposed to being cleared

through an account, and there was no necessity to deposit these two cheques in the

account of the Appellant. The third is, once the endorsement of ‘account payee only’ is

cancelled, the necessity to clear a cheque through an account no longer arises. Thus, there

was no need for Ariyawathie to seek the assistance of the Appellant to clear the cheques

and nor was there a necessity for the Appellant to accede to such request, especially

since, having been a signatory to the cancellation of the said endorsement, the Appellant

would have known that the cheques could be encashed across the counter. The fourth is

that according to the evidence of an Officer from Sampath Bank, Ariyawathie had opened

account no. 1005 5048 5405 at the Kiribathgoda Branch of the said Bank on 12th August

2004. Thus, by the time the first cheque was issued to her in October 2004, Ariyawathie

already had a bank account, thus demonstrating that the version of the Appellant that he

had only helped her as she did not have a bank account is not true. It is only after the

preliminary inquiry into the above transaction commenced in March 2005 that a cheque

issued in favour of Ariyawathie was deposited in her account.

The learned Counsel for the Respondent also drew the attention of this Court to the

position of the Appellant that he had handed over the money to Ariyawathie after

encashing the said cheques, and that he has not unduly benefitted by assisting her. I have

examined the bank statements of the Appellant produced before the Labour Tribunal and

observe that upon realisation of each cheque, the full value thereof has not been

withdrawn from his account. The argument of the learned Counsel for the Respondent

was that if the Appellant was merely assisting Ariyawathie, then, as soon as the cheques

realised, cash equivalent to the value of each cheque should have been withdrawn by the

Appellant. The explanation of the Appellant, on being cross-examined on this issue, was

25

that his wife operated two vans to transport school children, and that he had paid

Ariyawathie from the monies that were available to him.

It is in the above factual background that I shall consider the order of the Labour Tribunal.

The Labour Tribunal has not considered any of the above four matters that were urged

before this Court by the learned Counsel for the Respondent. Instead, the Labour

Tribunal, while noting that the Appellant has admitted that the said cheques were

deposited in his account, has accepted the evidence of the Appellant that there was no

complaint by Ariyawathie that he did not give her the money or that he solicited any

money from her for assisting her. Ariyawathie has in fact made a statement to the

Respondent during the preliminary investigation that she received the full sum of money

from the Appellant but she has not given evidence at the domestic inquiry. In any event,

that was not the charge against the Appellant, a fact which the Labour Tribunal has chosen

to ignore.

The Labour Tribunal has also held that the Respondent failed to call Ariyawathie as a

witness to rebut the evidence of the Appellant. The High Court has correctly concluded

that there was no necessity on the part of the Respondent to call Ariyawathie as a witness,

and that the burden was on the Appellant to show that his actions did not give rise to a

conflict of interest, and that he acted in good faith when he assisted Ariyawathie. Thus, it

was the Appellant who should have called Ariyawathie to give evidence.

This brings me to the question whether the High Court erred when it set aside the findings

of the Labour Tribunal in respect of Charge Nos. 5 – 7.

The High Court has correctly observed that the allegations in Charge Nos. 5 and 6 have

not only been admitted by the Appellant but has been proved by the Respondent by

leading the evidence of officials of the Bank of Ceylon and Sampath Bank. The High Court

has also held that the Labour Tribunal has misinterpreted the crux of Charge Nos. 5 and

6, a conclusion with which I agree. It is indeed a matter of regret that the Labour Tribunal

has wholly ignored the essence of the allegation in Charge Nos. 5, 6 and 7, in that the

26

allegation was not that the Appellant benefitted financially but that he permitted cheques

signed by him and issued to a service provider of his employer to be deposited in his

private bank account, thereby giving rise to an obvious conflict of interest.

In the above circumstances, I am satisfied that the Labour Tribunal has failed to consider

the totality of the evidence led before it, and that the findings of the Labour Tribunal are

not supported by the evidence and material placed before it. The Labour Tribunal could

not have exonerated the Appellant on the material that was available to it and its decision

is irrational and perverse. The decision of the High Court on these charges is therefore in

line with Section 31D(3) of the Act.

Charge Nos. 8 and 9

Charge Nos. 8 and 9 relate to the Respondent losing confidence in the Appellant and the

Appellant bringing discredit to the Respondent, respectively. The said charges read as

follows:

“8. by; wxl 01 yd 08 olajd jq fpdaokdjkays wvx.= jeros tlla fyda bka lSysmhla fyda ish,a,u fyda isoq lsrsfuka wOHCI jrfhl= f,i uKav,h Tn flfrys ;nk ,o jsYajdih lv lsrsu' 9. by; wxl 01 isg 08 olajd jq fpdaokdjkays wvx.= jeros tlla fyda bka lSysmhla fyda ish,a,u fyda isoqlsrSfuka fmdoqfjs Y%s ,xld wdfhdaPk uKav,fha wOHCIjrfhla jYfhka Un fuu uKav,fha orK ,o ;k;=r wmlSra;shg m;a lsrsu'”

Having exonerated the Appellant of the first seven charges, there was no necessity for

the Labour Tribunal to consider these two charges. These two charges however come to

the forefront in view of the findings of the High Court in respect of Charge Nos. 1, 2 and

5 to 7, with the High Court holding that these two charges have been established in view

of its findings on Charge Nos. 5 and 6.

In Peiris v Celltel Lanka Limited [SC Appeal No. 30/2009; SC Minutes of 11th March 2011],

Tilakawardane, J, has quoted with approval the following excerpt from Democratic

Workers’ Congress v De Mel and Wanigasekera [CGG 12432 of 19th May, 1961 at para

24], at pages 8 and 9:

27

“The contractual relationship as between employer and employee so far as it

concerns a position of responsibility is founded essentially on the confidence one has

in the other and in the event of any incident which adversely affects that confidence,

the very foundation on which that contractual relationship is built should necessarily

collapse … Once this link in the chain of the contractual relationship … snaps, it would

be illogical or unreasonable to bind one party to fulfil his obligations towards the

other. Otherwise it would really mean an employer being compelled to employ a

person in a position of responsibility even though he has no confidence in the latter.”

Peiris v Celltel Lanka Limited [supra] is a case where the appellant was an Assistant

Manager (Credit Collection), a position which this Court described as being “of

responsibility which demands integrity, competency, reliability and independence.”

Given the nature of the appellant’s services which was to independently handle the

respondent’s work in the outstation districts, it was held as follows at page 8:

“There was without a doubt an expectation by the Respondent that the Appellant

was to act with the utmost integrity and honesty, arguably even more so than that

required of an employee without such autonomy.

Once the Appellant fell short of this expectation it is perfectly reasonable, by any

reasonable standard, that the Respondent would cease to continue to repose any

confidence in the Appellant. Loss of confidence arises when the employer suspects

the honesty and loyalty of the employee. It is often a subjective feeling or individual

reaction to an objective set of facts and motivation. It should not be a disguise to

cover up the employer’s inability to establish charges in a disciplinary inquiry but

must be actually based on a bona fide suspicion against the employee making it

impossible or risky to the organization to continue to keep him in service. The

employer-employee relationship is based on trust and confidence both in the

integrity of the employee as well as his ability or capacity. Loss of confidence

however, is not fully subjective and must be based on established grounds of

misconduct which the law regards as sufficient.”

28

At page 9, Tilakawardane, J summarised it in the following manner:

“In cases of employment which demand a high level of responsibility and autonomy,

a lapse in integrity is the precise sort of moral turpitude that can result in a

particularly devastating structural and managerial breakdown simply because of the

reliance and expectation placed in the hands of such positions, and as such is the sort

of transgressive behaviour for which termination of services can be justified.”

The Appellant was a senior employee of the Respondent, holding the post of Director and

entrusted with a position of responsibility and trust. It is obvious that he was required to

act with the highest level of integrity and in a manner that the Respondent would not lose

the confidence that it had reposed in him. The Appellant could have acted with more

responsibility with regard to the requirement in his letter of appointment that he resides

within a distance of 15 km from the place of work. While the failure to do so would lead

to an erosion of the confidence that the Respondent had in the Appellant, in my view, the

said two charges do not, on its own, justify termination of the services of the Appellant.

The position, however, is different with regard to Charge Nos. 5 – 7. An employee cannot

have any financial dealings with a service provider whose services were obtained by a

tender board of which he was a member. The factual circumstances, to which I have

referred earlier, can only lead to a complete loss of confidence that the Respondent had

in the Appellant. Viewed objectively, these charges were of a serious nature and once

established, would justify termination of the services of the Appellant. The High Court

was therefore correct when it found the Appellant guilty of Charge Nos. 8 and 9, and held

that the termination of the services of the Appellant was justified.

Taking into consideration all of the above circumstances. I would answer the second

question of law on which leave to appeal was granted – i.e., “Is the judgment of the High

Court in an appeal against the judgment of a Labour Tribunal valid without giving reasons

for the same?”, as follows:

29

“A High Court must give reasons for its judgment. In its judgment dated 25th July 2017,

the High Court has given the reasons for setting aside the findings of the Labour Tribunal.

I do not see any basis to interfere with the said judgment.”

The appeal of the Appellant is accordingly dismissed, without costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT E.A.G.R Amarasekara, J I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT