IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Bank of Ceylon,

No. 04, Bank of Ceylon Mawatha,

Colombo 01.

Plaintiff

SC APPEAL NO: SC/APPEAL/40/2014

SC LA NO: SC/HCCA/LA/244/2010

HCCA NO: UVA/HCCA/BDL/82/2003 (F)

DC BADULLA CASE NO: L/947

Vs.

A.C. Rajasingham,

No. 03/C, Bandarawela Road,

Badulla.

Defendant

AND BETWEEN

Bank of Ceylon,

No. 04, Bank of Ceylon Mawatha,

Colombo 01.

Plaintiff-Appellant

Vs.

A.C. Rajasingham,

No. 03/C, Bandarawela Road,

Badulla.

Defendant-Respondent

2

SC/APPEAL/40/2014

AND NOW BETWEEN

Bank of Ceylon,

No. 04, Bank of Ceylon Mawatha,

Colombo 01.

Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant

Vs.

A.C. Rajasingham,

No. 03/C, Bandarawela Road,

Badulla.

Defendant-Respondent-Respondent

(deceased)

1. Jenita Margret Swarnabai,

Rajasingham nee Rajamoni,

No. 03, Bandarawela Road, Badulla.

2. Amanda Priyadarshani Rajasingham,

No. 03, Bandarawela Road, Badulla.

3. Aaron Dhayalan Rajasingham,

Presently at Flat 16 Building 8,

Al Kharaib, Street 920, Najma,

Doha Qatar.

Substituted Defendant-Respondent-

Respondents

Before: Vijith K. Malalgoda, P.C., J.

P. Padman Surasena, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

3

SC/APPEAL/40/2014

Counsel: Jagath Wickramanayake, P.C., with Pujanee De Alwis for

the Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant.

H. Withanachchi with Shantha Karunadhara for the

Defendant-Respondent-Respondent.

Argued on : 11.01.2023

Written submissions:

by the Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant on 28.02.2014 and

13.10.2022

by the Defendant-Respondent-Respondent on 28.04.2017.

Decided on: 04.07.2023

Samayawardhena, J.

Introduction

The plaintiff (Bank of Ceylon) filed this action in the District Court of

Badulla seeking declaration of title to, ejectment of the defendant from,

the land described in the second schedule to the plaint, and damages.

The defendant filed answer seeking dismissal of the plaintiffs action.

After trial, the District Court dismissed the plaintiffs action. On appeal,

the High Court of Civil Appeal of Badulla affirmed the judgment of the

District Court. Hence this appeal by the plaintiff.

This Court granted leave to appeal against the judgment of the High

Court on three questions suggested by the plaintiff (1st to 3rd below) and

one suggested by the defendant (4th below). They read as follows:

(1) Did the High Court make a fundamental error in construing the

nature of the action in view of the fact that the defendant not

having claimed adverse title against the plaintiff?

4

SC/APPEAL/40/2014

(2) Did the High Court err with regard to standard of proof in an action

for declaration of title when the defendant does not set up adverse

title as against the plaintiff?

(3) Did the High Court err in the assessment of the title deed P1

produced at the trial?

(4) Can the plaintiff in a rei vindicatio action prove title by mere

production of his title deed without predecessors title being proved

as in this action?

There is no issue regarding the identification of the land/premises in suit.

No such issue was ever raised in the District Court. Therefore this Court

cannot be misled by making submissions on the identification of the land.

The simple case for the plaintiff is that the plaintiff is the owner of the

land by deed of transfer marked P1 at the trial and the defendant is in

unlawful occupation of the land. He is a trespasser. The deed P1 was not

marked subject to proof. The plaintiff did not think it necessary to prove

the devolution of title, and rightly so. This is not a partition case to prove

the pedigree. The defendant never claimed ownership of the property by

deed or by prescription or any other mode. His position was that he

occupied the premises in suit as an employee of Browns & Co. on

payment of rent and Brown & Co. was closed down on 22.11.1994 and

from that day he is not an employee of that company. He further admits

that he is in unlawful occupation of the premises since 22.12.1994. He

has been paid compensation for the termination of his employment by

his former employer and thereafter that amount has been enhanced by

the Labour Tribunal. It is clear that he thinks the compensation awarded

was inadequate. This is the evidence of the defendant in that regard:

: 1994 ?

: . .

5

SC/APPEAL/40/2014

: 94

?

: .

: ?

: .

:

?

: .

: 1992 .1, .1, .1

92 ?

: .

:

?

: .

(pages 59-60 of the appeal brief)

In my view, this should end the matter. But unfortunately, the District

Court thought that the plaintiff did not prove his title in the manner a

plaintiff in a rei vindicatio action ought to have proved. What is this

standard of proof the District Court expected from the plaintiff and on

what basis? The District Court states that the mere production of the title

deed of the plaintiff is not sufficient but the plaintiff shall prove his

predecessors title as well. In other words, the plaintiff in a rei vindicatio

action shall prove the chain of title as in a partition case. In elaborating

the basis for this very high standard, citing Pathirana v. Jayasundera

(1955) 58 NLR 169, the District Judge states that, since a rei vindicatio

action is filed against the whole world, the plaintiff shall prove title to the

property strictly. This is what the District Judge states:

(58 169) ..

.

6

SC/APPEAL/40/2014

. In reference to the

defendants evidence quoted above, citing Wanigaratne v. Juwanis

Appuhamy (1962) 65 NLR 167, the District Judge states that, in a rei

vindicatio action, the defendants evidence can never be used to support

the plaintiffs case. The High Court affirmed these findings

unhesitatingly. I must state that those findings are misconceived in law.

In summary, the correct position is as follows:

(a) A rei vindicatio action is not an action filed against the whole world.

In modern law, rei vindicatio action is an action in personam and

not an action in rem in the popular sense.

(b) In a rei vindicatio action, the plaintiff needs only to prove his case

on a balance of probabilities, and no higher degree of proof is

required.

(c) If there is no challenge, in a rei vindicatio action, the mere

production of the title deed is sufficient to prove title to the

property.

(d) The Court can consider the defendants evidence in a rei vindicatio

action.

Let me elaborate on these matters in greater detail.

Burden of proof in a rei vindicatio action

The burden of proof in a rei vindicatio action is overwhelmingly shrouded

in misconceptions and misconstructions.

In order to succeed in a rei vindicatio action, first and foremost, the

plaintiff shall prove his ownership to the property. If he fails to prove it,

his action shall fail. This principle is based on the Latin maxim onus

probandi incumbit ei qui agit, which means, the burden of proof lies with

7

SC/APPEAL/40/2014

the person who brings the action. Section 101 of the Evidence Ordinance

is also to a similar effect.

Macdonell C.J. in De Silva v. Goonetilleke (1960) 32 NLR 217 at

219 stated:

There is abundant authority that a party claiming a declaration of

title must have title himself. To bring the action rei vindicatio

plaintiff must have ownership actually vested in him. (1 Nathan p.

362, s. 593.) ... The authorities unite in holding that plaintiff must

show title to the corpus in dispute and that if he cannot, the action

will not lie.

In Pathirana v. Jayasundera (1955) 58 NLR 169 at 172, Gratiaen J.

declared:

The plaintiffs ownership of the thing is of the very essence of the

action. Maasdorps Institutes (7th Ed.) Vol. 2, 96.

In Mansil v. Devaya [1985] 2 Sri LR 46, G.P.S. De Silva J. (later C.J.)

stated at 51:

In a rei vindicatio action, on the other hand, ownership is of the

essence of the action; the action is founded on ownership.

In Latheef v. Mansoor [2010] 2 Sri LR 333 at 352, Marsoof J. held:

An important feature of the actio rei vindicatio is that it has to

necessarily fail if the plaintiff cannot clearly establish his title.

Having said the above, it needs to be emphasised that the plaintiff in a

rei vindicatio action has no heavier burden to discharge than a plaintiff

in any other civil action. The standard of proof in a rei vindicatio action is

on a balance of probabilities.

8

SC/APPEAL/40/2014

Professor George Wille, in his monumental work Willes Principles of

South African Law, 9th Edition (2007), states at page 539:

To succeed with the rei vindicatio, the owner must prove on a

balance of probabilities, first, his or her ownership in the property.

If a movable is sought to be recovered, the owner must rebut the

presumption that the possessor of the movable is the owner thereof.

In the case of immovables, it is sufficient as a rule to show that title

in the land is registered in his or her name. Secondly, the property

must exist, be clearly identifiable and must not have been destroyed

or consumed. Money, in the form of coins and banknotes, is not

easily identifiable and thus not easily vindicable. Thirdly, the

defendant must be in possession or detention of the thing at the

moment the action is instituted. The rationale is to ensure that the

defendant is in a position to comply with an order for restoration.

In Preethi Anura v. William Silva (SC/APPEAL/116/2014, SC Minutes of

05.06.2017), the plaintiff filed a rei vindicatio action against the

defendant seeking a declaration of title to the land in suit and the

ejectment of the defendant therefrom. The District Court held with the

plaintiff but the High Court of Civil Appeal set aside the judgment of the

District Court on the basis that the plaintiff failed to prove title of the

land. The plaintiffs title commenced with a statutory determination made

under section 19 of the Land Reform Law in favour of his grandmother,

who had bequeathed the land by way of a last will to the plaintiff, with

the land being later conveyed to the plaintiff by way of an executors

conveyance. No documentary evidence was tendered to establish that the

last will was proved in Court and admitted to probate in order to validate

the said executors conveyance. The District Court was satisfied that the

said factors were proved by oral evidence but the High Court found the

same insufficient to discharge the burden that rests upon a plaintiff in a

9

SC/APPEAL/40/2014

rei vindicatio action, which the High Court considered to be very heavy.

The Supreme Court reversed the judgment of the High Court and restored

the judgment of the District Court, taking the view that the plaintiff had

proved title to the land despite the purported shortcomings. In the course

of the judgment, Dep C.J. (with De Abrew J. and Jayawardena J.

agreeing) remarked:

In a rei vindicatio action, the plaintiff has to establish the title to the

land. Plaintiff need not establish the title with mathematical

precision nor to prove the case beyond reasonable doubt as in a

criminal case. The plaintiffs task is to establish the case on a

balance of probability. In a partition case the situation is different as

it is an action in rem and the trial judge is required to carefully

examine the title and the devolution of title. This case being a rei

vindicatio action this court has to consider whether the plaintiff

discharged the burden on balance of probability.

What is the degree of proof expected when the standard of proof is on a

balance of probabilities? This is better understood when proof on a

balance of probabilities is compared with proof on beyond a reasonable

doubt.

On proof beyond a reasonable doubt, in Miller v. Minister of Pensions

[1947] 2 All ER 372, Lord Denning declared at 373:

Proof beyond reasonable doubt does not mean proof beyond the

shadow of doubt. The law would fail to protect the community if it

admitted fanciful possibilities to deflect the course of justice. If the

evidence is so strong against a man as to leave only a remote

possibility in his favour which can be dismissed with the sentence

of course it is possible, but not in the least probable, the case is

10

SC/APPEAL/40/2014

proved beyond reasonable doubt, but nothing short of that will

suffice.

In relation to proof on a balance of probabilities, it was stated at 374:

That degree is well settled. It must carry a reasonable degree of

probability, but not so high as is required in a criminal case. If the

evidence is such that the tribunal can say: We think it more

probable than not, the burden is discharged, but, if the probabilities

are equal, it is not.

In consideration of the degree of proof in a rei vindicatio action, we

invariably refer to the seminal judgment of Pathirana v. Jayasundara

(1955) 58 NLR 169. In that case the plaintiff sued the defendant on the

basis that the defendant was an overholding lessee. The defendant

admitted the bare execution of the lease but stated that the lessors were

unable to give him possession of the land. He averred that the land was

sold to him by its lawful owner (not one of the lessors) and that by adverse

possession from that date he had acquired title by prescription. The

plaintiff then sought to amend the plaint by claiming a declaration of title

and ejectment on the footing that his rights of ownership had been

violated. The Supreme Court held:

A lessor of property who institutes action on the basis of a cause of

action arising from a breach by the defendant of his contractual

obligation as lessee is not entitled to amend his plaint subsequently

so as to alter the nature of the proceeding to an action rei vindicatio

if such a course would prevent or prejudice the setting up by the

defendant of a plea of prescriptive title.

In the course of the judgment the Court distinguished an action for

declaration of title (based on the contractual relationship between the

plaintiff and the defendant) from an action rei vindicatio proper. In

11

SC/APPEAL/40/2014

general terms, in both actions, a declaration of title is sought in the

former, as a matter of course, without strict proof of title, but in the latter,

as a peremptory requirement, with strict proof of title. H.N.G. Fernando

J. (later C.J.) at page 171 explained the distinction between the two in

this way:

There is however the further point that the plaintiff in his prayer

sought not only ejectment but also a declaration of title, a prayer for

which latter relief is probably unusual in an action against an

overholding tenant. I have no doubt that it is open to a lessor in an

action for ejectment to ask for a declaration of title, but the question

of difficulty arises is whether the action thereby becomes a rei

vindicatio for which strict proof of the plaintiff's title would be

required, or else is merely one for a declaration (without strict proof)

of a title which the tenant by law precluded from denying. If the

essential element of a rei vindicatio is that the right of ownership

must be strictly proved, it is difficult to accept the proposition that an

action in which the plaintiff can automatically obtain a declaration

of title through the operation of a rule in estoppel should be regarded

as a vindicatory action. The fact that the person in possession of

property originally held as lessee would not preclude the lessor-

owner from choosing to proceed against him by a rei vindicatio. But

this choice can I think be properly exercised only by clearly setting

out the claim of title and sounding in delict.

The term strict proof of the plaintiffs title used here does not mean that

the plaintiff in a rei vindicatio action shall prove title beyond a reasonable

doubt or a very high degree of proof. The term strict proof of the plaintiffs

title was used here to distinguish the standard of proof between a

declaration of title action based on a contractual relationship between

the plaintiff and the defendant such as lessor and lessee, and a rei

12

SC/APPEAL/40/2014

vindicatio action proper based on ownership of the property. In a rei

vindicatio action, if the plaintiff proves on a balance of probabilities that

he is the owner, he must succeed.

Professor G.L. Peiris, in his treatise Law of Property in Sri Lanka, Vol I,

makes it clear at page 304:

It must be emphasized, however, that the observations in these

cases to the effect that the plaintiffs title must be strictly proved in

a rei vindicatio, cannot be accepted as containing the implication that

a standard of exceptional stringency applies in this context. An

extremely exacting standard is insisted upon in certain categories of

action such as partition actions. It is clear that a standard

characterized by this degree of severity does not apply to the proof

of a plaintiffs title in a rei vindicatory action.

(Justice) Dr. H.W. Tambiah opines in Survey of Laws Controlling

Ownership of Lands in Sri Lanka, Vol 2, International Property

Investment Journal 217 at pages 243-244:

In a vindicatory action, the plaintiff must prove that he is the owner

of the property which is in the possession of the defendant. See de

Silva v. Gunathilleke, 32 N.L.R. 217 (1931); Abeykoon Hamine v.

Appuhamy, 52 N.L.R. 49 (1951); Muthusamy v. Seneviratne, 31

C.L.W. 91 (1946). Once title is established, the burden shifts to the

defendant to prove that by adverse possession for a period of 10

years he has acquired prescriptive title. Siyaneris v. Udenis de Silva,

52 N.L.R. 289 (1951). In rei vindicatory action once the plaintiff

proves he was in possession but then he was evicted by the

defendant, the burden of proving title will shift to the defendant. In

Kathiramathamby v. Arumugam 38 C.L.W. 27 (1948) it was held

that if the plaintiff alleges that he was forcibly ousted by the

13

SC/APPEAL/40/2014

defendant the burden of proving ouster remains with the

complainant. As a practical matter, the burden of proof in a rei

vindicatio action is not burdensome. The plaintiff must prove only

that he is the probable owner of the property.

The view of Dr. Tambiah As a practical matter, the burden of proof in a

rei vindicatio action is not burdensome. The plaintiff must prove only that

he is the probable owner of the property shall be understood in the

context of his view expressed at the outset that In a vindicatory action,

the plaintiff must prove that he is the owner of the property which is in the

possession of the defendant.

The recent South African case of Huawei Technologies South Africa (Pty)

Limited v. Redefine Properties Limited and Another [2018] ZAGPJHC 403

decided on 29.05.2018 reveals that the burden of proof of a plaintiff in a

rei vindicatio action is not unusually onerous. In this case it was held

that what the plaintiff in a rei vindicatio action needs to prove is that he

is the owner of the property (which the Court stated could be done by

producing his title deed) and that the defendant is holding or in

possession of the property. Once this is done, the onus shifts to the

defendant to establish a right to continue to hold against the owner. Cele

J. declared:

The rei vindicatio is the common law real action for the protection of

ownership. C.P. Smith, Eviction and Rental Claims: A Practical Guide

at p. 1-2; Graham v. Ridley 1931 TPD 476; Chetty v Naidoo 1974 (3)

SA 13 (A). It is inherent in the nature of ownership that possession

of the res should normally be with the owner and it follows that no

other person may withhold it from the owner unless he or she is

vested with some right enforceable against the owner. The owner, in

instituting a rei vindicatio, need do no more than allege and prove

that he is the owner and that the defendant is holding or in

14

SC/APPEAL/40/2014

possession of the res. The onus is on the Defendant to allege and

establish a right to continue to hold against the owner. Chetty v.

Naidoo (supra) at 20 AE. A court does not have an equitable

discretion to refuse an order for ejectment on the grounds of equity

and fairness. Belmont House v. Gore NNO 2011 (6) SA 173 (WCC) at

para [15]. In the case of eviction based on an owners rei vindicatio,

the owner has only to prove his ownership which can be done by

producing his title deed indicating that the property is registered in

his name. Goudini Chrome (Pty) Ltd v. MCC Contracts (Pty) Ltd [1999]

ZASCA 208; 1993 (1) SA 77 (A) at 82 AC.

The requirement of proof of chain of title which is the norm in a partition

action is not applicable in a rei vindicatio action. If there is no challenge

to the title deed of the plaintiff on specific grounds, the plaintiff can prove

his ownership to the property by producing his title deed.

This view was expressed by Professor Wille (op. cit. at page 539) when he

stated that In the case of immovables, it is sufficient as a rule to show

that title in the land is registered in his or her name.

When the standard of proof is on a balance of probabilities, the Court is

entitled to consider whose version the plaintiffs or the defendants is

more probable.

Banda v. Soyza [1998] 1 Sri LR 255 is a rei vindicatio action filed by a

trustee of a temple seeking a declaration of title, the ejectment of the

defendant and damages. The Court of Appeal set aside the judgment of

the District Court and the plaintiffs action was dismissed on the ground

that the plaintiff had failed to establish title to the subject matter of the

action or even to identify the land in suit. But the Supreme Court set

aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal and restored the judgment of

the District Court on the basis that there was sufficient evidence led on

15

SC/APPEAL/40/2014

behalf of the plaintiff to prove the title and the identity of the lots in

dispute. G.P.S. de Silva C.J. laid down at page 259 the criterion to be

adopted in a rei vindicatio action in respect of the standard of proof in the

following manner:

In a case such as this, the true question that a court has to consider

on the question of title is, who has the superior title? The answer

has to be reached upon a consideration of the totality of the evidence

led in the case.

Dr. H.W. Tambiah (op. cit. at p. 244) refers to proof of superior title by

the defendant as a defence to a rei vindicatio action.

In a vindicatory action, the defendant has numerous defenses,

which include: denial of the plaintiffs title; establishment of his own

title, in the sense of establishing a title superior to that of the plaintiff;

prescription; a plea of res judicata; right of tenure under the plaintiff

for example usufruct, pledge or lease of land; the right to retain

possession subject to an indemnity from the plaintiff under peculiar

conditions; a plea of exception rei venditae et traditae; and, ius tertii.

The Full Bench of the Supreme Court in Jinawathie v. Emalin Perera

[1986] 2 Sri LR 121 adverted to superior title and sufficient title and

held that the plaintiff in a rei vindicatio action shall prove that he has title

to the disputed property and that such title is superior to the title, if any,

put forward by the defendant, or that he has sufficient title which he can

vindicate against the defendant.

The plaintiff in Jinawathies case filed a rei vindicatio action against the

defendants relying upon a statutory determination made under section

19 of the Land Reform Law, No. 1 of 1972. The defendants sought the

dismissal of the plaintiffs action on the basis that the alleged statutory

determination did not convey any title on the plaintiff and that in the

16

SC/APPEAL/40/2014

absence of the plaintiff demonstrating dominium over the land, the

plaintiffs action shall fail. Both the District Court and the Court of

Appeal held with the plaintiff and the Supreme Court affirmed it.

Ranasinghe J. (later C.J.) with the agreement of Sharvananda C.J.,

Wanasundera J., Atukorale J., and Tambiah J., whilst emphasising that

in a rei vindicatio action proper, the plaintiffs ownership of the land is of

the very essence of the action, expressed the view of the Supreme Court

in the following terms at page 142:

This principle was re-affirmed once again by Gratiaen J. in the case

of Palisena v. Perera (1954) 56 NLR 407 where the plaintiff came

into court to vindicate his title based upon a permit issued under the

provisions of the Land Development Ordinance (Chap. 320). In giving

judgment for the plaintiff, Gratiaen, J. said: a permit-holder who

has complied with the conditions of his permit enjoys, during the

period for which the permit is valid, a sufficient title which he can

vindicate against a trespasser in civil proceedings. The fact that the

alleged trespasser had prevented him from entering upon the land

does not afford a defence to the action.

In a vindicatory action the plaintiff must himself have title to the

property in dispute: the burden is on the plaintiff to prove that he

has title to the disputed property, and that such title is superior to

the title, if any, put forward by the defendant in occupation. The

plaintiff can and must succeed only on the strength of his own title,

and not upon the weakness of the defence.

On a consideration of the foregoing principles relating to the legal

concept of ownership, and to an action rei vindicatio it seems to me

that the plaintiff-respondent did, at the time of the institution of these

proceedings, have, by virtue of P6 [statutory determination],

sufficient title which she could have vindicated against the

defendants-appellants in proceedings such as these.

17

SC/APPEAL/40/2014

In the Supreme Court case of Khan v. Jayman [1994] 2 Sri LR 233 the

plaintiff sued the defendant for ejectment from the premises in suit and

damages on the basis that the defendant was in forcible occupation of

the premises after the termination of the leave and licence given to the

defendant. The defendant claimed tenancy. The District Court dismissed

the plaintiffs action on the basis that the plaintiff failed to establish that

the defendant was a licensee and the Court of Appeal affirmed it. On

appeal, the Supreme Court held that the plaintiff shall succeed since the

defendant failed to establish a better title to the property after the

plaintiff established his title and the defendant in his evidence admitted

the plaintiffs title. Kulatunga J. with the agreement of G.P.S. De Silva

C.J. and Wadugodapitiya J. stated at page 235:

The plaintiff did not pray for a declaration of title or raise an issue

on ownership, presumably because no challenge to his ownership

was anticipated. Indeed the defendants answer did not deny the

plaintiffs title. At the trial, the plaintiff established his title and the

defendant in his evidence admitted the plaintiff's title to the premises

in suit. This action is, therefore, a vindicatory action i.e. an action

founded on ownership. Maasdorps Institutes of South African Law

Vol. II Eighth Edition page 70 commenting on the right of an owner

to recover possession of his property states

The plaintiff's ownership in the thing is the very essence of such an

action and will have to be both alleged and proved

He also states

The ownership of a thing consists in the exclusive rights of

possession and in the absence of any agreement or other legal

restriction to the contrary, it entitles the owner to claim possession

18

SC/APPEAL/40/2014

from anyone who cannot set up a better title to it and warn him off

the property, and eject him from it.

The argument of the defendant that he was prejudiced in his defence as

the plaintiff did not sue the defendant as the owner of the premises was

rejected by the Supreme Court. Kulatunga J. stated at 239:

Learned Counsel for the defendant-respondent also submitted that

in view of the fact that this was not a case of the plaintiff suing as

owner simpliciter and in the absence of an issue on ownership, the

defendant would not have known the case he had to meet and was

prejudiced in his defence. I cannot agree. As stated early in this

judgment, the plaintiff pleaded his ownership and clearly set out his

case, including the fact that the defendant was in occupation of a

room of the premises in suit by leave and licence. The defendant too

set out his case in unambiguous terms viz. that he was a protected

tenant from 1971. In the end, the plaintiff proved his case whilst the

defendant failed to establish a better title to the property. As such,

the question of prejudice does not arise.

When the paper title to the property is admitted or proved to be in the

plaintiff, the burden shifts to the defendant to prove on what right he is

in possession of the property.

In Siyaneris v. Udenis de Silva (1951) 52 NLR 289 the Privy Council held:

In an action for declaration of title to property, where the legal title

is in the plaintiff but the property is in the possession of the

defendant, the burden of proof is on the defendant.

In Theivandran v. Ramanathan Chettiar [1986] 2 Sri LR 219 at 222,

Sharvananda C.J. stated:

19

SC/APPEAL/40/2014

In a vindicatory action the claimant need merely prove two facts;

namely, that he is the owner of the thing and that the thing to which

he is entitled to possession by virtue of his ownership is in the

possession of the defendant. Basing his claim on his ownership,

which entitles him to possession, he may sue for the ejectment of

any person in possession of it without his consent. Hence when the

legal title to the premises is admitted or proved to be in the plaintiff,

the burden of proof is on the defendant to show that he is in lawful

possession.

This was quoted with approval by G.P.S. de Silva C.J. in Beebi Johara v.

Warusavithana [1998] 3 Sri LR 227 at 229 and reiterated in Candappa

nee Bastian v. Ponnambalam Pillai [1993] 1 Sri LR 184 at 187. Vide also

Wijetunge v. Thangarajah [1999] 1 Sri LR 53, Gunasekera v. Latiff [1999]

1 Sri LR 365 at 370, Jayasekera v. Bishop of Kandy [2002] 2 Sri LR 406

and Loku Menika v. Gunasekara [1997] 2 Sri LR 281 at 282-283.

Maasdorps Institutes of South African Law (Vol II, 8th Edition (1960), p.

27) states the rights of an owner are comprised under three heads,

namely, (1) the right of possession and the right to recover possession; (2)

the right of use and enjoyment; and (3) the right of disposition. He goes on

to say that these three factors are all essential to the idea of ownership

but need not all be present in an equal degree at one and the same time.

As stated in K.J. Aiyars Judicial Dictionary, 11th Edition (1995), page

833, it is not possible to give a comprehensive definition to the rights of

ownership. Traditionally, those rights include:

Jus utendi the right to use of the thing

Jus possidendi the right to possess a thing

Jus abutendi the right to consume or destroy a thing

20

SC/APPEAL/40/2014

Jus despondendi vei transferendi the right to dispose of a thing

or to transfer it as by sale, gift, exchange etc.

Jus sibi habendi the right to hold a thing for oneself

Jus alteri non habendi or Jus prohibendi the right to exclude

others from its use

These rights unmistakably point to the conclusion that a person having

paper title to the property need not necessarily possess it in order for him

to protect his ownership intact. The right to possession is an essential

attribute of ownership. Either he can possess it or leave it as it is. That

is his choice. He will not lose title to the property if he does not possess

it. Conversely, he has the right to exclude others from its use.

In general, in a rei vindicatio action the plaintiffs case is based on his

paper title whereas the defendants case is based on prescriptive title.

Prescriptive title necessarily commences and continues with violence,

hostility, force and illegality. Court should not in my view encourage such

illegal conduct. Court must resist converting illegality into legality unless

there are cogent and compelling reasons to do so. As stated by

Udalagama J. in the Supreme Court case of Kiriamma v. Podibanda

[2005] BLR 9 at 11 considerable circumspection is necessary to recognize

the prescriptive title as undoubtedly it deprives the ownership of the party

having paper title. It is in fact said that title by prescription is an illegality

made legal due to the other party not taking action.

Evidence of the defendant in a rei vindicatio action

Whilst emphasising that (a) the initial burden in a rei vindicatio action is

on the plaintiff to prove ownership of the property in suit and (b) the

burden of proof in a rei vindicatio action is proof on a balance of

probabilities, if the plaintiff in such an action has sufficient title or

superior title or better title than that of the defendant, the plaintiff

21

SC/APPEAL/40/2014

shall succeed. No rule of thumb can be laid down on what circumstances

the Court shall hold that the plaintiff has discharged his burden. Whether

or not the plaintiff proved his title shall be decided upon a consideration

of the totality of the evidence led in the case.

In this process, the defendants evidence need not be treated as illegal,

inadmissible or forbidden. The oft-quoted dicta of Herat J. in

Wanigaratne v. Juwanis Appuhamy (1962) 65 NLR 167 that The

defendant in a rei vindicatio action need not prove anything, still less, his

own title. The plaintiff cannot ask for a declaration of title in his favour

merely on the strength that the defendants title is poor or not established.

The plaintiff must prove and establish his title. shall not be

misinterpreted to equate a defendant in a rei vindicatio action with an

accused in a criminal case where inter alia his confession made to a police

officer is inadmissible and he can remain silent until the prosecution

proves its case beyond reasonable doubt.

I must add that even in a criminal case, if a strong prima facie case has

been made out against the accused by the prosecution, the accused owes

an explanation, if it is within the power of him to offer such explanation.

This is in consonance with the dictum of Lord Elenborough in Rex v.

Cochrane (Garneys Reports 479) which is commonly known as

Elenborough dictum. In reference to this dictum, Dep J. (later C.J.) in

Ranasinghe v. O.I.C. Police Station, Warakapola (SC/APPEAL/39/2011,

SC Minutes of 02.04.2014) states:

This dictum could be applied in cases where there is a strong prima

facie case made out against the accused and if he refrains from

explaining suspicious circumstances attach to him when it is in his

own power to offer evidence. In such a situation an adverse

inference can be drawn against him.

22

SC/APPEAL/40/2014

The dicta of Herat J. in Wanigaratne v. Juwanis Appuhamy (supra) is

eminently relevant to the facts of that particular case but has no

universal application to all rei vindicatio actions. Since it is a one-page

brief judgment, the facts are not very clear. However, as I understand,

the plaintiffs in that case had filed a rei vindicatio action against the

defendant on the basis that the defendant was a trespasser

notwithstanding that he (the defendant) had been in occupation of some

portions of the land for some considerable period of time. From the

following sentence found in the judgment, In this case, the plaintiffs

produced a recent deed in their favour and further stated in evidence that

they could not take possession of the shares purchased by them because

they were resisted by the 1st defendant, it is clear that the plaintiffs, if at

all, had only undivided rights in the land. It is also clear from the

judgment that whether or not the defendant also had undivided rights

was not clear to Court. It is in that context Herat J. states The learned

District Judge, in his judgment expatiates on the weakness of the defence

case; but unfortunately has failed to examine what title, if any, has been

established by the plaintiffs. No evidence of title has been established

by the plaintiffs in our opinion.

It may be noted that in Wanigaratnes case, the finding of the Supreme

Court is that No evidence of title has been established by the plaintiffs.

The facts are totally different in the instant case. In the instant case, the

plaintiff has established title to the land in suit by deed P1, which title

was never challenged by the defendant; nor did the defendant ever make

a claim for title to the land. He is admittedly in unlawful occupation.

As this Court held in Wasantha v. Premaratne (SC/APPEAL/176/2014,

SC Minutes of 17.05.2021), the Court can in a rei vindicatio action

consider the evidence of the defendant in arriving at the correct

conclusion:

23

SC/APPEAL/40/2014

Notwithstanding that in a rei vindicatio action the burden is on the

plaintiff to prove title to the land no matter how fragile the case of

the defendant is, the Court is not debarred from taking into

consideration the evidence of the defendant in deciding whether or

not the plaintiff has proved his title. Not only is the Court not

debarred from doing so, it is in fact the duty of the Court to give due

regard to the defendants case, for otherwise there is no purpose in

a rei vindicatio action in allowing the defendant to lead evidence

when all he seeks is for the dismissal of the plaintiffs action.

This Court took the same view in Ashar v. Kareem

(SC/APPEAL/171/2019, SC Minutes of 22.05.2023).

The finding of the District Judge that in a rei vindicatio action the Court

cannot rely on the defendants evidence to decide whether the plaintiff

has proved his case is unacceptable.

Actio rei vindicatio and action in rem

In Pathirana v. Jayasundara (1955) 58 NLR 169 at 173 Gratiaen J. states:

A decree for a declaration of title may, of course, be obtained by way

of additional relief either in a rei vindicatio action proper (which is in

truth an action in rem) or in a lessors action against his overholding

tenant (which is an action in personam). But in the former case, the

declaration is based on proof of ownership in the latter, on proof of

the contractual relationship which forbids a denial that the lessor is

the true owner.

The learned District Judge inter alia relying on the above observation of

Gratiaen J. states that an action rei vindicatio is an action filed against

the entire world (action in rem) and therefore the plaintiff in a rei

vindicatio action must prove title to the land very strictly.

24

SC/APPEAL/40/2014

The phrase in rem requires an explanation rather than a definition. The

Latin term in rem derives from the word res, which means a thing or

an object whether movable or immovable. Actions in rem were originally

used as a means of protecting title to movables, especially slaves, because

land was not at first the object of private ownership Buckland and

McNair, Roman Law and Common Law Comparison (Cambridge

University Press, 1936) p. 6. Also, in rem jurisdiction is invoked in

maritime cases where a party could bring an action in rem against a ship

instead of the owner of the ship. It is the ship that suffers the

consequences. The owner suffers the consequences if it is an action in

personam.

Maasdorps Institutes of South African Law, Vol II, 8th Edition (1960),

p.70 states The form of action for the recovery of ownership was under

the Roman law called vindicatio rei, which was an action in rem, that is,

aimed at the recovery of the thing which is in the possession of another,

whether such possession was rightfully or wrongfully acquired, together

with all its accretions and fruits, and compensation in damages for any

loss sustained by the owner through having been deprived of it.

Blacks Law Dictionary, 11th edition, defines the term in rem as Latin

against a thing Involving or determining the status of a thing, and

therefore the rights of persons generally with respect to that thing. It

defines the term in personam as Latin against a person Involving or

determining the personal rights and obligations of the parties. (Of a legal

action) brought against a person rather than property.

The following passage of Dr. H. W. Tambiah (op. cit. p. 242) explains why

rei vindicatio is an action in rem.

The primary remedy granted to an owner against the person who

disputes his ownership is rei vindicatio. This Roman-Dutch Law

25

SC/APPEAL/40/2014

remedy has been adopted by the courts in Sri Lanka. Since the

owner, as dominus, has a right of possession, occupation and use of

the land, this action is in the nature of an action in rem. See Vulcan

Rubber Ltd. v. South African Railways and Harbours, 3 S.A. 285

(1958); Hissaias v. Lehman, 4 S.A. 715 (1958). In this type of action,

the owner of land whose title is disputed and who has been

unlawfully ejected, may bring an action for a declaration of title and

ejectment. If the owner has not been ejected but his title is disputed

he is entitled to bring a declaratory action to dismiss any disputes

to his title. Where an owner is unlawfully ejected he may bring an

action for declaration of title for mesne profits, damages and

ejectment.

In the case of Allis Appu v. Endris Hamy (1894) 3 SCR 87, Withers J.

categorised rei vindicatio both as an action in rem and action in personam:

Certain actions of an analogous nature apart, the action rei

vindicatio is allowed to the owner and to him alone. Lesion to the

right of property is of the very essence of the action and in that

respect constitutes it an action in rem. Lesion to the personal right of

the true proprietor properly constitutes a claim to compensation for

the produce of which he has been deprived by the possessor and in

that respect constitutes it an action in personam.

In classical Roman Law although actio rei vindicatio is classified as an

action in rem as opposed to an action in personam, the term action in

rem shall not be understood in the popular sense that we conceive in

contemporary society. An action in rem means an action against a thing

whereas an action in personam means an action against a person. A

partition action is considered an action in rem in that the judgment in a

partition action has a binding effect on all persons having interests in the

property whether or not joined as parties to the action. It transcends the

26

SC/APPEAL/40/2014

characteristic of an inter partes action and assumes the characteristic of

an action in rem resulting in title good against the world. The scheme of

the Partition Law is designed to serve that purpose. But the entire world

is not bound by the judgment in a rei vindicatio action. The judgment in

a rei vindicatio action binds only the parties to the action and their

privies. In modern-day legal jargon, rei vindicatio is not an action in rem

but an action in personam.

The fact that rei vindicatio is not an action in rem in the popular sense is

reflected in the dicta of Dep C.J. in Preethi Anura v. William Silva (supra)

where in reference to the standard of proof in a rei vindicatio action it was

stated The plaintiff's task is to establish the case on a balance of

probability. In a partition case the situation is different as it is an action in

rem and the trial judge is required to carefully examine the title and the

devolution of title.

In Sithy Makeena v. Kuraisha [2006] 2 Sri LR 341 at 344, Imam J. with

Sriskandarajah J. in agreement stated It is well-settled law that only the

parties to a rei vindicatio action are bound by the decision in such a case,

as a rei vindicatio action is an action in personam and not an action in

rem.

In the Supreme Court case of Mojith Kumara v. Ariyaratne

(SC/APPEAL/123/2015, SC Minutes of 29.03.2016), the plaintiff filed

action seeking declaration of title to the land in suit, ejectment of the

defendants therefrom and damages. It was a rei vindicatio action proper.

The defendants sought dismissal of the plaintiffs action. The plaintiff

relied on a decree entered in his favour in a previous rei vindicatio action

filed against a different party, but in respect of the same land. The District

Court dismissed the plaintiffs action on the basis that the defendants

before Court were not parties to the previous action and therefore they

are not bound by that judgment. On appeal, the High Court set aside the

27

SC/APPEAL/40/2014

judgment of the District Court and held that the plaintiff can claim

ownership to the land on the strength of the previous decree apparently

on the basis that rei vindicatio is an action in rem. The Supreme Court

held that the previous action is an action in personam and not an action

in rem and therefore third parties are not bound by that judgment.

Chitrasiri J. with the agreement of Aluwihare J. and De Abrew J. held:

A decree in a case in which a declaration of title is sought binds only

the parties in that action. Such a proposition is not applicable when

it comes to a decree in rem which binds the whole world. Effects and

consequences of actions in rem and actions in personam are quite

different. Action in rem is a proceeding that determines the rights

over a particular property that would become conclusive against the

entire world such as the decisions in courts exercising admiralty

jurisdictions and the decisions in partition actions under the partition

law of this country. Procedure stipulated in Partition Law contains

provisions enabling interested parties to come before courts and to

join as parties to the action even though the plaintiff fails to make

them as parties to it. Therefore there is a rationale to treat the

decrees in partition cases as decrees in rem.

Actions in personam are a type of legal proceedings which can affect

the personal rights and interests of the property claimed by the

parties to the action. Such actions include an action for breach of

contract, the commission of a tort or delict or the possession of

property. Where an action in personam is successful, the judgment

may be enforced only against the defendants assets that include

real and personal or movable and immovable properties. Therefore,

a decree in a rei vindicatio action is considered as a decree that

would bind only the parties to the action. In the circumstances, it is

clear that the plaintiff cannot rely on the decree in 503/L to establish

28

SC/APPEAL/40/2014

rights to the property in question as against the defendants in this

case are concerned.

Conclusion

I answer the questions of law upon which leave to appeal was granted in

the affirmative. The judgments of the District Court and the High Court

of Civil Appeal are set aside. The defendant never challenged the evidence

of the plaintiff on damages. I direct the District Judge to enter judgment

as prayed for in the prayer to the plaint. The plaintiff is entitled to costs

in all three Courts.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Vijith K. Malalgoda, P.C., J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

P. Padman Surasena, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court