1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms

of Article 128 of the Constitution of

the Democratic Socialist Republic of

Sri Lanka.

The Officer-in-Charge

Police Station

Pulmoddai

Complainant

SC Appeal No. 62/2025

SC SPL LA No. 140 / 2024

CA/ PHC / 209 / 2018

HCT/REV/501/17

MC/P/16/Mis/17/K

V.

1.⁠ ⁠S.A.K. Subash Priyankara

Aariyasinghe

2.⁠ ⁠W.A. Piyadasa

3.⁠ ⁠E.J. Saman Pushpakumara

4.⁠ ⁠S. Tuder

5.⁠ ⁠K.A. Ruwan

6.⁠ ⁠D.K. Sugath Jayawickrama

7.⁠ ⁠A.Anil Nilantha

8.⁠ ⁠K.A. Ranil Chaminda

9.⁠ ⁠G.K. Premachandra

2

Accused

AND BETWEEN

Siyaptha Finance PLC,

No. 110, Sir James Peiris

Mawatha,

Colombo 02.

Claimant-Petitioner

V.

1.The Officer-in-Charge

Police Station

Pulmoddai

2. The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department

Colombo 12.

Respondents

AND BETWEEN

Siyaptha Finance PLC,

No. 110, Sir James Peiris

Mawatha,

Colombo 02.

Claimant - Petitioner - Appellant

3

V.

1.The Officer-in-Charge

Police Station

Pulmoddai

2. The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department

Colombo 12

Respondents - Respondents

AND NOW BETWEEN

1.The Officer-in-Charge

Police Station

Pulmoddai

2. The Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department

Colombo 12

Respondents - Respondents - Appellants

V.

Siyaptha Finance PLC,

No. 110, Sir James Peiris

Mawatha,

Colombo 02.

4

Claimant - Petitioner - Appellant - Respondent

Before : Shiran Gooneratne, J

Mahinda Samayawardhena J

K. Priyantha Fernando, J

Counsel : Maheshika de Silva, DSG with Nishantha Nagaratnam,

SC instructed by Ms. I. Kalanasuriya, SASA for the

Respondents - Respondents - Appellants.

Naveen Maha Arachchige instructed by Lochana

Jayasekara for the Claimant - Petitioner - Appellant -

Respondent.

Argued on : 26.08.2025

Decided on : 19.09.2025

K. PRIYANTHA FERNANDO, J

1. The present appeal has been instituted by the respondents-

respondents-Appellants (hereinafter referred to as "the Appellants")

challenging the judgment of the Court of Appeal dated 01.04.24 by

which an order was made directing the release of a vehicle that had

been confiscated pursuant to offences committed under the Forest

Ordinance and the Antiquities Ordinance. The Claimant - Petitioner-

Appellant-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the Respondent ) to

this appeal is the absolute owner of the said vehicle. At the time of the

5

arrest, however, the 1st accused who was charged with the commission

of the aforementioned offences was the owner of the vehicle.

2. On 12.12.2016, nine suspects excavating in the Elandamunei

Conservation forest were arrested along with tools used for excavation

and a Van bearing Number SGPH 4430 (hereinafter referred to as the

Vehicle). At the time of the seizure, the registered owner of the vehicle

was the 1st accused and the absolute owner was the claimant

respondent. On 11.01.2017, the nine accused were charged for the

following offences in the Magistrate’s Court of Kuchchaveli.

❖ Commission of the offence of trespass in conservation forest under S.06

(2)(a) of the Forest Ordinance.

❖ Digging soil in a conservation forest which is an offence under S.06

(2)(p) of the Forest Ordinance.

❖ Excavation in a forest conservation for the purpose of discovery of

antiquities - Section 15 (1) of the Antiquities Ordinance.

3. Thereafter, on 11.01.2017, all nine accused persons including the

registered owner of the Vehicle, pleaded guilty to all the above

mentioned charges and were sentenced. By motion dated 18.01.2017,

the absolute owner (claimant) made a claim for the vehicle. After inquiry

the learned Magistrate refused the claim and ordered to confiscate the

vehicle.

4. Aggrieved by the order of the learned Magistrate, the respondent made

a revision application to the Provincial High Court of Trincomalee which

also affirmed the order of the learned Magistrate. Being aggrieved, the

respondent appealed to the Court of Appeal. The Court of Appeal on

01.04.2024 overturned the judgments of the Provincial High Court as

well as the learned Magistrate and ordered the release of the Van to the

claimant respondent.

6

5. Aggrieved by the judgement of the Court of Appeal, the instant

application was filed to this Court by the appellants, and leave was

granted for the following questions of law:

23)

a. Did the Court of Appeal err in law by its failure to correctly

appreciate and apply the provisions of Section 40(1) of the Forest

Ordinance, as amended, in respect of the instant case?

b. Did the Court of Appeal err in law by its failure to correctly

appreciate and apply the rules formulated by Your Lordships'

Court as regards to the 'owner' contemplated under Section 40(1)

of the Forest Ordinance, as amended, in respect of the instant

case?

c. Did the Court of Appeal err in law by its failure to consider that the

Respondent was estopped from challenging the jurisdiction of the

learned Magistrate in holding a confiscation inquiry, belatedly

during the appeal, having failed to raise any objection at the time

of the inquiry?

6. At the hearing, referring to Section 40 of the Forest Ordinance the

Learned Deputy Solicitor General for the appellants stated that, the

Court of Appeal has erred in law by incorrectly applying the proviso to

Section 40 of the Forest Ordinance to the given matter. The Learned

Deputy Solicitor General argued that, in the instant case it is the

registered owner who has control and possession of the vehicle, who

has also pleaded guilty for the commission of the offence. Therefore, the

learned Deputy Solicitor General took the position that, the proviso to

Section 40 of the Forest Ordinance, does not apply when the owner

himself committed the offence under the Forest Ordinance.

7. The learned Deputy Solicitor General further contended that, it is very

important to consider and understand the term “owner” as per section

40 of the Forest Ordinance. She referred to the case of Ceylinco

Leasing Corporation Ltd V. M.H. Harison and Others CA (PHC) APN

7

45/2011 dated 25.08.2011 and submitted that in the instant case, the

control and possession of the vehicle in question was entirely with the

registered owner, which means that in this circumstance when the

registered owner commits the offence, then the vehicle that was used

to commit such an offence must also be confiscated.

8. Further to that, the learned Deputy Solicitor General also submitted

that the respondent had no right to challenge the jurisdiction of the

Magistrates’ Court belatedly during the appeal, when they did not raise

objections in relation to the jurisdiction at the beginning of the vehicle

inquiry. In the vehicle inquiry, no objection/s were taken up regarding

the jurisdiction and instead, the absolute owner testified that if he knew

that the vehicle would be used for the commission of an offence, he

would not have given it to the accused. The learned Deputy Solicitor

General argued that, the position of the Court of Appeal that as the

charge does not include the 'use of the vehicle' the charge is defective,

is erroneous because the substantive offence does not require that as

an element of the offence. She contended that, what is to be stated and

proved are the elements of the offence and the “modus operandi of the

commission of the offence” is a matter to be proved by evidence .

Therefore, she submitted that, when the accused pleaded guilty, and

no formal evidence was led, the prosecution narrative as mentioned in

the ‘B’ reports and production list along with the charge should be

considered as admitted by the accused. Hence when the Absolute

Owner takes part in the vehicle inquiry, he cannot challenge the charge.

Neither the Absolute Owner challenged the use of the vehicle in the

offence. Therefore, the learned Deputy Solicitor General for the

appellants submitted that the respondents are estopped from now

challenging the jurisdiction of the Magistrate and consequently call into

question the validity of the charge sheet.

9. The learned Counsel for the respondent submitted that, the learned

Magistrate and the Learned Judges of the High Court erred by failing

to evaluate that under section 40 of the Forest Ordinance it is required

8

to ascertain whether the vehicle was used in the commission of the

offence. At the hearing the Learned Counsel argued that, in an instance

like this, initially the Learned Magistrate has to consider and form an

opinion whether the vehicle was "used” in committing such offence and

thereafter if such opinion is formed, then the vehicle may be

confiscated. The learned Counsel takes the position that, it is in this

instance the proviso is applicable which affords opportunity for the

owner to satisfy the Learned Magistrate whether all precautions were

taken to prevent the use of the vehicle for the commission of the offence

and if the Learned Magistrate considers that the vehicle was not used

in the commission of the offence, then the vehicle shall be released.

10. According to the learned Counsel for the respondent, ⁠in arriving at the

opinion whether the vehicle was in fact "used” in committing the

offence, the Learned Magistrate is to consider all material on record

including B-report and further reports. He argued that neither the B-

report nor the charge sheet mentioned the details in respect of the

vehicle used in committing the offence and despite this lacuna, the

Magistrate went on to erroneously confiscate the vehicle.

11. The learned Counsel for the respondent submitted that there was no

evidence to establish that the vehicle was used in the commission of

the offence. According to the Counsel, the B-report doesn't provide

anything clearly to demonstrate whether the vehicle was used to

commit the offence and therefore contends that Magistrate's order to

confiscate the vehicle is bad in law.

12. Section 40 of the Forest Ordinance provides that,

“When any person is convicted of a forest offence, all timber or forest

produce which is not the property of the State in respect of which such

offence has been committed, and all tools, boats, carts, cattle, and

motor vehicles used in committing such offence, shall, in addition to

9

any other punishment prescribed for such offence, be confiscated by

order of the convicting Magistrate.”

13. It is evident from the aforementioned section that, in order for a tool,

motor vehicle, cart, or similar item to be subject to confiscation upon

conviction for an offence, it must have been used in the commission of

that particular offence. In the present case, the accused persons were

charged under Section 6(2)(a) of the Forest Ordinance for unlawfully

trespassing into a conservation forest.

14. According to the ‘B’ Report, the vehicle in question was utilized by the

accused to gain access to the conservation forest, thereby facilitating

the alleged trespass.

“ෙමම සැකක&ව( පැ*+ අංක එස්0 1එ2 4430 දරන 67 පැහැ9 වෑ( රථය හා ස්>2

ය?ර භාරයටෙගන ෙපාCස්ථානෙD ෙEපල G>තා(IපJ අංක 390/16 යටෙJම ඇ?ලJ

කර ඇත. ”

While it is noted that the vehicle was found in an isolated area at the

time of the arrest, the material on record indicates that it had, in fact,

been used by the accused persons to enter the forest reserve.

Accordingly, it is apparent that the vehicle played a contributory role

in the commission of the offence which is the offence of trespass and

was, therefore, used in furtherance of the unlawful act. These facts

mentioned in the ‘B’ report were never disputed in the Magistrate Court

by the accused including the owner of the vehicle who was the 1st

accused, and they all pleaded guilty to the charges.

15. Upon a careful examination of the ‘B’ Report, there is sufficient material

to establish that the vehicle was utilised for the commission of the

alleged offence of trespass. Despite this, the respondents, in their

written submissions, have urged the Court to consider the contents of

the B Report and contend that there is no reference therein as to the

10

presence of the vehicle at the time of the offence. This assertion is both

erroneous and can be considered to be an attempt to be misleading, in

light of the clear and ample evidence contained in the B Report

indicating that the said vehicle was in fact used in furtherance of the

unlawful trespass.

16. In the case of Ceylinco Leasing Corporation Ltd V. M.H. Harison

and Others CA (PHC) APN 45/2011 decided on 25.08.2011 His

Lordship Justice Sisira de Abrew held that,

“If the court is going to release the vehicle on the basis that the owner of

the vehicle is the absolute owner, then after the release, it is possible for

the absolute owner to give the vehicle to another person. If this person

commits a similar offence, the finance company can take up the same

position and the vehicle would be again released. Then where is the end

to the commission of the offence? Where is the end to the violation of the

Forest Ordinance? There will be no end.

If the courts of this country take up this attitude purpose of the legislature

in enacting the said provisions of the Forest Ordinance would be

defeated. In my view Courts should not interpret the law to give an

absurd meaning to the law. In this connection I would like to consider a

passage from 'Interpretation of Statutes by Bindra' 7' edition page 235.

"It is a well-known rule of construction that a statute should not be

construed so as to impute absurdity to the legislature."

17. It is therefore clear and settled law that the absolute owner cannot be

considered to be the owner as mentioned in S. 40 of the Forest

Ordinance, as the absolute owner has no control over the vehicle.

18. At the time of the inquiry, the Counsel for the respondent merely

submitted that he was unaware of the accused intentions regarding the

use of the vehicle. He stated that he had no knowledge of any criminal

acts that were to be committed using the said vehicle, and accordingly

11

sought the release of the vehicle on the basis of this lack of knowledge.

However, no challenge was raised at that stage regarding the

jurisdiction of the Magistrates’ Court. As the issue of jurisdiction was

not taken as a ground of defence during the initial proceedings, it

cannot now be introduced at the appellate stage.

19. In the case of Saman Kumara and Another V. Hon. Attorney

General C.A (PHC) NO.157/12 decided on 19.02.2015 His Lordship

Justice K.T Chithrasiri held that,

“Furthermore, the person who makes a claim under the proviso to the

said Section 40 could not have made such an application unless and

until the accused are found guilty to a charge framed under the Forest

Ordinance. Hence, it is clear that he is making such a claim, knowing

that the accused were already been convicted for a particular charge

under the Forest Ordinance. Therefore, the appellant is estopped from

claiming the cover relying on the defects in the charge sheet, in his

application made under the proviso to Section 40 of the Forest

Ordinance.”

20. Therefore, having considered the foregoing, I am of the view that the

learned Judges of the Court of Appeal have erroneously interpreted the

provisions of the Forest Ordinance in arriving at their decision to

overturn the order of the learned Magistrate. Upon a careful and

thorough analysis of the material placed before the Court, it is evident

that the vehicle in question was, in fact, used in the commission of the

offence. It is further apparent that the absolute owner of the vehicle

failed to exercise the necessary precautionary measures to prevent the

commission of the said offence. As mentioned before in this Judgment,

the absolute owner cannot claim the vehicle as the owner in terms of

Section 40 of the Forest Ordinance. In light of the above reasoning, the

Questions of Law are answered in the affirmative.

12

21. Accordingly, the judgment of the learned Judges of the Court of Appeal

is hereby set aside, and the order of the learned Magistrate dated

23.08.2017 is thus affirmed.

Appeal is allowed

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

JUSTICE SHIRAN GOONERATNE

I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

JUSTICE MAHINDA SAMAYAWARDHENA

I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

.