Page 1 of 19

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application

under and in terms of section 37 of

the Arbitration Act No. 11 of 1995.

SC/HC/LA No: Ceylon Electricity Board,

06/2020 No. 50,

Sir Chithampalam A Gardiner

HC/ARB No: Mawatha,

294/2018 Colombo 2,

Sri Lanka.

SLNAC/22-6-2017 CLAIMANT

Vs.

Poyry Switzerland Limited,

(Formerly Poyry Energy Limited),

Herostrasse 12,

8048 Zurich, Switzerland.

RESPONDENT

AND BETWEEN

Page 2 of 19

Poyry Switzerland Limited,

(Formerly Poyry Energy Limited),

Herostrasse 12,

8048 Zurich, Switzerland.

RESPONDENT-PETITIONER

Vs.

Ceylon Electricity Board,

No. 50,

Sir Chithampalam A Gardiner

Mawatha, Colombo 2,

Sri Lanka.

CLAIMANT-RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

Ceylon Electricity Board,

No. 50,

Sir Chithampalam A Gardiner

Mawatha, Colombo 2,

Sri Lanka.

CLAIMANT-RESPONDENT-

PETITIONER

Page 3 of 19

Vs.

Poyry Switzerland Limited,

(Formerly Poyry Energy Limited),

Herostrasse 12,

8048 Zurich, Switzerland.

RESPONDENT-PETITIONER-

RESPONDENT

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SC/HC/LA No: Ceylon Electricity Board,

07/2020 No. 50,

Sir Chithampalam A Gardiner

HC/ARB No: Mawatha,

629/2017 Colombo 2,

Sri Lanka.

SLNAC/22-6-2017 CLAIMANT

Vs.

Poyry Switzerland Limited,

(Formerly Poyry Energy Limited),

Herostrasse 12,

8048 Zurich, Switzerland.

RESPONDENT

Page 4 of 19

AND BETWEEN

Ceylon Electricity Board,

No. 50,

Sir Chithampalam A Gardiner

Mawatha, Colombo 2,

Sri Lanka.

CLAIMANT-PETITIONER

Vs.

Poyry Switzerland Limited,

(Formerly Poyry Energy Limited),

Herostrasse 12,

8048 Zurich, Switzerland.

RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

Ceylon Electricity Board,

No. 50,

Sir Chithampalam A Gardiner

Mawatha, Colombo 2,

Sri Lanka.

CLAIMANT-PETITIONER-

PETITIONER

Page 5 of 19

Vs.

Poyry Switzerland Limited,

(Formerly Poyry Energy Limited),

Herostrasse 12,

8048 Zurich, Switzerland.

RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT-

RESPONDENT

Before : Janak De Silva, J.

: Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

: Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

Counsel : Kuvera de Zoysa, P.C. with Samuditha

Kumarasinghe for Claimant-Respondent-Petitioner

in SC/HC/LA/06/2020 and Claimant-Petitioner-

Petitioner in SC/HC/LA/07/2020 instructed by

Achini Wickremasinghe.

: Avindra Rodrigo, P.C. with Kasuni Jayaweera for

Respondent-Petitioner-Respondent in

SC/HA/LA/06/2020 and Respondent-

Respondent-Respondent in SC/HC/LA/07/2020

instructed by F J & G de Saram.

Inquiry on : 07-05-2025

Page 6 of 19

Written Submissions : 27-05-2025 (By the Claimant-Respondent-

Petitioner in SC/HC/LA/6/2020)

: 27-05-2025 (By the Claimant-Petitioner-Petitioner

in SC/HC/LA/7/2020)

Decided on : 09-07-2025

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

The above two Leave to Appeal Applications, namely SC/HC/LA/6/2020 and

SC/HC/LA/7/2020, were taken up for consideration in relation to the

preliminary objection raised by the respondent-petitioner-respondent as to

the maintainability of the applications before the Court on the basis of the

claimant-respondent-petitioners failure to adhere to mandatory Supreme

Court Rules as to appellate procedure.

At the hearing, both parties mutually agreed that the two applications can be

consolidated and heard together, and a single amalgamated judgment could

be pronounced.

Accordingly, this Court heard the submissions of the learned Presidents

Counsel on behalf of the respondent-petitioner-respondent (hereinafter

referred to as the respondent) in relation to the preliminary objection raised,

and also the submissions of the learned Presidents Counsel who represented

the claimant-respondent-petitioner (hereinafter referred to as the petitioner)

as to their respective stands.

In both these Leave to Appeal Applications, the petitioner is seeking leave to

appeal in order to challenge the judgment pronounced on 29-11-2019 by the

learned Judge of the Commercial High Court of the Western Province holden

in Colombo, which was a judgment pronounced by consolidating the High

Court Case No. 629/2017 and Case No. 294/2018 with the agreement of all

parties relevant to the said actions.

In case No. 629/2017, the application by the petitioner had been in terms of

section 32(1) of the Arbitration Act No. 11 of 1995, seeking to set aside the

Page 7 of 19

arbitral award dated 23-10-2017 marked and produced as P-07 along with

the petition filed before the High Court.

In case No. 294/2018, the respondent has instituted proceedings to enforce

the same arbitral award made by the arbitrators on 23-10-2017 marked and

produced as P-13 along with the respondents petition.

From the impugned judgment, the learned High Court Judge had determined

that he has no reasons to refuse the enforcement order in Case No. 294/2018,

and had proceeded to order the enforcement of the said award according to

the award dated 23-10-2017, subject to the limitation of the legal fees that

can be claimed to a sum of Rs. 500,000/- and restricting the compensation

awarded to a sum of USD 10,000/-.

Being aggrieved of the said judgment, the petitioner has instituted both these

Applications for Leave to Appeal before this Court on 09-02-2020.

When both the matters were taken up on 27-09-2023 for the consideration of

granting leave, the learned Counsel for the respondent in both the cases drew

the attention of the Court to the motion dated 18-01-2023 filed on behalf of

the respondent, where the respondent has raised preliminary objections as to

the maintainability of these applications and has sought permission of the

Court to support the said preliminary objections.

Accordingly, the matter was fixed for inquiry in relation to the said preliminary

objections and both the learned Presidents Counsel were heard on 07-05-

2025, and this Court also granted an opportunity to the parties to file written

submissions, if any, together with legal authorities.

Although it has been contended in the motion dated 18-01-2023 filed on

behalf of the respondent that the petitioner has failed and/or neglected to act

in compliance with Rules 8 and 34 of the Supreme Court Rules of 1990, at

the hearing, the learned Presidents Counsel agreed that considering the

objections in terms of section 34 of the Rules would not arise, and would only

limit his objections as to the compliance of Rule 8.

Page 8 of 19

For matters of clarity, I will now reproduce the said objections raised in terms

of Rule 8 as stated in the motion where it was alleged that the petitioner has

failed to follow the said Rules:

a. Cause notice of the caption Leave to Appeal Application to be

served on respondent-respondent-respondent (respondent)

through the Registrar of Your Lordships Court as required under

and in terms of Rule 8(1).

b. Tender notices and other necessary documents to the Registrar,

along with the Leave to Appeal Application for service on the

respondent as required under and in terms of Rule 8(3).

c. Attend at the Registry and verify that notices have been delivered

to the respondent as required under and in terms of Rule 8(5); and

d. In any event, show due diligence in the prosecution of his appeal.

The relevant Rules, where the respondent submits that the petitioner has

failed to adhere, read as follows;

8.(1) Upon an application for special leave to appeal being lodged

in the Registry of the Supreme Court, the Registrar shall forthwith

give notice, by registered post, of such application to each of the

Respondents, in the manner hereinafter set out. There shall be

attached to the notice a copy of the petition, a copy of the

Judgment against which the application for special leave to appeal

is preferred, and copies of affidavits and annexures filed therewith.

8.(3) The Petitioner shall tender with his application such number

of notices as is required for service on the Respondents and himself

together with such number of copies of the documents referred to

in sub-rule (1) of this rule as is required for service on the

Respondents. The Petitioner shall enter in such notices the names

and addresses of the parties, and the name, addresses for service

and telephone number of his instructing Attorney-at-Law, if any,

and the name, address and telephone number, if any, of the

Attorney-at-Law, if any who has been retained to appear for him at

Page 9 of 19

the hearing of the application, and shall tender the required

number of stamped addressed envelopes for the service of notice

on the Respondents by registered post. The Petitioner shall

forthwith notify the Registrar of any change in such particulars.

8.(5) The Petitioner shall, not less than two weeks and not more

than three weeks after the application has been lodged, attend at

the Registry in order to verify that such notice has not been

returned undelivered. If such notice has been returned

undelivered, the Petitioner shall furnish the correct address for the

service of notice on such Respondent. The Registrar shall

thereupon dispatch a fresh notice by registered post, and may in

addition dispatch another notice, with or without copies of the

annexures, by ordinary post.

He may, if he thinks fit, and after consulting the Petitioner,

substitute a fresh date of hearing, or direct that the matter be

called in the Registry, on the date originally fixed for the hearing,

for the purpose of fixing a fresh date of hearing.

It was the position of the learned Presidents Counsel for the respondent that

the case record bears testimony that the Registrar of the Court has entered a

minute in both the case records indicating that the relevant notices have not

been tendered by the petitioner to be served on the respondent. It was his

position that even after a lapse of nearly 3 years from the institution of the

Leave to Appeal Applications in both the cases, the petitioner has, even up

until 18-01-2023 (the date of the motion filed by the respondent raising the

preliminary objections), failed to serve relevant notices with the relevant

documents.

In the motion, the respondent has averred that the Registered Attorney-at-

Law of the respondent received a copy of a motion dated 15-12-2022 filed by

the petitioner indicating that the instant application is to be mentioned before

the Supreme Court, which alerted the respondent, and upon perusal of the

Page 10 of 19

case record, the respondent came to know that the matter is listed for support

on 16-02-2023.

This has resulted in the respondent submitting the motion dated 18-01-2023

in both the cases, raising the preliminary objections as to the maintainability

of the applications, moving that both Leave to Appeal Applications should be

dismissed in limine as the petitioner has failed to follow the mandatory rules

of procedure laid out in Supreme Court Rules.

At the hearing, the learned Presidents Counsel substantiated his argument

citing several decided cases of this Court, and argued that the failure by the

petitioner to prosecute its case with due diligence is a matter that should be

considered by this Court in dismissing the Leave to Appeal Applications in

limine.

It was the submissions of the learned Presidents Counsel who represented

the petitioner in both the cases that the petitioner at all times acted in full

compliance of the Supreme Court Rules of 1990 and caused and tendered the

relevant documents to the Registrar of this Court, when the Leave to Appeal

Application was filed on 09-01-2020.

It was further claimed that the Supreme Court Registry also confirmed this

fact to the Registered Attorney of the petitioner.

However, the learned Presidents Counsel also agreed that there was no

minute which indicates that the notices and the other relevant documents

have been tendered to Court in both the case records.

He went on to submit that this should be considered as, if at all, a thing that

occurred due to the restrictions imposed upon the judicial system due to the

Coronavirus disease that was prevalent in the country during the period, and

that should be taken into consideration in determining these objections. He

was of the view that, as the respondent has been served with the relevant

material since then, no prejudice would be caused to the respondent, and

hence, the preliminary objections should stand overruled. It was his view that

the Leave to Appeal Application in both the cases should be considered on its

merits by the Court, rather than on technicalities.

Page 11 of 19

With the above arguments advanced by both the learned Presidents Counsel

and the relevant factual matrix in mind, I will now proceed to consider

whether the preliminary objections have merit or on the other hand, whether

the Leave to Appeal Applications in both the cases should be considered

despite the said failure to follow the Supreme Court Rules as required.

Having scrutinized both case records, I find that in case No.

SC/HC/LA/06/2020, the petitioner has instituted proceedings seeking Leave

to Appeal as discussed earlier on 09-01-2020. The minute dated 14-01-2020

reveals that a minute has been made to the effect that the Attorney-at-Law

has not tendered notices to be issued to the respondent in order to support

the application. The next minute that appears on the case record is on 11-01-

2023, where the Attorney-at-Law for the petitioner has filed a motion dated

15-12-2022 with a certified copy of the written submission marked as X3(b),

moving to accept the same and file of record.

A request has also been made for the matter to be listed for support, informing

the Court that a copy of the said motion was sent to the respondent under

registered cover.

Accordingly, the Court has ordered that the matter be supported on 16-02-

2023. The next minute which was dated 25-01-2023 shows that the Attorney-

at-Law of the respondent has filed a motion dated 18-01-2023 raising

preliminary objections as to the maintainability of the Leave to Appeal

Application filed by the petitioner on the basis that the application should be

dismissed due to the failure by the petitioner to prosecute the action with due

diligence even after a lapse of over 3 years from the date of the application.

It is quite apparent that the respondent has filed the motion raising

preliminary objections once it received the notice issued as for the request

made in the motion dated 15-12-2022 by the petitioner. When the matter was

mentioned on 16-02-2023 as previously directed, it has been ordered that the

connected matter, namely SC/HC/LA/07/2020, should also be taken up

together, where the same preliminary objection has been raised.

Page 12 of 19

The said case, namely Case No. 07/2020, has also been filed by the petitioner

on the same date, that is, 9-01-2020. The 1st minute that appears in the case

record entered on 14-01-2020 shows that in this case as well, a minute has

been made to the effect that the Attorney-at-Law has not tendered notices to

be sent to the respondent in order to support the application.

However, in this application, the Registrar of the Court on 04-05-2022 has

brought to the attention of the Hon. Chief Justice that, although the case has

been filed on 09-01-2020, the Attorney-at-Law for the petitioner has not taken

any step up to date, and has sought the Lordships direction in that regard.

This has resulted in the Hon. Chief Justice giving directions to the Registrar

to mention the matter on 06-12-2022, and accordingly, the Court has sent

notices to the petitioner as well as the Attorney-at-Law who filed the action

under registered cover on 21-11-2022.

The case record bears testimony that it was only after the said notices were

issued by the Court, the petitioner has got activated and has stated when the

matter was mentioned in open Court that Case No. 06/2020, which is a

connected matter, has not been listed yet. As a result, the Court has ordered

that both the cases should be mentioned on 18-01-2023. It has been directed

further that the matters should be listed before a bench where the Hon. Chief

Justice presides, apparently for the Hon. Chief Justice to take a decision in

this regard.

The minute dated 11-01-2023 shows that the Attorney-at-Law for the

petitioner has filed a motion dated 15-12-2022 with a certified copy of the

written submission marked as X3(b) and moving it to be accepted and filed

of record, which is the same application that appears in the 2nd minute of the

case record in Case No. 06/2020. This has resulted in the Court giving a

direction for this case also to be taken up on 16-02-2023.

However, when the case was mentioned on 18-01-2023 as originally

scheduled, the Attorney-at-Law representing the respondent has informed the

Court that the respondent is appearing before the Court after receiving the

notices of the motion dated 15-12-2022, and the respondent has not been

Page 13 of 19

served with any other papers in relation to the application by the petitioner

as yet.

The Counsel who represented the petitioner has informed the Court that he

has instructions to say that all the necessary papers were submitted when

this application was originally filed before the Court, other than the document

filed along with the motion dated 15-12-2022. He has undertaken to attend

the Registry and verify matters at that stage. The respondent has reserved its

right to raise objections, and both the matters have been fixed for

consideration on 17-05-2023.

The minute made on the case record on 14-02-2023 shows that the

respondent, by the motion dated 18-01-2023, has raised the same

preliminary objections as in Case No. 06/2020 praying that the application

in this case also should be dismissed for want of due diligence by the

petitioner.

As stated earlier, although it was submitted that the relevant necessary

papers were filed in both the cases when the actions were instituted on 09-

01-2020, as the learned Presidents Counsel who represented the petitioner

rightly agreed, this Court has to go by what the respective case records

indicate.

In the written submissions filed before this Court, the petitioner has heavily

relied on the cases pronounced by this Court to the effect that mere technical

defects in relation to matters of procedure should not be considered as a

reason to refuse an application. It was also submitted that the adverse effects

of the COVID-19 pandemic and travel restrictions imposed, which resulted in

the limited functioning of the judicial system, should be considered as a

reason as to why the matter was not listed for support until 06-12-2022 when

it comes to Case No. 07/2020. He moved that the preliminary objections be

overruled, and the matter be taken up for the granting of Special Leave to

Appeal.

Page 14 of 19

Having considered the arguments advanced before the Court, and also the

written submissions tendered in relation to the maintainability of the

preliminary objections, I find it necessary to consider whether the COVID-19

pandemic has prevented the Attorney-at-Law for the petitioner attending

Court as required in terms of the Appellate Procedure Rules and submitting

the necessary papers.

The certified copy of the High Court case record shows that the impugned

judgment has been pronounced by the learned High Court Judge of the

Commercial High Court on 29-11-2019 during the period the COVID-19

pandemic was emerging in the world. It is common knowledge that it started

to affect the day-to-day life of Sri Lankans during the 1st quarter of the year,

which was after the judgment was pronounced. A certified copy of the entire

case record has been issued by the Registrar of Commercial High Court on

20-12-2019, which amply demonstrates that there has been no difficulty in

obtaining relevant copies, or for any party to attend the Court under any

circumstances. Both the applications filed this Court on 09-01-2020 also

shows that there had been no impediment for the petitioner to access justice,

and the judicial system was functioning during the period.

The preliminary objections before this Court are to the effect that the

petitioner has failed to file the necessary notices and the copies of the petition,

and relevant documents to be served on the respondent, and thereby, has

failed to exercise due diligence in that regard.

I find that after having filed the petition and the other documents relied on by

the petitioner in both the cases on 09-01-2020, there can be no basis for the

petitioner to argue that the COVID-19 pandemic prevented taking further

action to issue notice of the case.

In terms of Rule 8(3), as I have reproduced previously, it was the duty of the

petitioner to tender the relevant notice required to be served on the

respondent together with the copies of the petition and documents, which the

petitioner has failed to fulfill. If that was done, there was no reason for the

Court not to issue notices to the respondent promptly, nominating a date for

Page 15 of 19

both the cases to be mentioned before the Court as it would be the normal

process.

I find no reason to accept the petitioners contention that the relevant notices

were tendered, as this Court is bound by what the case record reflects in that

regard.

If the relevant notices were tendered accordingly, the Attorney-at-Law of the

petitioner should have a written acknowledgment in that regard as provided

for in Rule 8(4) of the Supreme Court Rules, which reads thus;

8.(4) Upon an application for special leave to appeal being lodged,

the Registrar shall insert in the notices tendered by the Petitioner

the Supreme Court number allotted to the said application, and the

date of hearing of the application, after consulting the Petitioner.

He shall issue one copy to the Petitioner upon request, obtaining a

written acknowledgment on the record itself; a copy of such notice

shall not be posted to the Petitioner.

The minute made by the relevant officer of the Court on 14-01-2020 in both

the cases shows that no date has been given to the petitioner for the case to

be mentioned because of the failure by the petitioner to submit the relevant

notices.

It needs to be noted further that even for the arguments sake, if this Court is

to accept the version that the notices were tendered, it shall be the duty of the

petitioners registered Attorney-at-Law to attend the Court Registry and verify

whether such notices were issued, served or not, in terms of Rule 8(5), which

obviously has not happened in this case.

What is clear to me is that the petitioner, after instituting the two Leave to

Appeal Applications, has never bothered to inquire the status of the cases

until the Registrar of the Court issued a notice to the petitioner and the

Registered Attorney, 3 years after the initial filing of the applications.

In Case No. 07/2020, it appears that even after the receipt of the notice, the

petitioner has never thought it fit to inquire from the Court Registry as to why

Page 16 of 19

the case was not mentioned previously, or to inquire into the status of the

other case until it was stated when Case No. 07/2020 was mentioned in open

Court on 06-12-2022, that Case No. 06/2020 has not been listed yet. This

clearly goes on to show the interest the petitioner has exhibited as to the

applications filed before the Court.

It is clear that even after the case was mentioned nearly 3 years after filing of

the same, the Registered Attorney or the petitioner has still failed to realize or

inquire whether the notices that should have been issued at the time of filing

of the action has gone out or been served. This was despite the direction given

by Court on 06-12-2022, directing the Counsel who represented the petitioner

to take all necessary steps in relation to both the matters within 2 weeks from

the day.

It appeared that instead, the only step taken had been to file a motion on 15-

12-2022 together with a copy of the written submissions marked X3(b), and

that has been the only notice served on the respondent without serving the

initial petition or the documents filed.

I am in full agreement with the submissions of the learned Presidents Counsel

for the petitioner that the Court should not rely on mere technical objections

to decide on a matter that needs adjudication from the Court, if such

technicality had not prejudiced the substantial rights of the parties. I am in

full agreement with the observations made by this Court in previous decisions

cited by the learned Presidents Counsel in this regard.

However, it is my considered view that disregarding a preliminary objection of

this nature should not allow a party who has shown no regard to the Rules of

Procedure and is clearly guilty of lashes and negligence, to benefit from such

action of its own making. I am also of the view that each default has to be

considered on a case-by-case basis in the context of the purpose of the Rule

that has been violated.

Page 17 of 19

In the case of Kiriwanthe and Another Vs. Nawarathne and Another (1990)

2 SLR 393, it was observed;

The weight of authority thus favours the view that while all these Rules

must be complied with the law does not require or permit an automatic

dismissal of the application or appeal of the party in default. The

consequence of non-compliance (by reason of impossibility or for any

other reason) is a matter falling within the discretion of the Court to be

exercised after considering the nature of the default, as well as the

excuse or explanation therefor, in the context of the object of the particular

Rule

Having considered the facts and the circumstances relevant to both the Leave

to Appeal Applications, Im of the view that the relevant default by the

petitioner would not fall under the category of a mere oversight or taking the

relevant steps without undue delay.

This is a clear situation where the petitioner has failed to follow the relevant

Supreme Court Rules and get the notices issued to the respondent in both

the cases, so that the respondent can enter an appearance and file the

necessary papers without delay. Getting activated nearly 3 years after the

initial filing of the application, and that was also only after the Court issued

notices on the petitioner and the registered Attorney-at-Law cannot be

considered under any circumstances as a default that can be excused under

the cover that it amounts to a mere technicality.

Under the circumstances, it is my view that the petitioner has failed to follow

the relevant Supreme Court Rules in relation to the Leave to Appeal

Applications, and has failed to prosecute the said applications with due

diligence for nearly 3 years, which amounts to the petitioner being guilty of

lashes.

At this juncture, I am reminded of the well-known Latin maxim Vigilantibus

Non Dormantibus Jura Subveniunt which means law assists those who are

vigilant, not those who sleep over their rights.

Page 18 of 19

In the case of Liyanage and Another Vs. Rathnasiri Divisional Secretary

Gampaha and Others (2013) 1 SLR at 6, the Supreme Court considered the

above Latin maxim as relevant in a Fundamental Rights Application filed

before the Court, and held that negligence in following the direction given by

Court would disentitle an applicant to claim that Fundamental Rights were

violated under the given circumstances.

In the case of Gunasekara and Another Vs. Abdul Lathif (1995) 1 SLR 225,

it was observed that delay alone will not bar a person from obtaining relief

which he may be entitled to, but the Court will grant relief only if the delay

can be reasonably explained;

It was observed by Ranaraja, J.,

The word lashes is a derivative of the French verb Lacher, which

means loosen. Laches itself means slackness or negligence or neglect to

do something which by law a man is obliged to do. Strouds Legal

Dictionary 5th Ed pg 1403) It also means unreasonable delay in pursuing

a legal remedy, whereby a party forfeits the benefit upon the principle

Vigilantibus Non Dormantibus Jura Subveniunt. The neglect to assert

ones rights or the acquiescence in the assertion or adverse rights will

have the effect of barring a person from the remedy which he might have

had if he resorted to it in proper time. (Mozley & Whiteleys Law

Dictionary 10th Ed pg 260). When it would be practically unjust to give a

remedy either because the party has by his conduct done that which

might fairly be regarded as equal to waiver of it, or where by his conduct

and neglect he has though perhaps not waiving that remedy, yet put the

other party in a situation in which it would not be reasonable to place

him if the remedy were to be afterwards asserted, in either of these cases

lapse of time and delay are most material.(Lindsay Petroleum Co Vs.

Hurd (1874 LRPC 221,239).

Having considered the facts and the circumstances relevant to both these

cases, I am of the view that since the petitioner has initiated these

applications in order to seek Leave to Appeal to challenge a judgment

Page 19 of 19

pronounced by the High Court in which the respondent was granted relief,

this is a matter where delay in duly prosecuting the matter by the party who

wanted to appeal against the judgment becomes a very much relevant factor.

As I have deliberated before, the petitioner had slept over its rights for almost

3 years without bothering to find out what happened to the two Leave to

Appeal Applications filed. I am unable to find any justification for attributing

that to the COVID-19 Pandemic.

Therefore, I am of the view that this is a matter where the petitioner has failed

to duly follow the relevant Supreme Court Rules and is guilty of lashes in

prosecuting the matter with due diligence.

Hence, I accept the preliminary objections raised by the respondent as to the

maintainability of these applications any further, and dismiss the

applications in both cases in limine.

The preliminary objections upheld. Both applications dismissed.

The parties shall bear their own costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Janak De Silva, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court