Page 1 of 11

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for Leave to

Appeal under and in terms of Section 5C of the

High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions)

Act No. 19 of 1990 as amended read with

Articles 127 and 128 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Ihala Hewage Don Bonny Jayaratne,

Batuwatta,

Helamada.

PLAINTIFF

Vs.

Kusum Pokunage Premadasa,

Batuwatta,

Helamada.

DEFENDANT

AND BETWEEN

Ihala Hewage Don Bonny Jayaratne,

Batuwatta,

Helamada.

PLAINTIFF APPELLANT

S.C. Appeal No. 40/2015

S.C. Application No.

SC/HCCA/LA/381/2012

High Court No.

SP/HCCA/KAG/736/2010

D.C. Kegalle Case No. 6334/L

Page 2 of 11

Vs.

Kusum Pokunage Premadasa,

Batuwatta,

Helamada.

DEFENDANT - RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

Ihala Hewage Don Bonny Jayaratne,

Batuwatta,

Helamada.

PLAINTIFF APPELLANT APPELLANT

Vs.

Kusum Pokunage Premadasa,

Batuwatta,

Helamada.

DEFENDANT RESPONDENT - RESPONDENT

BEFORE : Yasantha Kodagoda, P.C., J.

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J.

Janak De Silva, J.

COUNSEL : Vidura Gunaratne with R.J. Upali de Almeida for the

Plaintiff Appellant Appellant

Sudarshani Coorey for the Defendant Respondent

Respondent

Page 3 of 11

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS : 02.04.2015 by Plaintiff Appellant Appellant 02.03.2016 by Defendant Respondent Respondent

ARGUED ON : 27.10.2022 DECIDED ON : 12.09.2025

Janak De Silva, J.

The Plaintiff-Appellant-Appellant (Appellant) instituted this action seeking a declaration

of title to the land and premises more fully described in the schedule to the plaint (corpus)

and ejectment of the Defendant-Respondent-Respondent (Respondent) from the corpus.

According to the plaint, the Appellant derived title to the corpus from H.J.R.V. Perera upon

deed of transfer No. 689 dated 19.11.1998 (P2). The Appellant contended that the

Respondent was in unlawful occupation of the corpus from 19.11.1998.

The Respondent claimed that he was the lessee of the corpus in terms of lease agreement

No. 11348 (D3/E1) dated 17.09.1992 executed by H.J.R.V. Perera and that upon its

expiration, he became a statutory tenant.

The parties proceeded to trial on the following issues:

:-

01.

. . . ?

02. 98.11.19

689 ?

03. 98.11.19 ?

Page 4 of 11

04. ,

?

:-

05. 1992.9.27 11348

?

06. ?

07. ?

The learned trial judge granted a declaration that the Appellant was the owner of the

corpus. However, he refused to grant ejectment and damages although he held that the

Respondent had failed to establish that he was a statutory tenant. The learned trial judge

further held that the Appellant failed to establish a cause of action as no evidence was led

that the Respondent was in unlawful occupation. He went on to hold that if the

Respondent was in unlawful occupation of the corpus after the end of the lease with

H.J.R.V. Perera, it was H.J.R.V. Perera who should have instituted action or in the

alternative he should have been added as a necessary party to this action.

The Appellant appealed to the Civil Appellate High Court of the Sabaragamuwa Province

holden in Kegalle (High Court). The High Court concluded that the Respondent had

entered into possession of the corpus as a licensee of H.J.R.V. Perera and remains as same

to the date of the action. It was held that the Respondent did not have an adverse claim

against H.J.R.V. Perera and that he was a monthly tenant. Moreover, it was held that the

Appellant had failed to establish that the two boutique rooms leased by H.J.R.V. Perera to

the Respondent were situated within the corpus.

Page 5 of 11

Leave to appeal has been granted on the following questions of law:

(1) Did the High Court err in not recognising the principle that upon admission of, or

proof of, the title of a Plaintiff in a rei vindicatio action, the onus shifts to the

Defendant to prove that he is in lawful occupation?

(2) Did both Courts err in holding that a cause of action has not accrued to the

Appellant in the circumstances of this case?

(3) Did both Courts err in not recognising that a Plaintiff in a vindicatory action need

only prove that he is the owner of the land in question and that the Defendant is

in possession of it?

(4) Was the High Court in error when it ignored the conclusion reached by the Court

below that the Respondent had failed to prove statutory tenancy?

(5) Did the High Court fail to grant the reliefs prayed for by the Petitioner in view of

the fact that the concept of statutory tenancy being the only defence of the

Respondent was not upheld by the District Judge?

(6) Is a person who over-stays the period of his lease entitled to a notice to quit?

Question of Law Nos. 1 and 3

The Appellant claimed to be the owner of the corpus and that the Respondent was in

unlawful possession of it. On the strength of the title pleaded, the Appellant sought a

declaration of title and ejectment of the Respondent and those claiming under him. This

is clearly a rei vindicatio action.

In a rei vindicatio action, the Plaintiff must prove that he is the owner of the land in

question and that the land is in the possession of the Defendant [Luwis Singho and Others

v. Ponnamperuma (1996) 2 Sri LR 320 at 324; Wijetunge v. Thangarajah (1999) 1 Sri LR

53 at 55]. Even a purchaser who had not been placed in possession can bring this action

[Voet 6.1.3; Punchi Hamy v. Arnolis (1883) 5 SCC 160]. Nor is it a bar that the plaintiffs

vendor had no possession.

Page 6 of 11

The learned trial judge granted a declaration that the Appellant is the owner of the corpus.

The High Court did not set aside this finding. Indeed, it could not have in the absence of

an appeal by the Respondent or the filing of a cross objection by him in terms of Section

772 of the Civil Procedure Code.

Nonetheless, the High Court, at page 2 of its judgment, held that it is settled law that in a

vindicatory action the burden of proof is solely on the plaintiff and not on the defendant.

This is an erroneous statement of law, in view of the finding of the learned trial judge that

the Appellant is the owner of the corpus.

Where the legal title to the corpus is proved, the burden of proof is on the Respondent to

show that he is in lawful possession [Theivandran v. Ramanathan Chettiar (1986) 2 Sri LR

219 at 222; Wijetunge v. Thangarajah (1999) 1 Sri LR 53 at 55; Candappa Nee Bastian v.

Ponnambalampillai (1993) 1 Sri LR 184 at 187; Beebi Johara v. Warusavithana (1998) 3

Sri LR 227 at 228].

Accordingly, I answer question of law Nos. 1 and 3 in the affirmative.

Question of Law No. 4

The High Court concluded that the Respondent was a monthly tenant and that he should

have been given a months notice to quit. I am unable to accept this conclusion. The High

Court could not have proceeded to examine this issue.

The Respondent in his answer claimed that he was a statutory tenant. Issue No. 6 was

raised on this basis. The learned trial judge concluded that the Respondent had failed to

prove that he was a statutory tenant and answered issue No. 6 as not proved. Hence his

conclusion was that the Respondent failed to prove that he was a statutory tenant.

The Respondent did not appeal. Neither did he file a cross objection in terms of Section

772 of the Civil Procedure Code which states that any respondent, though he may not

have appealed against any part of the decree, may, upon the hearing, not only support

Page 7 of 11

the decree on any of the grounds decided against him in the court below, but take any

objection to the decree which he could have taken by way of appeal, provided he has

given to the appellant or his registered attorney seven days' notice in writing of such

objection.

In Jagathasena and Others v. G.D.D. Perera, Inspector, Criminal Investigation

Department and Mrs. Sirimavo Bandaranaike (Aggrieved Party) [(1992) 1 Sri LR 371 at

386] it was held that if a respondent in a civil appeal fails to take the steps as specified in

Section 772 of the Civil Procedure Code, he will not be allowed to canvass any such finding

of the trial judge which is unfavourable to him.

Hence, the High Court erred in law in examining issue No. 6 afresh.

Moreover, the Respondent denied the rights of the Appellant to the corpus (Appeal Brief,

pages 105, 107). A tenant who disclaims to hold of his landlord and puts him at defiance

is not entitled to have the action against him dismissed for want of a valid notice to quit

[Muttu Natchia et al v. Patuma Natchia et al (1 NLR 21); Sundra Ammal v. Jusey Appu

(36 NLR 400); Pedrick v. Mendis (62 NLR 471); K. Hassen v. A.O.Nagaria (75 NLR 335);

Mansoor v. Umma (1984) 1 Sri LR 151; Subramaniam v. Pathmanathan (1984) 1 Sri LR

252; Ranasinghe v. Premadharma (1985) 1 Sri LR 63 at 71].

In fact, the Respondent went as far as claiming, in the answer, that upon an understanding

between H.J.R.V. Perera and the Respondent in relation to the purchase of the corpus, he

had paid the said H.J.R.V. Perera an aggregate sum of Rs. 25,000/= by cheque in two

instalments of Rs. 10,000/= and Rs. 15,000/=.

Invito beneficium non datur, the law confers upon a person no right or benefit which he

does not desire.

Accordingly, I answer the question of law No. 4 in the affirmative.

Page 8 of 11

Question of Law No. 2

The learned trial judge held that no cause of action has accrued to the Appellant in the

absence of notifying the Respondent that he is now the owner of the corpus or the giving

of a notice to quit.

The Respondent submitted that the Appellant had failed to prove that he informed the

Respondent of the new ownership and did not inform the Respondent to attorn to the

Appellant, nor pay the Appellant any rentals. The only allegation made by the Appellant is

that the Respondent verbally promised to the Appellant that he will vacate the corpus and

did not vacate as promised.

According to the Respondent, the Appellant had not proved that he had informed the

Respondent to vacate the corpus and thereafter the Respondent promised to vacate the

corpus. In these circumstances, the Respondent submitted that no cause of action had

arisen in favour of the Appellant to institute this action against the Respondent.

However, the principle is that where an owner of property sues for ejectment, his real

cause of action is simply the fact that he is owner and therefore prima facie entitled to

possession. In this action, the Respondent is admittedly in possession of the corpus.

In Graham v. Ridley (1931 T.P.D. 476 at 479) Greenberg, J. held that the cause of action in

that case arises out of the fact that the plaintiff is the owner and is therefore entitled to

possession, and whether a monthly lease is alleged, which has been lawfully terminated

or whether it is alleged that there is a long lease which has been lawfully terminated, it

does not affect her real ground of the right of possession.

Greenberg, J. went on to refer (at page 479) to the following extract from the unreported

judgment in Gordon v. Kamaludin (T.P.D. 15.9.27):

One of the rights arising out of ownership is the right of possession: Indeed Grotius

(Introd. 2, 3, 4) says that ownership consists in the right to recover lost possession.

Page 9 of 11

Prima facie, therefore, proof that the appellant is the owner and that respondent is

in possession entitles the appellant to an order giving him possession, i.e., to an

order for ejectment. When an owner sues in ejectment an allegation in his

declaration that he has granted the defendant a lease which is terminated is an

unnecessary allegation and is merely a convenient way of anticipating the

defendant's plea that the latter is in possession by virtue of a lease, which plea

would call for a replication that the lease is terminated. It is the defendant and not

the owner-plaintiff who relies on the lease, and if the lease itself is denied by the

defendant, as in the present case, the allegation of the lease is a surplusage.

This position has been cited with approval in Senanayake v. Peter De Silva [(1986) 2 Sri

LR 405] where Goonewardena, J., after examining several South African authorities which

have applied the principle expounded in Graham (supra), held (at page 411) that:

These authorities, it will be seen, go so far as to hold that it is sufficient for an

owner in these circumstances to make an assertion of ownership to the property,

without further statement that the defendant's right of occupation is at an end (if

that be the case) and upon the proof of such title to obtain recovery of possession.

Indeed, they then demonstrate beyond any manner of doubt, that it is competent

for an owner who has leased his land, upon showing that the lessee has lost the

right of occupation, to eject him on the strength of his title and that an action so

framed is not misconceived nor that the action should be constituted as one against

an over holding lessee based upon the lawful termination of the contract of lease,

before possession can be recovered.

Pieris [G.L. Pieris, Law of Property in Sri Lanka, 1st ed., page 297] agrees with the

exposition of this principle.

Page 10 of 11

Moreover, in Luwis Singho and Others v. Ponnamperuma [(1996) 2 Sri LR 320 at 324]

Wigneswaran, J. held that:

[] in a rei vindicatio action, the cause of action is based on the sole ground of

violation of the right of ownership. In such an action proof is required that;

(i) the Plaintiff is the owner of the land in question i.e. he has the dominium and,

(ii) that the land is in the possession of the Defendant (Voet 6:1:34) (emphasis

added)

At this point, it must also be stated that the High Court erred in holding that the Appellant

failed to establish that the two boutiques possessed by the Respondent fall within the

corpus.

According to the Respondent, the two boutiques leased to him were situated on Lot 18 in

Plan No. 1467. The Appellant purchased Lots 2 and 3 in Plan No. 4232 which was a

subdivision of the amalgamated Lots 18 and 19 in Plan No. 1467. According to the

evidence of K.H.S. Panditharatne, Licensed Surveyor, he has included the buildings

situated in Lots 18 and 19 in Plan No. 1467 as part of Lots 2 and 3 in his Plan No. 4232.

This part of his evidence went unchallenged.

Accordingly, I answer question of law No. 2 in the affirmative.

In view of the answers given to questions of law Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 4, there is no need to

answer questions of law Nos. 5 and 6.

For all the foregoing reasons, I set aside the judgment of the High Court dated 30.07.2012

and the judgment of the District Court of Kegalle dated 01.06.2010.

I enter judgment as prayed for in prayers () and () of the plaint dated 12.05.1999.

The Learned District Judge of Kegalle is directed to enter decree accordingly.

Page 11 of 11

The Respondent shall pay the Appellant Rs. 100,000/= as costs of this appeal.

Appeal allowed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Yasantha Kodagoda, P.C., J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT