(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 1 of 46

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal in terms of Section 37

(2) of the Arbitration Act No. 11 of 1995.

1. Sathsindu Forwarding & Security (Pvt) Limited,

No. 80,

Navam Mawatha,

Colombo 02.

2. Bagnold Associates Limited,

No. 85,

Grace Church Street,

London, EC3 0AA,

United Kingdom.

CLAIMANTS

Vs.

Sri Lanka Ports Authority,

No. 19,

P.O Box No. 595,

Church Street,

Colombo 01.

RESPONDENT

AND BETWEEN

1. Sathsindu Forwarding & Security (Pvt) Limited,

S C Appeal No. 119/2017

(with S C Appeal No. 120/2017)

SC/HC/LA No: 87/2016

HC No: HC/ARB/57/2013

ARB No: SLNAC/166/12/2006

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 2 of 46

No. 80,

Navam Mawatha,

Colombo 02.

2. Bagnold Associates Limited,

No. 85,

Grace Church Street,

London,

EC3 0AA,

United Kingdom.

CLAIMANT-PETITIONERS

Vs.

Sri Lanka Ports Authority,

No. 19,

P.O Box No. 595,

Church Street,

Colombo 01.

RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

Sri Lanka Ports Authority,

No. 19,

P.O Box No. 595,

Church Street,

Colombo 01.

RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT-APPELLANT

Vs.

1. Sathsindu Forwarding & Security (Pvt) Limited,

No. 80,

Navam Mawatha,

Colombo 02.

2. Bagnold Associates Limited,

No. 85,

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 3 of 46

Grace Church Street,

London, EC3 0AA,

United Kingdom.

CLAIMANT-PETITIONER-RESPONDENTS

Before: JAYANTHA JAYASURIYA PC CJ

P. PADMAN SURASENA J

E. A. G. R. AMARASEKARA J

Counsel: Vikum De Abrew SDSG with Chaya Sri Nammuni SSC for the Respondent-

Respondent-Appellant

Nihal Jayawardena PC with Shyamalie Goonewardena & Radhya Herath for the

Claimant-Petitioner-Respondents

Argued on: 12 - 01 - 2021 and 29 - 03 - 2021

Decided on: 22 - 03 - 2022

P Padman Surasena J

The Respondent-Respondent-Appellant, Sri Lanka Ports Authority (hereinafter referred to as

the SLPA), entered in to the agreement dated 22-01-2004 (produced marked P 4), with the

1st Claimant-Petitioner-Respondent, a company incorporated in Sri Lanka, which acted in

association with the 2nd Claimant-Petitioner-Respondent, Bagnold Associates Limited, a

company incorporated in the United Kingdom, to conduct Port Security Consultancy Service

according to the International Code for the Security of Ships and Port Facilities (ISPS) required

by the Diplomatic Conference on Maritime Security held in London in December 2002 which

had called for development of new measures relating to the security of ships and port facilities.

For convenience, the 1st Claimant-Petitioner-Respondent and the 2nd Claimant-Petitioner-

Respondent will hereinafter be jointly referred to in this judgment, as the Claimants.

Schedule A of the afore-stated agreement (hereinafter referred to as the Agreement),

specified the services entrusted to the Claimants by the SLPA, while Schedule B of the

Agreement specified the rates of payment for the provision of the said services. The Claimants

had agreed to complete the said services within the time scale specified at the end of Schedule

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 4 of 46

B of the Agreement. For easy reference I would reproduce below, the two of the above-

mentioned schedules to the Agreement.

Schedule A which sets out the services entrusted to the Claimants is as follows.

Schedule A

SCOPE OF WORK

Phase 1

Port Facility Security Assessment (PFSA)

A risk analysis of a port facility’s operation in order to determine its risk to be the

subject of any attack and its vulnerabilities in relation to such attack known as “Port

Facility Security Assessment” (PFSA) of the Seaports of Sri Lanka and would address

following.

a. Identification and evaluation of important assets and infrastructure it is important

to protect.

b. Identification of the possible threats to the assets and infrastructure and likelihood

of their occurrence, in order to establish and prioritize security measure.

c. Identification, selection and prioritization of countermeasures and procedural

changes and their level of effectiveness in reducing vulnerability.

d. Identification of vulnerabilities

e. Recommendations

- 4 Weeks

On getting approval of the Port Facility Security Assessment report by your

Designate Authority, the Port Facility Security Plan (PFSP) would be prepared.

Phase 2

Port Facility Security Plans (PFSP)

A plan developed to ensure the Application of measures designed to protect the

port facility and ships, persons and Cargo, Cargo transport units and Ship’s stores

within Port facility from the risks of a Security incident known as Port Facility

Security Plans (PFSP) of the Sea Ports of Sri Lanka and would address following.

a. Detail the security organisation of Port Facility.

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 5 of 46

b. Detail of Port Facility’s link with other relevant authorities and the necessary

commutation system to allow the effective continuous operation of the organization

and its links with others, including ships in port;

c. Detail the basic security level 1 measures, both operational and physical, that will

be in place;

d. Detail the additional security measures that will allow the port facility to progress

without delay to security level 2 and, when necessary, to security level 3;

e. Provide for regular review, or audit, of the PFSP and for its amendments in response

to experience or changing circumstances; and

f. Detail reporting procedures to government of Sri Lanka’s contact points.

- 4 Weeks

Phase 3

Training of Port Facility Security Officers

SATHSINDU/BAGNOLD undertakes to design a training program and

conducted aid program for up to ten persons.

• Understanding the reasons for the ISPS code

• ISPS Code content and requirements.

• Understanding the ISPS Code.

• Carrying out port critically assessments.

• Carrying out port vulnerability assessments.

• Ship & port interface.

• Understanding port security searches and search technology.

• ISPS documentation

• Developing an ISPS security manual.

- 3 Days to 01 Week

In return, the SLPA had agreed to pay for the above-mentioned services, as per the payment

scheme provided in Schedule B which is as follows.

Schedule B

ISPS PAYMENT SCHEDULE

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 6 of 46

An advance payment of 50% of the total cost

upon signing the Agreement

US $

60,000.00

25% to be paid at the time of submitting the

security manuals

US $

30,000.00

25% to be paid at the time Government

accepts security manuals

US $

30,000.00

Total US $

120,000.00

TIME SCALE

Phase Local Foreign

01 4 Weeks

02 4 Weeks

03 1 Week

By virtue of the aforementioned payment schedule, the SLPA, upon signing the Agreement,

was required to make an advance payment of 50% of the total cost which the SLPA had duly

paid to the Claimants.

After the lapse of one year and six days to be exact, the Claimants, by the Notice of Arbitration

dated 28th January 2005, had informed the SLPA that a dispute had arisen as the SLPA was

in breach of their obligations under the Agreement as it had refused to pay the balance part

of the total payment. The Claimants stated in the said notice that they are entitled to the

balance payment since they had performed the services under the Agreement.

As the parties had agreed to refer for arbitration, any dispute arising between them regarding

the performance of the contract as per clause 15 of the Agreement, the Claimants had referred

the aforesaid dispute for arbitration by way of the afore-mentioned Notice of Arbitration.

The dispute in respect of which the Claimants had given Notice of Arbitration to SLPA, could

be gathered by the following averments in the said Notice of Arbitration, produced marked P

3 in this proceeding.1

1 The said Notice of Arbitration was annexed marked X 8 to the Statement of Claim filed in the arbitral tribunal.

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 7 of 46

“In terms of Clause 2 of the above-mentioned agreement, Sri Lanka Ports Authority

established by Act No. 51 of 1979, appointed our clients Sathsindu Forwarding &

Security (Pvt) limited (SFSL) and/or in association with Bagnold Associates Limited as

the Recognized Security Organization (RSO) and to perform the services listed in

Schedule A annexed thereto upon the payment of rates mentioned in Schedule B to

the said agreement for and on behalf of the Sri Lanka Ports Authority.

Our clients Sathsindu Forwarding & Security (Pvt) limited (SFSL) in association with

Bagnold Associates Limited have performed their obligations and/or carried out the

said services for which Sri Lanka Ports Authority has paid and settled a sum of US $

60,000/- being 50% of the total payment that should be paid under the agreement

mentioned above.

However, as the Sri Lanka Ports Authority in breach of its obligation under the above

Agreement failed and neglected to pay the balance sum of US$ 60,000/. Therefore our

clients Sathsindu Forwarding & Security (Pvt) limited (SFSL) in association with

Bagnold Associates Limited are entitled to claim the said balance sum of US$ 60,000/-

together with the interest at the rate of 12% per annum on the said sum from 23rd

March 2004. Further, our clients the said Sathsindu Forwarding & Security (Pvt) limited

(SFSL) in association with Bagnold Associates Limited have incurred a sum of Rs.

126,823.60 as expenses incurred to them and thus in terms of Clause 4.1.3 of the said

Agreement entitled to claim the same together with the interest at the rate of 12%

per annum from 23rd of March 2004.

However, as the Sri Lanka Ports Authority repeatedly failed and neglected to pay the

above mentioned sums to our clients as per the said Agreement, through their

Attorneys-at-law, sent a letter of demand dated 27th November 2004 demanding the

above mentioned sums from Sri Lanka Ports Authority.”

Thus, the dispute, the Claimants had referred for arbitration before the relevant arbitral

tribunal as per the Notice of Arbitration, is the non-payment by the SLPA, the balance sum of

US Dollars 60,000/=, in breach of its obligation under the Agreement despite the completion

of the performance by the Claimants, their obligations under the Agreement. It is because the

Claimants had carried out the services entrusted to them by the Sri Lanka Ports Authority that

the former had claimed the balance sum of US Dollars 60,000/=.

Accordingly, having taken necessary steps to have the arbitrators appointed, the Claimants

had filed in the arbitral tribunal, their Statement of Claim dated 05th January 2007 in which

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 8 of 46

they have described in detail, the dispute that had arisen between the Claimants and the

SLPA.

The dispute in respect of which the Claimants have filed the said Statement of Claim, could

be gathered by the averments contained in the 14th and 15th paragraphs in that Statement of

Claim produced marked P 5 in this proceeding. The said paragraphs are reproduced below

for easy reference.

“14. An agreement to that effect was entered into between Sathsindu Forwarding &

Security (Pvt) Limited (SFSL), the first named claimant, in association with Bagnold

Associates Limited, the second named claimant and the Sri Lanka Ports Authority

the(sic) for conducting of port security consultant services for international code for

the security of ships and port facilities (ISPS) and to perform the services listed in

Schedule A annexed thereto upon the payment of rates mentioned in Schedule B to

the said agreement for and on behalf of the Sri Lanka Ports Authority.

A true copy of the said Agreement is annexed hereto marked as “X2” and pleads the

same as part and parcel hereof.

15. The claimants above named have performed their obligations to the full satisfaction

of the SLPA and/or carried out the said services for which Sri Lanka Ports Authority

has paid and settled a sum of US$ 60,000/- being 50% of the total payment that

should be paid under the agreement mentioned above.

In proof of the said contention, the claimants annexe herewith marked as “X3 (a)”,

“X3 (b) and “X3 (c)” respectively, true copies of the said invoice, letter dated 26th

January 2004 and receipt issued by the 1st Claimant.”

Moreover, in the said Statement of Claim, the Claimants have also stated the following.

i. The Claimants have submitted the Port Facility Security Assessment (PFSA) and

the invoice for payment for work carried out for SLPA in terms of the agreement

for part payment.

ii. The Claimants have prepared the Port Facility Security Plans (PFSP).

iii. In the meantime, in April 2004 the Parliamentary election was held after which a

different political party formed the Government.

iv. Thereafter the Government has appointed Sri Lanka Navy as the designated

authority and the Recognized Security Organization (RSO) for ports security.

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 9 of 46

v. The LTTE almost carried out a major attack on the port of Colombo on 16-06-2006

which would have caused heavy damaged to the port of Colombo and to the city

of Colombo. The attack failed purely due to bad weather.

vi. The 1st Claimant sent a letter dated 24-03-2004 to the Respondent with an

attached invoice for an immediate payment of US Dollars 30,000 /=.

vii. The Claimants are therefore entitled to claim the balance sum of US Dollars 60,000

together with the interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum on the said sum

from the date of 23rd March 2004 from the SLPA.

viii. The Claimants have incurred a sum of RS. 126,823.60 as expenses incurred to

them and thus in terms of clause 4.1.3 of the agreement are entitled to claim that

amount also together with the interest.

ix. The Claimants have sent a letter of demand dated 27-11-2004 to the SLPA.

The Claimants, in keeping with the dispute they had referred for arbitration, had only prayed

in their Statement of Claim, the following relief:

a. an award in a sum of US $ 60,000/- or its equivalent sum in Sri Lanka rupees,

together with the interest at the rate of 12% per annum on the said sum from 23rd

March 2004 from the Respondent,

b. further award in a sum of Rs. 126,823.60 as expenses incurred to them together

with the interest at the rate of 12% per annum from 23rd of March 2004, and

c. Costs of the arbitration.

The SLPA filing its Statement of Defence, had taken up inter alia, the following positions.

(i) Following the tragic events of 11.09.2001, IMO adopted new provisions to the

SOLAS convention in December 2002 in order to enhance maritime security.

(ii) IMO by resolution amended the SOLAS convention under which the said ISPS

security arrangements became mandatory from 01.07.2004.

(iii) The SLPA entered into the agreement in order to comply with the mandatory

requirements under ISPS Code.

(iv) The SLPA paid a sum of US $ 60,000/= as an advance payment in terms of the

agreement.

(v) The Claimants have failed to fulfill their obligations in terms of the agreement.

(vi) The Claimants are not entitled for any payment under the agreement as the

Claimants have failed to carry out their obligations under the agreement.

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 10 of 46

(vii) Sri Lanka Navy has fulfilled the requirements under the ISPS Code before the

deadline given for the implementation of the same.

At the commencement of the inquiry before the arbitral tribunal, both parties framed issues

to be decided by the arbitral tribunal. This was also done in keeping with the dispute that was

referred for arbitration. It is relating to that particular dispute, that the parties had submitted

their respective pleadings before the arbitral tribunal. The issues (as per the award as well as

the written submissions filed by the parties in the arbitral tribunal) raised respectively by the

Claimants and the SLPA, would help identify the nature of the said particular dispute, the

arbitral tribunal was dealing with, in the instant case.

Issues raised by the Claimants:

i) Did the Claimants enter into the agreement marked X 22 to perform the services

described in the said agreement?

ii) Did the Claimants perform the obligations contracted in terms of X 2?

iii) Did the Claimants make a demand by X 63?

iv) Did the [SLPA] refuse to make payment in terms of X 74?

v) Are the Claimants entitled to the sums referred to in paragraphs 44 of the

Statement of Claim?

vi) If one or more issues are answered in favour of the Claimant, are the Claimants

entitled to the reliefs prayed for in the claim?

Issues raised by the SLPA:

i) Was there a valid contract between the Claimant and the [SLPA]?

ii) Was there a valid Arbitration Agreement to refer the purported dispute for

arbitration due to one or more aforesaid reasons?

iii) Was there a valid reference for arbitration?

iv) Has the tribunal jurisdiction to hear this arbitration and grant relief prayed for by

the Claimant?

v) If any one or more issues above are answered in favour of the [SLPA], should the

Statement of Claim be dismissed in limine by the tribunal?

vi) Without prejudice to the above issues, did IMO adopt new provisions to the SOLAS

convention in December 2002 in order to enhance maritime security?

2 The Agreement produced (in the Supreme Court) marked P 4 in this appeal. 3 The letter of demand dated 27-11-2004 annexed to the Statement of Claim. 4 The letter dated 24-12-2004 by which the SLPA had replied the above letter of demand.

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 11 of 46

vii) Did IMO resolution amend the SOLAS convention under which the said ISPS

security arrangements became mandatory from 01-07-2004?

viii) Did the [SLPA] enter into the agreement marked X 2 in order to comply with the

mandatory requirements under the ISPS Code?

ix) Did the [SLPA] pay a sum of US $ 60,0000/- as an advance payment in terms of

the agreement marked X 2?

x) Did the Claimant fail to fulfill its obligations in terms of the agreement?

xi) Did the [SLPA] appoint the Claimants as a Recognised Security Organization

(RSO)?

xii) Are the Claimants entitled for payment under the agreement?

xiii) Has the Sri Lanka Navy fulfilled the requirements under the ISPS Code before the

deadline given for implementation of the same?

xiv) If any one or more of the issues above are answered in favour of the [SLPA],

should the Statement of Claim be dismissed in limine by the tribunal?

xv) Are the Claimants entitled for the relief prayed for, in the Statement of Claim?

xvi) Are the Claimants estopped from claiming any money in terms of the agreement

due to their conduct?

xvii) Is the amount claimed by the Claimant excessive?

xviii) If any one or more of the issues above are answered in favour of the [SLPA],

should the Statement of Claim be dismissed in limine by the tribunal?

xix) Had the Claimants failed to discharge its obligation for the advance payment made

even after the time period stipulated in the agreement?

xx) Had the Claimant failed to fulfill its obligations for the advance payment made in

terms of the agreement marked X 2?

xxi) Did the Claimants fail to fulfill its obligations for the advance payment made even

after the time period stipulated in the agreement?

xxii) Has a cause of action accrued to the [SLPA] against the Claimant to recover the

aforesaid sum of US $ 60,000/- with the interest at the rate of 12% per annum on

the said sum from 23-04-2004 up to the date of award and legal interest on the

aggregate amount mentioned in the award till payment in full?

The above issues clearly show that all three stakeholders in this arbitration, namely the two

rival parties and the arbitral tribunal, had focussed on the dispute of non-payment by the

SLPA, the balance sum of US Dollars 60,000/=, in breach of its obligation under the

Agreement, despite the completion of the performance by the Claimants, their obligations

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 12 of 46

under the Agreement. This is because it was the said dispute that the Claimants had referred

for arbitration before the arbitral tribunal.

However, after the completion of the inquiry, the arbitral tribunal had unanimously awarded

the Claimants a sum of US$ 48,000/- being the balance of 90% of the total cost (US$

120,000/-) after deducting the advance of US $ 60,000/- already paid to the Claimants by the

SLPA. In the award, the arbitral tribunal had held that the Claimants are entitled to the said

90% of the total sum in terms of clause 10.3 of the Agreement on the basis that the SLPA

had prevented the Claimants from carrying out the services entrusted to them.

Being aggrieved by the award of the arbitral tribunal, the SLPA filed in the High Court, the

petition and affidavit dated 28-03-2013 in the case bearing No. HC ARB/ 57/ 2013 in terms of

section 32(1) of the Arbitration Act No. 11 of 1995 (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the

Arbitration Act), seeking to set aside the aforesaid arbitral award. Thereafter, the Claimants

filed an application dated 28-05-2013 bearing case No. HC ARB/ 112/ 2013, seeking to enforce

the said arbitral award under section 31 of the Arbitration Act. The learned High Court Judge

having consolidated those two applications in terms of section 35 of the Arbitration Act,

pronounced the judgment which is impugned in this appeal. The learned High Court Judge by

that judgment had dismissed the application of the SLPA refusing to set aside the arbitral

award and made order in the same judgment recognizing and enforcing the arbitral award.

Being aggrieved by the judgment of the learned High Court Judge, the SLPA has filed the

instant appeal to challenge the order refusing to set aside the arbitral award. This Court, when

the Leave to Appeal application pertaining to the instant appeal was supported before it,

having heard the submissions of the learned Counsel for both parties, by its order dated 12-

06-2017, has granted Leave to Appeal in respect of the questions of law set out in sub-

paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of paragraph 18 of the Petition dated 15-01-2016 filed by the

SLPA. The said questions of law read as follows.

a) Is the judgement of the High Court contrary to the provisions in sections 4, 15, 18, 24

and 25 of the Arbitration Act?

b) Has the Judge of the High Court failed to set aside the Arbitral Award in terms of the

provisions of Section 32 (1)(a)(iii) of the Arbitration Act?

c) Has the Judge of the High Court failed to set aside the Arbitral Award in terms of the

provisions of Section 32 (1)(b)(ii) of the Arbitration Act?

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 13 of 46

Since there is a reference to sections 4, 15, 18, 24 and 25 of the Arbitration Act in the afore-

stated question of law set out in paragraph 18 (a) of the petition, reproducing those sections

first, would be convenient.

Section 4 of the Arbitration Act describes the arbitrability of the dispute as follows:

“Any dispute which the parties have agreed to submit to arbitration under an

arbitration agreement may be determined by arbitration unless the matter in respect

of which the arbitration agreement is entered into is contrary to public policy or, is not

capable of determination by arbitration.”

Section 15 of the Arbitration Act specifies the duties of the arbitral tribunal as follows:

15. (1) An arbitral tribunal shall deal with any dispute submitted to it for arbitration in

an Impartial, practical and expeditious manner.

(2) An arbitral tribunal shall afford all the parties an opportunity, of presenting their

respective cases in writing or orally and to examine all documents and other

material furnished to it by the other parties or any other person. The arbitral

tribunal may, at the request of a party, have an oral hearing before determining

any question before it.

(3) An arbitral tribunal may, notwithstanding the failure of a party without

reasonable cause, to appear before it, or to comply with any order made by it,

continue the arbitral proceedings and determine the dispute on the material

available to it.

(4) Parties may, introduce new prayers for relief provided that such prayers for

relief fall within the scope of the arbitration agreement and it is not inappropriate

to accept them having regard to the point of time at which they are introduced

and to other circumstances. During the course of such proceedings, either party

may, on like conditions, amend or supplement prayers for relief introduced earlier

and rely on new circumstances in support of their respective cases.

Section 18 of the Arbitration Act describes the commencement of arbitral proceedings as

follows:

18. An arbitration shall be deemed to have been commenced if -

a) a dispute to which the relevant arbitration agreement applies has arisen; and

b) a party to the agreement -

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 14 of 46

(i) has received from another party to the agreement a notice requiring that

party to refer, or to concur in the reference of, the dispute to arbitration; or

(ii) has received from another party to the agreement a notice requiring that

party to appoint an arbitral tribunal or to join or concur in or approve the

appointment of, an arbitral tribunal in relation to the dispute.

Section 24 of the Arbitration Act describes the law applicable to the substance of dispute as

follows:

24. (1) An arbitral tribunal shall decide the dispute in accordance with such rules of law as

are chosen by the parties as applicable to the substance of the dispute. Any designation

of the law or legal system of a given State shall be construed, unless otherwise

expressed, as referring to the substantive law of that State and not to its conflict of

laws rules.

(2) Failing any designation by the parties to any arbitration agreement, the arbitral

tribunal shall apply the law determined by the conflict of laws rules which it considers

applicable.

(3) The provision of subsections (1) and (2) shall apply only to the extent agreed to by

the parties.

(4) The arbitral tribunal shall decide according to considerations of general justice and

fairness or trade usages only if the parties have expressly authorised it to do so.

Section 25 of the Arbitration Act describes the form and content of the arbitral award as

follows:

25. (1) The award shall be made in writing and shall be signed by the arbitrators

constituting the arbitral tribunal. In arbitral proceedings with more than one arbitrator,

the signatures of the majority of the members of the arbitral tribunal shall suffice,

provided that the reason for any omitted signature is stated.

(2) The award shall state the reasons upon which it is based, unless the parties have

agreed that no reasons are to be given or the award is an award on agreed terms under

section 14.

(3) The award shall state its date and place of arbitration as determined in accordance

with section 16. The award shall be deemed to have been made at that place.

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 15 of 46

(4) After the award is made, a copy signed by the arbitrators constituting the arbitral

tribunal in accordance with subsection (1) of this section shall be delivered to each

party.

Having reproduced the above sections, let me first consider the questions of law set out in

paragraphs 18 (a) and 18 (b) of the petition since the main thrust of the arguments advanced

by the learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General who appeared for the SLPA was directed

towards the issues set out in those questions.

At the outset, it must be remembered that arbitration is a process dependant solely on the

agreement of the parties. The party autonomy is fundamental to such process. When one

traverses through the provisions of the Arbitration Act, it becomes clear that the Act has

recognised the party autonomy to a great extent. For example, the parties are free to

determine the number of arbitrators of an arbitral tribunal;5 the parties are free to agree on

a procedure for appointing the arbitrators;6 the parties are free to agree on any appropriate

procedure including mediation and conciliation to encourage settlement at any time during

the arbitral proceedings;7 the parties are free to agree on the place of arbitration;8 the parties

are free to agree on the procedure to be followed by the arbitral tribunal in conducting the

proceedings.9 It is also open for the parties to agree: on the manner in which evidence before

arbitral tribunal shall be given,10 on the mode in which they could be represented before

arbitral tribunal.11 Moreover, the parties also can agree to an exclusion agreement as per

section 38 of the Act. Thus, the principle of party autonomy could be seen permeating the

entire Act as the guiding principle through those and also the other provisions of the Act. It is

the said guiding principle which the Courts also adopt and give effect to, when deciding cases

involving arbitrations. This is perhaps why arbitration is sometimes referred to as a private

method of dispute resolution. In the arbitration process, the Government is not involved; the

court system is not involved (except as provided for in the Act); the parties do not have to

rely on any Government institution for resolution of their dispute. Process of conducting the

arbitration, venue, time, mode of adducing evidence are all decided by agreement of parties.

Although it is the agreement of the parties which first establishes the arbitral tribunal, it would

thereafter be the arbitral tribunal which would eventually take over the whole affairs of

5 Section 6. 6 Section 7 (subject to the provisions of the Act). 7 Section 14. 8 Section 16. 9 Section 17. 10 Section 22. 11 Section 23.

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 16 of 46

conducting the arbitration to its conclusion. However, one must not forget that it is basically

the agreement of the parties which initially founds the arbitral tribunal and it is the parties

and parties alone which confer it with jurisdiction by referring a dispute to it, for adjudication.

Although it is a private method of dispute resolution, once the arbitral tribunal makes an

award, the law of the country (Arbitration Act) steps in to recognize and enforce that award.

However, this is not without any limitation. The law (Arbitration Act) has put in place, certain

legal framework within which the arbitral tribunal must operate. Courts will recognise and

enforce an award made by an arbitral tribunal only if it had conducted its affairs (leading to

the relevant award) within the framework specified by law. The afore-stated limitations are

reflected in section 32 of the Act. Thus, it would be opportune at this juncture to reproduce

that section. This is more so as the questions of law set out in Paragraphs 18 (b) and 18 (c)

are also centred around some of the provisions in the said section.

Section 32 of the Arbitration Act.

(1) An arbitral award made in an arbitration held in Sri Lanka may be set aside by the High

Court, on application made therefor, within sixty days of the receipt of the award –

(a) where the party making the application furnishes proof that -

(i) a party to the arbitration agreement was under some incapacity or the said

agreement is not valid under the law to which the parties have subjected it

or, failing any indication on that question, under the law of Sri Lanka ; or

(ii) the party making the application was not given proper notice of the

appointment of an arbitrator or of the arbitral proceedings or was otherwise

unable to present his case ; or

(iii) the award deals with a dispute not contemplated by or not falling within the

terms of the submission to arbitration, or contains decisions on maters

beyond the scope of the submission to arbitration:

Provided however that, if the decision on matters submitted to arbitration

can be separated from those not so submitted, only that part of the award

which contains decisions on matters not submitted to arbitration may be set

aside; or

(iv) the composition of the arbitral tribunal or the arbitral procedure was not in

accordance with the agreement of the parties, unless such agreement was

in conflict with the provisions of this Act, or, in the absence of such

agreement, was not in accordance with the provisions of this Act : or

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 17 of 46

(b) where the High Court finds that -

(i) the subject matter of the dispute is not capable of settlement by

arbitration under the law of Sri Lanka: or

(ii) the arbitral award is in conflict with the public policy of Sri Lanka.

(2) Where an application is made to set aside an award, the High Court may order that

any money made payable by the award shall be brought into Court or otherwise secured

pending the determination of the application.”

In the instant case, in clause 15 of the Agreement, the parties had agreed that any arbitration

must be determined and resolved according to the rules and procedures as per the laws of

Sri Lanka. Indeed, in the Notice of Arbitration dated 28-01-2005 itself, the Claimants also have

relied on the provisions of the Arbitration Act No.11 of 1995. There is also no dispute that the

provisions of the Arbitration Act must apply in this instance.

The main contention of the SLPA is that the arbitral tribunal had unlawfully made an award in

relation to a new matter, raised for the first time by the Claimants in their written submissions,

filed after the conclusion of the inquiry. It is because of that, the SLPA argues that the award

of the arbitral tribunal must be set aside under section 32(1)(a)(iii) of the Arbitration Act. It is

that argument I would now consider.

The Claimants commenced the inquiry proper, led evidence of witnesses and marked

documents. They attempted to prove that they had fulfilled their obligations under the

Agreement, as claimed in their Statement of Claim. However, the SLPA by way of cross

examination, leading evidence of witnesses and by producing documents showed the arbitral

tribunal, that the Claimants in fact had not fulfilled their obligations as per the Agreement.

Perusal of the arbitral award shows clearly that the arbitral tribunal had accepted the position

that the Claimants had not completed fulfilling their obligations as per the Agreement.

After the conclusion of the inquiry, both the Claimants and the SLPA had filed their respective

written submissions. Some of the averments in the written submissions filed by the Claimants

after the inquiry,12 clearly show that the Claimants too do not assert positively that they had

completely fulfilled their obligations as per schedule A of the Agreement. This is evident as

the Claimants had more specifically used the phrase ‘having almost completed’ in paragraph

84 of the written submissions dated 10.05.2012. It is in the said written submissions that the

12 Page 949 & 969 of the appeal brief.

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 18 of 46

Claimants, for the first time, had claimed 90% of the total cost as per clause 10.3 of the

Agreement.

Perusal of the proceedings of the arbitral tribunal shows that the arbitral tribunal had

concluded recording of evidence on 03-09-2009, on which date, a date for correction of

proceedings was fixed. Thereafter the arbitral tribunal had proceeded to make corrections of

the proceedings on several dates i.e., 18-11-2009, 27-11-2009 and 16-02-2010.

The Claimants had thereafter filed their final written submission dated 10-05-2012.

Proceedings dated 20-06-2012 shows that the learned Counsel for the Claimants Mr. Nihal

Jayawardena had made an oral submission before the arbitral tribunal on that date (i.e., 20-

06-2012) and thereafter continued his submission on 11-07-2012 also. Thereafter, on the

same day (i.e., 11-07-2012), the learned Deputy Solicitor General Mr. De Abrew had started

replying the aforesaid submissions made on behalf of the Claimant. (Same Counsel had

continued to represent their respective parties in the High Court as well as in this Court.)

The sequence of the above events would clearly show that the arbitral tribunal had proceeded

to hear the oral submissions of the learned Counsel for both parties, after both parties had

filed their respective written submissions; the Claimants on 10-05-2012 and the SLPA on 22-

05-2012 (as per the date stamp placed on the written submissions of the SLPA). Perusal of

the aforesaid oral submissions made by the parties (recorded in the proceedings before the

arbitral tribunal), also clearly shows that the Claimants had not advanced a case based on

clause 10.3 of the Agreement up until that moment. The submissions made by the learned

Deputy Solicitor General shows that the claim under clause 10.3 of the Agreement, put forward

by the Claimants for the first time in their written submission filed after conclusion of recording

of evidence, had taken the SLPA by surprise. The said submission also reveals that the learned

Deputy Solicitor General had sufficiently appraised the arbitral tribunal of the above position

well before it pronounced the award dated 30-01-2013.

However, despite the above position being brought to its attention, the arbitral tribunal had

just brushed aside the said position and proceeded to make an award on the new claim put

forward by the claimant in their final written submission. This has clearly deprived the SLPA

any opportunity of defending such a claim before the arbitral tribunal. This clearly is

tantamount to the arbitral tribunal breaching the provisions in section 15 (2) of the Arbitration

Act which has stipulated that an arbitral tribunal shall afford all parties an opportunity, of

presenting their respective cases. When the SLPA did not know that the Claimants would

finally rest their case on clause 10.3 of the Agreement how could the SLPA have presented its

case to defend such a claim? This is primarily due to the fact that the Claimants had not

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 19 of 46

referred any such dispute arising out of clause 10.3 of the Agreement for adjudication before

the arbitral tribunal. The operative part of the said award dated 30-01-2013, (produced

marked P 2 in this proceeding) which is reproduced below would shed further light on the

above issue.

“… Therefore, in view of the failure by the Respondent to perform its obligations in relation

to the PFSAs the Claimants could not have completed performance in respect of PFSPS

and in view of the foregoing statement of law set out by C G Weeramantry, the Respondent

cannot seek to avoid liability on the basis that Claimants have not performed their

obligations in relation to the PFSPs as per the agreement C9. The Claimants in

paragraph 22 of their written submission dated 10/05/2012 submit that they

are entitled to 90% of the total sum in terms of Clause 10.3 of the agreement

C9.13 For the foregoing reasons I am in agreement with this submission on the ground

that the Respondent’s employees prevented Claimant 1 from carrying out the

services as contemplated in Clause 10.3. 14 Accordingly, 90% of US$ 120,000/-

amounts to US $ 108,000. The advance of US $ 60,000 already [paid] to Claimant 1 by

the Respondent would have to be deducted from this sum. Therefore, the balance sum

payable by the Respondent to Claimant 1 will be US $ 48,000/- …”

The phrases emphasized by me in the above quotation which was extracted from the award

clearly show that, the entitlement to 90% of the total sum in terms of clause 10.3 of the

Agreement was put forward by the Claimants for the first time in their written submissions

dated 10-05-2012, filed after the conclusion of the inquiry; and the arbitral tribunal had made

the award in relation to that claim so made in the said written submission, on the ground that

the SLPA had prevented the Claimants from carrying out the services, as contemplated in

clause 10.3.

The Claimants did not refer for arbitration, any dispute arising out of a situation where the

SLPA had terminated the services of the Claimants or the SLPA or its employees had

prevented the Claimants from carrying out the services entrusted to them. It would only be

to such an istance, the aforestated clause 10.3 of the Agreement would apply. Further, as per

the said clause, it would only be under such circumstances that the SLPA is required to pay

the Claimants, 90% of the total sum payable, in terms of Schedule B of the Agreement,

irrespective of the amount of work completed. The said clause 10.3 is reproduced below.

13 Emphasis is mine. 14 Emphasis is mine.

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 20 of 46

“10.3. If the SFSL services are terminated or SLPA its employees prevented the SFSL to

carry out the Services due to any reason SLPA shall pay 90% of the total sum payable in

terms of schedule B irrespective of the extent of work carried out.”

The dispute, the Claimants had referred for arbitration, is the failure on the part of the SLPA

to pay and settle a sum of US$ 60,000/- (being 50% of the total payment that should be paid

under the Agreement) after the Claimants had performed their obligations to the full

satisfaction of the SLPA. It is that claim that the Claimants had demanded from the SLPA

through the letter of demand dated 27-11-2004 annexed marked X - 6 to the Statement of

Claim and produced in the inquiry before the arbitral tribunal marked C -34. The paragraph

extracted from the said letter of demand which is reproduced below would clearly confirm

that it was indeed the dispute.

“Our clients state that they carried out the said services as per the Agreement but the

Sri Lanka Authority having paid a sum of US $ 60,000/- failed and neglected to pay

the balance sum of US $ 60,000 and together with the interest at the rate of 12% per

annum on the said sum from 23rd March 2004 and the expenses incurred in terms of

Clause 4.1.3 of the said Agreement of Rs. 126,823.60 together with interest at the

rate of 12% per annum from 23rd March 2004. “

According to the said letter of demand, it is for the recovery of the said claim (in case the

SLPA fails to pay) that the Claimants had instructed their Attorneys at Law to institute legal

proceedings against the SLPA.

The Claimants neither divulged nor invited the arbitral tribunal to adjudicate, any dispute

revolving around the question whether the SLPA had terminated the services of the Claimants

or whether the SLPA or its employees had prevented the Claimants from carrying out

the entrusted services which would have called for application of clause 10.3 of the

Agreement.

It is only in the written submissions filed after the conclusion of the inquiry,15 that the

Claimants had admitted (as I have already adverted to), the fact that they had not completely

fulfilled their obligations as per Schedule A of the Agreement. (The arbitral tribunal too upheld

this position).

The SLPA did not file its Statement of Defence to defend any dispute arising out of any incident

where SLPA had either terminated the services of the Claimants or had prevented the

15 Page 949 of the appeal brief.

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 21 of 46

Claimants from carrying out the services entrusted to them. That would be a situation falling

under clause 10.3 of the Agreement which would have in all probability required the SLPA to

adopt a different ‘strategy’ in its defence. The SLPA in their pleadings, had only focused on

the particular dispute that was referred for arbitration. i.e., its alleged failure to pay a sum of

US $ 60,000.00/= being 50% of the total payment that should be paid under the Agreement

upon the Claimants completing the performance of their obligations to the full satisfaction of

the SLPA. That was the case the SLPA had defended in the course of the inquiry before the

arbitral tribunal.

Thus, it is clear from the above facts that the parties had not mandated the arbitral tribunal

to resolve any dispute arising out of any situation to which clause 10.3 of the Agreement

applies. This was simply because there was no such dispute arisen between the parties.

Indeed, it is clear that the SLPA had become aware of such a claim (under clause 10.3 of the

Agreement) only after the Claimants had filed their written submission dated 10-05-2012

which is a date after the completion of the inquiry. Therefore, the arbitral tribunal could not

have focused its mind on such a dispute during the inquiry as the parties had not invited the

arbitral tribunal to consider and resolve that kind of dispute. The Claimants chose to raise it

for the first time in their written submissions filed after the conclusion of the inquiry.

As per the provisions of the Arbitration Act, once the arbitral tribunal makes an award, there

can be no review of its merits subject however to the aforesaid grounds of challenge set out

in section 32 of the Act. This is the law and it is the parties who on their own volition agree

to be bound by that law. However, this does not mean that an arbitral tribunal, once formed

by the agreement of the parties, can go on voyages of discovery of disputes between the

parties which formed it, irrespective of the fact that the parties before that tribunal had not

referred such disputes for adjudication by the tribunal. The arbitral tribunal therefore has a

legal duty to stay within its limits. These limits must be basically gathered cumulatively from

the Notice of Arbitration, pleadings such as Statement of Claim and Statement of Defence,

and issues. That is the wish of the parties; that is what the parties had agreed; that is the

only power conferred on it by the parties; and that is the power conferred on the arbitral

tribunal by law. Thus, an arbitral tribunal must take all possible steps to ensure that it remains

within its terms of reference. It must guard its boundaries so that neither the tribunal nor any

party before it could cross them. This is further illustrated by the following citations.

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 22 of 46

In their work, ‘Law and Practice of International Commercial Arbitration’,16 the authors

underscore the need for an arbitral tribunal to remain within its mandate in the following way:

“An arbitral tribunal may only validly determine those disputes that the parties have

agreed that it should determine. This rule is an inevitable and proper consequence of

the voluntary nature of arbitration.17 In consensual arbitration, the authority or

competence of the arbitral tribunal comes from the agreement of the parties; indeed,

there is no other source from which it can come. It is the parties who give to a private

tribunal the authority to decide disputes between them; and the arbitral tribunal must

take care to stay within the terms of its mandate. The rule to this effect is expressed in

several different ways. Sometimes it is said that an arbitral tribunal must conform to the

mission entrusted to it; 18 or that it must not exceed its mandate; or that it must stay

within its terms of reference,19 competence or authority. Another way of expressing the

rule (which is followed in this book) is to state that an arbitral tribunal must not exceed

its jurisdiction (this term being used in the sense of mandate, competence or authority).”

In the case of Oberoi Hotels (Pvt) Limited Vs. Asian Hotels Corporation Ltd,20 the appellant

(Oberoi) being the owner of the premises of Oberoi Hotel, entered into a Technical Assistance

and Operating Agreement (TAOA) dated 08-03-1970 with the respondent Company (Asian

Hotels), which provided for the promotion of the hotel named, "Lanka Oberoi" and the services

to be performed by the appellant (Oberoi) in managing the hotel. After some years of

operation under the said agreement, the appellant (Oberoi) sent Notice of Arbitration dated

19-03-1997 to the respondent (Asian Hotels). The dispute referred for arbitration was in

relation to certain failures and interferences by the respondent (Asian Hotels) as reflected in

the following two paragraphs of the said Notice of Arbitration.

"1. You have failed-

16 Alan Redfern and Martin Hunter with Nigel Blackaby and Constantine Partasides; (2004), 4th Edition, London: Sweet & Maxwell, at page 248 (paragraph 5-30). 17 In some states, such as Chile, some matters must be referred to arbitration (see Jorquiera & Helmlinger, “Chile” in International Arbitration in Latin America (Blackaby, Lindsey & Spinillo eds), p.95. It is questionable whether such compulsory arbitration is in fact arbitration in the true sense of the word since it lacks the necessary element of consent. Such “arbitrations” are outside the scope of this book. 18 See, e.g., French Code of Civil Procedure 1981, Art.1502.3. 19 Under the ICC Arbitration Rules, Art. 18, an arbitral tribunal must draw up its own “Terms of Reference” for signature by the parties and the tribunal and for approval by the ICC’s Court, before proceeding with the arbitration. 20 SC/LA No. 28/2000, decided on 25-11-2002. [Reported in 2002 BALR 23 and also in Cabral’s ALR (Vol I)].

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 23 of 46

(a) to complete the refurbishment works;

(b) to provide a hotel which can be operated as a modern fully-equipped hotel,

catering to International Tourist and Business Trade.

2. You have interfered with, obstructed and prevented the exercise of the

absolute control and discretion in the operation of the Hotel vested".

The respondent (Asian Hotels) replying by letter dated 16-05-1997 denied the allegations and

counter claimed damages on the basis of certain lapses on the part of the appellant (Oberoi).

The respondent (Asian Hotels) also by this letter appointed its arbitrator. As per the letter

dated 22-07-1997, the nominated arbitrators had notified that a chairman has been appointed

to the arbitral tribunal. Thereafter, the respondent (Asian Hotels) by the letter dated 19-09-

1997 sent to the appellant (Oberoi), had informed that in the circumstances set out in that

letter, ‘the Management Contract has terminated by operation of the circumstances of law/

has ceased to subsist in law’ and the respondent (Asian Hotels) would have the right to

formally terminate the agreement. The arbitral tribunal in that case, having considered the

contents of that letter, in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of the award held that the agreements

continued to exist and to be binding up to the date of close of the hearing in Colombo i.e.,

16-10-1998 stating in the award as follows:

"Accordingly, we hold that although notice of 19-9-97 was given in good faith on legal

advice, it was not effective to bring the contract to an end, either through a unilateral right

of termination or on the ground of a repudiation by the Oberoi".

It was on the above finding that the tribunal in that case had considered remedies contained

in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of the award and held that the agreements continued to exist and

to be binding up to the date of close of the hearing in Colombo i.e., 16-10-1998. The

respondent (Asian Hotels) then made an application to the High Court seeking to set aside

the award, in terms section 32(1)(a)(iii) of the Arbitration Act on the basis that the award

deals with a dispute not contemplated by or not falling within the terms of the submission to

arbitration or contains decisions on matters beyond the scope of the submission to arbitration.

The High Court set aside this part of the award holding that the letter dated 19-09-1997 did

not come within the scope of the submission to arbitration, since it was sent six months after

the commencement of arbitral proceedings. His Lordship Sarath N Silva Chief Justice seeing

no error in the judgment of the High Court, examined in that judgment the applicable law

namely, sections 15, 18, 24, 25 and 50 of the Arbitration Act. The following two paragraphs

extracted from that judgment would be relevant for the instant case too.

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 24 of 46

“….The words "any dispute submitted to it for arbitration" [in section 15 of the

Arbitration Act]21 should be understood consistent with the provisions of Section 18

as meaning, any dispute that had arisen relevant to the arbitration agreement and

submitted by way of a reference to arbitration by the parties. Similarly, Section 24

which deals with the law that will be applicable on the basis of which the arbitral

tribunal will make its decision, is to be understood as requiring the arbitral tribunal

to decide the dispute which has arisen and submitted to arbitration by way of a

reference by the parties, “in accordance with such rules of law as are chosen by the

parties ...". The same construction should be carried through to the making of an

award as provided in Section 25 of the Act. The term "award" is defined in Section

50(1) to mean, "a decision of the arbitral tribunal on the substance of the dispute".

In this provision too the phrase “substance of the dispute” should be construed to

mean, the substance of the dispute that had arisen and submitted to arbitration by

way of a reference by the parties. …”

“…. It is seen that the touchstone in all situations is "the submission to arbitration".

Therefore the question as to the validity of the award or any decision contained

therein has to be decided primarily on the basis of the dispute that has arisen and

submitted to arbitration by way of a reference by the parties. The leeway that is

provided in paragraph (iii) is that the High Court should not look at only the strict

letter of the submission to arbitration, but look at the entirety of the submission and

ascertain whether the award deals with a dispute as envisaged by the parties or

whether decisions contained in the award come with the terms of the scope of the

submission to arbitration. In brief, the test is to ascertain whether the award contains

matters which the parties could reasonably be said to have intended, to be decided

by the arbitral tribunal, when they submitted the dispute, that had arisen, to

arbitration. This is in keeping with the basic principle that an arbitral tribunal derives

jurisdiction solely from the submission to arbitration by the parties. …”

Hatton National Bank Limited Vs. Casimir Kiran Atapattu and another,22 is another case in

which this Court had to consider whether the High Court had erred in law in holding that the

arbitral award relevant to that case did not violate Section 32(1) (a) (iii). I would albeit briefly,

advert to the facts of that case only to the extent relevant to the afore-stated section.

21 The addition of the phrase within brackets is mine. 22 SC Appeal 38/2006, SC Appeal 39/2006 decided on 25-06-2013, [Cabral’s ALR (Vol I) 547].

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 25 of 46

Hatton National Bank Limited (HNB), granted certain financial accommodation to the

respondents (Casimir Kiran Atapattu and another), who were carrying on business in

partnership under the name, style and firm of Soul Entertainments (SOUL), to enable the

latter to meet the initial expenses of importing into Sri Lanka, one set of Apogee Speakers

from the United States of America. As security for the said financial accommodation, SOUL

entered into a lease agreement, which provided for the lease of the said Apogee Speakers to

SOUL for a period of 36 months. The said lease agreement meant that the HNB remained and

continued to be the owner of the said Apogee Speakers. SOUL had initially complied with the

lease agreement and duly paid the lease rentals for more than half the period of the lease.

HNB by its letter dated 02.06.1998, sought to terminate the said agreement on the basis that

SOUL had defaulted the payment of rentals. More than a month after the said termination of

the said lease agreement, SOUL claimed that the said Apogee Speakers were destroyed in a

fire. According to the Statement of Claim the HNB claimed a sum of money being the amounts

due to it as arrears of rental on the lease agreement, and a further sum of money being the

value of the Apogee Speaker system that was leased out to SOUL. According to the Statement

of Defence, SOUL claimed that it had paid the lease rentals for 28 months and the letter of

termination was wrongful and was of no force or avail in law. SOUL also contended that in

any event the subject matter of the lease agreement, namely the Apogee Speaker system was

destroyed by fire and therefore the lease agreement had become frustrated. The tribunal in

that case, in its unanimous award had partly rejected the claim made by HNB, and directed

HNB to pay SOUL, on the basis of latter’s counter-claim, a sum of money found to be the

amount of loss suffered by SOUL due to HNB’s failure to insure the Apogee Speaker system,

and a further sum of Rs. 1,462,832/- being the lease rentals SOUL had neglected to pay HNB

in terms of the lease agreement, and interest thereon.

HNB sought to have the award set aside before the High Court primarily on the basis that it

dealt with "a dispute not contemplated by or not falling within the terms of the submission to

arbitration, or contains decisions on matters beyond the scope of the submission to

arbitration" under section 32(1)(a)(iii) of the Arbitration Act. The High Court, rejected that

contention on the ground that no objection to the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal was raised

by HNB at any stage before the said tribunal. In that case, one of the questions of law this

Court granted Leave to Appeal against the aforesaid judgment of the High Court was aimed

to ascertain whether the High Court had erred in law in determining and/or holding that the

said arbitral award did not violate section 32(1) (a) (iii). The paragraphs which immediately

follow the instant, would show that this Court had held that the award in that case fell within

section 32(1)(a)(iii) of the Arbitration Act as the arbitral tribunal in that case had strayed

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 26 of 46

beyond its limits to consider some issues not taken up in the Statement of Defence and were

altogether inconsistent with SOUL’s conduct and pleadings.

In the said case, certain admissions were recorded which included, an unqualified admission

that that HNB entered into a lease agreement with SOUL. The Counsel for SOUL had sought

to formulate issues No. 9 and 10, but were strongly objected to, by the counsel for HNB on

the basis that those issues were not covered by the pleadings and in fact inconsistent with

the position taken up by SOUL in its correspondence with HNB as well as its Statement of

Defence. The said issues Nos. 9 and 10 were to the following effect:

9. Did the HNB have a right to enter into the said lease agreement?

10. Was the HNB the "owner" of the Apogee Speaker system?

The arbitral tribunal, without giving any reason, allowed issues Nos. 9 and 10 to stand.

Subsequently, in the award, the tribunal inaccurately stated that "the following issues were

agreed upon by the parties at the commencement of the inquiry", and proceeded to set out

the 31 issues on which it based its award. That included issues No. 9 and 10 which Counsel

for HNB had strongly resisted. It was in that backdrop that His Lordship Justice Saleem

Marsoof PC, holding that the purpose of rejecting the claim of HNB for the return of the

Apogee Speaker system or the payment of its agreed value, was created by the tribunal’s

failure to reject issues Nos. 9 and 10 based on the objection taken to them by the Counsel for

HNB, despite the fact that they did not arise from the pleadings, and were altogether

inconsistent with them, answered the afore-stated question of law (in respect of which this

Court had granted Leave to Appeal in that case) in the affirmative and in favour of HNB, and

stated as follows:

“In conclusion, it needs to be emphasised that the manner in which the arbitral tribunal

arrived at its astonishing award is most revealing, and demonstrates not only that the

arbitral tribunal was, to say the least, altogether confused in regard to what exactly

was legitimately in issue in the case, but also that it had wittingly or unwittingly strayed

outside its mandate. It is trite law that the mandate of an arbitral tribunal to decide

any dispute is based on party autonomy and is confined to the limits of the power

conferred to it by the parties in express terms or by necessary implication. An

arbitration tribunal does not have the freedom that Italian poet Robert Browning

yearned for in his famous Andrea del Sartio, I. 97, or as those lesser mortals who are

not that poetically inclined would put it, the freedom of the wild ass; it is obliged to

act within, and not exceed, its mandate. …”

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 27 of 46

Let me continue further with the discourse relevant to the issues at hand. In the instant case,

the Claimants have neither prayed for any relief under clause 10.3 of the Agreement nor

framed any issue in relation to such a claim. It is despite the absence of such a claim that the

arbitral tribunal had awarded the Claimants a sum of US $ 48,000/= together with simple

interest at the rate of 12% per annum from the period beginning 27-11-2004 until the

payment is paid in full, together with costs in the sum of Rs. 250,000/- against the SLPA.

Section 15(1) of the Arbitration Act mandates an arbitral tribunal to deal with any dispute

submitted to it for arbitration in an impartial, practical and expeditious manner. As has been

held in the case of Oberoi Hotels,23 section 15 of the Arbitration Act does not confer on an

arbitral tribunal to deal with any dispute between parties to an arbitration agreement. An

arbitral tribunal can validly exercise its jurisdiction to conduct an arbitration only in respect of

any dispute that had arisen relevant to the arbitration agreement and submitted by way of a

reference to arbitration by the parties for its adjudication.

Similarly, section 4 of the Arbitration Act also must be interpreted in the same way. Thus,

section 4 of the Arbitration Act too does not empower an arbitral tribunal to deal with any

dispute between parties to an arbitration agreement but only disputes that had arisen relevant

to the arbitration agreement and submitted to it by way of a reference to arbitration by the

parties for adjudication.

It is the same interpretation that should be provided to section 24 of the Arbitration Act which

has stipulated the law which an arbitral tribunal must apply to decide a dispute. The phrase

“in accordance with such rules of law as are chosen by the parties as applicable to the

substance of the dispute” must therefore mean as held in Oberoi Hotels24case, as empowering

the arbitral tribunal to decide the dispute which has arisen and submitted to arbitration by

way of a reference by the parties, in accordance with such rules of law as are chosen by the

parties.

In the instant case, although there is an arbitration agreement between the Claimants and

the SLPA, neither party had submitted any dispute arising out of any situation falling under

clause 10.3 of the Agreement for arbitration by the arbitral tribunal. Thus, the arbitral tribunal

in the instant case, has made an award on a matter not submitted before it by any party, for

arbitration.

As per section 15(2) of the Arbitration Act, it is mandatory for an arbitral tribunal to afford all

parties an opportunity, of presenting their respective cases. In the instant case, the arbitral

23 Supra. 24 Supra.

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 28 of 46

tribunal has failed to comply with that requirement as well. (I have already commented on

this above).

Section 15(4) of the Arbitration Act has not granted an unrestricted freedom for any Party to

introduce new prayers for relief. Such new prayers can only be permitted having regard to

the point of time at which they are introduced and the other relevant circumstances. It is only

in their written submissions, that the Claimants for the first time change the character of the

scope of the arbitration by introducing a new matter under clause 10.3 of the Agreement.

The Claimants did not make any application for insertion of a new prayer invoking the

provisions in section 15 (4). Thus, the relief granted to the Claimants by the arbitral tribunal

is not something even the Claimants had prayed for, as a relief.

An arbitration must have commenced before it could be concluded, for nothing that has not

commenced can be concluded. Section 18 of the Arbitration Act requires fulfilment of two

requirements before one could assert the fact that a particular arbitration has commenced.

These two requirements are set out in limbs (a) and (b) of that section. First requirement is

that a dispute to which the relevant arbitration agreement applies must have arisen between

parties. Second requirement can be fulfilled in one of the two ways set out in section 18 (b)

and that is when a party to the agreement -

i. has received from another party to the agreement a notice requiring that party

to refer, or to concur in the reference of, the dispute to arbitration; or

ii. has received from another party to the agreement a notice requiring that party

to appoint an arbitral tribunal or to join or concur in or approve the appointment

of, an arbitral tribunal in relation to the dispute.

As has been mentioned above, in the instant case, the pleadings, issues, documents produced

and evidence recorded, show that no dispute arising out of any situation falling under clause

10.3 of the Agreement had arisen between the Claimants and the SLPA. Thus, the above

mentioned first requirement under section 18 (a) does not exist.

The dispute, the Claimants had referred for arbitration before the relevant arbitral tribunal as

per the Notice of Arbitration, is the non-payment by the SLPA, the balance sum of US Dollars

60,000/=, in breach of its obligation under the Agreement despite the completion of the

performance by the Claimants, their obligations under the Agreement. The Claimants had not

referred to any dispute arising out of any situation falling under clause 10.3 of the Agreement

in the Notice Arbitration P 3. Thus, the notice the SLPA has received (P 3) is not a notice

falling under section 18 (b) of the Arbitration Act as far as any dispute arising out of any

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 29 of 46

situation falling under clause 10.3 of the Agreement is concerned. Therefore, the second

requirement under section 18 (b) also does not exist in the instant case. This means that no

arbitration with regard to any dispute arising out of any situation falling under clause 10.3 of

the Agreement has ever commenced.

‘Award’ has been defined in section 50 (1) of the Arbitration Act as follows.

“award” means a decision of the arbitral tribunal on the substance of the dispute.

As has been held in the case of Oberoi Hotels,25 the phrase “substance of the dispute” in

section 50 (1) must be interpreted to mean, the substance of the dispute that had arisen and

submitted to arbitration by way of a reference by the parties. The fact that no arbitration in

relation to any dispute arising out of any situation falling under clause 10.3 of the Agreement

has ever occurred, establishes conclusively that no award in terms of section 50 (1) in relation

to that kind of dispute can exist in law.

Thus, the term "award" in section 50(1) must mean, a decision of the arbitral tribunal on the

substance of the dispute which has arisen and submitted to arbitration by way of a reference

by the parties. Similarly, the award referred to in section 25 of the Arbitration Act must only

mean an award which qualifies to fall under the above interpretation.

Perusal of the judgment of the learned Judge of the High Court shows that in view of the

issue: ‘Did the Claimants fail to fulfill its obligations in terms of the agreement?’, the learned

High Court Judge had concluded that the arbitrators were obliged to consider the question

whether the Claimants have failed to fulfill the obligations of the agreement fully or partially

and if partially, why the Claimants were unable to fulfill the obligations fully. The learned

Judge of the High Court had also taken into account, the presence of the issue: ’Are the

Claimants entitled for payment under the agreement?’. It is on that basis that the learned

Judge of the High Court had taken the view that the claim under clause 10.3 of the agreement

is not a new claim taken up for the first time by the Claimants in the written submissions. The

learned Judge of the High Court has also taken the view that the Claimants have only brought

the contractual term to the attention of the tribunal with regard to the manner in which

compensation should be awarded in the event of such breach of the agreement by the

respondent when the services by the claimant was prevented by the respondent. Moreover,

the judgment of the High Court also reveals that the learned Judge of the High Court in view

of the issue: ’Has a cause of action accrued to the [SLPA] against the Claimant to recover the

aforesaid sum of US $ 60,000/- with the interest at the rate of 12% per annum on the said

25 Supra.

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 30 of 46

sum from 23-04-2004 up to the date of award and legal interest on the aggregate amount

mentioned in the award till payment in full?’, has taken the view that the arbitrators were also

required to refer to any other term of the agreement and consider whether the claimants are

entitled to payments under any of the clauses in the agreement.

It must be observed that paragraph 15 of the Statement of Claim (P 5) reads "The claimants

above named have performed their obligations to the full satisfaction of the SLPA and /or

carried out the said services for which Sri Lanka Ports Authority has paid and settled a sum of

USD 60,000/- being 50 % of the total payment that should be paid under the agreement

mentioned above". The Claimants maintain the same position in the Notice of Arbitration (P

3). However, the SLPA in paragraph 16(iv) of its Statement of Defence (P 6) had disputed

this claim and had pleaded that it paid the said sum of USD 60,000/- which was 50 % of the

total payment as an advance payment as it was required to do so in terms of the

agreement. The fact that the said sum of USD 60,000/- was required to pay as an advance,

is clearly borne out from the ‘ISPS PAYMENT SCHEDULE’ in Schedule B of the Agreement.

Clause 4.1.1 of the Agreement (P 4) reads: “In consideration of the services to be rendered

by the SFSL under this agreement SLPA shall pay to SFSL the amounts at terms as per agreed

Schedule B and such additional sums (if any) as shall from time to time agreed by the parties

in writing”. Further, item 1 of schedule B of the Agreement requires the SLPA to make an

advance payment of 50% of the total cost upon signing the agreement. Therefore, the

above payment is NOT made in recognition of any work carried out by the Claimant as claimed

in the Notice of Arbitration but paid as an advance just after signing the agreement. Therefore,

there cannot be any ambiguity on that issue.

According to schedule B of the Agreement, the total sum of USD 120,000/= was to be paid at

three stages:

o Advance payment of 50% (USD 60,000/=) upon signing the agreement

o 25% (USD 30,000/=) to be paid at the time of submitting the security manuals

o 25% (USD 30,000/=) at the time when Government accepts security manuals

Therefore, after the receipt of USD 60,000/- as the advance payment, the Claimants’

entitlement to the balance 50% of the total sum arises at two stages in equal sums namely,

USD 30,000/- at the time of submitting security manuals and the ﬁnal payment of USD

30,000/- at the time the Government accepts security manuals. It is therefore pertinent to

observe that the Claimants’ entitlement to receive the full payment (USD 120,000/-) arises

only at the point the SLPA accepts the security manual. Therefore, to receive the 100% of the

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 31 of 46

sum the Claimants must have completed all their undertakings to the satisfaction of the SLPA

too. It is also pertinent to observe, according to clause 4.1.2 ‘SFSL shall be entitled to a

ratable proportion of the sum or sums payable under this clause for any broken portion of any

work during which its engagement under this agreement subsists’.

The above facts in my view, are important to comprehend the nature of the dispute that was

placed for arbitration by the Claimants.

As has already been stated above, the Claimants in the Notice of Arbitration (P 3) claim, that

they ‘have performed their obligations and /or carried out the services for which SLPA has

paid and settled a sum of USD 60,000/- being 50% of the total payment that should be paid

under the Agreement. The Claimants also allege in P 3 that the SLPA had breached its

obligation under the Agreement and failed and neglected to pay the balance sum of USD

60,000/-. It was on that basis that the Claimants had stated in P 3 that they are entitled to

claim the balance sum of USD 60,000/= together with the interest at the rate of 12% per

annum on the said sum from 23rd March 2004. Further, the Claimants had stated in P 3 that

they are entitled in terms of Clause 4.1.3 of the Agreement, to claim a sum of Rs 126,823.60

as expenses incurred by them together with the interest at the rate of 12% per annum from

23rd March 2004".

As per paragraph 15 of the Statement of Claim (P 5), the Claimants have stated that they

have performed their obligations to the full satisfaction of the SLPA and / or carried out the

said services for which Sri Lanka Ports Authority has paid and settled a sum of USD 60,000/=

being 50% of the total payment that should be paid under the Agreement.

In paragraph 29 of P 5 the Claimants have stated that they are therefore entitled to claim the

said balance of USD 60,000/= together with the interest at the rate of 12% per annum on the

said sum from 23rd March 2004 from the SLPA. Further the Claimants in paragraph 29 have

also stated that in terms of clause 4.1.3 of the Agreement, they are entitled to claim a sum of

Rs 126,823.60 as expenses incurred to them together with the interest at the rate of 12% per

annum from 23rd of March 2004.

It was on the above basis that the Claimants stated in paragraph 44 of P 5 that they are

entitled to receive a total sum of USD 60,000/= or its equivalent sum in Sri Lanka Rupees,

together with the interest at the rate of 12% per annum on the said sum from 23rd March

2004 from the SLPA. Further the Claimants in that paragraph have claimed a sum of Rs

126,823.60 as expenses incurred to them in terms of clause 4.1.3 of the Agreement together

with the interest at the rate of 12% per annum from 23rd March 2004.

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 32 of 46

It was in those circumstances that the Claimants as per paragraph 45 have prayed for;

a. an award in a sum of USD 60,000/= or its equivalent sum in Sri Lanka Rupees,

together with the interest at the rate of 12% per annum on the said sum from

23rd March 2004 from the respondent,

b. an award in a sum of Rs 126,823.60 as expenses incurred to them together

with the interest at the rate of 12% per annum from 23rd of March 2004, and

c. costs of the arbitration.

The matter initiated by the Claimants for arbitration through the Notice of Arbitration had

been further crystalized through the Statement of Claim and the issues raised by the

Claimants. Among the six issues raised by the Claimants, issues (ii) and (v) read as:

§ Did the Claimants perform the obligations contracted in terms of X2?

§ Are the Claimants entitled to the sums referred to in paragraph 44 of the Statement

of Claim?

In the light of the above positions, the general reference to a dispute in relation to the

performance of the Agreement as referred to in paragraph 33 of the Statement of Claim

namely, "Under the above circumstances a dispute and / or [deference] has arisen between

the Claimants ............. touching and / or concerning and / or with respect to the performance

of the said Agreement marked ‘X2’ mentioned above” should be taken in conjunction with the

speciﬁc pleadings in the Notice of Arbitration, Statement of Claim and the issues raised by the

Claimants in comprehending the Claimants’ case presented for arbitration. When all these

matters are taken together, in my view, the Claimants have proceeded for arbitration on the

basis that they have performed their obligations fully and are entitled to receive the full

amount in the agreement (USD 120,000/=). They had claimed the balance 60,000/= leaving

aside the advance received upon the signing of the Agreement.

Issues No. (x), (xi), (xiv) and (xv) raised by the SLPA, in my view, cannot expand the case of

the Claimants. Even though the issue on excessiveness in the amount claimed, does not refer

to any speciﬁc legal provisions or a speciﬁc clause in the agreement, the inquiry by the

Arbitrators cannot expand to examine clause 10.3 as the said clause is applicable only to a

speciﬁc factual positions i.e.:

o "that the SFSL services are terminated" and / or

o “SLPA its employees prevented the SFSL to carry out the services..”

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 33 of 46

The claimants had not pleaded either of these two eventualities in the Notice of Arbitration,

Statement of Claim or in the issues. To the contrary, the Claimants had claimed that they had

performed their obligations under the Agreement fully while the SLPA had pleaded that the

Claimants had failed to fulﬁll their obligations. Therefore, in the backdrop of the two rival

positions taken up by the parties, the excessiveness of the amount claimed by the Claimants

has to be considered and evaluated in terms of a general provision in the Agreement namely

clause 4.1.2 (i.e., "SFSL shall be entitled to a ratable proportion of the sum or sums payable

under this clause for any broken portion of any work during which its engagement under this

agreement subsists”) without resorting to clause 10.3 which expands the parameters of the

dispute referred for arbitration. This is important when considering the scheme of payment in

Schedule B (ISPS Payment Schedule) of the Agreement. Therefore, the right for a tribunal to

grant a lesser relief that falls within the main relief needs to be interpreted subject to the

limitation that granting of such relief should not either expand or change the parameters of

the dispute that had been presented for adjudication.

Even when the principle of law that "a failure of one party to perform an entire contract is due

to the act of the other party, it is not open to the latter to seek to avoid liability on the ground

of non-performance" is invoked to determine the legal obligation of a party, the calculation of

payments due, should not have been made based on a clause that expands / changes the

parameters of the matter presented. Such calculation should have been based on the clause,

which permits the tribunal to consider the proportion of work and the scheme of payment

agreed by the parties, in determining the entitlement and responsibilities of the parties.

In view of the foregoing, in my view, the Claimants’ submission that ‘they did not refer any

fresh issue with regard to the non- performance of the Petitioner as per clause 10.3 of the

Agreement, but merely brought a contractual term of the Agreement to the attention of the

tribunal with regard to the manner in which the quantum of the payment due to the Claimants

could be calculated in accordance with the Agreement’ is devoid of any merit.

I have already discussed above as to how an arbitral tribunal could assume jurisdiction to

decide a dispute. In my view, the High Court in the instant case, has failed to appreciate the

fact that the arbitral tribunal had no jurisdiction to adjudicate a dispute which the parties had

not referred to it for arbitration. It also had not endeavoured to ascertain correctly, the dispute

which the parties had referred to it for arbitration. Moreover, the learned Judge of the High

Court has failed to purposively interpret the above issues with a view of keeping the arbitral

tribunal within the four corners of its jurisdiction. Further, the arbitral tribunal also has failed

to uphold the effect of the provisions in sections 4, 15, 18, 24 and 25 of the Arbitration Act in

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 34 of 46

their correct spirit. This is a fundamental error directly affecting the jurisdiction of the arbitral

tribunal which vitiates the judgment of the High Court.

Thus, I hold that the arbitral tribunal after hearing all the evidence and after receiving the

written submissions, had not proceeded to make an award in relation to the dispute that was

referred to it, for arbitration.

On the other hand, the arbitral tribunal had made an award relating to a matter which is

outside the scope of the dispute submitted by the Claimant for arbitration before it. The

dispute that the arbitral tribunal resolved was unknown to the parties. It is not possible for

the arbitral tribunal to assume jurisdiction on its own to resolve a dispute which is unknown

to the parties. The Arbitration Act does not permit exercise of such arbitrary power by arbitral

tribunals.

Although the above comments would sufficiently dispose this appeal, the following few

paragraphs also would further demonstrate that the award made by the tribunal in the instant

case has dealt with a dispute not contemplated by, and not falling within the terms of the

submission to arbitration and contains decisions on maters beyond the scope of the

submission to arbitration. As per the agreement (P4) the following facts could be gathered.

It was after the tragic events occurred on 11th September 2001 that the International Maritime

Organization (IMO) had unanimously agreed in November 2001 to develop new measures

relating to the security of ships and port facilities for adoption at a conference of contracting

governments to the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea 1974 (known as the

Diplomatic Conference on Maritime Security). In December 2002, the development of the said

new measures to be submitted to the said Diplomatic Conference, was entrusted to the

Maritime Safety Committee of the IMO. Accordingly, in December 2002, the Maritime Safety

Committee had agreed on the final version of the proposed texts, to be submitted to the

Diplomatic Conference. The Diplomatic Conference held from 9th - 13th December 2002, had

adopted the proposed amendments to the existing provisions of the International Convention

for the Safety of Life at Sea, 1974 (SOLAS). Thereafter, the IMO by a resolution had amended

Chapter V and XI of SOLAS by which compliance with the Code had become mandatory with

effect from 1st July 2004. It is in that background that the SLPA on behalf of the Government

of Sri Lanka, had taken steps to enter into the relevant agreement with the Claimants in order

to ensure the timely compliance with the aforesaid mandatory requirements specified by IMO.

In clause 1 of the Agreement itself, the parties had agreed the commencement date of the

Agreement to be 22nd January 2004. The parties also had agreed in the same clause that the

Agreement would be for a period of 03 months from the commencement date. As per clause

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 35 of 46

4.1.4, SLPA shall make the payments agreed, within seven (07) days of the receipt of the

invoice. As per the time scale specified in Schedule B to the Agreement, the Claimants were

supposed to complete all three phases within a very short time specified therein. Thus, it can

be seen, from the above clauses that the work entrusted to the Claimants were to be carried

out on urgent basis. Indeed, the time scale itself reflects this fact.

The Claimants in their Statement of Claim (Paragraph 16) had stated that in fact their foreign

consultants visited Colombo, Trincomalee, Galle and Point Pedro sea ports to carry out Port

Facility Security Assesment (PFSA) on several dates from February to April 2004. Thus, even

during the last stages of the Agreement’s validity/operational period, (the Agreement was to

end on 22-04-2004) the Claimants had no obstruction to carry out the tasks entrusted to

them. On the other hand, the Claimants neither complain that the SLPA had terminated their

services nor complain of any obstruction by the SLPA or its employees at any stage which

would have prevented them from completely carrying out their obligations. Their clear position

was that they had performed their obligations to the full satisfaction of the SLPA. Their

complain/dispute that was referred for arbitration was the failure on the part of the SLPA to

pay a sum of US $ 60,000.00/= being 50% of the total payment that should be paid under

the Agreement despite the completion of the services by them to the satisfaction of SLPA.

This means that the Claimants had claimed that they had completed their work, for it is only

then that they can claim for the balance US $ 60,000.00/=. That is the payment which the

Claimants allege that the SLPA had defaulted. Within that dispute, any obstruction by the

SLPA to complete the tasks undertaken by the Claimants cannot exist for such an obstruction

should have preceded the completion of the Claimants’ obligations.

The above facts also show that the Claimants have had free access to those sea ports; and

there had been no dispute over an incident in which the SLPA had prevented the Claimants

from carrying out their entrusted services during the time the agreement was in force. It was

in April 2004, that the Claimants state that a General Election was held and a new political

party formed the Government. It was only thereafter that the Claimants had found out from

the media about the Sri Lanka Navy being appointed by Government as the Designated

Authority & the Recognised Security Organization (RSO) for ports security. The validity period

of the Agreement would have ended on 22-04-2004 since it was only for 03 months

commencing from 22-01-2004. The fact that the Claimants had prayed for the balance sum

of US $ 60,000/- together with the interest at the rate of 12% per annum on the said sum

from 23rd March 2004 from the SLPA, too indicates that it is their position that they had

finished their task by that time. Thus, when the Claimants had advanced that kind of case,

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 36 of 46

one cannot expect the SLPA to predict in advance, that the Claimants, at the stage of the final

written submissions, would bring in a claim under clause 10.3 of the Agreement.

For the foregoing reasons, I answer the questions of law in respect of which this Court has

granted Leave to Appeal in the following manner.

Answer to the question of law set out in paragraph 18(a) of the petition:

The High Court has failed to uphold the effect of the provisions in sections 4, 15, 18, 24 and

25 of the Arbitration Act in their correct spirit and hence the judgment of the High Court is

contrary to those sections.

Answer to the question of law set out in paragraph 18(b) of the petition:

The learned Judge of the High Court should have set aside the arbitral award in terms of the

provisions of Section 32 (1)(a)(iii) of the Arbitration Act as the award has dealt with a dispute

not contemplated by and not falling within the terms of the submission to arbitration, and

contains decisions on maters beyond the scope of the submission to arbitration.

In view of the above conclusion, it would not be necessary to consider the question of law set

out in paragraph 18(c) of the petition.

In these circumstances, the judgment of the High Court cannot be allowed to stand. I set

aside the judgment of the High Court dated 04.11.2016.

I have held that the award made by the arbitral tribunal deals with a dispute not contemplated

by and not falling within the terms of the submission to arbitration, and contains decisions on

maters beyond the scope of the submission to arbitration. In the said award there is no

decision on the dispute submitted to it for arbitration. The sole decision in the award, is a

decision on a matter not submitted to arbitration.

Moreover, the Claimants have failed to present their case on the basis that they are entitled

to receive payment for the speciﬁc work that they have performed (on a ratable proportion

under clause 4.1.2). The case they had presented was on the basis that they have fully

performed their duties under the contract. Furthermore, the Arbitrators did not use such

criteria when they determined the Claimants’ entitlement, but based the award on clause 10.3

which mandates payment of 90% of the total sum, irrespective of the volume of work

completed by the Claimants. Therefore, in my view the High Court was not in a position to

invoke the proviso to section 32(1)(a)(iii) of the Arbitration Act in making its determination.

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 37 of 46

Thus, the separation in terms of the proviso to section 32 (1) (a) (iii) does not arise.

For the foregoing reasons, I also set aside the arbitral award dated 30-01-2013.

The learned High Court Judge after consolidating both applications filed respectively by the

SLPA and the Claimants in the High Court, had pronounced one judgment applicable to both

of them. Thus, it would suffice for this Court also to pronounce one judgment in respect of

both the appeals namely SC Appeal No. 119/2017 and SC Appeal No. 120/2017 as the said

appeals correspond to the aforesaid two applications in the High Court. Therefore, this

judgment will apply to both cases bearing Nos. SC Appeal 119/2017 (HC ARB/ 57/ 2013) and

SC Appeal 120/2017 (HC ARB/ 112/ 2013).

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

JAYANTHA JAYASURIYA PC CJ

I agree,

CHIEF JUSTICE

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 38 of 46

E. A. G. R. AMARASEKARA J

I had the opportunity of reading the draft judgement written by his lordship justice P.

Surasena. With all due respect to the views expressed by his lordship Justice P. Surasena, I

prefer to express a dissenting view with regard to the matter before us.

1. This application before us was originally a leave to appeal application against the Judgment

dated 04.11.2016 made by the High Court of Colombo in case No. HC/ARB/57/2013 which

confirmed the award made in arbitration No SLNAC/166/12/2006.

2. This Court granted leave on 3 questions of law, namely;

o Is the judgment of the High Court contrary to the provisions in sections 4,15, 18, 24,

and 25 of the Arbitration Act?

o Has the Judge of the High Court failed to set aside the Arbitral Award in terms of the

provisions of Section 32(1)(a)(iii) of the Arbitration Act?

o Has the Judge of the High Court failed to set aside the Arbitral Award in terms of the

provisions of Section 32(1)(b)(ii) of the Arbitration Act?

3. In the Judgment written by his lordship Justice Surasena, it appears that the conclusion is

that, due to a reference to clause 10.3 of the agreement in the written submissions of the

Claimant – Respondents (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the claimants), the

Arbitration Tribunal had exceeded the jurisdiction they were bestowed with by the party

autonomy or in other words by the reference for arbitration by the parties.

4. I am not in disagreement with what has been said by his lordship in his judgment in general

with regard to the party autonomy in relation to arbitration proceedings and also with

regard to the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal that it shall not go on a voyage of discovery

and exceeds the mandate given to it by the reference of the dispute by the parties. I do

not intend to express contrary views to the views expressed by the authorities cited by my

brother judge. However, it is my view that in an application made in terms of section 32 of

the Arbitration Act, the applicant must produce before the High Court proof to establish his

application and the scope of the court to set aside the award is limited to the grounds

highlighted by the section itself. Thus, the High Court has no jurisdiction to decide on the

facts relating to the dispute, other than what is necessary to decide the existence of any

ground / grounds for setting aside the award mentioned in the section itself. Thus, in my

view, this court sitting in appeal over the decision of the High Court is also circumscribed

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 39 of 46

in deciding on facts other than what is necessary to decide the existence of any ground/

grounds for setting aside the award mentioned in the said section itself. Further, with all

due respect to the view expressed by his lordship justice Surasena, I hold a different

opinion with regard to what had been referred for arbitration by the parties in the matter

at hand; In other words, a different opinion as to the dispute presented for the arbitration

by the Parties.

5. By giving notice P2 in terms of Section 18, the Claimants put in motion the arbitration

proceedings. It is true that in the said notice, the Claimants have referred to the dispute in

the manner they saw it or wanted to present it, but Claimants are only a party to the

dispute. In the process, opposite party also has presented the dispute in the manner it saw

the dispute or wanted to present it. After giving notice, the Claimants have filed a statement

of claim and the Respondent before the arbitration tribunal, namely the Appellant in this

matter has filed a statement of defense and however, thereafter parties have framed issues

before the Arbitral Tribunal. Once issues are framed, the dispute becomes crystalized in

issues because parties expect the answers for issues from the tribunal in the form of its

decision. None of the issues have been objected on grounds such as that they were not in

conformity with the notice, or pleadings tendered or that they were not within the scope

of the agreement for arbitration or they were too wide in scope etc. Thus, the arbitrators

were invited to answer the issues raised by the parties as it finalized the nature of the

dispute placed before it by both the parties. If the issues raised before an Arbitral tribunal

are within the ambit of the arbitration agreement, I think arbitral tribunal is bound to

answer them; when those issues exceed the scope of the arbitration agreement, arbitrators

have to answer accordingly, stating that they are not arbitrable since they fall outside the

arbitration agreement.

6. Following paragraphs from the said notice have been quoted by his lordship Justice

Surasena in his draft Judgment.

“In terms of Clause 2 of the above-mentioned agreement, Sri Lanka Ports Authority

established by Act No. 51 of 1979, appointed our clients Sathsindu Forwarding & Security

(Pvt) limited (SFCL) and/or in association with Bagnold Associates Limited as the

Recognized Security Organization (RSO) and to perform the services listed in Schedule

A annexed thereto upon the payment of rates mentioned in Schedule B to the said

agreement for and on behalf of the Sri Lanka Ports Authority.

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 40 of 46

Our clients Sathsindu Forwarding & Security (Pvt) limited (SFCL) in association with

Bagnold Associates Limited have performed their obligations and /or carried out the said

services for which Sri Lanka Ports Authority has paid and settled a sum of US $ 60,000/-

being 50% of the total payment that should be paid under the agreement mentioned

above.

However, as the Sri Lanka Ports Authority in breach of its obligation under the above

Agreement failed and neglected to pay the balance sum of US$ 60,000/-. Therefore, our

clients Sathsindu Forwarding & Security (Pvt) limited (SFSL) in association with Bagnold

Associates Limited are entitled to claim the same together with the interest at the rate

of 12% per annum from 23rd of March 2004.

However, as the Sri Lanka Ports Authority repeatedly failed and neglected to pay the

above mentioned sums to our clients as per the said agreement, through their Attorneys-

at law, sent a letter of demand dated 27th November 2004 demanding the above

mentioned sums from Sri Lanka Ports Authority.”

Those paragraphs contain the claim, and state that the Claimants performed their

obligations and/or carried out the services for which the Claimants were paid USD 60,000

being 50% of the total payment that should be paid under the agreement. It further states

that Sri Lankan Ports Authority (Respondent – Appellant, hereinafter sometimes referred

to as the appellants) is in breach of its obligations. The Claimants in those paragraphs state

their entitlement to the balance payment and to the expenses together with interest, and

further states that due to the failure of the SLPA, the Claimants through their lawyers had

sent a letter of demand. However, the three paragraphs following the quoted paragraphs

are also necessary to grasp the dispute contained in the notice. First of those 3 paragraphs

that follows the aforesaid quoted paragraphs indicates how the Respondent – Appellant,

Sri Lanka Ports Authority, disputed the claim of the claimants by stating that the Claimants

were never appointed as RSO (Recognized Security Organization).The 2nd of those 3

paragraphs which is quoted below states the dispute that the Claimants wanted to refer

for arbitration.

“Under the above circumstances a dispute and/or difference has arisen between the

Claimants…… and the Sri Lankan Ports Authority, ………………………….. and/or concerning

and/or with respect to the performance of the said agreement mentioned above.”

Thus, the Claimants described the dispute in the backdrop of their claim and the stand

taken up by the Appellant as one arisen with regard to the performance of the relevant

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 41 of 46

agreement. By the 3rd of the 3 paragraphs following the above quoted paragraphs the

claimants refer the said dispute for arbitration. Thus, what was referred to the arbitration

by the notice was a dispute with regard to the performance of the agreement in the

backdrop of the two stances as described in the notice. Full performance of the obligations

as stated by the Claimants belongs to the stance they have taken. In my view it is within

the authority of the tribunal to accept fully or partly or reject such stances. Further, it

appears the Claimant has referred to the US $60,000/- advance as a payment made for

the obligations performed /services carried out. An advance is generally paid for with a

purpose. Maybe it is necessary for the preparatory/initial works. In my view, there is

nothing wrong in referring to it as a payment for obligations done or services performed

after such initial/preparatory work is done. On the other hand, as a finding on facts, the

tribunal had answered issue no. 24 and 25 negatively indicating that the claimants did not

fail in fulfilling their obligations for the advance payment.

7. As I said before, this notice only expresses the dispute as indicated by one party, namely

the claimants, and the dispute for arbitration get crystalized only when the issues are

framed. Now I would like to bring the attention to some of the issues raised on behalf of

the Appellant at the inquiry, namely, issues number 15, 17, 20, 21, and 22 of the Appellant

Respondents which are quoted below.

“ 15. Did the Claimant fail to fulfill its obligations in terms of the agreement?

17. Are the Claimants entitled for payment under the agreement?

20. Are the claimants entitled for the relief prayed for in the statement of claim?

21. Are the Claimants estopped from claiming any money in terms of the agreement

Due to their conduct?

22. Is the amount claimed by the Claimant excessive?”

Thus, it was the Appellant itself which wanted answers to the above issues. It is true that

these issues were raised without prejudice to the issues raised by the appellant with regard

to the jurisdiction of the arbitration tribunal entertaining the statement of claim, namely

issues no.06 to 10, but those issues have been answered in favour of the Claimants by

giving sufficient reasons by the tribunal. In my view, since the issues raised regarding the

jurisdiction were answered in favour of the claimants, the dispute referred for arbitration

by the parties is also comprised of the issues quoted above. When the Appellant asks

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 42 of 46

whether the claimants are entitled for payment under the agreement or whether they are

estopped from claiming any money in terms of the agreement, and whether the amount

claimed by the Claimant is excessive, they do not refer to any legal provisions or limit the

question of excessiveness or entitlement to any identified clause in the agreement, but

these issues cannot be understood out of context. Those questions including the

excessiveness of the claim or entitlement to the claim have been raised in contemplation

of the contractual relationship between the parties; thus, the questioning goes to the extent

of asking whether the claim is excessive and whether the claimants are entitled to

payments under the agreement. Hence it was none other than the Appellant who wanted

the tribunal to inquire as to the questions whether the amount claimed by the Claimant is

excessive as per the contract between them or whether claimants are entitled to payments

in terms of the agreement. In such a situation, irrespective of the reference to clause 10.3

of the agreement in written submissions of the Claimants, the Tribunal is bound to peruse

such clauses if they apply to the factual situation revealed by the evidence led before it.

My view is that when the entitlement for a payment is questioned in terms of an agreement

without referring to any specific term in the agreement it contemplates the whole

agreement. It is for the relevant party to frame issues in such a manner to express what is

intended by them. However, if an issue is too wide or devoid of clarity, the opposite party

can object to the issue when it is raised if it is prejudicial to it. In the case at hand, the

appellant has raised the afore quoted issues without any objections. I do not think that this

court being a court exercising appellate jurisdiction should devolve on an exercise that

limit the scope of the issues as the inquiry based on facts is not within the task of this

court.

8. On the other hand, written submissions cannot be considered as an instrument that refer

a dispute for arbitration. It is there to present an analysis of the evidence led and to show

applicable law. The Claimant has not raised or proposed any new issues through it. What

the paragraph 22 of the written submissions of the Claimant says is that in any event they

are entitled to 90% of the balance. The use of the words “in any event” indicate that the

Claimant did not abdicate his claim for the balance but it brings to the notice of the tribunal

that when and if the tribunal comes to the conclusion that the Claimant could not fulfill

their obligations due to the fault of the Appellants, they are entitled to that amount as per

the agreement. One must not forget that whether the claim was excessive was put in issue

by the Appellant itself. Further, the tribunal came to its conclusions on the facts revealed

by evidence led prior to the filing of written submissions and if such evidence were not

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 43 of 46

within the framework contemplated by issues, it could have been objected by the relevant

party at the time they were placed before the tribunal.

9. In my view, a Court can always grant a lesser relief by giving reasons if it falls within the

main relief prayed for (Allis Vs Senevirathne (1989) 2 SLR 335, Attanayake V

Ramyawathie (2003) 1 S L R 401 at 409). However, it cannot exceed what has prayed

for in giving relief. I do think that it should be the same in arbitration proceedings. On the

other hand, the Arbitral Tribunal had the plenary jurisdiction with regard to the disputes

arising from the agreement if they are referred to it. It is the Appellant who invited to see

whether the claim is excessive or whether the claimants are entitled to payment in terms

of the agreement. The Appellant should not be allowed to challenge the award before a

forum which exercises supervisory jurisdiction when the tribunal found that a certain

amount has to be reduced or the full payment of balance is not due owing to a clause in

the agreement when it granted relief when the Appellant itself raised issues whether the

claim was excessive or whether the claimants are entitled in terms of the agreement.

Further, a dispute exists only when there is a difference between the stances taken by the

parties. Basically, granting relief is within the domain of the court or tribunal. However,

there can be disputes as to the relief when parties take different stances as to the nature,

quantum or scope of the relief that can be given. In the case at hand, as per the issues

raised, the Claimants’ position was that they performed the obligations as per the

agreement marked X2 and made a demand by X6 and the Appellant refused to make

payment and they are therefore entitled to the sums referred to in paragraph 44 of the

statement of claim. It appears that the main stance of the Appellant was that there was no

valid contract and valid arbitration agreement between parties and therefore the tribunal

has no jurisdiction to hear and grant relief. However, on analysis of facts relating to the

contractual relationship between parties, the tribunal has decided by giving adequate

reasons that there was an agreement between parties which also contained an arbitration

agreement and the tribunal has jurisdiction to hear and grant relief. However, without

prejudice to the aforesaid main stance, the Appellant among other things had taken up the

position that;

• the Claimants failed in fulfilling their obligations and also that the Claimants were not

appointed as RSO (Recognized Security Organization),

• the Claimants are not entitled to payment under the agreement as well as to the

reliefs prayed for in the statement of claim and Claimants are estopped from claiming

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 44 of 46

money in terms of the agreement and further that the amount claimed by the

claimant is excessive.

Thus, in my view, the Appellant had brought forward a dispute to be resolved by the arbitral

tribunal with regard to the fulfilment of obligations by the claimants and the entitlement of

the claimants for payment in terms of the agreement as well as to the excessiveness of the

claim made by the claimant, in case its main stance with regard to the jurisdiction was to

be rejected. Hence, in my view, the award made by the Tribunal was within the parameters

of the reference for arbitration. One may argue that a party cannot take a different stance

during the proceedings. Generally, this type of argument is based on the provisions in the

Civil Procedure Code, namely section 150 and its explanation 2. The said section and

explanation applies to courts of law and in fact, it appears the Claimants had relied on a

similar argument against the Appellant with regard to taking up a different stance but the

Tribunal had refused the said argument in favour of the Appellants stating that applies only

to courts of law- vide page 8 paragraph 3 of the Award. Even if it applies it is a limitation

on the relevant party and the tribunal is not restricted by it in answering the issues raised

by the opposite party.

10. On the other hand, even if consideration of clause 10.3 of the agreement by the tribunal

is considered wrong, the High Court or this Court just cannot totally refuse the claim of the

Claimant if the effect of it can be separated – vide Section 32(iii) proviso of the Arbitration

Act. In this regard it is important to see the findings of the Arbitral Tribunal with regard to

the dispute prior to applying the clause 10.3 of the agreement. In this regard, I would

quote the following part from the arbitral award.

“Therefore, it is evident that the cause for the none completion of the obligations is because

the employees of the Respondents took up a position contrary to the express provisions in

the agreement C9 to the effect that (a) the Claimants were not RSO; and (b) the

Respondents could not review and approve the PFSA and thus the conduct of the

employees of the Respondent prevented the Claimants from carrying out its services in

terms of the agreement C9. It is relevant to mention that “where a failure of one party to

perform an entire contract is due to the act of the other party, it is not open to the latter

to seek to avoid liability on the ground of none performance”; vide C G Weeramantry in

Law of Contracts (page 605). Therefore, in view of the failure by the Respondent to perform

its obligations in relation to the PFSAs the Claimants could not have completed performance

in respect of PFSPS and in view of the foregoing statement of law set out by C G

Weeramantry, the Respondent cannot seek to avoid liability on the basis that Claimants

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 45 of 46

have not performed their obligations in relation to the PFSPs as per the agreement C9” (in

this quoted part the Appellants are referred to as Respondents)

The above shows that if the application of clause 10.3 is taken away, the finding of the

tribunal was that the Appellant cannot avoid liability on the ground of non-performance

of the claimants, since the Appellant was the one who prevented the Claimants from

performing their obligations. In other words, it says that wrongdoer cannot benefit from

its wrong. Thus, it appears that the Arbitral Tribunal has applied clause 10.3 of the

agreement in favour of the Appellant since there was such a clause, if such application

is removed from the arbitral award its finding is that the Appellant cannot avoid liability

on the basis of non-performance as it has happened due to the fault of the Appellant.

In other words, finding was that the Appellant is liable in the same manner the contract

was duly performed by the Claimants. The attempt of the Appellant now is to use the

application of clause 10.3 in reducing the claim of the claimant by the tribunal in their

favour irrespective of their fault, to quash the relief granted to the Claimants.

If application of clause 10.3 is separated and removed, the finding of the tribunal

indicates that the Appellant should be liable since it cannot take up the defense of non

performance. That was a finding by the tribunal based on facts placed as evidence

before the Tribunal.

11. The Appellant attempts to argue if the claimants put in issue the application of clause 10.3,

it could have presented its case to meet that. Firstly, it is the appellant itself which raised

the issue of excessiveness of the claim as per the agreement as well as Claimants’

entitlement to payment in terms of the agreement. Now it cannot blame the claimants. On

the other hand, this argument cannot hold water as the finding of the tribunal indicates

that if it was not for this clause, as per the law, Appellant cannot take up the non-

performance in its defense indicating that the Appellant is liable in the same way when the

obligations are duly performed by the claimants.

The tribunal on the material placed before it has decided that there was a valid

agreement between the parties and there was an agreement to refer disputes for

arbitration and therefore, the tribunal had jurisdiction to proceed with the reference for

arbitration. The tribunal has given adequate reasons for its conclusions. There was no

substantial material to show that any party to the arbitration agreement was under any

incapacity.

(SC Appeal 120/2017) - Page 46 of 46

For the reasons given above in this judgment by me, it is my view that the award was

within the parameters of the reference for arbitration by the parties. It was the Appellant

who wanted arbitrators to go into the questions of the claimant’s entitlement as per the

agreement and the excessiveness of the claim. The finding of the tribunal was that the

Appellant cannot take up the position that the Claimants did not fulfil the obligation in

terms of the contract since it was the fault of the Appellant that hindered the

performance of the obligations by the Claimants. The Appellant had the notice of

Arbitration, took part in the arbitration proceedings and had the opportunity to lead

evidence on the issues framed. I cannot find that the composition of the tribunal or the

procedure followed was not in accordance with the agreement or in conflict with the

Arbitration Act. I do not see any ground to hold that the subject matter of the dispute

is not capable of settlement by arbitration under the laws of this country. Since there

was an agreement between the parties with regard to certain services to be performed

by the Claimants and an arbitration agreement to refer dispute for arbitration, where no

illegality, unlawfulness or immorality is involved I do not think that the award is in

conflict with the public policy of this country. Learned High Court Judge has discussed

in detail why the Award should not be considered as one against public policy. I cannot

find fault with reasons given by the learned High Court Judge in that regard. Therefore,

the questions of laws allowed by this court have to be answered in the negative. Thus,

I affirm the judgment delivered by the learned High Court judge. This appeal has to be

dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT