IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

In the matter of an appeal from the Judgment of the Civil Appellate High Court of Colombo in the Western Province dated 20.11.2013. S.C. Appeal No. 217/2014 HCCA Colombo Appeal Nos. WP/HCCA COL. 96/2005(F)A WP/HCCA COL. 96/2005(F)B DC Colombo Case No.18861/L Sathyajith Deshabandu Welaratne Presently at No.15, Gainsburry Lane, Acton, London United Kingdom By his Attorney U.D. Welaratne No. 57/14. Jayaweera Mawatha, Ethul Kotte. Plaintiff Vs. 1. G.N. Perera 2. H. Damayanthi Samarasekara Both of No.50/1, New Jayaweera Mawatha, Ethulkotte.

Defendants AND BETWEEN in WP/HCCA COL. 96/2005(F)A 1. G.N. Perera (deceased) 2. H. Damayanthi Samarasekara Both of No.50/1, New Jayaweera Mawatha, Ethulkotte.

S.C. Appeal No. 217/2014

2

Defendant-Appellants Vs. Sathyajith Deshabandu Welaratne Presently at No.15, Gainsburry Lane, Acton, London United Kingdom By his Attorney U.D. Welaratne No. 57/14. Jayaweera Mawatha, Ethul Kotte. Plaintiff-Respondent

AND BETWEEN in WP/HCCA COL. 96/2005(F)B Sathyajith Deshabandu Welaratne Presently at No.15, Gainsburry Lane, Acton, London United Kingdom By his Attorney U.D. Welaratne No. 57/14. Jayaweera Mawatha, Ethul Kotte. Plaintiff-Appellant Vs. 1. G.N. Perera (deceased) 2. H. Damayanthi Samarasekara Both of No.50/1, New Jayaweera Mawatha, Ethulkotte.

Defendant-Respondents

S.C. Appeal No. 217/2014

3

AND NOW BETWEEN 2. H. Damayanthi Samarasekara

No.50/1, New Jayaweera Mawatha, Ethulkotte. 2nd Defendant-Appellant-Appellant and 2nd Defendant-Respondent- Appellant Vs. Sathyajith Deshabandu Welaratne Presently at No.15, Gainsburry Lane, Acton, London United Kingdom By his Attorney U.D. Welaratne No. 57/14. Jayaweera Mawatha, Ethul Kotte. Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent and Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent BEFORE : MURDU N.B. FERNANDO, PC, CJ. E.A.G.R. AMARASEKARA, J. ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J. COUNSEL : Jagath Wickramanayake, PC, with Ms. Pujanee De Alwis instructed by Ms. Nimesha Nicholas for the 2nd Defendant-Appellant-Appellant and 2nd Defendant-Respondent-Appellant.

S.C. Appeal No. 217/2014

4

Manohara de Silva, PC, with Ms. Sasiri Chandrasiri for the Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent and Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent. ARGUED ON : 31st January, 2023 DECIDED ON : 11th June, 2025 ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

The Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as “the

Plaintiff”) through his power of Attorney holder instituted an action

against the 1st and 2nd Defendant-Appellant-Appellants (hereinafter

referred to as “the 1st and 2nd Defendants”) and sought inter alia a

declaration of Court of his entitlement to the land described in the 1st

schedule to the Plaint, a declaration in respect of the disputed land strip as

a reserve for a common access roadway described in the 2nd schedule, and

he is entitled to use the said roadway. The Plaintiff also prayed for an

order of Court directing the Defendants not to cause any obstruction to the

said roadway and remove any obstacles that had been placed on it, which

prevented him from gaining access to his land over the said section of the

roadway.

In seeking the dismissal of the Plaintiff’s action as the primary relief,

the Defendants, in their joint answer, have claimed that the said roadway

is used by them as a ‘private roadway’ to access their property and also

disclosed the fact that the Plaintiff has a separate access to his land, along

his Eastern boundary. They also claimed that the Plaintiff never used this

roadway to access his land. After the Defendants have tendered their joint

answer, a commission was issued by the District Court on licensed

S.C. Appeal No. 217/2014

5

surveyor C.C. Wickramasinghe, who returned that commission with the

Plan No. C/343.

Parties proceeded to trial after settling for a total of 12 issues

between them. The Power of Attorney Holder, and three surveyors gave

evidence for the Plaintiff and tendered the Power of Attorney No. 801 (P1),

Deed Nos. 943 (P2), 555( P9) and 1391 (P10) along with Plan Nos. 518 (P3),

2451 (P4), 880 (P5) and C/343 (P7), its report (P8) in addition to a statement

made by the mother of the Plaintiff to Welikada Police Station on 16.02.1999

(P6), in support of his case. The 1st Defendant, who was 89 years of age at

that time, and the 2nd Defendant gave evidence before the trial Court. They

have tendered Plan Nos. 693 (V1), 425 (V2) and 866 (V3), along with the

certified copy of the proceedings held before the Chief Magistrate’s Court,

in case No. 97737/4, and its order dated 30.09.1999 (V5).

At the conclusion of the ensuing trial, the District Court has held

with the Plaintiff and granted relief as prayed for, except for prayer “we”.

The 2nd Defendant, being aggrieved by the conclusion reached by the trial

Court in the said judgment, preferred an appeal against it. The Plaintiff, in

spite of the fact that the District Court has held with him, also preferred an

appeal against the said judgment, apparently due to the fact that the trial

Court recognised his right of way over the disputed land strip only up to a

point and thereby leaving out a portion of that strip of roadway, which is

in an extent of about 5.6 perches and formed the disputed portion of the

roadway, in the hands of the Defendants.

During the hearing of the appeals before the Civil Appellate High

Court, both the appeals were consolidated and a common judgment was

pronounced. The appellate Court affirmed the impugned judgment of the

S.C. Appeal No. 217/2014

6

District Court, and having partly allowed the Plaintiff’s appeal, dismissed

the 2nd Defendant’s appeal. The High Court of Civil Appeal granted the

right of way of the roadway to the Plaintiff in its full extent, inclusive of

the said portion of land depicted as Lot No. A in Plan No. C/343, left out

by the District Court to the Defendants.

Thereupon, the 2nd Defendant sought leave to appeal against the

judgment of the High Court of Civil Appeal and, after hearing the parties

on 19.11.2014, this Court granted leave on the following questions of law:

a. Have their Lordships of the Civil Appellate Court erred in losing

sight of the fact –

i. That a right of way is a servitude which must

necessarily appertain to a dominant tenement?

ii. That on the Respondent’s own showing the

dominant tenement is in respect of which he has

claimed the alleged right of way in question was

in respect of Lot 2A in Plan No. 2451 produced at

the trial, marked P4?

iii. That as per the Respondent’s Deed No. 943 (P2)

and as per the boundaries given in the 2nd

schedule to the Plant, the physical boundary on

the Western side of the “reservation for the road

20 ft wide” depicted as Lot A2 in Plan 518 (P3)

was the canal and such reservation for road did

not extend beyond it?

S.C. Appeal No. 217/2014

7

b. If the aforesaid questions of law are answered in favour of the

Appellant, are the findings of their Lordships of the Civil

Appellate Court based on irrelevant considerations?

c. Have their Lordships of the Civil Appellate Court erred in

holding that due to the fact that the 1st Defendant did not have

soil rights to the disputed roadway he could not have objected to

the use of the disputed roadway by the Respondent?

Before I embark on the onerous task of considering the three

questions of law, it is necessary to present a gist of the individual cases

that were presented before the trial Court by the contesting parties, as well

as to make a brief reference to the evidence they have placed before that

Court, in support of their respective cases.

The Plaintiff’s case is based on an entitlement conferred on him by

his title deeds to have egress and ingress over the disputed roadway

whereas the Defendants’ case was that the disputed roadway is used

exclusively by them to gain access to their land and being used as a

‘private road’.

Paragraph 4 of the Plaint describes the manner in which the Plaintiff

became entitled to the right of way on which he moves the trial Court to

issue a declaration to that effect. The Plaintiff averred in the said

paragraph that he became the rightful owner to the Lot No. 2A, depicted in

Plan No. 2451, through the Deed of Transfer No. 943, executed on

18.11.1996. The Lot No. 2A of Plan No. 2451 was carved out of Lot 2 in

Plan No. 880, after making a sub-division, and with the execution of the

S.C. Appeal No. 217/2014

8

Deed of Transfer No. 943, the rights over that land were transferred in

favour of the Plaintiff, along with its rights appertaining to the use of two

roadways. He further averred in paragraph 6, that the roadway depicted

as the Northern boundary of the said Lot No. 2A, is the strip of land

forming a part of Jayaweera Mawatha, and is described in the schedule 2 to

the Plaint. Except for the declaration sought from Court to the effect that

he is the rightful owner of the land depicted as Lot No. 2A in Plan No.

2451, more fully described in the first schedule to the Plaint, the other

reliefs that were prayed for by the Plaintiff relates to the land described in

the second schedule to the Plaint, which is as follows:

“fojk Wm f,aLkh

fl`ÜfÜ" uy k.r iNd iSudj ;=, msysgd we;s la,hsõia ,kaâ *dï

kue;s bvu uek jI_ 1967 fmnrjdrs ui 18 jk osk iS’ iS’ úl%uisxy udkl

;ek ilia lrk ,o wxl 518 is;shfï fmkajd we;s f,dÜ wxl ‘ta2’ ork wä

20la m<, we;s mdrla i|yd fjka lrk ,o h:d;Srejhs’ thg udhsï (- W;=rg (-

tu bvfïu fldgila” kef.kysrg (- ù’ ta’ we,a fiakdr;ak udkl ;ekf.a

wxl 2630 yd 1963 wfm%a,a 17 jk osk is;shfï f,dÜ î ork bvïo ol=Kg (-

518 ork is;shfï f,dÜ ta1 jYfhka fmkajd we;s lene,a, yd tu bvfïu

fldgiskao” niakdysrg (- we,o hk udhsï ;=, m¾pia ;sia kuhhs oYu tlla

^w(0” rE(0” m¾( 30’01& úYd, ìï ;Srejhs’”

The Plaintiff, although seeking a declaration of title to the parcel of

land, depicted as Lot No. 2 in Plan No. 2451, for the purpose of declaration

of his entitlement to the right of way, relied on Plan No. 518, in which the

roadway, including the disputed portion of it, is depicted as Lot No. A2,

and named “road reservation 20 ft wide”.

In view of these factors, it is necessary to peruse the title deeds on

which the Plaintiff relied on, in support of his case, particularly to examine

S.C. Appeal No. 217/2014

9

the manner in which the right of way he attempts to establish is actually

described.

The Plaintiff acquired title to Lot No. 2A of Plan No. 518, through a

Deed of Transfer No. 943, executed on 18.11.1996 by its vendor Stanly

Devaraj Moses. As already noted, Lot No. 2A is a part of Lot No. 2 depicted

in Plan No. 880 before its subdivision made by Plan No.2451, forming it

into two Lots bearing Lot Nos. 2A and 2B. It was Stanly Devaraj Moses, who

subdivided Lot 2 of Plan No. 880, after acquiring its title, through the Deed

of Transfer No. 555, executed on 23.07.1974. A section of the roadway,

depicted as Lot No. A2 in Plan No. 518, is also shown in the Plan Nos. 880

and 2451 and described the same as a “reservation for road”.

Thus, in establishing the right of way and its alleged obstruction by

the Defendant, the Plaintiff must place heavy reliance on the Deed No. 555,

by which his predecessor in title had obtained his bundle of rights over Lot

No. 2, depicted in Plan No. 880.

The vendor of the Deed of Transfer No. 555, conveyed his rights

over Lot No. 2 of Plan No. 880, “… fully and particularly described in the First

Schedule hereto together with the right of way and user over the reservations for

roads in the Second Schedule hereto fully described” to its vendee Stanley Devraj

Moses (emphasis added). The Second Schedule to the said Deed makes a

reference to “ [A]ll that divided allotment of land marked Lot A2 reservation for

a road (20 feet wide) in Plan No. 518 dated 18th February 1967 made by C.C.

Wickramasinghe, Licensed Surveyor …”.

The vendee of the said Deed No. 555 (Stanley Devraj Moses), after

subdividing Lot No. 2 of Plan No. 880, by Plan No. 2451, as Lot Nos. 2A

S.C. Appeal No. 217/2014

10

and 2B, thereupon transferred his rights over Lot No. 2A to the Plaintiff by

executing Deed of Transfer No. 943 by conveying its title “ [T]ogether with

the right of way in over under along, … All that divided and defined allotment of

land marked Lot A2 (Reservation for Road 20 feet wide) depicted in Plan No. 518

dated 18th February 1967 made by C.C. Wickramasinghe, Licensed Surveyor …”

along with “[A]ll that divided and defined allotment of land marked Lot 10

(Reservation for Road 20 feet wide) depicted in Plan No. 880 dated 24th March

1969 made by C.C. Wickramasinghe, Licensed Surveyor…”.

Upon perusal of the Plan Nos. 2451, 518 and 880, the following

factors could be observed;

a. Lot No. 2A of Plan No. 2451 is a rectangular block of land which

is in an extent of 9.8 perches,

b. The Northern and Eastern boundaries of the said Lot No. 2A

forms reservations made for 20 feet wide roads,

c. Owner of Lot No. 2A was conferred with a right of way along its

Northern boundary by Deed No. 943 with “… [A]ll that divided

and defined allotment of land marked Lot A2 (Reservation for Road 20

feet wide) depicted in Plan No. 518 dated 18th February 1967 made by

C.C. Wickramasinghe, Licensed Surveyor …”,

d. Similarly, the owner of Lot No. 2A was also conferred with a

right of way along its Eastern boundary by Deed No. 943 with

“[A]ll that divided and defined allotment of land marked Lot 10

(Reservation for Road 20 feet wide) depicted in Plan No. 880 dated 24th

March 1969 made by C.C. Wickramasinghe, Licensed Surveyor…”,

S.C. Appeal No. 217/2014

11

e. Therefore, the owner of Lot No. A2 of Plan No. 518 (the Plaintiff),

became entitled to use either or both of these roadways to gain

access to the said parcel of land,

f. Lot No. A2 of Plan No. 518, which depicts the road reservation 20

feet wide runs from East to West along the Northern boundary of

Lot No. A2 of Plan No. 518, as per superimposition done by Plan

No. C/343 on 09.04.2001,

g. The said Lot No. A2 of Plan No. 518, depicting the road

reservation 20 feet wide has its terminal end of the said roadway

ending with a “Canal”, forming the Western boundary of that

roadway,

h. Plan No. C/343, prepared by the Court Commissioner, depicts

the disputed land area of the said road reservation, as Lot No. A,

i. Lot No. A of Plan No. C/343 shows a “Canal” to the Western

boundary of the section of the roadway( New Jayaweera Mawatha),

now separated by a concreate structure erected across the said

roadway, by the 1st Defendant from the rest of the and thus

forming the said Lot No. A of Plan No. C/343, depicted in the

said Plan marked as “X” and “Y”, whereas the Eastern most

boundary of the said roadway (New Jayaweera Mawatha), is

depicted as its end marking the point at which it connects to the

main public road,

j. The said Lot No. A of Plan No. C/343 forms its Southern

boundary, becoming the Northern boundary of Lot No. A2 of

Plan No. 518,

S.C. Appeal No. 217/2014

12

k. The said Lot No. A of Plan No. C/343 forms its Northern

boundary, becoming the Southern boundary of the land held by

the 1st Defendant.

It is in view of these items of evidence, that were presented before

the trial Court for its consideration, that the Plaintiff sought to establish his

legal right of access to his land through the section of the roadway, shown

as the Lot No. A of Plan No. C/343. Both the 1st Defendant and 2nd

Defendant gave evidence before the trial Court, but did not tender any title

deed by which either of them became entitled to use the servitude of right

of way over the said roadway, referred to as New Jayaweera Mawatha, along

with the section that was separated by the erection of a concreate structure

across the said roadway by the 1st Defendant, marked “X” and “Y”. That

erection resulted in the isolation of a portion of roadway (Jayaweera

Mawatha) from the rest, and now depicted as Lot No. A of the commission

Plan No. C/343.

In his evidence, the 1st Defendant stated that when he bought the

land located to the north to the parcel of land owned by the Plaintiff,

separated by the disputed roadway in between, it was a marshy land and

therefore he had created an access road to his land by filling over that

section of the roadway with gravel. It is on this footing the 1st Defendant

claims that the access road, now known as New Jayaweera Mawatha, is a

‘private road’, to which the Plaintiff had no right to use in accessing his

land at all. In support of his claim, the 1st Defendant tendered Plan No.

693C of 26.12.1968, prepared by licensed surveyor C.C. Wickramasinghe,

marked as “V1”, Plan No. 425 of 10.07.1995, prepared by licensed surveyor

S.C. Appeal No. 217/2014

13

C.H. Dias Abeywardene, marked as “V2” and Plan No. 866 of 02.03.1998,

prepared by licensed surveyor S.J. Jayawickrema, marked as “V3” in order

to impress upon the trial Court of the position that the disputed roadway

is in fact a private road. The 1st Defendant also relied on an order made by

the Chief Magistrate’s Court of Colombo on 30.09.1999 in Case No. 97737/4,

in which his name and the name of the mother of the Plaintiff are cited as

the two disputants.

During cross examination, no challenge was made by any of the

Defendants to any of the title deeds presented by the Plaintiff. Learned

President’s Counsel who appeared for the Plaintiff, in addition to inviting

attention of this Court to that evidence, also submitted that, when the two

Defendants held back their own title deed, without presenting it before

Court, the Plaintiff during his cross examination of the 2nd Defendant,

produced it marked as “P10” (Deed of Transfer No. 1391).

Perusal of the said deed (P10) revealed that it was executed on

07.02.1969, in favour of the 1st Defendant for the purpose of conveying title

to a land in extent of 1A-2R-18.7P depicted in Plan No. 693C of 26.12.1968

and prepared by licensed surveyor C.C. Wickramasinghe as Lot No. 1 , “…

together with the right of way for both foot and vehicular traffic and other rights

hereinafter mentioned in common with others having similar rights in over along

and above the said Lots 6 and 7 (reservation for road 20 feet wide) …”.

The Plan referred to in the said title deed is the one tendered to

Court by the 1st Defendant, marked “V1”. This Plan was prepared in order

to sub divide Lot No. A of Plan No. 4559 of 05.10.1934, into seven lots. In

the said plan, Lot No. 1 was shown with a “reservation for Road 20 feet wide”

at its Southern boundary, depicted therein as Lot No. 7, and another

S.C. Appeal No. 217/2014

14

“reservation for Road 20 feet wide” as its Eastern boundary, depicted as Lot

No. 6, also with the description “reservation for Road 20 feet wide”, serving as

the access road to Lot Nos. 2, 3, 4 and 5 of that Plan.

Thus, similar to the Lot No. 2A of Plan No. 2451 (the parcel of land

owned by the Plaintiff), the Lot No. 1 of Plan No. 693C, (the parcel of land

owned by the 1st Defendant) had his right of way over Lot No. 7 and also

over Lot No. 6 of Plan No. 693C of 26.12.1968. According to Plan No. 2451,

Lot No. 2A, which belong to the Plaintiff, also has two roadways over

which it could be accessed. Plan No. 2451 depicts a roadway along the

Eastern boundary of Lot 2A, depicted in Plan No. 880 as Lot No. 10 and

named “RES FOR ROAD 20 FT WIDE” and another, by forming its

Northern boundary, as the road reservation “now known as Jayaweera

Mawatha” leading up to the public road, identified as Kotte Road.

Learned President’s Counsel for the Plaintiff contended that his

client and the 1st Defendant have both acquired right of way over the same

road reservation (known as Lot No. A2 of Plan No. 518 and also known as

Lot No. 7 of Plan No. 693C, according to their title deeds.

Since the dispute relates to a part of the road reservation of 20 feet

wide, named as Jayaweera Mawatha, it must be investigated into whether

the “reservation for Road 20 feet wide” depicted as Lot No. 7 in Plan No. 693C

(over which the 1st Defendant was conferred with his right of way to Lot

No. 1 of the said Plan, in terms of his title Deed No. 1391) and the “Road

Reservation 20 ft wide” depicted as A2 in Plan No. 518, by which the

Plaintiff was conferred his right of way to Lot No. 2A of Plan No. 2451, in

his title deed No. 943, is one and the same.

S.C. Appeal No. 217/2014

15

The report and the evidence of the Licensed Surveyor, who was

commissioned by Court to conduct a survey and report over the disputed

portion of the roadway, indicate that indeed it is so. Not only Lot No. 7 of

Plan No. 693C, but also the Lot No. A2 in Plan No. 518 was superimposed

during the preparation of the commission Plan No. C/343, in which the

boundaries that were so superimposed from the two previous plans were

clearly depicted in his Plan using different colours. The 1st Defendant,

during his cross examination of the licensed surveyor, had further clarified

this issue from him and the witness answered it in the affirmative.

In view of the documentary proof presented before the trial Court,

the Plaintiff was able to establish that the denial of his right of way over a

section of Jayaweera Mawatha by the Defendants, who also have identical

rights over the same as him, in terms of the title deed No. 1391.

The conclusion reached by the District Court that the Plaintiff has

established his right of way over the disputed portion of Jayaweera

Mawatha is therefore well supported by evidence and is a correct finding

both in fact and in law. The affirmation of the said judgment by the High

Court of Civil Appeal, in the determination of the appeals before it, too

could not be faulted for that very reason. In dismissing the appeal, the

appellate Court added that the Defendants, who had no soil rights over the

land, cannot prevent the Plaintiff from using same as a means of ingress

and egress to his land following the judgment of Fernando v

Wickramsinghe (1998) 3 Sri L.R. 37. In addition, in determining a ground

of appeal presented by the 2nd Defendant on the basis of abandonment of a

servitude of a right of way, in favour of the Plaintiff, the High Court of

Civil Appeal, adopted the view that an abandonment of a servitude of

S.C. Appeal No. 217/2014

16

right, created by a notarial grant, could not be lost by mere non user,

following the dicta of the judgment of Paramount Investments Ltd., v

Cader (1986) 2 Sri L.R. 309.

With this backdrop of factual narrative, I now turn to consider the

questions of law on which the instant appeal was argued on.

The question of law, whether the findings of their Lordships of the

Civil Appellate Court are based on irrelevant considerations, could be

narrowed down to the three instances that are referred to in the said

question of law, are as follows:

i. That a right of way is a servitude which must

necessarily appertain to a dominant tenement?

ii. That on the Respondent’s own showing the dominant

tenement is in respect of which he has claimed the

alleged right of way in question was in respect of Lot

2A in Plan No. 2451 produced at the trial, marked P4?

iii. That as per the Respondent’s Deed No. 943 (P2) and as

per the boundaries given in the 2nd schedule to the

Plaint, the physical boundary on the Western side of the

“reservation for the road 20 ft wide” depicted as Lot A2

in Plan 518 (P3) was the canal and such reservation for

road did not extend beyond it?

These considerations, which the Defendant now trying to impress

this Court with, are based on the principles of law in relation to servitudes.

S.C. Appeal No. 217/2014

17

However, among the issues that were raised before the trial Court there

was no issue on the servitudes and the relevant principles of law,

regarding the right of way. Of the four issues raised by the Defendants

were on the points; whether the Plaintiff used his Eastern boundary to

have access to his land; whether the Plaintiff used the disputed roadway at

any point of time; whether the disputed roadway is used by the

Defendants to have egress and ingress to their respective houses; and if

any of these issues are answered in the negative, should the action of the

Plaintiff be dismissed made no reference to any other point. Interestingly,

the Defendants also failed to raise any issues on the principle of law of

abandonment of servitude, or on prescription.

The consideration of the law applicable to servitudes arose in the

appeal before the High Court of Civil Appeal, when the 2nd Defendant, in

seeking to challenge the findings made against her by the District Court,

contended that “only a soil rights owner can confer the right of a user of a

roadway to the third party. Unlike the claims by prescription, the claim based on a

deed or a grant, should indicate the grant made by the owner of the soil rights”

citing Servitudes by Hall and Kellaway – Juta & Co Ltd, (1942 Ed, at p. 18),

in support of the proposition that “no evidence is available to establish that

Watson Jansen, the grantor of the Deed No. 555 (P9) was the soil owner of Lot

No. A2 in Plan No. 518 and that the plans produced by the Plaintiff do not

indicate any such grant by the said soil owner.”

This was due to the fact that the Defendants collective contention

before the District Court was that the servitude of a right of way could be

lost due to some means known to law and there was no evidence

presented to Court that the predecessor in title of the Plaintiff, Stanley

S.C. Appeal No. 217/2014

18

Devraj Moses, ever used the disputed roadway as an entrance to the

allotment of land he had purchased. The Defendants therefore contended

that particular factor, coupled with the evidence that there was no entrance

opening up to the disputed part of the roadway from the Plaintiff’s land,

gives rise to the presumption that the said Stanley Devraj Moses has

“intentionally abandoned the said right of way as there was no reason or purpose

to use the said right of way.”

In view of this contention, it is convenient to deal with this factual

issue at this stage, before I proceed to consider the contention advanced by

the 2nd Defendant on the principles of law that are applicable in relation to

servitudes pertaining to conferment of a right of way.

However, in this instance, the Plaintiff is a person who owns soil

rights of the dominant tenement, and also enjoys the servitude of right of

way over Jayaweera Mawatha to access his land. Similarly, the two

Defendants too have such rights over Jayaweera Mawatha in respect of

their respective lots. Clearly, this is not a situation where an action is

instituted by a person who owns the dominant tenement and seeking to

vindicate his right over a servitude that runs over a servient tenement

held by the two Defendants. This is an action instituted by the Plaintiff,

against the two Defendants, for causing obstruction to the enjoyment of

his right of way over Jayaweera Mawatha who too incidentally are entitled

to the same servitude. In this respect, both the Plaintiff as well as the

Defendants, who own soil rights to their respective lands, could be

considered as owners of dominant tenements, who have their respective

rights of way over Jayaweera Mawatha, the servient tenement.

S.C. Appeal No. 217/2014

19

Interestingly, when the Defendants claim that the disputed portion

of the roadway as a “private road” used by them exclusively, they

obviously claim acquisition of soil rights over same. The title deeds that

were presented by the parties before the trial Court clearly indicate that all

of them are only entitled to access their respective lands over Jayaweera

Mawatha, in addition to soil rights over their individual parcels of land.

When the Defendants, in addition to their claim of “private road”, also

claim that an “abandonment” of the servitude of right of way by the

Plaintiff’s predecessor in title, they contradict their already declared

position that it is a “private road”, and thereby blowing hot and cold.

The Defendant relied on a quotation from a text on servitudes and

the principle it refers to in order to contend that the Plaintiff’s predecessor

in title had no soil rights to grant the servitude over the disputed roadway.

It is the 1st Defendant’s contention that his predecessor in title, Henry

Edward Clive Goonesekera, who owned the all the lands depicted in Plan No.

693C (inclusive of s Lot No. 1) in its totality, and had transferred his rights

over that parcel of land to George Nelson Perera, (the 1st Defendant), along

with the right of way over Lot No. 7 of the same plan.

In contrast, Stanley Devraj Moses, who transferred his rights over Lot

No. 2A of Plan No. 2451 to the Plaintiff, had derived that title from Waltson

Mackslin Jansen who received the same also on a transfer, and since the

said Jansen being not the soil rights owner over the disputed roadway, the

2nd Defendant contends that there is no proof of the fact that Lot No. A2,

which is the reservation for a road 20 feet wide in Plan No. 518 (the Plan

relied on by the Plaintiff), too was owned by Henry Edward Clive

Goonesekera at any point of time.

S.C. Appeal No. 217/2014

20

It is correct that Deed No. 1391 (P10), being executed on 07.02.1969,

is the oldest of the deeds that were tendered before the trial Court. The

vendor, named in the said instrument, Henry Edward Clive Goonesekera,

states in its page 2, “ … the vendor caused 7 divided portions marked Lots 1, 2,

3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 depicted in Plan No. 693C dated 26.12.1968 made by C.C.

Wickramasinghe, Licensed surveyor, …”. Thus, when he granted right of way

over Lot No. 7 of Plan No. 693C, had the soil rights over that Lot No. 7 and

therefore could grant such a servitude on that road reservation.

Now the question is whether the devolution of title to Lot No. 2A of

Plan No. 2451 could be traced back to the said Henry Edward Clive

Goonesekera, enabling the owner of the said parcel of land also could use

Lot No. 7 of Plan No. 693C to egress and ingress from his lot.

The answer to this question could easily be found in the Plan No.

693C itself. It is already referred to the fact that Goonesekera had

subdivided Lot No. A of Plan No. 4559, into seven lots by Plan No. 693C

and granted the servitude of right of way over Lot No. 7 to the said

subdivided parcels of land. In that Plan No. 693C, Lot No. 7 is depicted as

a roadway running across a larger land from its Eastern boundary to the

Western boundary, and thereby bisecting the same, and thereby forming

the two parts of the land located on the Northern side of Lot No. 7 and also

on its Southern side. The land area shown in the said plan to the South of

the Lot No. 7 is also referred to as “Part of the same land” by the surveyor,

meaning that part too was owned by Goonesekera.

Immediate predecessor in title to that of the Plaintiff is Stanley Devraj

Moses, who purchased his rights over Lot No. 2A of Plan No. 2451, from

Waltson Mackslin Jansen, upon execution of the Deed of Transfer No. 555. In

S.C. Appeal No. 217/2014

21

the recital of the said deed, the vendor Jansen states that “… under and by

virtue of Deed No. 393 dated 26th September 1969, attested by the Notary

attesting these presents is the owner and proprietor and is seized and possessed of

or sufficiently entitled to all that allotment of land marked Lot 2 depicted in Plan

No. 880 dated 24th March 1969 made by C.C. Wickremasinghe, Licensed Surveyor

fully and particularly described in the First Schedule hereto together with the

right of way and user over the reservation for roads in the Second Schedule hereto

fully described”( emphasis added).

The Second Schedule contained in the said deed refers to “[A]ll that

divided allotment of land marked Lot A2 reservation for a road 20 feet wide in

Plan No. 518 dated 18th February 1967 made by C.C. Wickremasinghe, Licensed

Surveyor …”.

Plan No. 518 refers to two lands that sits either side (Northern and

Southern) of a roadway depicted therein as Lot No. A2, as already noted in

the preceding paragraphs. The land located to its north is described as

“Part of the same land (Remaining Part of Lot A)”, whereas the land located to

the South of that lot, is also described as “Part of the same land (Remaining

Part of Lot A)”. In the same plan, a reference is made to a Plan No. 4559, as

it states “ … being a divided portion of Lot A in Plan No. 4559 dated 5th October

1934 made by M.G. de Silva, Licensed Surveyor …”. Therefore, it is clear that

Lot No. A referred to in Plan No. 518 is taken from the description given to

that lot by Plan No. 4559.

The Plan No. 4559 also features in the Deed of Transfer No. 1391, by

which the 1st Defendant had derived title from. In the recital of the said

deed, its vendor states that “ … all those contiguous allotments of land forming

S.C. Appeal No. 217/2014

22

one field marked “A” in Plan No. 4559 …” which was then sub divided into

seven lots by Plan No. 693C.

The Deed No. 1391(P10) was executed on 07.02.1969 and the Deed

No. 393 was executed on 26.09.1969, just over seven months apart, in

respect of Lot No. A of Plan No. 4559. This is a fact that strongly suggests

that the execution of both these deeds are the acts of the owner of the land,

Henry Edward Clive Goonesekera, who had the soil rights over that land, and

therefore possessed the power to confer a right of way to the several

vendees, who bought different allotments from the Northern part of Lot A

of Plan 4559 as well as to those who did from the Southern part of the said

lot, carved out of the said larger land, which was bisected by the roadway

reservation A2 in Plan No. 518.

Predecessor in title to the Plaintiff, Stanley Devraj Moses, who

purchased his rights over Lot No. 2A of Plan No. 2451, from Waltson

Mackslin Jansen, received whatever rights his vendor has parted with in

relation to the roadway. When Waltson Mackslin Jansen, acquired title to

Lot 2 of Plan No. 880, and his vendor in describing his title derived from

the vendor to Deed No. 393 dated 26.09.1969, that deed would have, in all

probability, executed by the original owner of the larger land, Henry

Edward Clive Goonesekera.

Thus, it is clear from the documentary evidence presented before the

trial Court, in the form of title deeds and survey plans, makes the Plaintiff

entitled to the use of the roadway now referred to as Jayaweera Mawatha up

to its terminal point, being the Western most boundary of said Lot No. A2,

and is depicted in Plan Nos. 518, 693C and C/343 (the commission plan) as

a “Canal”. This is due to the fact that the Plaintiff’s right of way over

S.C. Appeal No. 217/2014

23

Jayaweera Mawatha could be traced back to Henry Edward Clive Goonesekera,

who had soil rights to the land in its entirety before he parted with it after

subdividing it while reserving the right of way of those subdivided plots

of land.

Professor G.L. Peiris, in his book The Law of Property (Vol. 3, at p.

60), quotes Voet (8.4.16) where it is stated “[M]any different servitudes can be

granted in or over the same place, provided in each case the prior holders of

servitudes are not prejudiced by any subsequent grant.” In view of this

principle, the right of way over Lot No. 7 of Plan No. 693C also described

as Lot A2 of Plan No. 518, could be granted and enjoyed by the 1st

Defendant as well as the Plaintiff along with others who are similarly

circumstanced.

Since these factors do have a bearing over the determination of the

rights the Plaintiff had over the disputed part of Jayaweera Mawatha they

indeed qualify to be considered as relevant facts, in terms of Sections 6 and

7 of the Evidence Ordinance and the contention that the Courts below had

considered irrelevant material could not be accepted as a valid one. The

said question of law is therefore ought to be answered in the negative.

The Defendants also brought up the issue of abandonment of a

servitude and harped on the admission made by the Plaintiff that when he

bought Lot No. 2A of Plan No. 2451 on 18.11.1996, the 1st Defendant had

already erected the concrete structure across the disputed roadway,

separating Lot No. A of Plan No. C/343 from the rest of the roadway

(Jayaweera Mawatha). It was also highlighted by the 2nd Defendant that

when the Court commissioner surveyed the land, he reported back of a

king-coconut tree of about 7 years and a coconut tree of about 5 years were

S.C. Appeal No. 217/2014

24

there planted on the roadway depicted as Lot No. A of Commission Plan

No. C/343. Strangely, the 1st Defendant did not claim credit for planting

these trees. Nonetheless, they contend that Stanley Devraj Moses, who

owned the servitude of right of way over it, had abandoned that right,

when he failed to object to the act of planting of these two trees on the

roadway. The Defendants relied on the dicta of the judgment of De Sampayo

J, in Nagamani v Vinayagamoorthi (1923) 24 NLR 438, where his Lordship,

followed the dicta of the judgment of Fernando v Mendis (1911) 14 NLR

101, that “… under the Roman Dutch law a servitude may be lost by

abandonment, whether by express abandonment or implied abandonment.”

In view of this contention, it is helpful if an attempt is made to

understand the grievance of the Plaintiff he wishes to remedy through this

action.

The Plaintiff in his evidence stated that when he acquired ownership

to Lot No. 2A of Plan No. 2451 from Stanley Devraj Moses, it was a bare

land of 9.8 perches. The land had two access roads. Lot No. A of Plan No.

C/343 also referred to as Lot A2 of Plan No. 518, which now known as

Jayaweera Mawatha is one, and the lane off Jayaweera Mawatha, depicted as

Lot No. 10 of Plan No. 2451, is the other. He then constructed a house

facing his Eastern boundary, as shown in Plan No. 2451. In answer to

Court, the Plaintiff stated that what he wants is to have access to his land

along his Northern boundary all the way up to the “Canal”, which is being

prevented by the concrete construction, erected across the roadway by the

1st Defendant, and shown in Plan No. C/343 as “X” and “Y”. The reason

for him to demand his right was to have access to the rear of his house.

S.C. Appeal No. 217/2014

25

It could be seen that Stanley Devraj Moses held the ownership of the

land depicted as Lot No2A of Plan No. 2451 for over a period of 22 years,

since 1974. The Plaintiff became its owner on 18.11.1996. The Court

Commissioner conducted his survey on 05.04.2001. When considered in

this light, the coconut tree that stood on Lot No. A of Plan No. C./343

could not have been planted during Moses’s time. Even the planting of

king-coconut tree just few months before the sale of the land, cannot add

much weight to the 1st Defendant’s claim.

The erection of a concrete structure is the remaining factor that was

relied on by the Defendants to impress upon this Court that the servitude

of right of way over Lot No. A of Plan No. C./343 was effectively

abandoned.

The Plaintiff, tendered a certified copy of a statement made by his

mother to Welikada Police on 16.02.1999 in support of his case. This was

made after a period of over two years since the Plaintiff purchased that

property, and in response to a complaint made against them by the 1st

Defendant. In that statement, Plaintiff’s mother states that they are in the

process of constructing a house on her son’s property and when they

attempted to bring in building materials to the land through the Northern

boundary of that land, the 1st Defendant objected. She further stated that in

order to protect building materials, they have constructed a temporary

fence using corrugated metal sheets along the Northern boundary. She

also mentioned laying three concrete cylinders to gain access to the land

over the ditch on their Northern boundary, a fact confirmed by the learned

Magistrate who made an inspection.

S.C. Appeal No. 217/2014

26

Despite the objections by the 1st Defendant, they were using the

entrance kept open in the said boundary to bring in building materials. On

that morning (referring to the date of the statement), she has alleged that

when a lorry came to unload some building material, the 1st Defendant

offered resistance and when she opened the entrance by removing gate

with corrugated sheets, noticed that a concrete construction, which was

not there before, was erected across the roadway.

None of the Defendants have offered to explain this statement by

presenting their version of events, either in conformation or contradicting.

Thus, the contents of the said item of evidence, remained before Court

without any form of challenge.

This dispute between the Plaintiff’s mother and the 1st Defendant

had reached the Chief Magistrate’s Court, when the Police reported facts

under Section 66(1) of the Primary Courts Procedure Act No. 44 of 1979.

On 30.09.1999, learned Magistrate, having visited the disputed portion of

the roadway observed that the boundary that separates the Plaintiff’s land

with that part of the roadway was covered with corrugated sheets, and

despite the fact that there was evidence to show that the Plaintiff’s mother

had constructed an entrance from that portion of roadway to the land

using concrete cylinders over the ditch that separates her Northern

boundary from the roadway, he could not notice that she had used that

entrance to have access to the land in the “recent past” and therefor

concluded that she was not in ‘possession’ of the disputed roadway.

The 1st Defendant, during his evidence did not claim that he

constructed any concrete structure across the roadway. But the evidence is

clear that there were consistent unfriendly interactions between the parties

S.C. Appeal No. 217/2014

27

over the use of the disputed roadway, depicted as Lot No. A of Plan No.

C/343. Clearly, there was no abandonment either express or tacit in nature

of the servitude of right of way neither by Stanley Devraj Moses nor by the

Plaintiff.

On the contrary, the Plan Nos. 425 (V2) and 866 (V3), prepared for

the purpose of subdividing the land held by the 1st Defendant and

submitted for approval of the local authority for its approval, did not

include the section of the roadway depicted as Lot No. A of Plan No.

C/343 and is limited to depicting only the Southern boundary of his land.

The Plaintiff accused the 1st Defendant of annexing Lot No. A of Plan No.

C/343 to his land. If there was an abandonment, then it was the 1st

Defendant who tacitly abandoned his rights over the said Lot No. A of

Plan No. C/343, when he decided to leave out that portion of the roadway

from those two plans, which he is entitled to use, to access his land.

One of the complaints made by the learned Counsel for the 2nd

Defendant over the issue of abandonment is that the High Court of Civil

Appeal erroneously followed the dicta of the judgment in Paramount

Investments Ltd., v Cader (1986) 2 Sri L.R. 309. In view of the 2nd

Defendant’s understanding of the said judgment, it was submitted on

behalf her that the dicta relied on by the appellate Court “ … is inapplicable

to the present case simply because the Respondent [ the Plaintiff] has failed to

prove his entitlement to the roadway, which he asserts before Court to have been

granted by deed”.

The High Court of Civil Appeal in its judgment referred to the head

note of judgment of this Court in Paramount Investments Ltd., v Cader (

ibid ) where it is stated that “[A] servitude of right of way can be lost by

S.C. Appeal No. 217/2014

28

abandonment express or tacit. A servitude is lost by express abandonment when

the dominant owner clearly and intentionally abandons it. Tacit abandonment

takes place where the servient owner is permitted to do something which

necessarily obstructs the exercise of the servitude and makes the servitude

inoperative. Where, as in the instant case, express abandonment based on, non-

user owing to a wall built by the dominant owner's predecessor-in-title is what is

relied on, the position is that under our law a servitude of right of way created by

notarial grant cannot be lost by mere non-user.

Seneviratne J, in delivering the said judgment stated (at p. 323) that

“ [I] hold that under our Law a person does not lose the right to any ownership of

immovable property e.g., a land, a servitude by mere non-possession (non-user).”

In view of the overwhelming evidence, that has been referred to and

considered in detail in the preceding paragraphs, the contention that the

Plaintiff failed to establish his right of way over the disputed portion of the

roadway must be rejected in its totality. The contention based on the

abandonment of a servitude of right of way appears to be a half-hearted

attempt by the 2nd Defendant to offer a justification for the construction of

a concrete structure attributed to the 1st Defendant, across a roadway

which meant to provide means of access to the multiple tenements, and

also to cover up their own lapse, in failing to raise an issue on that point

before the trial Court.

The other question of law that remains to be considered by this

Court is set out as follows;

“[H]ave their Lordships of the Civil Appellate Court erred in holding that

due to the fact that 1st Defendant did not have soil rights to the disputed

S.C. Appeal No. 217/2014

29

roadway he could not have objected to the use of the disputed roadway by

the Plaintiff ?”

Perusal of the judgment of the High Court of Civil Appeal reveals

that the said Court arrived at the conclusion, now being impugned by the

Defendants, upon following the judgment of Fernando v Wickremasinghe

(1998) 3 Sri L.R. 37, pronounced by Weerasuriya J, who in turn relied on the

judgment of Saparamadu v Melder (although decided in 1996 but reported

in (2004) 3 Sri L.R. 148) in arriving at that conclusion. This principle was

considered by this Court once more in Malkanthi Silva v Perera and

Others (SC Appeal No. 181/2010 – decided on 23.07.2024).

This is an instance where, the appellant before that Court only had a

right of way over the disputed roadway (Lot No. 30). He did not own soil

rights over the said Lot No. 30. M.N.B. Fernando J (as she then was)

accepted the contention of the respondent, that the appellant before her

Ladyship, in the absence of any soil rights over Lot No. 30, “… cannot object

to the Respondent using the said road-way or prevent or obstruct the Respondent

from using the right of way over lot 30, the road-way leading to the Respondent’s

land”.

In arriving at the said conclusion, her Ladyship considered the

judgments of Fernando v Wickramasinghe (supra), Saparamadu v Violet

Catherine Melder (supra) and Gunadasa v Subasinghe (CA 92/95 – decided

on 27.03.1995), and quoted the view held by Weerasuriya, J., in Fernando v

Wickramasinghe (supra) that “a person who had no soil rights in respect of a

road reservation could not maintain an action for a declaration that defendant was

not entitled to a servitude of right of way over such road reservation”, with

approval.

S.C. Appeal No. 217/2014

30

I find no reason to depart from the said view taken by this Court

after much deliberation and therefore proceed to answer the relevant

question of law in the negative.

In view of the reasoning contained in the preceding paragraphs of

this judgment and the answers provided to the questions of law, the

judgment of the High Court of Civil Appeal is hereby affirmed and the

District Court is directed to enter the decree in the lines of the said

judgment pronounced by the appellate Court.

The appeal of the Defendants is accordingly dismissed and the

Plaintiff is entitled to the costs of this appeal.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT MURDU N.B. FERNANDO, PC,C J.

I agree.

CHIEF JUSTICE E.A.G.R. AMARASEKARA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT