1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application in terms of Articles 17 and 126 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. SC (FR) Application No. 233/2018

1. H. M. Punchimenike 2. S. H. M. Sumanawathi Menike Both at Moragolla, Nagollagoda.

PETITIONERS

vs.

1. D. M. Bandula Saman Dissanayake, Maginpitiya Road, Dandagamuwa.

2. I. M. Premaratne, Hikokadawala, Mahama. 3. K. Wasantha Kumara, C-45, Saman Uyana, Mawathagama. 4. R. M. Saman Hemantha Rathnayake, Ihalakagama, Nikaweratiya. 5. W. M. G. K. G. Aruna Weerakoon, No. 76, Ihalagama, Mihigamuwa. 6. H. M. Danushka Buddhi Prabha Ranasinghe, No. 38/1, Katulanda, Akaragama. 1st 6th Respondents at Excise Department, Kuliyapitiya.

2

7. Commissioner General of Excise, Excise Department, No. 353, Kotte Road, Rajagiriya. 8. Hon. Attorney General, Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS Before: Jayantha Jayasuriya, PC, CJ Murdu N. B. Fernando, PC, J Arjuna Obeyesekere, J Counsel: Ms. Thilini Vidanagamage for the Petitioners J. M. Wijebandara for the 1st 6th Respondents Sajith Bandara, State Counsel for the 7th and 8th Respondents Argued on: 9th January 2023 and 27th March 2023 Written Tendered by the Petitioners on 2nd February 2021 and 14th June 2023 Submissions:

Tendered by the 1st 6th Respondents on 26th May 2020 Tendered by the 7th and 8th Respondents on 10th May 2021 Decided on: 4th October 2023

Obeyesekere, J

The 1st Petitioner and her daughter, the 2nd Petitioner, filed this application on 19th

July 2018 alleging that their fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 11, 12(1), 12(2),

13(1), 13(2) and 13(5) of the Constitution have been infringed by the 1st 6th

Respondents [the Respondents], who are officers of the Excise Department, by their

actions in a series of incidents that occurred on 19th December 2017. Leave to proceed

was granted on 2nd November 2018 but only in respect of the alleged infringement of

the 2nd Petitioners fundamental rights guaranteed by Article 11.

3

Although this application has been filed seven months after the alleged infringement,

the Petitioners have filed a complaint with the Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka

the day after the occurrence of the incidents complained of. Article 126(2) of the

Constitution stipulates that an application must be filed within one month of the

alleged infringement, and on the face of it, it is clear that the Petitioners have not

complied with such requirement. However, Section 13(1) of the Human Rights

Commission of Sri Lanka Act, No. 21 of 1996 provides that, Where a complaint is made

by an aggrieved party in terms of section 14, to the Commission, within one month of

the alleged infringement or imminent infringement of a fundamental right by executive

or administrative action, the period within which the inquiry into such complaint is

pending before the Commission, shall not be taken into account in computing the

period of one month within which an application may be made to the Supreme Court

by such person in terms of Article 126(2) of the Constitution. The learned Counsel for

the Respondents did not raise any objection with regard to the maintainability of this

application for non-compliance with the provisions of Article 126(2) probably in view

of the said provision and for that reason, the necessity for this Court to go into the

issue of time bar or whether Section 13(1) applies to this application, does not arise.

The complaint of the 2nd Petitioner the first stage

The incidents complained of by the 2nd Petitioner took place during two stages on 19th

December 2017. The first was at the boutique operated by the 1st Petitioner and the

sister of the 2nd Petitioner, Damayanthi. The second was at the office of the Excise

Department at Kuliyapitiya.

The Petitioners state that the 1st Petitioner, who was 70 years old at the time of the

alleged incident, is carrying on a small boutique at her residence situated in

Nagollagoda together with Damayanthi. The 2nd Petitioner lives approximately 300

metres away, together with her husband and two children. The 2nd Petitioner states

that at about 9.45am on 19th December 2017, she had walked across to the said

boutique to purchase breakfast for herself, despite this being her own mothers

boutique, when at about this time, a group of six persons i.e., the Respondents

arrived at the boutique in a blue pick-up lorry. The Petitioners claim that while one of

the group was dressed in what appeared to be a Police uniform, the manner in which

these individuals conducted themselves and the repeated references they made to

4

kasippu gave rise to a reasonable apprehension on their part that the said individuals

were from the Excise Department.

The Petitioners state that the Respondents had thereafter suggested to the 2nd

Petitioner that she consent to criminal charges being filed against her for possession

of kasippu on the assurance that any action to be filed in a Court of law can be amicably

resolved by the 2nd Petitioner pleading guilty to such charge and paying a fine. The 2nd

Petitioner claims that as neither she nor her mother agreed to the suggested course

of action, the Respondents had become aggressive and attempted to assault her sister,

Damayanthi. The 2nd Petitioner had intervened only to have been slapped by the

officer who was dressed in what appeared to be Police uniform. The 2nd Petitioner

admits that she had then held onto the said officer to prevent herself from falling to

the ground and claims that thereafter the other officers had dragged her out of the

boutique and across the gardens gravel driveway and forced her into the back of the

lorry, in the process of which, the draped cloth that she was wearing had come off.

The Petitioners claim that the 1st Petitioner too had been assaulted by the officer in

uniform when she pleaded with the officers not to arrest the 2nd Petitioner. The 2nd

Petitioner claims further that she was manhandled by the Respondents, who were all

male, whilst being shouted at in obscene language in the presence of several villagers

who had gathered by then, and that this caused her intense emotional suffering and

humiliation. This is the first and the most critical stage of the incidents complained of

by the 2nd Petitioner, as the alleged assault and the subsequent dragging of the 2nd

Petitioner out of the boutique, across the gravel driveway and into the lorry, as well

as the witnessing of these incidents by the other villagers, took place during this stage.

The Petitioners have submitted three video recordings marked P1a, to which I shall

advert to later, which the Petitioners claim support the 2nd Petitioners position.

The complaint of the 2nd Petitioner the second stage

The 2nd Petitioner states that she was thereafter taken to the office of the Excise

Department at Kuliyapitiya, where the second stage of the incidents complained of

took place, with the 2nd Petitioner once again being urged to agree to charges being

framed against her and that the fine would be paid by the Respondents. The 2nd

Petitioner states that she was surrounded by approximately ten officers, including the

Respondents, and had been threatened by them as she had refused to comply with

5

the said suggestion. The 2nd Petitioner states further that there were no female officers

present at the time.

The 2nd Petitioner had thereafter been taken to the Bingiriya Police Station where it

transpired that her sister Damayanthi had already lodged a complaint against the said

Respondents. A copy of this complaint has however not been placed before this Court.

The 2nd Petitioner had thereafter been taken to the Hettipola Police Station and had

later been produced before the Acting Magistrate at about 6.30pm that day, at a place

situated on the Kuliyapitiya Hettipola main road and thereafter enlarged on bail. As

adverted to earlier, the 2nd Petitioner states that she lodged a complaint with the

Human Rights Commission the next day and has produced two letters dated 10th

January 2018 [P7b] and 23rd January 2018 [P7a] issued by the Human Rights

Commission acknowledging receipt of the said complaint and informing the 2nd

Petitioner that the said complaint has been referred for further investigation. The 2nd

Petitioner has however failed to produce a copy of the said complaint nor has she

made an effort to apprise this Court of the status of that inquiry, although this

application and the counter affidavit were filed well after P7a and P7b had been

issued.

Medical treatment

The 2nd Petitioner states further that as she was feeling unwell and due to several

aches and pains following the alleged assault, she sought medical treatment the day

after the incident. She had initially visited the Bingiriya Hospital but due to the lack of

resources at Bingiriya, she had visited the General Hospital, Chilaw, where she had

received in-house treatment for one day. According to the entry card P3a, the 2nd

Petitioner had complained of an impact on her left eye, headache, dizziness and pain

on the right side of the chest. No injuries suggestive of the 2nd Petitioner having been

dragged along the ground or of any assault or for that matter, indicative of there

having been a scuffle, have been noted. Although in the prayer to this application, the

Petitioners had prayed for a direction on the Medical Superintendent of the General

Hospital, Chilaw to produce the bed head ticket and other medical records pertaining

to the 2nd Petitioners medical condition and the treatment carried out on her, the

Petitioners have not pursued the said prayer. As a result, there is no medical evidence

of any injuries caused to the 2nd Petitioner to support her version of the incident.

6

Version of the Respondents

The Respondents admit that they were attached to the Kuliyapitiya office of the Excise

Department. They state that they left the office at about 7.40am that morning to carry

out a detection of illicit alcohol and that on their return, the 2nd Respondent received

information that Ranasinghe Bandara, the husband of the 2nd Petitioner, had stored

barrels of kasippu for sale at the 1st Petitioners boutique. The Respondents state that

both Petitioners as well as Ranasinghe have previously been convicted for possession

and sale of illegal alcohol, a fact which had not been disclosed in the petition, but

which gives context to the arrival of the Respondents at the boutique that morning, as

well as to their version of the events that transpired thereafter. The Respondents have

tendered to this Court the case records pertaining to seven cases where the 2nd

Petitioner had been charged for the possession and sale of illegal alcohol during the

period 2012 2017 and where the 2nd Petitioner had pleaded guilty on each occasion.

I am mindful that any previous convictions of the 2nd Petitioner for similar offences are

immaterial as far as the alleged violation of her fundamental rights are concerned, for

as stated in Amal Sudath Silva v Kodituwakku, Inspector of Police and Others [(1987)

2 Sri LR 119 at page 127], The petitioner may be a hard-core criminal whose tribe

deserve no sympathy. But if constitutional guarantees are to have any meaning or

value in our democratic set-up, it is essential that he be not denied the protection

guaranteed by our Constitution.

However, it must be noted that, (a) the 2nd Petitioner had been charged in the

Magistrates Court for an incident that involved her being in possession of 15 litres of

kasippu on 7th November 2017, which is just six weeks prior to the alleged incident,

and (b) the detection that led to the filing of the above case had been carried out by

the 2nd Respondent. This revelation cannot escape the raising of a doubt in the 2nd

Petitioners version of events, in particular, that she did not know that the persons

who arrived at the boutique were officers attached to the Excise Department, and that

it is only the manner in which such individuals conducted themselves, and the repeated

references to kasippu (that) engendered in them the reasonable apprehension that

such individuals were all Excise Officers.

7

The version of the Respondents is that having received the abovementioned

information, they had proceeded towards the said boutique, arriving there at about

10.05am. Having entered the boutique, they had seen the 2nd Petitioner with a

container filled with a yellow colour liquid. The Respondents claim that the 2nd

Petitioner had attempted to throw away the said liquid upon her seeing the

Respondents, but had been prevented by the Respondents, who had thereafter

proceeded to take the 2nd Petitioner into their custody. The Respondents claim that

the detection of what was immediately perceived by them to be illicit alcohol had

prompted the Petitioners and Damayanthi to behave in an aggressive manner towards

them, which necessitated the Respondents using minimum force to compel the 2nd

Petitioner to get into the lorry. The Respondents claim that the Petitioners as well as

Damayanthi used abusive language on them and attempted to prevent them from

discharging their duty.

The Respondents have denied assaulting the 2nd Petitioner, but claim that she resisted

arrest and that as a result, they were compelled to use minimum force. While the

Respondents have not elaborated on the minimum force they claim to have used, I

wish to place emphasis on the cardinal rule of law enforcement that law enforcement

officials should only use force in exceptional circumstances where no other option is

available, and even then, no amount of force beyond that which is reasonably

necessary under the circumstances, for the prevention of crime or in effecting or

assisting in the lawful arrest of offenders or suspected offenders, can be used.

This position is reflected in, (a) the fundamental right of freedom from arbitrary arrest

and detention, guaranteed to all persons, whether a citizen or not, by Article 13(1) of

the Constitution, read with Section 23 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, No 15 of

1979 (as amended), and (b) the judgment in Kumara v Silva, Sub-Inspector of Police,

Welipenna and Others [(2006) 2 Sri LR 236 at page 245] where Shirani Bandaranayake,

J [as she then was] stated that It is not disputed that use of minimum force will be

justified in the lawful exercise of police powers. However, the force used in effecting an

arrest should be proportionate to the mischief it is intended to prevent. [emphasis

added].

In her counter affidavit, the 2nd Petitioner contends that she was determined to turn a

new leaf and hence had given up the brewing and sale of illicit alcohol, and that for

8

this reason, the allegation of the Respondents that she was found in possession of

illicit alcohol at the said premises is false.

ases filed in the Magistrates Court

I must note that the incidents that occurred during the first stage on 19th December

2017 have given rise to three cases before the Magistrates Court. The first is where

the Excise Department has instituted action against the 2nd Petitioner for the

possession of illicit alcohol, the second is where the Bingiriya Police has instituted

action against the 2nd Petitioner for interfering with the duties of public officers and

the third is the plaint filed by the Bingiriya Police against the 1st 6th Respondents on

the complaint of Damayanthi. While all three cases were pending at the time of the

institution of this action, neither the Petitioners nor the Respondents have apprised

this Court of the present status of these cases, which could have been useful in placing

in context the facts relating to the present application. Be that as it may, this Court

would only be adjudicating on whether the 2nd Petitioners fundamental rights

guaranteed by Article 11 have been infringed during the course of the incidents that

are alleged to have occurred on 19th December 2017 and not on the merits of any of

the above cases, which would be the function of the learned Magistrate.

Article 11 of the Constitution

It is clear that human dignity underpins the application of all fundamental rights, and

is the fundamental virtue sought to be protected through the securement of

fundamental rights and the Rule of Law, as demonstrated by the Svasti to our

Constitution.

Prasanna Jayawardena, PC, J in Ajith C. S. Perera v. Minister of Social Services and

Social Welfare and Others [(2019) 3 Sri LR 275 at page 300] mentioned that it

seems to me that the concept of human dignity, which is the entitlement of every

human being, is at the core of the fundamental rights enshrined in our Constitution.

It is a fountainhead from which these fundamental rights spring forth and array

themselves in the Constitution, for the protection of all the people of the country. As

Aharon Barak, former Chief Justice of Israel has commented [Human Dignity The

Constitutional Value and the Constitutional Right (2015)]:

9

Human dignity is the central argument for the existence of human rights. It is

the rationale for them all. It is the justification for the existence of rights. The

constitutional value of human dignity has a central normative role. Human

dignity as a constitutional value is the factor that united the human rights into

one whole. It ensures the normative unity of human rights. [emphasis added]

In Kandawalage Don Samantha Perera v Officer in Charge, Hettipola Police Station

and Others [SC (FR) Application No. 296/2014; SC Minutes of 16th June 2020]

Thurairaja, PC, J referring to the above passage stated that, I am in respectful

agreement with his Lordship that Human Dignity is a constitutional value that

underpins the Fundamental Rights jurisdiction of the Supreme Court. I am of the view

that Human Dignity as a normative value should buttress and inform our decisions on

Fundamental Rights.

Article 11 provides that, No person shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman

or degrading treatment or punishment.

In Kumara v Silva, Sub-Inspector of Police, Welipenna and Others [supra; at page 244]

this Court noted that, Article 11 refers to torture separately from cruel, inhuman or

degrading treatment or punishment similarly to Article 5 of the Universal Declaration

of Human rights, Article 7 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights as

well as Article 3 of the European Convention which had referred to torture separately

from inhuman, degrading treatment or punishment. The importance of the right to

protection from torture has been further recognized and steps had been taken to give

effect to the universally accepted safeguards by the Convention Against Torture And

Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment signed in New York in

1984, which has been accepted in Sri Lanka by the enactment of Act No. 22 of 1994 on

the Convention Against Torture And Other Cruel, Inhuman Or Degrading Treatment Or

Punishment.

Chief Justice Sharvananda in his treatise, Fundamental Rights in Sri Lanka (A

Commentary) [(1993) at page 69] has pointed out that, The fundamental nature of

the right of freedom from torture or inhuman treatment is emphasized by the fact that

it is an absolute right subject to no restriction or derogation under any condition, even

in times of war, public danger or other emergency. This human right from cruel or

10

inhumane treatment is vouched not only to citizens, but to all persons, whether citizens

or not, irrespective of the question whether the victim is a hard-core, criminal or not.

[emphasis added]

In Velmurugu v Attorney General and Another [(1981) 1 Sri LR 406 at page 453]

Wanasundera, J stated as follows:

Article 11 which gives protection from torture and ill-treatment has a number of

features which distinguish it from the other fundamental rights. Its singularity lies

in the fact that it is the only fundamental right that is entrenched in the

Constitution in the sense that an amendment of this clause would need not only

a two-thirds majority but also a Referendum. It is also the only right in the

catalogue of rights set out in Chapter III that is of equal application to everybody

and which is (sic) no way can be restricted or diminished. Whatever one may say

of the other rights, this right undoubtedly occupies a preferred position.

Having regard to its importance, its effect and consequences to society, it should

rightly be singled out for special treatment. It is therefore the duty of this Court

to give it full play and see that its provisions enjoy the maximum application.

Atukorale, J in Amal Sudath Silva v Kodituwakku Inspector of Police and Others

[supra; at page 126] held as follows:

Article 11 of our Constitution mandates that no person shall be subjected

to torture, or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. It

prohibits every person from inflicting torturesome, cruel or inhuman treatment

on another. It is an absolute fundamental right subject to no restrictions or

limitations whatsoever. Every person in this country, be he a criminal or not, is

entitled to this right to the fullest content of its guarantee. [emphasis added]

Although said in the context of Police officers, the following passage by Atukorale, J is

equally applicable to this application:

Constitutional safeguards are generally directed against the State and its

organs. The police force, being an organ of the State, is enjoined by the

Constitution to secure and advance this right and not to deny, abridge or restrict

11

the same in any manner and under any circumstances. Just as much as this right

is enjoyed by every member of the police force, so is he prohibited from denying

the same to others, irrespective of their standing, their beliefs or antecedents. It

is therefore the duty of this court to protect and defend this right jealously to

its fullest measure with a view to ensuring that this right which is declared and

intended to be fundamental is always kept fundamental and that the executive

by its action does not reduce it to a mere illusion. [emphasis added]

In Mrs W M K De Silva v Chairman, Ceylon Fertilizer Corporation [(1989) 2 Sri LR 393

at page 403], Amerasinghe, J opined that the torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading

treatment or punishment contemplated in Article 11 of our Constitution is not confined

to the realm of physical violence and would embrace the sphere of the soul or mind,

as well.

Amerasinghe, J went onto state at page 405 that:

In my view Article 11 of the Constitution prohibits any act by which severe pain

or suffering, whether physical or mental is, without lawful sanction in accordance

with a procedure established by law, intentionally inflicted on a person

(whom I shall refer to as 'the victim) by a public official acting in the discharge

of his executive or administrative duties or under colour of office, for such

purposes as obtaining from the victim or a third person a confession or

information, such information being actually or supposedly required for

official purposes, imposing a penalty upon the victim for an offence or breach

or a rule he or a third person has committed or is suspected of having committed,

or intimidating or coercing the victim or a third person to do or refrain from

doing something which the official concerned believes the victim or the third

person ought to do or refrain from doing, as the case may be.

However, as pointed out by A.R.B. Amerasinghe in Our Fundamental Rights of

Personal Security and Physical Liberty [(1995) Sarvodaya at page 37], Torture, cruel,

inhuman degrading treatment or punishment may take many forms, psychological and

physical, but whether the relevant criteria have been satisfied must depend on the

circumstances of each case.

12

Of the three general observations made by Amerasinghe, J in Channa Pieris and

Others v Attorney General and Others (Ratawesi Peramuna Case) [(1994) 1 Sri LR 1

at page 105] with regard to an Article 11 infringement, the first was that the acts

or conduct complained of must be qualitatively of a kind that the Court can take

cognizance of. At page 106, Amerasinghe, J further noted that where physical harm

is concerned, a long line of cases have adopted the criteria set out in Mrs W M K De

Silva v Chairman, Ceylon Fertilizer Corporation [supra; at page 401], where it was held

that for there to be an Article 11 infringement the degree of mental or physical

coerciveness or viciousness must be such as to occasion not mere ill-treatment, but

maltreatment of a very high degree. This has been emphasised in Our Fundamental

Rights of Personal Security and Physical Liberty [supra; at page 29], where the author

states that, 'Torture' implies that the suffering occasioned must be of a particular

intensity or cruelty. In order that ill-treatment may be regarded as inhuman or

degrading it must be 'severe'. There must be the attainment of a 'minimum level of

severity'. There must (be) the crossing of the 'threshold' set by the prohibition. There

must be an attainment of 'the seriousness of treatment envisaged by the prohibition in

order to sustain a case based on torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or

punishment.

Accordingly, in determining whether Article 11 has been infringed, this Court will

consider whether the level of intensity, cruelty and severity of suffering implied by

and inherent to the notion of torture and inhuman, and degrading treatment has

been satisfied.

The position is therefore clear. Every human being is entitled to live with dignity and

not be subject to any torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.

It is the duty of this Court, as the guardian of the fundamental rights of our People, to

foster and protect these rights. Whenever a complaint alleging the infringement of

Article 11 is made to this Court, it is our duty to examine thoroughly the facts relating

to such complaint, the corroborative evidence, if any, tendered by the Petitioner in

support of such complaint, the version of the Respondents and arrive at a considered

decision.

13

Standard of proof that must be satisfied

I shall now turn to the standard of proof that a Petitioner who alleges an infringement

of Article 11 must discharge.

In Goonewardene v Perera [(1983) 1 Sri LR 305 at page 313], Soza, J observed thus:

Before I deal with the facts a word about the burden of proof. There can be no

doubt that the burden is on the petitioner to establish the facts on which she

invites the court to grant her the relief she seeks. This leads to the next question.

What is the standard of proof expected of her? Wanasundera, J. considered the

question in the case of Velmurugu v. The Attorney-General and another and held

that the standard of proof that is required in cases filed under Article 126 of the

Constitution for infringement of fundamental rights is proof by a preponderance

of probabilities as in a civil case and not proof beyond reasonable doubt. I agree

with Wanasundera, J. that the standard of proof should be preponderance of

probabilities as in a civil case. It is generally accepted that within this standard

there could be varying degrees of probability. The degree of probability required

should be commensurate with the gravity of the allegation sought to be proved.

This court when called upon to determine questions of infringement of

fundamental rights will insist on a high degree of probability as for instance a

court having to decide a question of fraud in a civil suit would. The conscience of

the court must be satisfied that there has been an infringement. [emphasis

added]

Wimalaratne, J In Kapugeekiyana v Hettiarachchi and Others [(1984) 2 Sri LR 153 at

page 165] stated that, In deciding whether any particular fundamental right has been

infringed I would apply the test laid down in Velmurugu that the civil, and not the

criminal standard of persuasion applies, with this observation, that the nature and

gravity of an issue must necessarily determine the manner of attaining reasonable

satisfaction of the truth of that issue.

In Channa Pieris and Others v Attorney General and Others (Ratawesi Peramuna

Case) [supra; at page 107], referring to the third general observation made with regard

to an Article 11 infringement, Amerasinghe, J stated as follows:

14

having regard to the nature and gravity of the issue, a high degree of certainty

is required before the balance of probability might be said to tilt in favour of a

Petitioner endeavouring to discharge his burden of proving that he was

subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or

punishment; and unless the Petitioner has adduced sufficient evidence to satisfy

the Court that an act in violation of Article 11 took place, it will not make a

declaration that (a violation of) Article 11 of the Constitution did take place.

[emphasis added]

( )

Would the guarded discretion of a reasonable and just man lead him to the

conclusion? is the test I would apply in deciding the matter. If I am in real and

substantial doubt, that is if there is a degree of doubt that would prevent a

reasonable and just man from coming to the conclusion, I would hold that the

allegation has not been established. [emphasis added]

Similar sentiments were expressed by my sister, Murdu N. B. Fernando, PC, J in

Ratnayaka Weerakoonge Sandya Kumari v Weerasinghe, Sub Inspector of Police [SC

(FR) Application No. 75/2012; SC minutes of 18th December 2019 at page 10] where,

having considered the above cases, it was concluded that, The foregoing judicial

decisions of this Court has clearly identified and laid down that a high degree of

certainty is required before the balance of probability would tilt in favour of a petitioner

endeavoring to discharge the burden of proof with regard to an allegation of torture

or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.

In Edward Sivalingam v Sub Inspector Jayasekara & Others (SC (FR) Application No.

326/2008; SC minutes of 10th November 2010), which has been referred to with

approval by Shiran Gooneratne, J in Kumarihami v Officer-in-Charge, Mahiyanganaya

Police Station and Others [(2021) 2 Sri LR 464 at page 469], Tilakawardane, J held that,

When considering the allegations made by the Petitioner against officers of the CID it

is important to bear in mind that the burden of proving these allegations lies with the

Petitioner. This court has held repeatedly that the standard required is not proof

beyond reasonable doubt but must be of a higher threshold than mere satisfaction.

The standard of proof employed is on a balance of probabilities test and as such must

15

have a high degree of probability and where corroborative evidence is not available

it would depend on the testimonial creditworthiness of the Petitioner. [emphasis

added]

Amerasinghe, J however added a word of caution in Samanthilaka v Ernest Perera

[(1990) 1 Sri LR 318; at page 319], which he reiterated in Channa Pieris and Others v

Attorney-General and Others (Ratawesi Peramuna Case) [supra; at page 108], when

he stated that he is conscious of the difficulties faced by a petitioner in proving

allegations of torture and that therefore, due regard must be had to the circumstances

of the particular case so as not to impose an undue burden on a petitioner, and

thereby impede access to justice. As correctly acknowledged in Weerasinghe v

Premaratne, Police Sergeant and Others [(1998) 1 Sri LR 127 at page 133], this Court

must also be alert to the tendency of State officials to act in an esprit de corps in

protecting their own and covering up their wrongs, such as through falsified medical

reports and police records.

Thus, while the burden of proof of establishing allegations of torture or cruel, inhuman

or degrading treatment or punishment shall remain with a petitioner to be satisfied

on a balance of probability with a high degree of certainty, the Court must be guided

by the facts of the particular case and the difficulties and disadvantages that a

petitioner could face in proving such allegations.

Allegations of the 2nd Petitioner revisited

It is in the above factual and legal background that I must consider the several

complaints of the 2nd Petitioner and determine whether the 2nd Petitioner has proved

that the Respondents committed any act amounting to an infringement of her

fundamental rights guaranteed by Article 11.

In her affidavit, the 2nd Petitioner has made four allegations of which three took place

during stage one, at the premises of the boutique. The first is the physical assault,

including a slap across her face and her being dragged along the ground. The second

is the humiliation she suffered in front of the villagers who had gathered and the

abusive language used on her. The third is her draped cloth being ripped off her as she

was dragged out of the boutique and into the lorry. The fourth is the intimidation and

16

threats made to her at the Excise Department office at Kuliyapitiya, which took place

during stage two.

The 2nd Petitioner has lodged a complaint with the Human Rights Commission on the

day after the incident, as borne out by the acknowledgment issued vide P7a but

she has failed to produce a copy of the said complaint before this Court. The 2nd

Petitioner has also made a complaint on the same date to the Bingiriya Police Station

and on the strength of which, the Bingiriya Police has filed the B report P6. The 2nd

Petitioner has neglected to tender a copy of this complaint as well. The 2nd Petitioner

has stated further that the Police Post at the General Hospital, Chilaw recorded a

statement from her, but this statement has also not been tendered. The 2nd Petitioner

had additionally sent a complaint on the day after the incident to the Minister under

whose purview the Excise Department functioned at the time and on the strength of

which, an inquiry was held by the Excise Department. Regrettably, a copy of this

complaint too has not been tendered. In my view, these four complaints / statements

could have served as contemporaneous evidence of the incidents that took place on

19th December 2017 and would have shed more light on what actually transpired,

especially since this application has been filed seven months after the occurrence of

the alleged incidents. The failure to file the said complaints / statements before Court

in an action filed to vindicate ones fundamental rights is difficult to comprehend given

the enthusiasm with which the 2nd Petitioner invoked the law enforcement machinery

soon after the occurrence of the said incidents. Such failure gives rise to a substantial

doubt in my mind with regard to the testimonial creditworthiness of the 2nd Petitioner.

Affidavit of Damayanthi

The 2nd Petitioner has tendered affidavits of two others to support her version. The

first is that of her sister, Damayanthi, and the second is that of one Lekamlage

Dayaratne who claims he was at a nearby bus halt and saw the incident at the

boutique. The Petitioners have not produced statements or affidavits from the

villagers who are said to have gathered and witnessed the incidents that took place at

the boutique on 19th December 2017, and therefore the allegation that they were

humiliated in front of the villagers has not been substantiated.

17

I approach with caution the affidavit of Damayanthi, who, being the 2nd Petitioners

sister, is not a disinterested witness. Damayanthi has stated as follows in her affidavit

signed on 24th July 2018:

03. wmf.a mqoquhg fuka iqrdnoq ks,Odrska 06 fofkl= muK t;kg lvd jeoS udf.a fidfydhqrsh

yg mjid isgsfha idmrdOs ls%hdjla ms<sn|j kvqjla mejrsug lreKq b,a,d isgsho" tlS lreKq l=ulaoehs lshd Tjqka jsiska wehg mejiqfjs ke;' 04. by; wxl 02 fPaofha i|yka mrsos th m%;slafIam l< nejska 2017.12.19 jk osk Wfoa 10'30 g muK tls k,Odrska msrsi jsiska ug myr oSug W;aiy lrk jsg udf.a fidfydhqrsh th je<elajsug W;aidy l< jsgos tls ks<Odrska jsiska weh yg myr fok ,oS' Tjqka jsiska wehf.a jus lusuq,g w;=,a myrlao fok ,oS' tjsg weh nsug weo jegqKs' tjsg tlS ishu ks,odrska jsiska wehg wudkqIsl f,i myr oS wehj wm fj<|ief,ka t<shg weof.k js;a nsu osf.a kej; weof.k f.dia w;awXx.=jg .kakd ,oS' fuu fya;=fjka wehf.a we|qus b;d wOsl f,i brs ;snqKs' bkamiq Tjqka jsiska wehj ks,a meye;s lens r:hlg weo oud l=,shdmsgsh iqrdnoq ldrahd,hg ref.k hk ,oS' 05. fuu isoaOsh wmf.a wi,ajdiska jsiskao olakd ,oqj" fidhqrshf.a weoquso nrm;, f,i brS f.dia ;snqKs' ;jo" tlS ks,Odrska jsiska wmg mreI jpkfhka b;d kskaos; f,i neK jeosks' kuq;a wmg wehj fnsrd .ekSug fkdyels jsh' 07. lsisu fya;=jla fkdue;sj tlS iqrdnoq ks,Odrska jsiska isoq lrk ,o fuu uSf,apSP myr osu ms,sn|j ud jsiska nsx.srsh fmd,sia iA:dkhg f.dia wxl nS 852$17 hgf;a meusKs,a,lao isoq lrk ,oS' ta wkqj mqoa.,hka yhfofkla fus olajd w;awXx.=jg f.k we;' Neither the 2nd Petitioner nor Damayanthi have produced photographs of the draped

cloth that the 2nd Petitioner was said to have been wearing on the said date to prove

the assertion that her clothing had been torn, thus embarrassing her in front of the

villagers who had gathered at the scene. Furthermore, as I have previously noted, a

copy of the complaint that Damayanthi claims she made to the Bingiriya Police Station

in Case No. B 852/2017 has not been tendered to this Court, even though the B report

P6 itself has been tendered by the Petitioners. Once again, the contents of this

complaint could have served as contemporaneous evidence of Damayanthis version

to this Court. It would also be pertinent to note that Damayanthi failed to appear at

the inquiry conducted by the Excise Department on the complaint made by the 2nd

Petitioner. Thus, Damayanthis version is also replete with infirmities and therefore it

may not be safe to rely on her evidence.

18

Affidavit of Dayaratne I must nonetheless consider if the allegations of brutal assault that Damayanthi claims the 2nd Petitioner was subjected to, can yet be established. In that regard, there are two matters that I must consider. The first is the affidavit of Lekamlage Dayaratne, which had only been tendered with the counter affidavit of the 2nd Petitioner, although it had been affirmed one month prior to the filing of this application and was available to the Petitioners at the time this application was filed. In his affidavit, Dayaratne has stated as follows: 02. ud by; ,smskfha mosxpsj isgsk w;r" jraI 2017.12.19 jk osk fm' j' 09'00 g muK ud iqrshfygsgs uqoshkafia,df.a u,a,sld ouhka;s hk whg wh;a fj<|ie, wi, msysgs nia fyda,ags tfla isgsk jsg ks,amdg lens r:hla meusK tlS fj<|ie, bosrsmsg kj;ajd ks, we|qfuka ieris isgs ks,Odrsfhl+ we;= lsysm fofkl= nei tlS fj<|ie, we;=,g .sh nj;a ud lshd isgsus' 03. bkamiq tlS fj<|ie, we;=f,ka .eyeKq msrsila .ykak tmd hkqfjka lE.ik Ynsohla weiS ud fj<|ie, bosrsmsgg meusK n,k jsg iQrshfygsgs uqoshkafia,df.a iqukdj;S ueKsfla hk whg lens r:fhka meusKs ks,Odrsfhl= iy ;j;a lsysm fofkl= myr oqka w;r wehf.a flia j,ska w,a,d weof.k wehj tlS lens r:h ;=<g oeuq nj ud oqgqj nj;a tfia weof.k hk wjia:dfjs oS wehf.a weoqus o .e,js ;snq nj;a ud m%ldY lr isgsus' 04. tfia wehj weof.k hk wjia:dfjs oS wi, ;snq lKqjl wdOdrfhka weh tu ks,Odrskaf.ka fnSrSug W;aiy .;a nj ud oqgq nj;a kuq;a tu wh wehg myr os

wehj tls lens r:hg oeuq nj;a ud lshd isgsus' No explanation has been tendered by either Dayaratne or the Petitioners with regard to the following: (a) Whether Dayaratne lives close by to the said boutique, which in turn would have explained his presence at the bus halt at the time of the incident at the boutique; (b) Whether the 2nd Petitioner is someone who was previously known to him and if

so, in what way, especially since he has referred to the 2nd Petitioner by her full name; and (c) Whether he made a statement to the Bingiriya Police as to what he witnessed that day at the boutique.

19

While the affidavit of Dayaratne contains the above infirmities, his version also appears to be an exaggeration of what took place, as neither the 2nd Petitioner nor Damayanthi refer to the 2nd Petitioner having been dragged by her hair or the 2nd Petitioner holding on to a post to prevent herself from being dragged by the Respondents. Perhaps these matters could well have been addressed had the Petitioners disclosed to this Court the complaints / statements made to the Human Rights Commission, the Bingiriya Police or at the Police Post at the Chilaw Hospital. Thus, in light of these observations, I am of the view that this Court cannot place much reliance on the affidavit of Dayaratne, either. Medical evidence The second matter that I wish to consider in examining if the allegations of brutal assault have been established, is the availability of medical evidence. Before I do so however, I wish to emphasise that there may be instances where medical evidence is not available and therefore it would not be reasonable for this Court to insist upon medical evidence. In fact, in Ansalin Fernando v Sarath Perera, Officer-in-Charge, Police Station, Chilaw [(1992) 1 Sri LR 411 at page 419], Kulatunga, J pointed out that, Whilst I shall not accept each and every allegation of assault/ill-treatment against the police unless it is supported by cogent evidence I do not consider it proper to reject such an allegation merely because the police deny it or because the aggrieved party cannot produce medical evidence of injuries. Whether any particular treatment is violative of Article 11 of the Constitution would depend on the facts of each case. The allegation can be established even in the absence of medically supported injuries. Although from a practical point of view, it may be that only medical evidence could afford corroboration, as noted by Dheeraratne, J in Weerasinghe v Premaratne, Police Sergeant and Others [supra; at page 134], the facts and circumstances may be such that One does not require medical evidence to prove the intensity of the pain which would have been caused to the body of a person (). The 2nd Petitioner states that she sought medical assistance the very next day after the incident. As I have already stated, what has been produced are (a) the entry card [P3a] which only sets out the history given by the 2nd Petitioner i.e., assault by a gang of people, impact and pain on the left eye, headache, dizziness and right side chest pain, and, (b) the requisition for an X-ray examination [P3b]. The Medical Officer who examined the 2nd Petitioner has not mentioned in P3a whether the 2nd Petitioner had any injuries on her body arising from the brutal assault that Damayanthi claims the 2nd

20

Petitioner was subjected to. Although the Petitioners have pleaded in the prayer to the application that a copy of the bed head ticket, the treatment sheet and the medical reports in respect of the 2nd Petitioner be called for from the Medical Superintendent, General Hospital, Chilaw, the Petitioners have not pursued this prayer. Yet again, this lacuna may have been overcome, at least to some extent, had the 2nd Petitioner produced the four complaints / statements that she made on 20th December 2017, where she may have referred to the assault and the injuries she alleges she sustained as a result of the incidents that took place the day before. The failure to produce any form of medical evidence to support the allegation of assault or take meaningful steps to procure such material, in spite of the 2nd Petitioner claiming that such material is available is a cause for concern. Video evidence This brings me to the final item of evidence tendered by the Petitioners with regard to the incidents that occurred during stage one, namely, the three video clips that have been produced with the petition, marked P1a. I have watched them carefully, but did not observe (a) any assault of the 2nd Petitioner, (b) any indication of the 2nd Petitioner being dragged along the ground, (c) the 2nd Petitioner being held by her hair, or (d) the cloth worn by the 2nd Petitioner being torn or coming off her in the process. What I did observe however, was the 1st Petitioners abusive threats to the Respondents and the officer in uniform slapping the 1st Petitioner. As mentioned at the outset, leave has not been granted in respect of the alleged infringement of the 1st Petitioners fundamental rights guaranteed by Article 11 and therefore I will proceed no further in this regard. I do however wish to firmly state that this amply documented aggression at the hands of a public servant is in no way condoned by this Court. What is left to be considered is whether the 2nd Petitioner has established that the Respondents subjected her to humiliation and intimidation at the Excise Department office at Kuliyapitiya. While, as already acknowledged, Article 11 includes mental, emotional and psychological suffering, I reiterate that such suffering must also be qualitatively of the kind that this Court can take cognizance of, and must thereafter be proved on a balance of probability with a high degree of certainty, all things considered. Answering this question attracts the same infirmities observed above, regarding the evidence placed before this Court. There is an abject lack of corroborative evidence in proof of humiliation, intimidation and threats amounting to an infringement of Article 11. Accordingly, I am of the view that the 2nd Petitioner has not proved her allegation with regard to the incidents that occurred during stage two.

21

Inquiry carried out by the Excise Department For the sake of completeness, I must state that following the complaint made by the 2nd Petitioner to the Minister, the 7th Respondent, the Commissioner General of Excise had proceeded to hold an inquiry into the conduct of the 1st 6th Respondents, especially with regard to the absence of a female officer during the raid. Pursuant to the recommendation of the Commissioner of Excise (Human Resources) who conducted the inquiry, the 1st 5th Respondents have been issued with letters of warning [7R3(A) - 7R3(E)] that they must comply with the requirements of the relevant Circulars and Departmental Orders and ensure the presence of female officers when conducting raids. Conclusion Taking into consideration all of the above facts and circumstances, I am of the view that the 2nd Petitioner has failed to adduce sufficient evidence to satisfy this Court that her fundamental rights guaranteed by Article 11 of the Constitution have been infringed by the Respondents during either of the two stages. The acts complained of have not been sufficiently proved for this Court to take cognizance of as constituting torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. This application is accordingly dismissed, without costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT Jayantha Jayasuriya, PC, CJ I agree.

CHIEF JUSTICE Murdu N. B. Fernando, PC, J I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT