IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Mahapatabendige Edmund Piyasena,

No. 11, Old Waidya Road,

Dehiwala. (Deceased)

Chula Subadra Dissanayake Mahawela,

also known as Chula Piyasena,

No. 11, Old Waidya Road,

Dehiwala.

Plaintiff

SC APPEAL NO: SC/APPEAL/170/2011

SC LA NO: SC/SPL/LA/100/2011

CA APPEAL NO: CA/543/95 (F)

DC MT. LAVINIA NO: 2379/T

Vs.

R.M. Seelawathie Menike Piyasena,

No. 44, Waidya Road, Dehiwala.

Intervenient Petitioner

AND BETWEEN

Chula Subadra Dissanayake Mahawela,

also known as Chula Piyasena,

No. 11, Old Waidya Road,

Dehiwala.

Petitioner-Appellant

2

SC/APPEAL/170/2011

Vs.

R.M. Seelawathie Menike Piyasena,

No. 44, Waidya Road, Dehiwala.

Intervenient Petitioner-Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

R.M. Seelawathie Menike Piyasena,

No. 44, Waidya Road,

Dehiwala.

Intervenient Petitioner-Respondent-

Petitioner-Appellant

Vs.

Chula Subadra Dissanayake Mahawela,

also known as Chula Piyasena,

No. 11, Old Waidya Road,

Dehiwala.

Petitioner-Appellant-Respondent-

Respondent

Before: Murdu N.B. Fernando, P.C., J.

Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J

Counsel: J.A.J. Udawatta with Kawshalya Molligida and Anuradha

N. Ponnamperuma for the Intervenient Petitioner-

Respondent-Appellant.

Faisz Musthapha, P.C., with Faisza Markar for the

Petitioner-Appellant-Respondent.

Argued on: 03.11.2021

3

SC/APPEAL/170/2011

Written submissions:

by the Intervenient Petitioner-Respondent-Appellant on

05.12.2011 and 22.11.2021.

by the Petitioner-Appellant-Respondent on 29.02.2012

and 07.12.2021.

Decided on: 26.07.2023

Samayawardhena, J.

Introduction

The Respondent instituted proceedings in the District Court of Mount

Lavinia seeking to prove and to have the probate issued in her name as

the executrix of the last will of her late husband. The Appellant who is

the wife of the younger brother of the deceased testator intervened in the

proceedings after the order nisi was published in the newspapers. After

inquiry, the District Court held that the last will was not an act and deed

of the deceased as there are suspicious circumstances attached to the

will and dismissed the Respondents application. On appeal, the Court of

Appeal reversed the judgment of the District Court and held that the

District Court had erroneously rejected the evidence led on behalf of the

Respondent and ruled that the last will is proved. Learned counsel for the

Appellant submits that the principal issue for adjudication before this

Court is whether the Court of Appeal erred in law and fact in overturning

the judgment of the District Court and holding that the last will is the act

and deed of the deceased testator.

Burden of proof of a last will

It is well-settled law that the party propounding the last will must satisfy

the conscience of the Court that the instrument so propounded is the last

will of a free and capable testator of sound disposition of mind. If there

4

SC/APPEAL/170/2011

are circumstances which excite the suspicion of the Court, the burden is

on the party propounding the will to remove all such suspicion and

doubt. If the propounder of the will fails to do so, the Court shall hold

against the will and dismiss the application without further ado.

Speaking on the rules of law according to which last will cases are to be

decided, in the seminal case of Barry v. Butlin [1838] II Moore 480 at 482-

483, Baron Parke, delivering the opinion of the Judicial Committee of the

Privy Council, articulates:

The rules of law according to which cases of this nature are to be

decided, do not admit of any dispute, so far as they are necessary

to the determination of the present Appeal: and they have been

acquiesced in on both sides. These rules are two; the first that the

onus probandi lies in every case upon the party propounding a will;

and he must satisfy the conscience of the Court that the instrument

so propounded is the last will of a free and capable testator.

The second is, that if a party writes or prepares a will, under which

he takes a benefit, that is a circumstance that ought generally to

excite the suspicion of the Court, and calls upon it to be vigilant and

jealous in examining the evidence in support of the instrument, in

favour of which it ought not to pronounce unless the suspicion is

removed, and it is judicially satisfied that the paper propounded

does express the true will of the deceased.

These dicta of Baron Parke are consistently adopted and applied as good

law for nearly two centuries. Vide The Alim Will Case (1919) 20 NLR 481,

Pieris v. Wilbert (1956) 59 NLR 245, Sithamparanathan v.

Mathuranayagam (1970) 73 NLR 53, Ratnayake v. Chandratillake [1987]

2 Sri LR 299.

5

SC/APPEAL/170/2011

What can be regarded as suspicious circumstances in a last will case?

Suspicious circumstances will necessarily vary from case to case. As

stated in Barry v. Butlin (supra), for instance, if the beneficiary of a will

has actively participated in the execution of the will, it is a circumstance

that ought generally to excite the suspicion of the Court. In such an

instance the will can be attacked on undue influence. Vide Arulampikai

v. Thambu (1944) 45 NLR 457.

In Sellammah v. Sellamuttu (1957) 59 NLR 376 certain obvious alterations

were noticeable in a will in regard to the name of one of the devisees. The

alterations were not attested or authenticated by the signatures of the

notary or the testator and the witnesses in terms of either section 30(21)

of the Notaries Ordinance or section 7 of the Prevention of Frauds

Ordinance. When application for probate of the will was made, obtaining

an affidavit from the attesting notary and witnesses proved to be quite

difficult. In such circumstances, the Supreme Court held that the will

should not have been admitted to probate. Sinnetamby J. at page 381-

382 stated that it was incumbent on the propounders in the first instance

to remove the suspicions created by alterations, the knowledge of which

must necessarily be imputed to them. Having regard to the far-reaching

effects of the alterations it was their duty if the alterations were made

before due execution to have led some independent evidence to establish

that the deceased during his lifetime confirmed the dispositions made in

the will. This was necessary to meet the charge that the testator did not

know and approve of the contents of the will.

In Meenadchipillai v. Karthigesu (1957) 61 NLR 320, the following

circumstances were held to be suspicious, where it was shown that the

testator died within seven hours after the execution of the will in a

hospital: (a) the testator was severely ill at the time of execution that he

was unable to speak or to hold a pen to sign; (b) the notary did not take

6

SC/APPEAL/170/2011

the precaution of consulting a doctor at the time he took instructions

from the testator or at the time of executing the will; (c) the notary was a

close relative of the petitioner who was the widow of the testator and the

primary beneficiary of the will; (d) the witnesses to the will were not of

independent character.

However, this initial burden cast upon the propounder of the will is not

as heavy as proof beyond reasonable doubt. It would be unrealistic to

expect proof of a will with mathematical precision when the actual author

of the will (testator) is not among the living. The question the Court has

to grapple with in last will cases is to understand what the deceased

intended to do, or, in some instances such as the instant one, whether

the deceased intended anything because the appellant alleges that the

will was prepared after the death of the testator. The standard of proof is,

like in any other civil case, on a balance of probabilities.

When suspicion is attached to the will, what the Court is actually

expected to do is to adopt the criterion proposed by Baron Parke in Barry

v. Butlin in the case of undue influence, i.e. to be vigilant and jealous in

examining the evidence in support of the instrument, in favour of which it

ought not to pronounce unless the suspicion is removed and it is judicially

satisfied that the paper propounded does express the true will of the

deceased. Vide The Alim Will Case (supra) at 494.

If the propounder of the will successfully discharges the aforesaid initial

burden, the burden then shifts to the opposing party to prove fraud,

conspiracy, coercion, undue influence or any other ground they rely upon

to invalidate the will.

In another landmark case on the subject, namely, Tyrrell v. Painton

[1894] P.D. 151, Lindley L.J. stated at 157 that the rule laid down in

Barry v. Butlin and similar other cases such as Fulton v. Andrew Law Rep.

7

SC/APPEAL/170/2011

7 H.L. 448 and Brown v. Fisher 63 L.T. 465 which places the onus

probandi upon the party propounding the will to satisfy the conscience of

the Court that the instrument so propounded is the will of a free and

capable testator should not be limited to cases where the beneficiary was

actively participated in the preparation of the last will, but should also

be extended to all cases in which circumstances exist which excite the

suspicion of the Court; and whatever such circumstances exist, and

whatever their nature may be, it is for those who propound the will to

remove such suspicion, and to prove affirmatively that the testator knew

and approved of the contents of the document, and it is only where this is

done that the onus is thrown on those who oppose the will to prove fraud

or undue influence, or whatever else they rely on to displace the case made

for proving the will.

This was reiterated by Davey L.J. at 159-160 when he stated:

There rests upon that will a suspicion which must be removed before

you come to the plea of fraud. It must not be supposed that the

principle Barry v. Butlin is confined to cases where the person who

prepares the will is the person who takes the benefit under it that

is one state of things which raises a suspicion; but the principle is,

that whatever a will is prepared under circumstances which raise a

well-grounded suspicion that it does not express the mind of the

testator, the Court ought not to pronounce in favour of it unless that

suspicion is removed.

Lindley L.J. was quoted with approval by Sansoni J. in Meenadchipillai v.

Karthigesu (supra) at 322 and Davey L.J. was quoted with approval by

Bertram C.J. in The Alim Will Case at 494.

8

SC/APPEAL/170/2011

When the burden shifts to the opposing party too, the required standard

of proof is not stringent. For instance, if the ground of attack is fraud, the

fraud need not be proved by the opposing party beyond reasonable doubt.

The Court need not disregard the evidence that casts suspicion on the

will on the basis that, even if it suggests fraud, it does not warrant a

definite finding of fraud. In The Alim Will Case at pages 493-494, Bertram

C.J. explained the law as follows:

It has been established by a long series of decisions, the most

important of which are Barry v. Butlin (1838) 2 Moore P.C. 480,

Baker v. Batt (1838) 2 Moore P.C. 317, Fulton v. Andrew L.R. 7 H.L.

448, Tyrrell v. Painton (1894) P.D. 151 (see also Orion v. Smith (1873)

L.R. 3 P.& D. 23, Dufaur v. Croft 3 Moore P.C. 136, Wilson Basil

(1903) P. 329 and Sukhir v. Kadar Nath I.L.R All. 405), that wherever

a will is prepared and executed under circumstances which arouse

the suspicion of the Court, it ought not to pronounce in favour of it

unless the party propounding it adduces evidence which would

remove such suspicion, and satisfies the Court that the testator

knew and approved of the contents of the instrument. It is now

settled that this principle is not limited to cases in which the will is

propounded by a person who takes a special benefit under it, and

himself procured or conducted its execution. It may very well be that

a refusal to grant probate in such a case may involve an imputation

of fraud upon the party propounding the will. This is no objection to

the operations of that principle. (See Baker v. Batt (supra).) The Court

is not necessarily bound to give a decision upon the truth or

falsehood of the conflicting evidence adduced before it upon the

question of fraud. What it has to ask itself is whether in all the

circumstances of the case it will give credit to the subscribing

witnesses, or the other witnesses adduced to prove the execution.

9

SC/APPEAL/170/2011

Nor is it an objection to the operation of this principle that the

evidence which casts suspicion on the will, though it suggests fraud,

is not of such a nature as to justify the Court in a finding of fraud.

(See Tyrrell v. Painton.) The principle does not mean that in cases

where a suspicion attaches to a will a special measure of proof or a

particular species of proof is required. (See Barry v. Butlin (supra).)

It means that in such cases the Court must be vigilant and jealous

in examining the evidence in support of the instrument, in favour of

which it ought not to pronounce unless the suspicion is removed, and

it is judicially satisfied that the paper propounded does express the

true will of the deceased.

In Samarakone v. The Public Trustee (1960) 65 NLR 100 at 115,

Weerasuriya J. stated:

As held by Lindley, L.J., in Tyrell v. Painton (1894) P. 151, where

there are features which excite suspicion in regard to a will,

whatever their nature may be, it is for those who propound it to

remove such suspicion. Suspicious features may be a ground for

refusing probate even where the evidence which casts suspicion on

the will, though it suggests fraud, is not of such a nature as to justify

the Court in arriving at a definite finding of fraud. It has also been

stated that the conscience of the Court must be satisfied in respect

of such matters. These principles have been applied in several local

cases, such as The Alim Will Case (supra), John Pieris et al. v.

Wilbert (1956) 59 N.L.R. 245 and Meenadchipillai v. Karthigesu

(1957) 61 N.L.R. 320.

However, in Barry v. Butlin at page 491 it was remarked that The undue

influence, and the importunity which, if they are to defeat a will, must be

of the nature of fraud or duress, exercised on a mind in a state of debility.

On the facts and circumstances of that case, it was held that those were

10

SC/APPEAL/170/2011

only insinuated but not proved. In Pieris v. Pieris (1906) 9 NLR 14 at 23-

24 Wood Renton J. (later C.J.) by citing Boyse v. Rossborough (1856) 6

H.L.C. 2 remarked that Undue influence is not to be presumed; the party

alleging it must prove the fact.In order to be undue the influence must

amount to coercion or fraud.

At this point, a word of caution may be necessary. Specific grounds of

challenge, such as fraud, conspiracy, coercion, undue influence should

not be considered as distinct and separate grounds that must be proved

by the opposing party alone after closing the propounders case. If the

opposing party alleges, for instance, fraud or undue influence, it has a

direct bearing on the initial burden of the propounder. The propounder

must first prove that the will was duly executed in terms of law and it is

the act and deed of a free and capable testator who not only was aware

of but also approved of the contents of it.

As pointed out by Viscount Dunedin in Robins v. National Trust Company

(1927) A.C. 515 at 519 In ordinary cases if there is no suggestion to the

contrary any man who is shown to have executed a will in ordinary form

will be presumed to have testamentary capacity, but the moment the

capacity is called in question then at once the onus lies on those

propounding the will to affirm positively the testamentary capacity. The

proof of due execution, testamentary capacity of the testator etc. are upon

the propounder of the will.

Before the question of fraud, undue influence etc. can arise, any

suspicion arising from the circumstances under which the will was

executed has to be dealt with and removed. In the course of establishing

his case, the propounder needs to address the allegations of his opponent

and remove all suspicion attached to the will before the burden is shifted

to the opposing party. It would be naive on the part of the propounder if

11

SC/APPEAL/170/2011

he leaves such allegations untouched on the basis that it is solely up to

those who oppose the will to establish them.

This was explained by Bertram C.J. in Andrado v. Silva (1920) 22 NLR 4

at 6-7 in the following manner:

I do not mean to say that the principle that it is the duty of the

propounders to remove suspicions does not apply to undue

influence. I think it does so apply in exactly the same manner as it

applies to fraud. But it is necessary that the Court should ask itself,

what are the nature of the suspicions which are said to be excited.

The only material suspicions are suspicions which affect issues the

proof of which is on the propounders. It lies upon the propounders to

prove (1) the fact of execution, (2) the mental competency of the

testator, (3) his knowledge and approval of the contents of the will.

If the circumstances are such that a suspicion arises affecting one of

these matters, it is for the propounders to remove it. The Court is

required under these circumstances to watch the evidence tendered

with special vigilance, and not to declare that the onus of proof is

discharged unless the suspicion is removed. The suspicion may

point to fraud. The onus of fraud is ordinarily on those who allege it.

But in the case of a will there may be a suspicion of fraud affecting

either the fact of execution, or the mental condition of the testator at

the moment of execution, or his knowledge and approval of the

document or part of the document. In such a case it is for the

propounders to remove the suspicion, and if this is not done the will

must be rejected, even though the suspicious circumstances do not

amount to a prima facie case of fraud, and even though it cannot be

said, on a review of the evidence on both sides, that fraud has been

established. Undue influence, as it seems to me, is on the same

footing as fraud, and I observe that in Tyrrell v. Painton (1894) P. D.

12

SC/APPEAL/170/2011

151 Davey L.J. speaks of them together:- If the circumstances are

such that a suspicion arises that the apparent approval by the

testator is not a real approval, that his act was not the expression of

his own free will, but of a will coerced or dominated by another, then

I take it that it is for the propounders to remove the suspicion, and

that if they fail to do so their whole case fails, even though the

suspicious circumstances do not constitute a prima facie case of

undue influence, and even though, on a review of the evidence on

both sides, it cannot be said that undue influence has been positively

established. I take this to be the meaning of Wood-Renton J. in his

observations in the case of Pieris v. Pieris (1907) 9 N.L.R., on page

23.

However, mere ipse dixit from the opposing party should not be regarded

as suspicious circumstances. Not every circumstance can be considered

suspicious; a circumstance warrants suspicion when it deviates from the

norm. The suspicion must be real, reasonable and well-founded, and not

based on conjecture, surmise and innuendo. In Tyrrell v. Painton at 159,

Davey, L.J. observed the principle is, that whatever a will is prepared

under circumstances which raise a well-grounded suspicion that it does

not express the mind of the testator, the Court ought not to pronounce in

favour of it unless that suspicion is removed. In Andrado v. Silva, Bertram

C.J. at 6 observed The only material suspicions are suspicions which

affect issues the proof of which is on the propounders. The circumstances

should indeed arouse the Courts suspicion peculiar to the case the Court

is called upon to decide.

In the ultimate analysis, in last will cases, no rigid rules can be laid down

in respect of burden of proof or appreciation of evidence. The matter rests

fairly and squarely on the facts and circumstances of each individual

case.

13

SC/APPEAL/170/2011

The decision on the will is essentially a question of fact

Whether there are in fact suspicious circumstances surrounding the will

and if so whether such suspicious circumstances have been removed to

the satisfaction of the Court is a question of fact best left to the trial

Judge. In Sithamparanathan v. Mathuranayagam (1970) 73 NLR 53 at

61, Lord Hodson stated:

The law as laid down in the older cases to which a reference has

been made was reiterated in the judgment delivered by Lord Du

Parcq in the Privy Council in Harmes and Another v. Hinkson 62

T.L.R. 445 at 446 in these words Whether or not the evidence is

such as to satisfy the conscience of the tribunal must always be, in

the end, a question of fact.

Learned Counsel for the Appellant strenuously submits that the Court of

Appeal should not have reversed the District Judges findings of fact

which he arrived at after seeing and hearing the witnesses.

As Chief Justice G.P.S. de Silva stated in Alwis v. Fernando [1993] 1 Sri

LR 119 at 122, It is well established that findings of primary facts by a

trial judge who hears and sees witnesses are not to be lightly disturbed on

appeal. This widely recognized general rule is largely predicated on the

premise that the trial Judge is at a distinctly advantageous position of

hearing and seeing witnesses giving evidence in the witness box. This

priceless opportunity, which is denied to a judge sitting in appeal,

enables the trial Judge to accurately determine which party is speaking

the truth.

Fradd v. Brown & Co. Ltd (1918) 20 NLR 282 is a case where the Privy

Council quashed the judgment of the Court of Appeal and restored the

judgment of the trial Court because the whole case depended upon the

14

SC/APPEAL/170/2011

veracity and trustworthiness of the witnesses who gave evidence at the

trial. Earl Loreburn stated at 282-283:

Accordingly, in those circumstances, immense importance attaches,

not only to the demeanour of the witnesses, but also in the course of

the trial and the general impression left on the mind of the Judge

present, who saw and noted everything that took place in regard to

what was said by one or other witness. It is rare that a decision of

a Judge so express, so explicit, upon a point of fact purely, is

overruled by a Court of Appeal, because Courts of Appeal recognize

the priceless advantage which a Judge of first instance has in

matters of that kind, as contrasted with any Judge of a Court of

Appeal, who can only learn from paper or from narrative of those

who were present. It is very rare that, in questions of veracity so

direct and so specific as these, a Court of Appeal will overrule a

Judge of first instance.

In Munasinghe v. Vidanage (1966) 69 NLR 97 on behalf of the Privy

Council, Lord Pearson quoted with approval the following part of the

speech of Viscount Simon in Watt or Thomas v. Thomas (1947) AC 484 at

486:

If there is no evidence to support a particular conclusion (and this is

really a question of law), the appellate court will not hesitate so to

decide. But if the evidence as a whole can reasonably be regarded

as justifying the conclusion arrived at the trial, and especially if that

conclusion has been arrived at on conflicting testimony by a tribunal

which saw and heard the witnesses, the appellate court will bear in

mind that it has not enjoyed this opportunity and that the view of

the trial judge as to where credibility lies is entitled to great weight.

This is not to say that the judge of first instance can be treated as

infallible in determining which side is telling the truth or is refraining

15

SC/APPEAL/170/2011

from exaggeration. Like other tribunals, he may go wrong on a

question of fact, but it is a cogent circumstance that a judge of first

instance, when estimating the value of verbal testimony, has the

advantage (which is denied to courts of appeal) of having the

witnesses before him and observing the manner in which their

evidence is given.

In Munasinghes case the Privy Council stated that the Supreme Court

should not have reversed the findings of the trial Judge who heard and

saw the witnesses giving evidence because it was a case of complicated

facts and there was a good deal to be said on each side and the findings

of the trial Judge were not unreasonable. The Privy Council restored the

judgment of the trial Court.

Chief Justice Samarakoon in Undugoda Jinawansa Thero v. Yatawara

Piyaratna Thero [1982] 1 Sri LR 273 at 281 acknowledged the importance

of this well-established principle when he stated:

The District Judge had the priceless advantage of seeing and

hearing these witnesses and of watching their demeanour. After

careful analysis and cogent reasoning he has rejected their

evidence. I can see no justification for holding that he was wrong.

Having quoted all these judgments, I must say that the accepted principle

that the findings of fact of the trial Judge should not be lightly disturbed

cannot be considered an absolute rule of law. If the findings of fact of the

trial Judge are not upon or not only upon the credibility or demeanour

and deportment of the witnesses, but upon or also upon analysis of the

evidence, and the appellate Court is fully convinced that the trial Judge

has manifestly failed to analyze the evidence in the proper perspective,

there is no impediment for the appellate Court to give effect to its own

conviction and reverse the findings of fact of the trial Judge.

16

SC/APPEAL/170/2011

It is important to understand that failure to analyze or evaluate the

evidence in the proper perspective is not necessarily a question of fact

but rather a question of law. (Collettes Ltd. v. Bank of Ceylon [1982] 2 Sri

LR 514) This includes rejecting relevant evidence, accepting irrelevant

evidence, clam and dispassionate appreciation of evidence.

After reviving a number of local and foreign authorities, in De Silva v.

Seneviratne [1981] 2 Sri LR 7 at 17, Ranasinghe J. (later C.J.) held:

On an examination of the principles laid down by the authorities

referred to above, it seems to me: that, where the trial judges

findings on questions of fact are based upon the credibility of

witnesses, on the footing of the trial judges perception of such

evidence, then such findings are entitled to great weight and the

utmost consideration, and will be reversed only if it appears to the

appellate Court that the trial judge has failed to make full use of the

priceless advantage given to him of seeing and listening to the

witnesses giving viva voce evidence, and the appellate Court is

convinced by the plainest consideration that it would be justified in

doing so: that, where the findings of fact are based upon the trial

judges evaluation of facts, the appellate Court is then in as good a

position as the trial judge to evaluate such facts, and no sanctity

attaches to such findings of fact of the trial judge: that, if on either

of these grounds, it appears to the appellate Court that such findings

of fact should be reversed, then the appellate Court ought not to

shrink from that task.

In Collettes Limited v. Bank of Ceylon [1984] 2 Sri LR 253 at 264-265

Sharvananda J. (later C.J.) held:

Thus this court undoubtedly has the jurisdiction to revise the

concurrent findings of fact reached by the lower court in appropriate

17

SC/APPEAL/170/2011

cases. However, ordinarily it will not interfere with findings of fact

based upon relevant evidence except in special circumstances, such

as, for instance, where the judgment of the lower court shows that

the relevant evidence bearing on a fact has not been considered or

irrelevant matters have been given undue importance or that the

conclusion rests mainly on erroneous considerations or is not

supported by sufficient evidence. When the judgment of the lower

court exhibits such shortcomings, this court not only may but is

under a duty to examine the supporting evidence and reverse the

findings.

Vide also Anulawathie v. Gunapala [1998] 1 Sri LR 63, De Silva v. De

Croos [2002] 2 Sri LR 409.

On the facts and circumstances of this case which I have discussed

below, I take the view that no special sanctity can be attached to the

findings of fact arrived at by the trial Judge as he has manifestly failed to

properly analyze the evidence and unnecessarily taken irrelevant matters

into consideration in the assessment of evidence. This has unfortunately

led him to come to an erroneous conclusion at the end.

Suspicious circumstances

Let me now consider the circumstances that the learned District Judge

deemed suspicious to hold that the last will is not the act and deed of the

deceased. The District Judge accepted the version of the Appellant that

the will was prepared after the death of the deceased and is therefore a

forgery.

The main ground upon which the will is attacked appears to be that it is

an irrational will in that the exclusion of the three children of the

Appellant as beneficiaries is highly suspicious. In my view, this is an

unreasonable suggestion. The Respondent is the wife (widow) of the

18

SC/APPEAL/170/2011

testator. They had no children. They had been living in harmony as

husband and wife throughout their married life. The Respondent was

unemployed. The deceased had been employed in the tourism industry

but towards the latter part he had been living a retirement life. The

testator did not have too many properties. The testator possessed a

modest estate. The sole immovable property owned by the testator

comprised the land and the house in which they resided together

throughout their married life. In addition, he had a paltry sum of Rs.

6,835 in his Bank Account and some shares in the Associated Motorways

company. Is it an irrational act to bequeath this modest property solely

to his wife with whom he found solace in life? Is this conduct inherently

improbable? This a rational and natural will rather than an irrational and

unnatural one. The argument of the Appellant that since the deceased

did not have children and he had an affection towards the three children

of his brother (who predeceased the testator), it is unlikely that he would

have excluded them (who would have become entitled to half of the

property had he died without a last will) is based on imagination, illusion

and wishful thinking.

Even if the deceased had children but bequeathed all the above properties

to his wife, the Court cannot look at it with suspicion. It should be

understood that a person takes the decision to execute a will to deviate

from the legal rules of succession. Hence, uneven distribution or denial

of any legacy to some heirs should not make otherwise genuine will an

ingenuine one. In adjudicating a last will case, it should not be the task

of the Court to see equitable and fair distribution of property among the

heirs of the deceased. The duty of the Court is to give effect to the wish

of the testator. There is no requirement in law that the rationality of the

will shall be established by the propounder of the will. However I must

add that if there are other suspicious circumstances surrounding the

will, the Court may take the irrationality of the will also into account in

19

SC/APPEAL/170/2011

deciding whether the will truly represents the act and deed of a free and

capable testator.

The learned District Judge in his judgment states that the following items

are suspicious.

The deceased was in good health when he is alleged to have executed the

last will about two months before his untimely death at the age of 59. The

Appellant states that this is highly unnatural, i.e. a healthy man

executing a last will. The vanity of this argument is demonstrable by the

fact that this healthy man died of a heart attack nearly two months after

the alleged execution of the will.

The learned District Judge states that if the last will had indeed been

executed, it would be expected for the wife to be informed immediately.

However, according to the Respondent wife, the deceased husband

informed her about it during their journey by train to attend a wedding

in Kandy. The Respondent stated in her testimony that she did not

further inquire into the matter as the deceased had already told her that

the property would be written to her. She discovered the last will in the

almirah approximately one week after the death. There is no cause for

panic or curiosity when the husband states that he executed a last will.

The wife is aware of the husbands wealth. At the risk of repetition, the

husband virtually had only the matrimonial home and the appurtenant

land. What is there to share with others?

The Respondent in her evidence tried to show that the two families, i.e

the Respondents family and the Appellants family (although lived

adjoining to each other on the same land which the two brothers

inherited from their parents) did not have a close association maybe to

convince that there was no reason to give anything to the children of the

brother. That is the laymans way of thinking. The Appellant gave

20

SC/APPEAL/170/2011

evidence to the contrary, which the District Judge believed. On that basis,

the District Judge treated the Respondent as an untrustworthy witness

and rejected her entire evidence. Rejection of her evidence in toto on that

basis is unreasonable. Even if there was a cordial relationship between

the two families and the deceased was fond of his brothers three children,

one cannot assume that he should give a portion of the matrimonial

house or a portion of his paltry savings to the brothers three children.

The Appellant further argues that the Respondent did not obtain an

opinion from the Examiner of Questioned Documents (EQD). On the

application of the Appellant a commission was issued to the EQD but the

EQD indicated that he was unable to give an opinion due to the

insufficiency of specimens for the comparison of the signatures. The

Appellant has not pursued the matter thereafter.

Taking into account all the facts and circumstances of this case I do not

think that these are circumstances seriously arouse the suspicion of the

Court as to the genuineness of the will.

Proof of a last will: statutory provisions

Wills Ordinance, No. 21 of 1844, as amended, makes provisions with

respect to testamentary dispositions of property. Section 2 thereof (after

the amendment by Act No. 29 of 2022) admits in no uncertain terms the

legal capacity of the testator to execute wills as he pleases even to the

exclusion of natural heirs without assigning any reasons whatsoever.

2(1). It shall be lawful for any person who has reached the age of

eighteen years and residing within or outside Sri Lanka to execute a

will bequeathing and disposing any movable and immovable

property and all and every estate, right, share or interest in any

property which belong to him at the time of death and which, if not

so devised, bequeathed or disposed would devolve upon his heirs of

21

SC/APPEAL/170/2011

such person not legally incapacitated from taking the same as he

shall seem fit.

(2) Every testator shall have full power to make such testamentary

disposition as he shall feel disposed, and in the exercise of such right

to exclude any child, parent, relative, or descendant, or to disinherit

or omit to mention any such person, without assigning any reason

for such exclusion, disinheritance, or omission, any law, usage, or

custom now or herefore in force in Sri Lanka to the contrary

notwithstanding.

The due execution of the will is regulated by section 4 of the Prevention

of Frauds Ordinance, No. 7 of 1840, as amended by Act No. 30 of 2022.

4(1) No will, testament, or codicil containing any devise of land or

other immovable property, or any bequest of movable property, or for

any other purpose whatsoever, shall be valid unless it shall be in

writing and executed subject to the provisions specified in

subsection (2);

(2) The testator shall -

(a) sign; and

(b) affix his left or right thumb impression,

at the foot or end of the will, testament or codicil referred to in

subsection (1), before a notary public and two witnesses who shall

be present at the same time:

Provided however, in the event the thumb impression of the testator

cannot be obtained due to any reason, he shall affix any other finger

impression or the toe impression, as the case may be.

22

SC/APPEAL/170/2011

Section 31 of the Notaries Ordinance, No. 1 of 1907, as amended, lays

down the rules to be observed by notaries but provides in section 33 that

no instrument shall be deemed to be invalid by reason only of the failure

of a notary to observe any provision of any rule set out in section 31 in

respect of any matter of form.

Section 68 of the Evidence Ordinance regulates the proof of a will. This

section reads as follows:

If a document is required by law to be attested, it shall not be used

as evidence until one attesting witness at least has been called for

the purpose of proving its execution, if there be an attesting witness

alive, and subject to the process of the court and capable of giving

evidence.

In this case, the notary and both attesting witnesses gave evidence. This

is indeed rare.

The notary had known the deceased for about 20 years. The District

Judge however rejected the evidence of the notary completely on the basis

that he failed to produce the paper on which he had noted down the

instructions given by the deceased prior to the execution of the last will.

As previously mentioned, the estate of the deceased is not characterized

by intricate complexities. The failure to produce the paper on which he

wrote down instructions cannot be fatal to reject the evidence of the

notary completely. It cannot be seriously considered a suspicious

circumstance.

In the written submissions filed on behalf of the Appellant it is stated that

the notary has not produced the monthly list. No question had been

asked from the notary on the monthly list.

23

SC/APPEAL/170/2011

The Appellant claims that it is unnatural for the notary to send a message

to the Respondent to look for the will upon hearing the death of testator.

Considering the fact that the notary and the testator knew each other for

a long time, I do not see any unnatural conduct on the part of the notary

in it.

The notary in his evidence has stated that the testator unsuccessfully

attempted to sell the house and thereafter wanted to gift the house to his

wife. However, since he had financial constraints in covering the stamp

fees for such a transaction, he opted to write a last will. The Appellant

says this is irrational. I cannot agree.

When making a declaration by Court that a will is proved, minor lapses

need not be taken very seriously. In Ranasinghe v. Somalin [2000] 2 Sri

LR 225 at 233, Udalagama J. stated:

Even the notarys admission that the attestation was in error and

the fact that she was unable to produce the relevant instruction book

would not cast a doubt on the capacity of the testator or that there

was undue influence or that the execution of P1 was fraudulent. The

most the said infirmities would point to is a lapse in the formalities

to be observed in the execution of a last will. As stated in the course

of the judgment in Coreas case (supra) court would always be

anxious to give effect to the wishes of the testator. Court could not

allow a matter of form to stand in its way, subject however to the

condition that essential elements of execution had been fulfilled.

However if there is affirmative evidence to show that there was no

due execution Court would no doubt hold against the will even

though the will was the act and deed of a free and capable testator.

Given the other circumstances of the case, contradictions regarding the

place of execution and attestation of the will were considered minor

24

SC/APPEAL/170/2011

discrepancies in Wijewardena v. Soysa [2002] 1 Sri LR 50. Vide also

Wijewardena v. Ellawala [1991] 2 Sri LR 14.

The District Judge rejected the evidence of the first attesting witness of

the will, namely Farook, on the sole basis that he could not identify the

signature of the deceased although he had stated that he knew the

deceased for about 20 years. The District Judge considers this as a

suspicious circumstance. According to the evidence of this witness,

which I read, he has never stated that he could not identify the signature

of the deceased on the will. What he has stated is that the deceased

signed the will in front of him and thereafter he signed it, and that was

the first occasion on which he saw the deceased signing a document. His

evidence was that he had been meeting the deceased during their regular

encounters, particularly at the club where they met in the evenings.

There was no opportunity for the witness to see him signing documents.

It cannot be regarded as a suspicious circumstance.

The second attesting witness is Rita. She was a clerk of the notary. Her

evidence was that she knew Farook since he used to come to the notarys

office in relation to some other Court cases. The notary is also an

Attorney-at-Law. She also says that the deceased testator also came on

some occasions to meet the notary to the office. The day on which the

last will was signed she was asked by the testator to sign the will as an

attesting witness which she agreed with the consent of the notary. This

is not an unusual practice or illegal practice. This happens in notarial

practice. The District Judge disbelieved the witness because she was a

clerk of the notary. This is unacceptable.

I accept that when there are suspicious circumstances, the mere proof of

compliance with the statutory requirements itself is not sufficient to

prove a will.

25

SC/APPEAL/170/2011

Sir John Woodroffe and Amir Alis Law of Evidence, Volume 3 (Edited by

M.L. Singhal, 15th Edition, 1991) states at page 603 that:

under ordinary circumstances, the competency of a testator will be

presumed, if nothing appears to rebut the ordinary presumption;

ordinarily, therefore, proof of execution of the will is enough. But

where the mental capacity of the testator is challenged by evidence

which shows that it is (to say the least) very doubtful whether his

state of mind was such that he could have duly executed the will, as

he is alleged to have done, the Court ought to find whether upon the

evidence the testator was of sound disposing mind and did know

and approve of the contents of the will.

This requirement is not confined to the testamentary capacity only. It is

applicable in all instances where there is suspicion surrounding the will.

However, in this case there are no suspicious circumstances to hold

against the will.

The failure to name the Appellant as a party to the main case

Let me now turn to the additional points the Appellant relies on before

this Court to say that the last will is suspicious.

The main additional ground is that the Respondent filed the application

seeking probate in the District Court without making any intestate heirs

parties to the application. The Respondent filed the action on the basis

that the Respondent is the sole heir of the deceased and that to her

knowledge no one would object to her being granted probate. This is not

a suspicious circumstance. This is not against the law either.

At the time the application was made to the District Court (i.e. on

28.03.1990) there was no express provision in the Civil Procedure Code

to make intestate heirs as parties to the application.

26

SC/APPEAL/170/2011

However, section 524(1) of the Civil Procedure Code required inter alia to

name the heirs of the deceased to the best of the petitioners knowledge

in the body of the application.

Section 525(1) at that time provided that If the petitioner has no reason

to suppose that his application will be opposed by any person, he shall file

with his petition an affidavit to that effect and may omit to name any

person in his petition as Respondent.

The said requirement in section 524(1) was taken away by the Civil

Procedure Code (Amendment) Act, No. 14 of 1993.

Section 525(1) was also repealed and reintroduced as section 524(5) by

the Civil Procedure Code (Amendment) Act, No. 14 of 1993.

Section 524(5) was repealed, and section 524(1)(bb) which requires the

petitioner to name in the body of the petition the heirs of the deceased to

the best of the petitioners knowledge was re-introduced by the Civil

Procedure Code (Amendment) Act, No. 38 of 1998.

Even as the law stands today, in the case of proving a last will, the law

does not require the petitioner to name the heirs of the deceased as

Respondents to the application.

The failure to name the heirs in the body of the application also will not

make the application bad in law per se. Compliance with all the

provisions of section 524(1)(a)-(d) is not mandatory but directory. If it is

mandatory, for instance, failure to mention one property of the deceased

or one heir of the deceased would render the entire proceedings void ab

initio. The section requires the heirs of the deceased to be stated in the

petition to the best of the petitioners knowledge. The language itself

gives the indication that it is not mandatory. If the petitioner is a stranger

to the family and has no personal knowledge of the heirs of the deceased,

27

SC/APPEAL/170/2011

for instance, he will not be able to list out the names of the heirs of the

deceased. Hence as was held in Biyanwila v. Amarasekere (1965) 67 NLR

488 and Pieris v. Wijeratne [2000] 2 Sri LR 145, the provisions of section

524(1)(a)-(d) are directory. However, willful suppression of material

particulars will not be tolerated by Court. It is in this context that

Sirimane J. in the Biyanwila case stated at 494 I am of the view that the

provisions of this section [524] are only directory, and that a failure to

strictly comply with those provisions, does not render the proceedings void

ab initio. They are, however, voidable, and in an appropriate case a party

may ask the court for relief under section 839 of the Civil Procedure Code.

Referring to the failure to name heirs as parties to the application for

probate, in the Supreme Court case of Actalina Fonseka v. Dharshani

Fonseka [1989] 2 Sri LR 95 at 99, Kulatunga J. stated However, such

failure is a relevant fact in determining whether probate had been obtained

by fraud.

These observations have no practical relevance to the instant appeal. In

the instant case, upon order nisi being published in the newspapers, the

Appellant intervened in the action and contested the Respondents case.

Conclusion

In the circumstances of this case, there is hardly anything significant to

cast any suspicion on the will. There are no legitimate doubts. The

circumstances suggested as being suspicious are all capable of natural

explanation. The due execution of the will had been proved by the

evidence of the notary who drew it and the two attesting witnesses who

signed it. The Appellant objected to the will on the sole basis that the will

is a forgery. This was never established by the Appellant when the initial

burden was discharged by the Respondent.

28

SC/APPEAL/170/2011

I answer the question of law whether the Court of Appeal erred in law and

fact in overturning the judgment of the District Court and holding that

the last will is the act and deed of the deceased testator in the negative

and dismiss the appeal with costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Murdu N.B. Fernando, P.C., J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court