P a g e 1 | 10

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Special

Leave to Appeal in terms of Article 127 read

with Article 128 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Complainant

SC Appeal No: 184/2019 SC (SPL) LA Application No: 210/2018 CA Appeal No: CA 122-123/2007 High Court: Kandy 161/1995 Vs.

Kotuwe Gedara Sriyantha Dharmasena

Accused

And Now

Kotuwe Gedara Sriyantha Dharmasena

Accused-Appellant

Vs.

P a g e 2 | 10

The Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo.

Respondent

And Now Between

Kotuwe Gedara Sriyantha Dharmasena

Accused-Appellant-Petitioner

(Presently incarcerated in Welikada Prison)

Vs. The Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department,

Colombo.

Complainant-Respondent-Respondent Before: Justice E.A.G.R. Amarasekara

Justice A.L. Shiran Gooneratne

Justice Janak De Silva

Counsel: Indica Mallawartchy for the Accused-Appellant-Petitioner.

Dilan Ratnayake, SDSG with Sajith Bandara, SC for the Complainant-Respondent-Respondent.

Argued on: 27/09/2022

Decided on: 04/11/2022

P a g e 3 | 10

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

The Accused-Appellant-Petitioner (hereinafter referred to as the Appellant) along with

two others (the 2nd and 3rd Accused) were indicted before the High Court of Kandy for

committing an offence punishable under Section 296 of the Penal Code. At the

conclusion of the trial, the learned trial judge convicted the Appellant on the said count

and was sentenced to death. Being aggrieved by the said Judgment, the Appellant

preferred an appeal to the Court of Appeal. By Judgment dated 06/06/2018, the said

appeal was dismissed and the death sentence was affirmed. The 2nd and the 3rd Accused

whose convictions were affirmed by the Court of Appeal have not canvassed their

convictions or the sentence imposed before the Supreme Court. This Court is called

upon to decide the legality of the Judgment of the Court of Appeal in relation to the

Appellant who stood as the 1st Accused before the High Court.

This Court by its order dated 03/12/2019, granted Special Leave to Appeal to the

question of law in paragraph 10(e) of the petition of appeal dated 16/07/2018, as well

as another question of law suggested by the learned Counsel for the Appellant and

permitted by this Court, set out below as;

1. Have the judges of the Court of Appeal failed to consider that, the learned trial judge

had totally failed to apply the principles governing circumstantial evidence when

evaluating the evidence against the 1st Accused.

2. Has the prosecution proved the case against the 1st Accused-Appellant beyond

reasonable doubt based on the circumstantial evidence.

According to the evidence led by the prosecution, the Deceased was 23 years of age at

the time of the incident and was a new entrant to the Peradeniya Medical Faculty. It

was revealed in evidence that on 04/01/1994, in anticipation of attending the faculty on

the following day, the Deceased had gone to sleep in the front room of his abode. In the

morning of 05/01/1994, the Deceased was not found in his room and later in the day

P a g e 4 | 10

the body was discovered in an abandoned well in the vicinity. The 1st post mortem

examination revealed that death was caused due to insecticide poisoning and possible

drowning. The body was exhumed after several days and the 2nd post mortem

examination held, revealed, that death was due to forcible introduction of an organo-

phosphate containing pesticide into the body through the mouth.

The conviction and sentence against the 2nd and 3rd Accused was primarily based on the

confessions made before the learned Magistrate of Kandy under Section 127 of the

Code of Criminal Procedure Act. The prosecution tendered in evidence the said

confessions against the Accused.

At the commencement of evaluation of evidence, the learned trial judge has arrived at

a precise conclusion that this case rests on the confessions made by the 2nd and 3rd

Accused and the circumstantial evidence available. The Court noted that inducement,

threat, or promise was not present and having regard to all the circumstances which the

evidence was obtained held, that the confessions were made voluntarily and admitted

it as evidence against the 2nd and 3rd Accused.

Evaluation of evidence against the Appellant (1st Accused) -

The prosecution case was entirely based on circumstantial evidence and accordingly

the Court must be satisfied that the chain of circumstances is complete and unbroken.

When evaluating the confessions made by the 2nd and 3rd Accused, the learned trial

judge was mindful of the statutory compass of Section 30 of the Evidence Ordinance,

as to the use of a confession against a co-accused, when he observed that the confessions

made by the 2nd and 3rd Accused cannot be used against the 1st Accused (page 399).

Same was reckoned later in the Judgment at page 402. However, it is noted that in

contrast to the said observation, the learned trial judge made use of the said confessions

as evidence against the Appellant. (Page 391-396, page 398, 400-403).

P a g e 5 | 10

The principle embodied in Section 30 of the Evidence Ordinance was indicated in a

Full Bench of the Supreme Court in Rex vs. Ukku Banda, (1923) 24 NLR 327, where

Bertram C J. stated that;

“Section 30 relates solely to confessions made before the actual trial and tendered in

evidence at the trial by the crown against the prisoner. It relates to confessions which

are “proved” in the case. The word ‘proved’ in Section 30 must refer to a confession

made beforehand.”

A clear distinction was made to the above-stated principle in King vs. Ferdinands et

al. (1944) 45 NLR 450 at p. 451, where Wijeyewardene J. observed that;

“Under our law a confession made by an accused in the witness box affecting himself

and his co-accused is not shut out by Section 30 of the Evidence Ordinance”. (Emphasis

is mine)

It is in this context that the learned Counsel for the Appellant submitted that both the

trial court and the Court of Appel fixed culpability upon the Appellant without a shred

of evidence which now stands for scrutiny before this Court. It was further submitted

that the circumstantial evidence available in this case, would raise a mere suspicion at

its best and not establish the guilt of the Appellant.

In the light of the afore-stated findings of the trial judge, I will initially deal with the

circumstantial evidence held against the Appellant and thereafter with the Appellants

evidence in defence.

The circumstantial evidence relied upon by the learned trial judge -

The learned trial judge in his deliberations did not compartmentalize the evidence led

against each Accused. The learned Judge considered the available circumstantial

evidence in totality and came to a finding that on the date prior to the incident, all three

Accused had been seen at a boutique making purchases, had spent the afternoon

consuming liquor, and therefore concluded that there exists a probability that the

P a g e 6 | 10

Appellant had spent the night prior to the incident together with the 2nd and 3rd Accused.

In order to establish the said probability, the learned trial judge read in conjuncture the

confessions made by the 2nd and 3rd Accused and the dock statements, to incriminate

liability on the Appellant.

The prosecution has relied on the Appellant’s subsequent conduct by drawing inference

to his unusual expression of grief at the funeral house of the Deceased. It is revealed

that the prosecution witness, Kodithuwakkuge Dickson who testified to such behaviour

of the Appellant is an accused in the murder trial of the Appellant’s brother, which took

place prior to this incident. In the circumstances, the learned Counsel for the Appellant

submitted that Dickson may have had an agenda to implicate the Appellant.

There is no evidence that the Appellant had entertained any animosity towards the

Deceased nor towards the deceased family. To the contrary, the family members of the

Deceased speak of the cordial relationship the Appellant had with the deceased family

and the Appellants assistance to them at the funeral house with the funeral

arrangements.

Placing the Appellant at the scene of the crime.

The Deceased was last seen alive on 04/01/1994, around 9.00 PM. The following

morning the body was discovered in an abandoned well. According to the evidence of

the mother of the Deceased, the Deceased accompanied by his family members had met

the Appellant on the road around 3.00 PM on 03/01/1994. Considering the time gap

when the Appellant parted company with the Deceased last seen alive, and the recovery

of the body of the Deceased, a strong inference could be drawn of the possibility of any

other person being responsible for the crime and that possibility was not totally

excluded. There is no other evidence to connect the Appellant from there onwards to

the place of occurrence. The learned trial judge noted that the Appellant was at the

house of the 2nd Accused in the company of the 2nd and 3rd Accused on 04/01/1994, to

incriminate liability on the Appellant.

P a g e 7 | 10

“In order to justify the inference of legal guilt from circumstantial evidence, the

existence of the inculpatory facts must be absolutely incompatible with the innocence

of the accused, and incapable of explanation upon any other reasonable hypothesis

than that of his guilt” (The Principles of Circumstantial Evidence, by William Wills -

3rd Ed. page 149 - Rule No. 4, Applicable to Circumstantial Evidence.)

In other words, all facts or circumstances proved by the prosecution must inevitably

and exclusively point to the guilt of the Accused and there should be no circumstances,

which may reasonably be considered consistent with the innocence of the Accused.

In Junaiden Mohamed Haaris, vs. Hon. Attorney General, SC Appeal 118/17 SC

(SC minutes 09/11/2018), the Supreme Court observed that;

“the prosecution relied entirely on circumstantial evidence to establish the charges, for

the reason that there were no eyewitnesses to substantiate any of the charges against

the Accused-Appellant. Thus, it was incumbent on the prosecution to establish that the

‘circumstances’ the prosecution relied on, are consistent only with the guilt of the

accused-appellant and not with any other hypothesis.”

In the afore-stated Judgment Aluwihare, PC. J., referred to “a set of principles and rules

of prudence, developed in a series of English decisions, which are now regarded as

settled law by our courts.”

The two basic principles referred to are-

(i) “The inference sought to be drawn must be consistent with all the proved facts, if it

is not, then the inference cannot be drawn.

(ii) The proved facts should be such that they exclude every reasonable inference from

them, save the one to be drawn. If they do not exclude other reasonable inferences,

then there must be a doubt whether the inference sought to be drawn is correct (per

Watermeyer J. in R vs. Blom 1939 A.D. 188)

P a g e 8 | 10

The rule regarding the exclusion of every hypothesis of innocence before drawing the

inference of guilt was laid down way back in 1838 in the case of R vs. Hodges (1838 2

Lew. cc.227). The circumstances must be such as to produce moral certainty to the

exclusion of every reasonable doubt.”

In the absence of any incriminating evidence stemming from the dock statements made

by the 2nd and 3rd Accused against the Appellant, the learned trial judge made use of the

said unsworn statements to compare, and contradict the evidence given by the Appellant

to fix culpability. The learned trial judge also made use of the unsworn statements made

by the said Accused to fill in the gaps to strengthen the prosecution case.

Even if there was evidence which implicated the Appellant, “a statement made by an

accused person from the dock implicating a co-accused is not admissible in evidence

against the latter.” [Rex vs. Ukku Banda (Supra)].

A similar decision was taken in Monis Appu vs. Heen Hamy et al. (1924) 26 NLR

303, in a situation where an unsworn statement made by a co-accused from the dock

implicating another, Bertram C. J. declared;

“If one prisoner makes a statement implicating himself, this is an admission which may

be taken into account. But if one prisoner standing in the dock makes an unsworn

statement implicating the other, this is not evidence. It has no more effect than an

ejaculation uttered by an auditor in Court.”

The 2nd and 3rd Accused opted to make dock statements. Though the Appellant testified

in Court, he was not bound to offer an explanation. In his testimony the Appellant

having denied any involvement with the death of the Deceased was consistent in his

stand when he stated that he was in the company of the 2nd and 3rd Accused at the house

of the 2nd Accused around 4.00 PM on 04/01/1994, had consumed liquor and thereafter

proceeded to his house around 6.00 PM. The trial judge did not make any

pronouncement on the strength or on the infirmities of the Appellants evidence or of

the dock statements made by the 2nd and 3rd Accused.

P a g e 9 | 10

Considering the question of evaluation of a dock statement made by an Accused, Sisira

De Abrew, J. in Priyantha Lal Ramanayake vs. Hon. Attorney General [SC Appeal

No. 31/211], (SC Minutes dated 27/01/2020), cited with approval the case of Queen

vs. Kularatne (1968) 71 NLR 529, where it was held;

1. If they believe the unsworn statement, it must be acted upon.

2. If it raises a reasonable doubt in their minds about the case for the prosecution the

defence must succeed.

In the afore-stated case, His Lordship made the following guidelines as to how the

evidence given by an Accused person should be evaluated;

1. If the evidence of the Accused is believed by court it must be acted upon.

2. If the evidence of the Accused raises a reasonable doubt in the prosecution case, the

defence of the Accused must succeed.

3. If the Court neither rejects nor accepts the evidence of the Accused, the defence

of the Accused must succeed.

(Emphasis is mine)

It is observed that the trial court or the Court of Appeal did not appear to have evaluated

the evidence of the Appellant or the dock statements made by the 2nd and 3rd Accused

with due judicial caution on credibility, admissibility, or relevancy of the evidence.

Having being mindful that making use of the confession made by the 2nd and 3rd

Accused against the Appellant is obnoxious to Section 30 of the Evidence Ordinance,

the learned trial judge has clearly made inroads to consider the facts and circumstances

of the confession, to arrive at an irresistible conclusion that the Appellant committed

the offence in question. To make use of the said item of circumstantial evidence to base

the said conviction, does not in any manner conform to the settled principles of law

applicable to the evaluation of circumstantial evidence.

P a g e 10 | 10

At the commencement of the oral submissions, the learned Deputy Solicitor General

upholding the highest traditions of the Attorney General’s Department submitted that

in the interest of justice he concedes to the issues of law raised by the learned Counsel

for the Appellant and as such contended that the conviction and sentence against the

Appellant should be set aside.

In view of the above finding, I am of the view that the conviction and sentence imposed

on the Appellant cannot be permitted to stand and accordingly, the questions of law No.

1 and No. 2 are answered in favour of the Appellant.

Therefore, the Judgment of the High Court of Kandy dated 27/08/2007 and the

Judgment of the Court of Appeal dated 06/06/2018 are set aside. The appeal of the 1st

Accused-Appellant is allowed.

Appeal allowed.

Judge of the Supreme Court

E.A.G.R. Amarasekara J. I agree

Judge of the Supreme Court

Janak De Silva J. I agree

Judge of the Supreme Court