==== BLOCKS ==== 

SC / APPEAL / 34 / 2022 1

SC / CHC / APPEAL / 19 / 2013 HC / Civil / 552 / 2009 / MR

In the matter of an appeal made in terms of

Section 5 of the High Court of the Provinces

(Amendment) Act No. 54 of 2006 and Article

154P of the Constitution of the Democratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Chintha Kumari Egodawela,

16, Mahadowa Division,

Madolsima.

PLAINTIFF

-Vs-

Kapilan Ananda Rajapakshe,

Karamatiya,

Meegahaqla.

DEFENDANT

AND THEN BETWEEN

SC / APPEAL / 34 / 2022

SC / HCCA / LA / 287 / 2020

UVA / HCCA / BDL / 43 / 2017 / F

DC Badulla: 1599 / 11 / L

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

SC / APPEAL / 34 / 2022 2

Kapilan Ananda Rajapakshe,

Karamatiya,

Meegahaqla.

DEFENDANT - APPELLANT

-Vs-

Chintha Kumari Egodawela,

16, Mahadowa Division,

Madolsima.

PLAINTIFF - RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

Chintha Kumari Egodawela,

16, Mahadowa Division,

Madolsima.

PLAINTIFF - RESPONDENT –

APPELLANT

SC / APPEAL / 34 / 2022 3

-Vs-

Kapilan Ananda Rajapakshe,

Karamatiya,

Meegahaqla.

DEFENDANT – APPELLANT –

RESPONDENT

Before: S. Thurairaja, PC, J.

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J. &

Achala Wengappuli, J.

Counsel: Jagath Wickramanayake, PC with Pujanee de Alwis for the Plaintiff –

Respondent – Appellant.

Wijaya Neranjan Perera, PC with Nilusha Dissanayake for the Defendant –

Appellant – Respondent.

Argued on: 13.11.2023

Decided on: 19.03.2026

A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J.

1. The applicability of the Roman-Dutch law principle of exceptio rei venditae et traditae

to settlement orders made under the Land Settlement Ordinance No. 20 of 1931 has

engaged the attention of this court since the enactment of the legislation and this

SC / APPEAL / 34 / 2022 4

court encounters such a legal conundrum in the case before us. I venture to hazard a

classification of the two strands of opinion that straddles this question.

2. One strand of cases which seem to outweigh or outnumber the other line of cases take

the view that the title of the vendor before the putative sale was unclear or there was

no evidence that he had title. In other words, it cannot be presumed that a vendor did

not have title. The scope and ambit of the Land Settlement Ordinance is such that it

cannot be presumed that a vendor as we find in this case that Samarakoon

Mudiyanselage Jayathileke Bandara Egodawela the original vendor in the case and

in whose favour the settlement order was published later did not have title.

3. The Roman-Dutch law doctrine of exceptio rei venditae et traditae applies only when

it could be said that the vendor did not have title at the time of transfer. But these

strands of cases take the view that the ambit of the Land Settlement Ordinance is

such that one cannot presume that the person in whose favour the land is settled

after an inquiry did not have title at the time of transfer. Consequently, these cases

hold that the doctrine of exceptio rei venditae et traditae would not apply in land

settlement cases.

4. As such, the title that is bestowed conclusively upon the publication of the settlement

order cannot be invoked by the vendee so as to clothe him with title. According to

these numerically larger cases, exceptio rei venditae et traditae cannot be used to

confer title on a vendee when his vendor is conclusively conferred with title by the

statute itself.

5. The second, and numerically smaller, line of authority adopts a contrary approach.

These decisions proceed on the footing that although the transferor may have had

only a defeasible title or none at all at the time of the conveyance, his subsequent

acquisition of an indefeasible statutory title upon the making of the settlement order

“feeds the estoppel” and enures to the benefit of the transferee. On this view, the later

SC / APPEAL / 34 / 2022 5

acquired title is deemed to relate back to the date of the original transfer and thus

perfects, in retrospect, the vendee’s title under the doctrine of exceptio rei venditae et

traditae. It is within this jurisprudential bifurcation that the present appeal must

now be located and resolved.

6. Before I deal with this question let me give a conspectus of the relevant provisions of

the Land Settlement Ordinance No. 20 of 1931.

7. The Land Settlement Ordinance No. 20 of 1931 implemented the recommendations

of the Land Commission. In Section 4, provision is made enabling the settlement

officers to deal not only with unplanted land, but also with planted land. The

ordinance has also made provision for claimants dissatisfied with decisions on their

claims to appeal to the Board established under Section 11.

8. Section 8 of the Land Settlement Ordinance deals with final orders. In Hetuhamy v

Boteju1 it was held that;

“Under Section 8 of the Land Settlement Ordinance the effect of a

settlement order under this Section is to declare the Crown or any person

to be entitled to a land or such share or interest in the land free from all

encumbrances and to the exclusion of all unspecified interests. The words

“unspecified interests” refer to unspecified interests in the title and they

do not deprive the right of a bona fide possessor of the land to

compensation for improvements.”

9. The language of the Ordinance is fully satisfied by interpreting it to mean, what

indeed is the plain and natural meaning of the words used, that the title to the lands

1 43 NLR 83. See also 46 NLR 348.

SC / APPEAL / 34 / 2022 6

is finally decided and that the land becomes vested in the persons mentioned in the

order.

10. Under Section 4 (4) of the Ordinance;

“If the Settlement Officer has reason to think that any person has a claim

to the land to which the settlement notice relates or to any share of or

interest in the land, he shall, in addition to publishing the notice as

herein before prescribed, cause a copy thereof to be served upon such

person or to be sent by post addressed to him at his last-known place of

abode”.

11. Sections 5 (2) and (3) are important to bear in mind;

(2) If in pursuance of the settlement notice a claim is made to any land

specified therein or to any share of or interest in any such land, either

within the aforesaid period of three months or, in any case in which

within the said period of three months it is brought to the knowledge of

the Settlement Officer that some person who is absent from Sri Lanka

has a claim to any such land or to any such share or interest, within the

further period prescribed by the proviso to subsection (1), the Settlement

Officer shall proceed to hold an inquiry into such claim and for that

purpose may with such assistants as may be required enter upon any

land to which the claim relates and make such inspection as may be

necessary.

(3) For the purpose of the inquiry the Settlement Officer shall call upon

every claimant, by summons in writing served upon him either

personally or by being left at his last-known place of abode, to appear

before the Settlement Officer upon a day and at a time and place within

the administrative district in which the land is situated to be specified in

SC / APPEAL / 34 / 2022 7

such summons and to produce the evidence upon which such claimant

relies in proof of his claim; and if after due service of the summons such

claimant, upon the day and at the place and time specified as aforesaid

or upon any subsequent day to which the inquiry or any proceeding under

subsection (4) has been adjourned and at the place and time to which

such inquiry or proceeding has been so adjourned or upon the day and at

the place and time specified in any further summons duly served upon

him as provided by this subsection, does not appear or does not produce

such evidence, or if he withdraws his claim, then in any of such cases his

claim shall be deemed to be null and void and the Settlement Officer may

thereupon deal with the land to which the claim relates as though no

such claim had been made:

12. The aforesaid sections and the allied provisions in the Act thus mandate claims to be

made and entitlement to the land could be made to the settlement officer such as

when a claimant has succeeded to the land through inheritance. All these rights of

entitlement could be brought forward before the settlement officer as the provisions

clearly provide for it. If the claimant is successful in finally establishing his

entitlement, Section 8 of the Ordinance comes into operation.

Section 8;

Subject to the provisions of section 5 (6), every settlement order shall be

published in the Gazette, and every settlement order so published shall

be judicially noticed and shall be conclusive proof, so far as the State or

any person is thereby declared to be entitled to any land or to any share

of or interest in any land, that the State or such person is entitled to such

land or to such share of or interest in the land free of all encumbrances

whatsoever other than those specified in such order and that subject to

the encumbrances specified in such order such land or share or interest

SC / APPEAL / 34 / 2022 8

vests absolutely in the State or in such person to the exclusion of all

unspecified interests of whatsoever nature and, so far as it is thereby

declared that any land is not claimed by the State or that some person

unascertained is entitled to a particular share of or interest in any land,

that the State has no title to such land or that some person unascertained

is entitled to such share of the land or that such interest in the land exists

and that some person unascertained is entitled thereto, as the case may

be:

Provided that nothing in this section contained shall affect the right of

any person prejudiced by fraud or the willful suppression of facts of any

claimant under the notice from proceeding against such claimant either

for the recovery of damages or for the recovery of the land awarded to

such claimant by the order.

13. In terms of the aforesaid provision once the settlement order is published the

settlement order shall be conclusive proof of the title of the claimant who is declared

to be having the title free from all encumbrances. The use of the word “conclusive

proof” establishes that no evidence could be brought to rebut the title that has already

been vested in the claimant. In this instant case it is one Samarakoon Mudiyanselage

Bandara Egodawela – the Plaintiff’s grandfather, who was bestowed with a

settlement order published in his favour in Gazette Notification No.495/12 dated 1

March 1988.

14. Applying the aforesaid provisions, I make the assertion that it is as lucid and lucent

that the said grandfather of the Plaintiff was bestowed with the conclusive title to

the land in 1988. It simply shows that he had satisfied the settlement officer that he

had his lawful entitlement to the land. If the Plaintiff’s grandfather did not have

lawful entitlement to the land, the land would have been settled in favour of the

Crown in the first instance. His title which he already had was proved before the

settlement officer was confirmed by the settlement order. In these types of inquiries

SC / APPEAL / 34 / 2022 9

only when a claimant satisfies the settlement officer as to his title, it gets crystallized

in a settlement order. This is the import and purpose of the Land Settlement

Ordinance. There was thus a mode of acquisition of this land that the grandfather of

the Plaintiff had established before the settlement officer. It may have been

inheritance or any other recognized mode of acquisition of land. Before the settlement

officer there was no other rival claimant and it was only the Plaintiff’s grandfather

who successfully established his title. In such a situation the question arises whether

one could apply exceptio rei venditae et traditae. I bear in mind that the doctrine

applies only when the claimant before the settlement officer did not have title. It is

for this reason I observed at the outset that in land settlement inquiries, it cannot be

presumed that the claimant did not have title. If the claimant-the Plaintiff’s

grandfather did not prove his title, the settlement officer could not have clothed him

with title by way of a settlement order.

15. It is on that basis the following case becomes apposite. In the case of Periacaruppen

Chettiar v. Messrs. Proprietors & Agents Limited2, the claimant sold to the

defendant a land the title to which he expected to obtain subsequently by virtue of a

settlement order under the Waste Lands Ordinance. By an order under Section 8 of

the Land Settlement Ordinance the claimant was declared entitled to the property.

The plaintiff became the successor in title to the claimant by bona fide purchase for

value. The defendant's deed was not registered whereas the Settlement Order and

the deeds of the plaintiff were duly registered. It was held that the plea of exceptio rei

venditae et traditae was not available to the first defendant as against the plaintiff

and the Settlement Order did not inure to the benefit of the Defendants. But that the

defendants are entitled to jus retentionis until compensation was paid for the

improvements made by them during the time when they had good title to, and were

owners of the land.

2 (1946) 47 NLR 121. See also Karunadasa v. Abdul Hamid 60 NLR 352

SC / APPEAL / 34 / 2022 10

16. The issue in this case is whether long before the conclusive title was bestowed in

1988, in the year 1964 the Plaintiff’s grandfather had transferred a land called

“Ruppeyaya” to the Defendant’s predecessors. It is argued that the conclusive title

that accrued in 1988 must now relate back to the transfer in 1964. In other words, it

is contended on behalf of the Defendant that the conclusive title would feed into the

absence of title in 1964 and supply the deficiency thus clothing the Defendant with

title.

17. The learned District Judge held against the Defendant by his judgement dated 30

March 2017 and the reasoning of the learned District Judge was on the basis that the

deed of transfer in favour of the Defendant’s predecessor in 1964 was in respect of the

land called “Ruppeyaya” and not the subject matter of the action which was according

to the learned District Judge “Karamatiyahena”. But the learned Judges of the Civil

Appellate High Court took the view that the transfer in 1964 and the settlement order

in 1988 related to the same subject matter and on the question of the applicability of

exceptio rei venditae et traditae, the learned Civil Appellate High Court Judges held

that the doctrine applied because the vendor - the grandfather of the Plaintiff did not

have title in 1964 and the accrual of title in 1988 would feed the estoppel and clothe

the Defendant’s predecessor with title and consequently, the property would devolve

on the Defendant.

18. As I said before, only when it can be said without any iota of doubt that the Plaintiff’s

grandfather did not have title, the Roman-Dutch law principle would apply. From the

facts I have recited, the Plaintiff’s grandfather went before the settlement officer and

successfully established his title to the property. In other words, I once again make

clear that it cannot be presumed that he did not have a title. If he did not have title,

the settlement officer would not have cleared him for an official bestowal of title.

Therefore, it cannot be argued that the doctrine would apply in favour of the

Defendant’s predecessors.

SC / APPEAL / 34 / 2022 11

19. I have to point out that if the Defendant’s predecessors had indeed acquired a title to

the land, they could have easily made a claim before the land settlement officer. If

there was a lawful claim that was available to the Defendant’s predecessors, it could

have been brought to the notice of the settlement officer. If indeed there was fraud on

the part of the Plaintiff’s grandfather in the sale transaction, there is provision in the

Land Settlement Ordinance to make claims for compensation. Neither the Defendant

nor his predecessors has resorted to this course of action. In other words, there was a

grievous omission on the part of the Defendant’s predecessors to make use of this

statutory remedy. That inaction would estop them from disproving the conclusive

title that had accrued to the Plaintiff’s grandfather and subsequently to his heirs.

20. I thus hold exceptio rei venditae et traditae would not apply to the case of the

Defendant and as such, the conclusive proof that was invested in the title of the

Plaintiff’s grandfather would now inure to the benefit of the Plaintiff.

21. In the circumstances, I proceed to set aside the judgement of the learned Judges of

the Civil Appellate Court 28 August 2020 and affirm the judgement of the learned

District Judge of Badulla dated 30 March 2017.

22. Leave had been granted in this case on questions of law in namely,

1. Have the learned judges of the Civil Appellate High Court misconceived

themselves in law in applying the concept of “exceptio rei vindiate er

traditae” to this instant case, disregarding the statutory provisions set

out in the Land Settlement Ordinance?

2. Have the learned judges of the Civil Appellate High Court misconceived

in law in applying a certain portion of the case of “Mudalihamy v.

SC / APPEAL / 34 / 2022 12

Dingiri Menika3, to interpret the concept of “Exceptio Rei Vindiate Er

Traditae” and erred in their failure to assess the said judgment fully in

concluding the judgement of this case?

23. Both questions of law are answered in the affirmative. As regards the case of

Mudalihamy v. Dingiri Menika (supra), it is to the effect that a partition decree

which usually frees the final decree from encumbrances could not be relied upon by a

person who is estopped by that decree to support and confirm the very title which it

bars. The import of this case has certainly been misunderstood by the learned Civil

Appellate judges.

24. Accordingly, I allow the appeal of the Plaintiff – Respondent – Appellant.

Judge of the Supreme Court

S. Thurairaja, PC, J.

1. I have had the privilege of reading through the draft opinions of my learned brothers.

With the greatest respect, I am unable to agree with the conclusion reached by my

learned brother Nawaz J that this appeal should be allowed. Upon a careful

consideration of the evidence placed before Court and the legal principles governing

the matter, I am inclined instead to agree with the reasoning and conclusion reached

by my learned Brother Wengappuli J that the appeal ought to be dismissed.

3 28 NLR 412

SC / APPEAL / 34 / 2022 13

2. The central legal difficulty in this appeal arises from the interaction between the

Roman-Dutch law principles governing transfers of immovable property and the

statutory finality attached to settlement orders issued under the Land Settlement

Ordinance. My brother Nawaz J proceeds on the basis that, because Section 8 of the

Ordinance declares that the publication of a settlement order in the Gazette shall

constitute conclusive proof that the person named therein is entitled to the land free

of all encumbrances, it would be impermissible to presume that the vendor lacked

title at the time of the earlier transfer. To do so, it is said, would contradict the

statutory declaration of title effected by the settlement order.

3. My brother Wengappuli J, however, adopts a different approach. While recognising

the conclusiveness of the statutory title created by the settlement order, His Lordship

takes the view that, where a person who later becomes clothed with such statutory

title had previously executed a conveyance of the same land for valuable

consideration, the earlier defect in title cannot in equity be used to defeat the rights

of the earlier transferee. In such circumstances, the later-acquired title enures to the

benefit of the purchaser to whom the vendor had already purported to convey the

property.

4. In my view, the aforesaid approach is more consistent both with the equitable

principles embedded within our Roman-Dutch legal tradition and with the practical

realities disclosed by the evidence in this case.

5. The doctrine of exceptio rei venditae et traditae, rooted in Roman-Dutch law, operates

to protect a purchaser who has paid the price and received possession of the property

from attempts by the vendor, or those claiming through him, to assert a title

inconsistent with the earlier transfer. The principle reflects the broader equitable

maxim that a person should not be permitted to approbate and reprobate in respect

of the same transaction. Where a vendor has represented that he transfers land and

has delivered possession in pursuance of that representation, neither he nor those

SC / APPEAL / 34 / 2022 14

claiming under him can later rely upon technical defects in his original title in order

to defeat the purchaser’s interest.

6. Where the vendor subsequently cures the defect in his title, whether through

inheritance, prescription, or statutory vesting, the law has long recognised that such

antecedent defect in title, which has later been perfecred, cannot be invoked to defeat

the purchaser to whom the vendor had earlier conveyed the land. Rather, the

perfected title enures to the benefit of the earlier transferee. Authorities such as

Rajapakse v. Fernando [1920]4 illustrate the manner in which courts have

recognised the equitable consequences that flow from such transactions.

7. Viewed in that light, the factual circumstances of the present case assume

considerable significance. The vendor executed the Deed of Transfer in 1964, thereby

purporting to convey the property in dispute to the Defendant. It is common ground

that the relevant Settlement Order was not gazetted until 1988. At the time of the

transfer, therefore, the vendor’s legal title may well have been imperfect or

incomplete. Yet the evidence indicates that the Defendant entered into possession

pursuant to that deed and continued in possession for a considerable period

thereafter.

8. In fact, the Defendant placed before Court documentary evidence demonstrating

possession dating back to 1964, including acreage tax receipts issued from 1975

onwards. In contrast, the Plaintiff was unable to produce documentary evidence

establishing possession by her predecessors in title after the execution of the 1964

deed. These factual circumstances lend substantial support to the conclusion that the

transfer effected in 1964 was not merely a paper transaction but one that was

followed by actual possession and enjoyment of the land by the Defendant.

4 21 N.L.R. 495

SC / APPEAL / 34 / 2022 15

9. It is true that Section 8 of the Land Settlement Ordinance provides that the

publication of a settlement order shall constitute conclusive proof that the person

named therein is entitled to the land described in the order. However, the

conclusiveness of the statutory title created by the settlement order does not, in my

view, operate in a vacuum. The provision determines the person in whom title is

deemed to vest as against the world at large; it does not necessarily extinguish

equitable obligations arising from prior voluntary transactions entered into by that

person.

10. To hold otherwise would produce consequences that are difficult to reconcile with

both equity and common sense. If a vendor who has conveyed land for valuable

consideration could subsequently rely upon a statutory declaration of title to reclaim

that same land from the purchaser, the Land Settlement Ordinance would become an

instrument through which prior conveyances could be retrospectively defeated. Such

an interpretation would permit the heirs of the vendor to rely upon the settlement

process to defeat obligations voluntarily undertaken by their predecessor in title. It

would allow the statutory scheme to facilitate an inequitable reclamation of land

rather than to confirm and regularize existing proprietary relationships.

11. In my view, the more principled approach is that the settlement order, when

gazetted, perfected the title of the person in whose favour it was made; but where

that person had already conveyed the land for valuable consideration and placed the

purchaser in possession, the fact that the title was perfected only subsequently

cannot in equity be used to defeat that prior transfer. Rather, the statutory title must

be regarded as feeding and perfecting the earlier conveyance.

12. This approach finds support in decisions such as Mudalihamy v. Dingiri Menika

[1927],5 which recognise that the subsequent perfection of title cannot be invoked to

undermine a prior conveyance executed by the same party. The gazetting of the

5 28 N.L.R. 412

SC / APPEAL / 34 / 2022 16

settlement order in 1988 therefore operated to cure the earlier defect in the vendor’s

title and to clothe the Defendant, who had been in possession pursuant to the 1964

deed, with a title capable of being recognised and enforced in law.

13. For these reasons, I am unable to agree with the view that the Plaintiff is entitled to

rely upon the settlement order in order to defeat the Defendant’s long-standing

possession and the rights arising from the earlier deed of transfer. In my respectful

view, the learned trial judge was correct in preferring the Defendant’s claim.

14. Accordingly, I would dismiss this appeal.

Appeal Dismissed.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Achala Wengappuli, J.

I have had the privilege of reading in draft the judgment of my brother, His Lordship Justice

Nawaz. With due respect to his Lordship’s views expressed therein, I regret my inability to

concur with same as I have taken the view in relation to the applicability of the maxim

Exceptio Rei Vinditae Et Traditae, in line with, which his Lordship has aptly described as

“… numerically smaller line of authority” that adopted a contrary approach to the one taken

in numerically larger instances. Hence, I state my reasons in separate judgment.

This appeal arises out of a Rei Vindicatio action instituted by the Plaintiff in the District

Court of Badulla. The Plaintiff sought a declaration of her title to the land described in the

schedule to the Plaint and also for the eviction of the Defendant therefrom. The case

presented by the Plaintiff before the trial Court was to the effect that the title to the land in

dispute was settled in favour of her grandfather Samarakoon Mudiyanselage Jayatillake

SC / APPEAL / 34 / 2022 17

Bandara Egodawela by a Settlement Order published in the Extraordinary Gazette No.

495/12 of 01.03.1988 [P1]. Upon the demise of the said S.M.J.B Egodawela, it was the

Plaintiff’s father, Dayaratne Bandara Egodwela, who inherited title to the land. The siblings

of Dayaratne Bandara Egodwela have formally renounced their rights of inheritance over

the land. With the execution of the Deed of Gift No. 355 on 22.10.2008 by her father, the

Plaintiff became the sole owner of the land in dispute. The Plaintiff also claimed that on

28.02.2009, she visited the land for the purpose of preparing a plan, but was obstructed by

the Defendant.

The Defendant’s case is that the Plaintiff’s grandfather S.M.J.B Egodawela executed the

Deed of Transfer No. 9244, on 27.08.1964 [V7] by which he had transferred all his right,

title and interest over the land in dispute in favour of one Konara Mudiyanselage

Punchibandara, for valuable consideration. It is from the said Punchibandara that the

predecessors in title to the Defendant’s land derived their rights. The Defendant, whilst

claiming that they were in possession of the land in dispute since 1964, sought the dismissal

of the Plaint.

The District Court, by its judgment held in favour of the Plaintiff. The original Court simply

acted on the Settlement Order and accepted the devolution of title pleaded by the Plaintiff.

The Defendant preferred an appeal to the Provincial High Court of Civil Appeal to set aside

the said judgment. The appellate Court, by its judgment dated 28.08.2020 held that the

Defendant “can have the benefit of the legal concept Exceptio Rei Vinditae et Traditae”

against the Plaintiff and allowed the appeal. The Court also proceeded to dismiss the Plaint.

The Plaintiff sought leave from this Court to appeal against the said judgement.

This Court proceeded to hear the instant appeal on the following two questions of law;

a. Have the learned Judges of the Civil Appellate High Court misconceived

themselves in law in applying the concept of Exceptio Rei Vinditae Et

Traditae to this instant case, disregarding the statutory provisions set out

in the Land Settlement Ordinance?

SC / APPEAL / 34 / 2022 18

b. Have the learned Judges of the Civil Appellate High Court misconceived in

law, in applying a certain portion of the case of Mudalihamy v Dingiri

Menika (1927) 28 NLR 412 to interpret the concept of Exceptio Rei Vinditae

Et Traditae and erred in their failure to assess the said judgment fully in

concluding the judgment of this case?

The evidence indicated that S.M.J.B Egodawela made a claim before the Settlement Officer

on 01.08.1960 after the Government published in the Gazette No. 12149 of 24.06.1960 (p.

306 of appeal brief) calling for such claims. The Settlement Notice in respect of Lot No. 36

(285) of B.S.V. Plan No. 604 was issued to him on 18.05.1961 after payment of Rs. 67.50 to

the Government. The said S.M.J.B Egodawela thereupon executed the Deed of Transfer No.

9244 on 27.08.1964, in favour of Konara Mudiyanselage Punchibandara.

The schedule to the said deed reads as follows;

“ඉහත & උප ෙ*ඛනය

./01 කාර මට 7891 පණත යටෙ; ඉඩ1 =ර>* ?@ෙ1A රජය මCD =ර>* කරA

Eෙබන, ඌව පලාෙ; බK*ල Aස්NOකෙP .යQව ඔයපලාත ෙකSරෙළ් බලෙගා*ෙ*ගම Eෙබන,

V.X. අංක 604 දරණ _ලැනෙP ෙකාටස් අංක 285 දරන,

d_ෙපයාය ?යන ඉඩෙ1 ෙකාටස අOකර eන/; fg ෙදකO (අ.3 d.2 පා.0)

.ශාල;වයට මාl1, උeරට අංක 284 දරණ ෙකාටසද, නැෙගනmරට පාරට ෙවDකළ 91nරය සහ

අංක 288 දරන ෙකාටසද ද/ණට අංක 286 දරණ ෙකාටසද බස්නාmරට කKෙo @සෙpසමද යන

ෙමm eළ ඉඩම සහ ඊට අlE ගසෙකාල පලed ආA sයQ ෙtද,

2 එ& vලෙගා*ෙ*ගම Eෙබන, .. w. 604 දරණ _ලැනෙP ෙකාටස් අංක 294 දරන

ෙකාyටගස් යාය ?යන ඉඩෙ1 ෙකාටස අOකර දහයO පමණ .ශාල;වයට මාl1, උeරට පාරට

ෙවDකළ 91nරයද නැෙගනmරට w.9. එෙගාඩෙවලට අlE අංක 295ද ද/ණට රජය සe ඉඩමද

බස්නාmරට අංක 293 දරණ ෙකාටස්ද යන ෙමm eළ ඉඩම සහ ඊට අlE ගසෙකාල පලed ආA

sයQ ෙtද,යන ෙමm ෙtපලය.”

The parties have admitted the identity of the corpus at the commencement of the trial.

During cross-examination, the Plaintiff had no answer to offer when it was suggested to her

SC / APPEAL / 34 / 2022 19

that she was unable to produce any documentary evidence to establish that any of her

predecessors in title had the possession of the corpus after 1964, when Deed No. 9244 was

executed. The evidence indicates that, except for the unlikely claim of picking mango fruits

occasionally, the Plaintiff or her predecessors in title had not possessed the land any time

after 1964. On the other hand, the Defendant produced receipt for acreage taxes paid in

1975 for a land in extent of 3 Acres and 2 Roods. The Commission Plan No. 186 (X3 in appeal

brief) indicates that the extent of the corpus is 3 Acres 2 Roods and 3 Perches, inclusive of

Lot No. 1, held by a third party, giving some credence to the Defendant’s claim. When the

Court Commissioner surveyed the corpus, he found that the Defendant had leased out Lot

No. 3 of Plan No. 186 to a Government Agency, which involved with a road development

project it has undertaken in the same area.

The Provincial High Court of Civil Appeal, in arriving at the conclusion that the Plaint

should be dismissed, had relied on the underlying rationale of the maxim Exceptio Rei

Vinditae Et Traditae as stated in the judgment of Mudalihamy v Dingiri Menika (supra)

by Garvin J. The relevant part of the judgment of Garvin J. was reproduced by that Court

in its judgment. This quotation included the section where his Lordship stated “[U]nder the

Roman-Dutch law a purchaser who has got possession from the vendor who at the time of the

sale had no title or a defective title could rely upon a title subsequently acquired by his vendor

and resist any attempt on the part of the vendor or any person claiming under the vendor to

eject him; …” The Provincial High Court of Civil Appeal was of the view that “ … by the

time V7 was executed, the title of the vendor was defective for the reason that settlement order

had not been gazetted. When it was gazetted, the defect was cured and the absolute title of

the land could be considered to have passed over to the vendee in view of the maxim Exceptio

Rei Vinditae Et Traditae”. Then the appellate Court ruled out that after execution of V7

and the settlement order, no rights over the land remained with S.M.J.B Egodawela to pass

on to his son

It is clear from the above, the appellate Court merely applied the principle of law

encapsulated in the maxim Exceptio Rei Vinditae et Traditae as stated by Garvin J. This

SC / APPEAL / 34 / 2022 20

principle was already acted upon by the Privy Council in Rajapakse v Fernando (1920)

21 NLR 495, where a grantor has purported to grant an interest in land, which he did not

at the time possess, but subsequently acquires, the benefit of his subsequent acquisition

goes automatically to the benefit of the earlier grantee.

Having considered the submissions of the parties, I am of the view that the two questions

of law on which the instant appeal was argued on should be answered in the negative.

I therefore affirm the judgment of the Provincial High Court of Civil Appeal and proceed to

dismiss the appeal of the Plaintiff. I make no order as to costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court