IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for

Leaveto Appeal under and in

termsofArticle128(2)ofthe

ConstitutionoftheDemocratic

Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

read with Section 9 of the High

CourtofProvinces(Special

Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990.

In the matter of an Application

under and in terms of Section

10(1)oftheAgrarian

Development Act No. 46 of 2000

as amended.

Gunawardane Liyanage Sirisena,

Dannangodawila, Thelikada,

Ginimellagaha.

Complainant

-Vs-

K. G. Piyadasa (deceased),

Medakeembiya, Podala.

Respondent

AND

1

In the matter of an Appeal under

and in terms of Section 42 of the

Agrarian Development Act No. 46

of 2000 (as amended).

Gunawardane Liyanage Sirisena,

Dannangodawila, Thelikada,

Ginimellagaha.

Complainant-Appellant

-Vs-

NaamullaArachchige

Premawathie,

Medakeembiya, Podala.

Substituted

Respondent-Respondent

AND

In the matter of an Appeal under

and in terms of Section 42B of

Section5coftheAgrarian

Development Act No. 46 of 2000

(as amended) read with the High

CourtofProvinces(Special

Provisions) Act No. 54 of 2006.

NaamullaArachchige

Premawathie,

Medakeembiya, Podala.

Substituted

Respondent-Respondent-

Appellant

2

-Vs-

Gunawardane Liyanage Sirisena,

Dannangodawila, Thelikada,

Ginimellagaha.

Complainant-Appellant-

Respondent

AND NOW BY AND BETWEEN

NaamullaArachchige

Premawathie,

Medakeembiya, Podala.

Substituted

Respondent-Respondent-

Appellant-Appellant

-Vs-

Gunawardane Liyanage Sirisena,

Dannangodawila, Thelikada,

Ginimellagaha.

Complainant-Appellant-

Respondent-Respondent

BEFORE:E. A. G. R. AMARASEKARA, J.

K. KUMUDINI WICKREMASINGHE, J.

JANAK DE SILVA, J.

COUNSEL:S. N. Ihalakathrige for the Substituted

Respondent-Respondent-Appellant-Appellant

3

Nuwan Bopage with P. R. S. Pinnaduwa for the

Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent-Respondent

ARGUED ON:06.12.2021

DECIDED ON:18.07.2023

K.KUMUDINI WICKREMASINGHE J.

This is an appeal from a judgment of the Provincial High Court holden in

Galle dated 31.01.2019 affirming the decision of the Agrarian Board of

Review dated 06.10.2016 pertaining to the recovery of rent due from an

alleged tenant (ande) cultivator.

I will briefly set out the factual background of the case as follows:

The Complainant- Appellant- Respondent- Respondent (hereinafter referred

to as the Respondent) instituted action before the Agrarian Tribunal

holdeninGalleagainstoneK.G.Piyadasa,thepredecessor of the

SubstitutedRespondent-Respondent-Appellant-Appellant(hereinafter

referred to as the Appellant). The Respondent instituted two complaints in

2002 and 2003 under and by virtue of Section 10 (1) of the Agrarian

Development Act, No. 46 of 2000 as amended by Act No. 46 of 2011,

contending that he is the owner of the paddy land in question, of which the

aforesaid K. G. Piyadasa, the husband of the Appellant, is the tenant

cultivator who has failed to pay rent due to him. The said K. G. Piyadasa

rejected the Respondents contention of being the owner of the aforesaid

land, and argued that the land was possessed and cultivated by his

predecessors over a long period, and as such, that he is not a tenant

cultivator of the land and therefore is not bound by law to pay rent to the

Respondent.

4

This matter was initially called up to be heard before the Office of the

Deputy Commissioner of Agrarian Development of Galle. Following the

establishment of the Agrarian Tribunal both complaints of the Respondent

which were of a similar nature were taken up for inquiry before the Tribunal

as one matter.

Afterwards, an inquiry was held and the Agrarian Tribunal pronounced its

decision dated 20.01.2016 dismissing the Respondents complaint holding

that the Respondent had failed to establish the fact that the said K. G.

Piyadasa was a tenant cultivator of the land. Being aggrieved by the decision

of the Tribunal, the Respondent preferred an appeal on 29.01.2016 to the

Agrarian Board of Review. When the matter was in progress before the

Board of Review, K. G. Piyadasa passed away, after which his wife, the

Appellant, was substituted for him in the action.

The Board of Review pronounced its decision on 06.10.2016 allowing the

Respondents appeal and setting aside the Agrarian Tribunal decision. The

aggrieved Appellant preferred an appeal against said decision to the High

Court of the Southern Province holden in Galle praying to set aside the

decision of the Board of Review. After both parties filed their written

submissions, the Learned High Court Judge pronounced the judgment

dated31.01.2019affirmingtheBoardsdecisionanddismissingthe

Appellants appeal without costs.

The Appellant now appeals to the Supreme Court seeking to set aside the

judgment of the High Court.

This Court on 02/07/2019, has granted leave only on the following question

of law referred to in the paragraph 28(1) (i) of the Petition, namely;

1) WhetherthelearnedHighCourtjudgeinhisjudgmentdated

31.01.2019 failed to consider that the Respondent failed in proving in

the inquiry before the Agrarian Tribunal that the K.G Piyadasa was

the Tennent Cultivator of the paddy land in dispute

5

This being a civil dispute there is a grave error and a misdirection in the

decision of the Agrarian Tribunal, as the tribunal in its order at several

places had considered that the dispute before it was one that had to be

proved beyond reasonable doubt- vide pages 3 and 4 of the said decision.

The learned High Court Judge has correctly identified this error and

misdirection of the original order and has stated as follows;

Having perused the record, it is found that the Agrarian Tribunal misdirected

itself by seeking the standards of proof of the matter as of a criminal case i.e.

beyond reasonable doubt. Where in an inquiry before an Agrarian Tribunal,

matter before it need not be established by proof beyond reasonable doubt.

Even where in an inquiry before a Labour Tribunal when it was alleged the

reason for termination of employment was that the workman was guilty of

criminal act involving moral turpitude, the allegation need not be established

by proof beyond reasonable doubt. (Associated Battery Manufacturers Ceylon

Ltd. Vs United Engineering Workers Union && N L R 451)

It gives a strong inference that the matters to be decided in an inquiry need

not be proved beyond reasonable doubt. Agrarian Disputes are civil in nature

and the complainant must establish the respondents liability only according

to the preponderance of evidence.

After finding the said misdirection relating to the standard of proof, the

learned High Court judge has confirmed the finding of the Agrarian Board of

Review as the learned Judge was of the view that the Appellant had never

denied during the inquiry that he was an Ande Cultivator and Respondents

stand point on the Appellant had remained unchallenged.

To sustain the judgment of the learned High Court judge and to answer the

aforementioned question of law, it is not sufficient to find a misdirection or

error in relation to the standard of proof by the Agrarian Tribunal but it is

necessary to see whether there were sufficient materials before the Agrarian

Tribunal for the proof of the stance of the Respondent that the Appellant

was the Tenant Cultivator of the paddy field in dispute. The Question of law

6

allowed by this court when granting leave does not contemplate the validity

of the paper title of the Respondent to the paddy land in dispute.

However, it is the contention of the Respondent that the Respondent holds

good title to the land in question, named as Walapalle Liyadda, situated in

Thelikada, Galle. The Respondent had produced Deed of Transfer bearing

No. 258 dated 19.01.1980, attested by P. D. G. Wimalarathne Notary Public,

in support of his position that he had purchased the aforesaid property. He

has produced the original of this deed which was more than 30 years old at

the time of producing in evidence along with a photocopy for the perusal of

the Tribunal. As per the order of the Tribunal even the extract of the folios of

the land registry have been produced as P9. As per the said deed and the

land registry folios the name of the paddy land is mentioned as Walapalle

Liyadde and the extent is described as fifteen vee kurinis. Agricultural land

register marked as P2 also confirm the existence of a paddy land named

Wallapalle Liyadde of which the Respondent is the registered land owner.

Through the deed marked P1 the Respondent has bought 1/10th and 9/10th

(whole land) from 2 people. No evidence was placed before the Agrarian

tribunal by the Appellant at least to say that the land in the deed and P2 is

not the land Piyadasa and the Appellant enjoyed. It must be noted that the

entries in the agricultural land register can be treated as prima facie proof of

the facts stated therein- vide section 53(6) of the Agrarian Development Act

No 46 of 2000. When P1 and P2 were marked, they were not challenged to

indicate that the Respondent should further summon other witnesses to

prove the authenticity of those documents. Even though, in P2 extent is

described as 3 roods 30 perches, the boundaries described there in P2 tally

with the boundaries found in the deed. It is true that there is no reference in

P2 as to the time the said entries were made but the register is maintained

by the officers of the relevant department, the respondent cannot be

penalized for their lapses. P2 contains prima facie proof as to the paddy land

and its owner even though it does not contain materials for the prima facie

proof of that the Appellants predecessor was the tenant cultivator.

7

The Respondent further has stated in evidence that K. G. Piyadasa, was his

tenant cultivator, who had duly given the Respondent his share of the

cultivation until the year 2001. In the aftermath of the failure of K. G.

Piyadasa to pay the share due to him since the Maha cultivation season

() of 2001, the Respondent instituted action before the Agrarian

Tribunal.

The Respondent has further tendered a document marked P4, extract of the

diary of the agrarian officer, Sugathadasa Ralahamy, to indicate that the

rent was received for the years 1985 and 1986 from the Tenant cultivator

Martin who was the father of said K G Piyadasa. This document also was not

objected when it was produced. The diary of the former Agrarian officer

would have been kept in the official custody of the Grama Niladari who

certified photocopies of those entries and issued it to the Respondent. It is

true some questions have been asked during cross examination to create

some doubt or suspicion over these documents. This was not a criminal

case to decide against the Respondent who was the complainant before the

Agrarian Tribunal on certain doubts created through cross examination. As

explained above this is where the Agrarian Tribunal misdirected itself and

erredindeciding.TheRespondent,asmentionedbefore, has placed

sufficient material to show by prima facie evidence that he is the owner of

the paddy land in dispute and along with the aforesaid documents has given

oral evidence to say that that aforesaid Piyadasa was his tenant cultivator. It

is common ground that the Appellant enjoys Property. If the Respondent is

prima facie the owner and if there is nothing placed in evidence before the

Tribunalagainstthat,theAppellantandhispredecessorsmustbe

trespassers, if not they must be licensees or Tenant Cultivators etc. under

the Respondent. Respondent by marking certain documents, though some

doubts were created through cross examination, and by giving oral evidence

has taken up the position that Piyadasa and his predecessors were tenant

cultivators.

8

The Respondent has also submitted extensive accounts of complaints made

to officials attached to the Department of Agrarian Development on the

grounds of irregular cultivation and non-payment of rent by Piyadasa. This

shows that this is not a new stance taken up by the Respondent. The

Respondent alleges that the Appellant was informed at numerous instances

toparticipateatinquiriesintothematter,whichtheAppellanthad

repeatedly refrained from doing. In particular, the Respondent submits a

letter dated 21.05.2011 (marked 8) issued following an ex-parte inquiry

conducted before an official of the Agrarian Service Centre of Keradewala,

Galle, which identified K. G. Piyadasa as the Respondents tenant cultivator

and ordered him to pay the owners share due to the latter. Even though, the

Appellant, in her written submissions dated 09.08.2019 vigorously denies

the contents and credibility of the aforesaid letter, written submission is not

evidence.

At the inquiry before the tribunal, the appellant has not placed anything or

given at least oral evidence to deny the stance of the Respondent. In my view

mere doubts created through cross examination or denials through written

submissions do not suffice. Against the evidence placed by the Respondent,

the Appellant should have explained how they possess the paddy land. If the

Appellant has a paper title or she is a licensee or a person who holds the

property on the strength of some other relationship she should have

naturally placed that evidence before the tribunal. If the Appellant has

become the owner of the property by prescription, she should have placed

such evidence before the tribunal. The silence shown without placing

evidence against the documentary and oral evidence placed before the

tribunal on behalf of the Respondent, indicates that the Appellant had

nothing to place against the said evidence led before the tribunal. In my view

the balance should tilt in favour of the Respondent.

Upon perusing the evidence submitted at the inquiry before the Tribunal, it

appears that the Respondent had succeeded in validly proving his paper title

to the land in question by preponderance of evidence.

9

Conclusion

For the foregoing reasons, it can conclusively be determined that the

Complainant-Appellant-Respondent-Respondenthadsucceededin

proving, on a balance of probabilities, that, firstly, he is the lawful owner of

the land in question, secondly, that the predecessor of the Appellant, K. G.

Piyadasa, had cultivated the land as a tenant cultivator, and thirdly, that the

aforesaid K. G. Piyadasa had defaulted in paying the rents due since the

maha season of 2001.

Thereby, it is noted that both the Agricultural Board of Review, by order

dated 06.10.2016, and the High Court of the Southern Province holden in

Galle, by judgment dated 31.01.2019 had correctly determined that the

Appellant owes an arrears of rent to the Respondent.

Under these circumstances and for reasons elucidated in my judgment, I see

no reason to interfere with the finding of the learned High Court Judge. This

appeal is accordingly dismissed. The Court orders no costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

E. A. G. R. AMARASEKARA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

JANAK DE SILVA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

10