SC/ FR/ 157/2014 JUDGEMENT Page 1 of 25

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application under and in

terms of Article 17 and 126 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist

Republic of Sri Lanka.

1. Kanda Udage Malika

Kosmo Farm, Akurukaduwa,

Meegahakiwula.

PETITIONER

VS.

1. D.M. Aberathna

Police Constable,

Kandaketiya Police station,

Kandaketiya.

2. D.P.K. Gamage,

Police Constable,

Kandaketiya Police station,

Kandaketiya.

3. S.M.R.P. Kumara

Police Constable,

Kandaketiya Police station,

Kandaketiya.

Case no.SC/FR/157/2014

Case no.SC/FR/182/2014

Case no.SC/FR/183/2014

Case no.SC/FR/184/2014

Case no.SC/FR/185/2014

SC/ FR/ 157/2014 JUDGEMENT Page 2 of 25

4. S.J.M. Jayasundara

Civil Defence Force,

Attach to the Kandaketiya Police station,

Kandaketiya.

5. D.M. Wijerathna

Reserve Staff attach to the Kandaketiya,

Police station,

Kandaketiya.

6. R.P. Somarathne

Sub Inspector,

Kandaketiya Police station,

Kandaketiya.

7. Officer in Charge

Kandaketiya Police station,

Kandaketiya.

8. Dr. Jagath Perera

District Medical Officer,

Meegahakiwula

Government Hospital,

Meegahakiwula.

9. Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP)

Badulla Range,

Badulla.

SC/ FR/ 157/2014 JUDGEMENT Page 3 of 25

10. Deputy Inspector General of Police

Badulla Range,

Badulla.

11. Superintendent of Prison

Badulla Prison,

Badulla.

12. Commissioner of Prison

Prison Department,

Welikada.

13. Mr. Pujith Jayasundara

Inspector General of Police,

Police head Quarters,

Colombo 01.

14. Hon. Attorney General

Attorney-General’s Department,

Hultfsdorp,

Colombo 12.

RESPONDENTS

BEFORE : SISIRA J. DE ABREW, J.

MURDU N. B. FERNANDO, PC, J. AND

S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

COUNSEL : Mr. Lakshan Dias with Ms. Shafnas Shamdeen for the Petitioner

SC/ FR/ 157/2014 JUDGEMENT Page 4 of 25

Mr. Pradeep Fernando for 1st to 3rd and 5th and 6th Respondents

Mr. Madhawa Tennakoon SSC with Mr. Thivanka Attygalle SC for

the 14th Respondent.

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS: Petitioner on 18th September 2020.

14th Respondent on 21st September 2020.

ARGUED ON : 22nd September 2020

DECIDED ON : 21st May 2021

S. THURAIRAJA, PC, J.

The Parties in Case no.SC/FR/157/2014

The Petitioner; Kanda Udage Malika, is petitioning on behalf of his 17-year-old

deceased son (a child), P.H. Sandun Malinga (Herein after sometimes referred to as the

deceased) who was deceased in the custody of the Police.

The 1st Respondent; D.M. Aberathna, 2nd Respondent; D.P.K Gamage and 3rd

Respondent; S.M.R.P. Kumara are Police Constables in the Kandaketiya Police station

and the 4th Respondent; S.J.M. Jayasundara is in the Civil Defence Force, attached to

the Kandaketiya Police station. The 1st – 4th Respondents are alleged to have directly

violated the Fundamental Rights of the deceased while the 5th Respondent; D.M.

Wijeratna who belongs to the Reserve Staff attached to the Kandaketiya Police station,

the 6th Respondent; R. P. Somarathne Sub Inspector, Kandaketiya Police station along

with 7th Respondent; the Officer in Charge of the Kandaketiya Police station, the 8th

Respondent; Dr. Jagath Perera, the District Medical Officer of Meegahakiwula, the 9th

Respondent; Senior Superintendent of Police of Badulla, 10th Respondent; Deputy

Inspector General of Police of Badulla, 11th Respondent; Superintendent of Prison of

SC/ FR/ 157/2014 JUDGEMENT Page 5 of 25

the Badulla Prison, 12th Respondent; the Commissioner of Prison, Welikada and 13th

Respondent; Mr. Pujith Jayasundara the Inspector General of the Police are alleged to

have indirectly contributed to the said violation being authorities under whose

guidance and/or assistance the said individuals acted, while the 14th Respondent is

the Hon. Attorney General.

The Petitioner instituted legal action in the Supreme Court under Article 126 of

the Constitution of Sri Lanka against the 1st -14th Respondents on the 5th of June 2014

for the violation of the Fundamental Rights of the deceased guaranteed by Articles 11,

12(1),13(1),13(2), 13(3), 13(4) of the Constitution.

On the 3rd of March 2015 the Supreme Court granted leave to proceed for the

alleged violation of the Fundamental Rights of the deceased guaranteed under Article

11 of the Constitution against 1 – 6th Respondents and under Articles 12(1), 13(1)

and 13(2) of the Constitution against the 1st – 14th Respondents.

It is pertinent to note that the instant case of SC/FR/157/2014 was taken

together with cases SC/FR/182/2014, SC/FR/183/2014, SC/FR/184/2014,

SC/FR/185/2014 with the agreement of the parties as the impugned conduct in all

the applications is the same. The Petitioners in the above cases are the relatives of the

deceased who accompanied him and who were further subject to assault by the errant

police officers.

The Petitioners in particular are, in SC/FR/182/2014; Gamini Hewanayake 42

year old brother-in-law of the Petitioner to the current case and the uncle of the

deceased, SC/FR/183/2014 Peruma Hewa Kasun Wiraj Madumadawa 20 year old elder

son of the Petitioner to the current case and the brother of the deceased, in

SC/FR/184/2014 R. A. Wijeratne a 42 year old friend of the brother-in-law of the

Petitioner to the instant case and SC/FR/185/2014 Kanda Uda Kularathne 56 year old

brother of the Petitioner to the current case and the uncle of the deceased. The

Respondents in all the above cases are the 1st - 14th Respondents to the current case.

SC/ FR/ 157/2014 JUDGEMENT Page 6 of 25

Accordingly, the following judgement shall bind the parties to the current case

and the aforementioned cases.

The Facts

The facts of the case as per the documents submitted before this Court are as

follows,

On the 7th of May 2014 at around 5.30 pm the deceased along with his brother;

Peruma Hewa Kasun Wiraj Madumadawa, two uncles; Gamini Hewanayake and Kanda

Uda Kularathne and a friend of his uncle; R. A. Wijeratne who are the Petitioners of the

aforementioned cases (herein after referred to as other Petitioners) had left to

Katawatte with the intention of purchasing a three-wheeler.

The deceased was given Rs. 75,000/- by his father for the purchase of the said

three-wheeler. Once the deceased and other Petitioners reached Katawatte they were

further directed by the seller to the School in Bogahatenna.

In the meantime, the Kandaketiya Police had received a 119 message (Police

Emergency contact) at 8.55 pm indicating that seven persons had entered the

Bogahatenna forest reserve at Katawatte and were engaged in treasure hunting.

As per the instructions of the 7th Respondent, the 6th Respondent had

proceeded to the reported area with 1st – 5th Respondents at 9.00 pm and had arrived

at the location passed 9.45 pm.

According to the other Petitioners, when they reached the school, a group of

police officers had walked towards the deceased and the other Petitioners and had

surrounded them. The 6th Respondent had inquired whether they had been treasure

hunting and had proceeded to beat them.

Even though the brother of the deceased stated that they did not come treasure

hunting but to purchase a three-wheeler, the police officers have continued to attack

them. During this time the 4th Respondent had advised the 6th Respondent as follows,

SC/ FR/ 157/2014 JUDGEMENT Page 7 of 25

‘මුංට බබෝම්බ 5ක් දාලා ඇතුලට දාම’

(Let’s introduce 5 bombs and arrest them)

rather than attacking them at the time.

However, the 6th Respondent who decided to ignore the same had continued

to assault the deceased and the other Petitioners. It is stated that the Respondents

attacked the deceased and the other Petitioners using their arms, legs and even a

baton.

The 6th Respondent had then instructed to bring the Police jeep to the location.

After sending the four other Petitioners to the Jeep, the 1st - 6th Respondents

had continued to attack the deceased. When the brother of the deceased tried to

escape from the jeep, not being able to bear the attacks against his brother, he had

been hit in the ear and locked inside the jeep.

The 1st – 6th Respondents had then proceeded to take the deceased to a green

path and brought him back 45 minutes later and has put him to the jeep. The other

Petitioners state that the deceased had wept and complained stating that the 1st – 6th

Respondents had attacked him while accusing him of treasure hunting.

Further, the 6th Respondent had stated,

‘ උඹලව මරණ එක මහ කජ්ජක් බෙබම්’

(Killing all of you is not a big deal)

and has proceeded to take them to the police station. The 6th Respondent while

pointing at one of his scars had stated that he got the same during a mission to capture

‘Army Suranga’ and that he will provide the same fate as of ‘Army Suranga’ to the

deceased and the other Petitioners.

The 1st – 3rd ,5th and 6th Respondents in their statement of objections state that

at their time of arrival to the scene, there was a commotion taking place between the

SC/ FR/ 157/2014 JUDGEMENT Page 8 of 25

parties and the said Respondents only used minimum force to separate them and had

questioned them later.

However, as per the Post-Mortem Report (PMR) of the deceased, the deceased

had several injuries including blunt forced head and chest injuries involving the

brain, heart and Lungs (sic). As per this evidence it is clear that the injuries were not

due to a ‘commotion’ or a result of the use of ‘minimal force’ but due to heavy attacks

possibly as described by the Petitioner.

Other Petitioners claim that the police officers had also taken their wallets.

Once the deceased and the other Petitioners were taken to the Police station,

they were forced by the 6th Respondent to sign a document after which they were put

in the cell in the Police station. Further he had mentioned to the uncle of the deceased

(Petitioner in case application no. 185/2014) that he will not free him for a year as he

was acting as if he didn’t care much about the situation.

The Petitioner claims that once she was made known of the arrest of the

deceased and other Petitioners by a known person, she visited them in the police cell

at around 2.30 am of 8th May 2014.

At that time the deceased had complained of chest pains and requested the

Petitioner to rub his chest. When she requested the reserve police officer to admit him

to the hospital as she realised that he was in critical condition the officer had informed

that nothing could be done as there were no officers at the station and ordered them

to come later in the morning.

When the Petitioner arrived at the police station at around 7.30 am the

deceased was in his worst condition, lying on the cold floor while crying. When the

Petitioner rubbed his chest, she realised that the chest region was swollen.

When the Petitioner requested the 6th Respondent to take the deceased to

the hospital, he had yelled at the Petitioner stating,

SC/ FR/ 157/2014 JUDGEMENT Page 9 of 25

‘ කෑ ගහන්බන් ෙැතුව පලයව්, අපි මන්ව ඉස්පපිරිතාබේ බගනියන්ෙ තමයි හදන්බන් ‘

(Get out without shouting, we are going to take them to the hospital)

At around 8.30 am the deceased along with the other Petitioners were taken to

the Meegahakiwula District Medical Officer (DMO), who is the 8th Respondent to the

case. Before producing them before the DMO, the 6th Respondent has had a private

conversation with him for about 30 minutes and then has proceeded to produce the

deceased and the other Petitioners.

However, it was stated that the 8th Respondent had not inquired about any

wounds/ assault of any of the parties produced.

The parties had been brought back to the Kandaketiya Police station and at

about 12.45 pm they had been taken to the Magistrate Court of Passara.

In the meantime, the Petitioner had gone to the Magistrate Court of Badulla as

she was informed that the deceased and the other Petitioners will be produced there.

Since they were not present, she had then proceeded to the Kandaketiya Police station

to inquire about the absence of the deceased and other Petitioners at the Magistrate

Court of Badulla , where she was informed that they were being presented at the

Magistrate Court of Passara. The Petitioner had then rushed to the Magistrate Court

of Passara.

However, the 6th Respondent denies such communication regarding producing

all suspects at the Magistrate Court of Baddula.

The case was heard in the Chamber of the Honourable Magistrate. The

Respondent had submitted that the deceased and the other Petitioners had been

arrested for treasure hunting. It was stated that, at the hearing the lawyer of the

deceased and the other Petitioners were not given an opportunity to present their case

but was constantly interrupted by the Respondents.

SC/ FR/ 157/2014 JUDGEMENT Page 10 of 25

As per the request of the Respondents, the Magistrate had ordered the

deceased and the other Petitioners to be remanded for a period of 14 days, till the

archeological report of the site in which the deceased and the other Petitioners were

arrested was prepared and presented.

Following the above order, the deceased and other Petitioners were taken to

the Remand Prison of Badulla where the deceased and his elder brother (Petitioner in

case no. 183/2014) had been kept separately from the other three Petitioners

(Petitioners in case no.185/2014, 182/2014, 184/2014). The deceased and his elder

brother had fallen asleep at around 8.30 pm. The brother of the deceased had woken

up at around 5.30 am on the 9th of May 2014 to see the deceased panting and

struggling for breath.

Once the brother of the deceased informed the above to the prison officers,

they had then taken the deceased to the Badulla Hospital. The prison officers who

returned from the hospital had informed that the deceased had passed away and has

requested for the contact number of the Petitioner’s husband.

Accordingly, following a phone call from the prison at around 8.30 am, the

Petitioner together with her husband had arrived at the prison.

The brother of the deceased stated that a report was taken from him regarding

the death of the deceased. The other Petitioners had then been taken to the Judicial

Medical Officer (JMO) who examined the wounds and made note of the same.

The brother of the deceased was then taken to identify the body of the

deceased and taken back to the Police station while the other Petitioners were taken

to the Mental Health Unit. He was later taken to the Mental Health Unit on the 29th of

May 2014.

The other Petitioners including the elder son of the Petitioner were remanded

till the 30th of May 2014 and was released on the same date.

SC/ FR/ 157/2014 JUDGEMENT Page 11 of 25

In the instant case, the mother of the deceased has come before this court

seeking relief under Article 126 of the Constitution for the rights of his deceased son,

guaranteed under Articles 11, 12(1), 13(1) and 13(2).

The Violation of Fundamental Rights

Article 17 of the Constitution provides for remedial action for breach of

Fundamental Rights subject to the Article 126 which provides for the jurisdiction of the

Supreme Court and its enforcement mechanism. As seen in previous cases such as

Sriyani Silva V. Iddamalgoda, Officer-in-Charge, Police Station Paiyagala and

Others [2003] 1 SLR 63 this right is extended to any person with legitimate interest

to prosecute. Accordingly, in the current circumstance the death of the deceased will

not cease his right to take remedial actions, but the right will be extended to the

Petitioner who is the mother of the deceased.

Alleged infringement of Article 11 of the Constitution

Article 11 of the Constitution reads,

“No person shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or

degrading treatment or punishment”

This Article in our Constitution is further in line with many International

Conventions and Declarations of Human Rights such as Article 5 of the Universal

Declaration of Human Rights, Article 7 of the International Covenant on Civil and

Political Rights and Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights which

prohibit torture, inhuman or degrading treatment and punishment.

Article 1 of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or

Degrading Treatment or Punishment reads as follows,

"Torture means any act by which severe pain or suffering, whether physical

or mental is intentionally inflicted on a person for such purposes as obtaining

SC/ FR/ 157/2014 JUDGEMENT Page 12 of 25

from him or a third person information or a confession, punishing him for an

act he or a third person has committed or is suspected of having committed,

intimidating or coercing him or a third person, or any reason based on

discrimination of any kind, when such pain or suffering is inflicted by or at

the instigation of or with the consent or acquiescence of a public official or

other person acting in an official capacity. It does not include pain or suffering

arising only from, inherent in or incidental to lawful sanctions"

In assessing cases such as Amarasinghe V. Seneviratne and Two Others [2010]

2 Sri LR 205, Bandula Samarasekera V. Vijitha Alwis, O.I.C., Ginigathhena [2009]

1 Sri LR 213, Channa Pieris and Others V. Attorney General and Others [1994]1

SLR 1 it is evident that acts under Article 11 of the Constitution are broadly interpreted

by this court to take many forms including both physical, psychological form.

However, in the current situation such distinction would not be necessary as there

is clear evidence of physical torture.

In the instant case the burden is on the Petitioner to prove to the court on a

preponderance of evidence with a high degree of certainty the violation of

Fundamental Rights by the said Respondents.

As per Dr. Shiranee Bandaranayake J in Bandula Samarasekera V. Vijitha Alwis

(supra),

“In order to establish alleged allegation of torture it would be necessary for

an aggrieved party to corroborate his averments against the Respondents

and for such corroboration it would be necessary to produce evidence

including medical evidence”.

As per the petition and affidavits submitted before this court, while the

deceased and other Petitioners were waiting for the seller of the three-wheeler, the 1st

- 6th Respondents have reported to the area and severely assaulted the deceased and

other Petitioners and further taken steps to separate the deceased from the group and

SC/ FR/ 157/2014 JUDGEMENT Page 13 of 25

assault him for a period of 45 minutes. At the end of which, the deceased had been

weeping and complaining of the assault by the 1st- 6th Respondents.

In the statement of objections, the 1st– 3rd ,5th and 6th Respondents deny the

above, stating that at the time of arrival to the scene, there was a commotion taking

place between the parties and the said Respondents hence used minimum force to

merely separate them.

I find this response to be rather unconvincing especially in light of the PMR of the

deceased submitted to this court. The PMR lays down nine injuries (Ante mortem)

including,

i. A scalp contusion (4 x 5 cm – dark blue) with a deep haematoma of the back of

the head

ii. A contusion (10 x 13 cm – dark blue) on the chest

iii. A graze (1 x 1.5 cm – brown scab+) with a deeper contusion (3.5 x 4 cm) on the

left lower abdomen

iv. A contusion (4.5 x 6 cm – dark blue) on the posterior aspect of the right shoulder

v. A tramline contusion (2 x 21 cm – dark blue) on the posterior aspect of the trunk

across the spine

vi. A graze (0.5 x 1 – brown scab+) with a deep contusion (2.8 cm x 4.5 cm) on the

right loin

vii. A graze (4 x 10 cm – brown scab+) on the posterior aspect of the right elbow

viii. A tramline contusion (2 x 8 cm dark blue) on the posterior aspect of the right

thigh

ix. Heavy blunt forces [ ii, iv & v above] have caused effect to lungs and heart

Could a ‘commotion’ between the deceased and the other Petitioners or ‘minimum

force’ used by the said Respondents cause the aforementioned injuries leading to the

death of the deceased? The answer to the above question is negative, as the

explanation of the said Respondents do not justify the grave injuries set out above.

SC/ FR/ 157/2014 JUDGEMENT Page 14 of 25

Further, even if the Respondents are to use minimum force this would not mean

subjecting the person to torture or inhuman treatment. This is further supported by

cases such as Kumara V. Silva, Sub-Inspector of Police, Welipenna and Others

[2006] 2 Sri LR 236 and Amal Sudath Silva V. Kodituwakku [1987] 2 Sri LR 119.

It is noteworthy to highlight the following statement of Atukorale, J. In Amal

Sudath Silva V. Kodituwakku [supra],

“Nothing shocks the conscience of a man so much as the cowardly act of a

delinquent police officer who subjects helpless suspect in his charge to

depraved and barbarous methods of treatment.... Such action on the part of

the police will only breed contempt for the law and will tend to make the

public lose confidence in the ability of the police to maintain law and order “

Therefore, as per the evidence submitted it is apparent that the deceased has

been subject to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment and accordingly

the 1st -6th Respondents are in violation of Article 11 of Constitution.

Alleged Infringement of Article 13 (1) ,13 (2) of the Constitution

Article 13 (1) of the Constitution reads,

“No person shall be arrested except according to procedure established by

law. Any person arrested shall be informed of the reason for his arrest.”

As previously mentioned, in the case at hand the Kandaketiya Police had

received a 119 message (Police Emergency contact) at 8.55 pm stating that seven

persons have entered the Bogahatenna forest reserve at Katawatte and were engaged

in treasure hunting. It was on this lead that the Police arrested the deceased and other

Petitioners.

As per the 1st- 3rd,5th and 6th Respondents the reason for the arrest was their

presence in the forest coupled up with the absence of a valid explanation, despite the

other Petitioners stating their intention to purchase the three-wheeler. However, as

SC/ FR/ 157/2014 JUDGEMENT Page 15 of 25

per the report presented by the Archeological Department, the area in question has

no archeological value and no mining had taken place in the said area.

As per the above evidence the reason for the arrest in itself is an unjustified

allegation. In addition to the reason for the arrest, the lawfulness of the manner in

which the arrest was conducted is questionable. As discussed under Article 11, When

the deceased and the Petitioners were brought to the Police station they were severely

injured, with the deceased more so injured than the others.

Further, according to the statements of the other Petitioners the 6th Respondent

had continuously intimidated and caused fear of injury during and after the arrest.

Such conduct by the said Respondents only prove the lack of ethical and moral value

which should be instilled in such peace keeping officers. As highlighted by Dr. Shirani

Bandaranayake in Bandula Samarasekera V. Vijitha Alwis (supra),

‘…. it would be necessary to have the trust and respect of the public. It is not

easy to command that from the public and in order to earn such trust and

respect, the police’ officers must possess a higher standard of moral and

ethical values than that is expected from an average person. ‘

Accordingly, it is acts such as this that depreciate the title of police officers in

the minds of the public. And considering all the above factors it is evident that the 1st

- 6th Respondents have violated Article 13 (1) in the process of the arrest.

Further, as per Article 13 (2) of the Constitution,

“Every person held in custody, detained or otherwise deprived of personal

liberty shall be brought before the judge of the nearest competent court

according to procedure established by law and shall not be further held in

custody, detained or deprived of personal liberty except upon and in terms of

the order of such judge made in accordance with procedure established by

law”.

SC/ FR/ 157/2014 JUDGEMENT Page 16 of 25

Procedure established by law in the current circumstance would be Sections 65

of the Police Ordinance No. 16 of 1865.

‘Every person taken into custody by any police officer without warrant

(except persons detained for the mere purpose of ascertaining their name

and residence) shall forthwith be delivered into the custody of the officer in

charge of a station in order that such person may be secured until he can

be brought before a Magistrate to be dealt with according to law, or

may give bail for his appearance before a Magistrate, if the officer in charge

shall deem it prudent to take bail as hereinafter mentioned:

Provided always that where bail is not taken, the prisoner shall be brought

before a Magistrate within twenty-four hours, unless circumstances render

delay unavoidable.’ (Emphasis Added)

In the case at hand the deceased and the Petitioners were brought to the

Kandaketiya police station late night on the 07th of May 2014 and was taken to the

Magistrate Court of Passara on the 8th of May 2014 at around 12.45 pm. Accordingly,

the deceased and the Petitioners were presented to the magistrate within 24 hours of

the arrest.

However, it is the duty of the officers to secure the person till he/she is been

presented to the Magistrate. Securing would mean, not the mere ensuring of the

detainment of the person but also ensuring the person is in good health and free from

unlawful actions.

As per the Petitioner when she reached the Kandaketiya police early morning

on the 8th of May, her son had a severe chest pain following the assault by the 1st – 6th

Respondents. The Petitioner had then requested the reserve officer to admit him to

the hospital. However, he had stated that nothing could be done as there were no one

else at the station and to come in the morning.

SC/ FR/ 157/2014 JUDGEMENT Page 17 of 25

The deceased was not taken to the hospital even by 7.30 am, but after the

request of the Petitioner they were taken to the DMO at around 8.30 am. The

Petitioners further claim that the DMO who is the 8th Respondent to the case, did not

inquire about any assault or apparent wounds but had merely inquired about their

names and marital statuses and had proceeded to fill the requisite documentation.

Accordingly, it is observed that the 8th Respondent had not fulfilled his obligation to

the best of his ability as he should have given more attention to the health of the

deceased and the other Petitioners.

After being presented to the Magistrate the deceased and the Petitioners were

then admitted to the Badulla remand prison in the evening of the same day.

According to the Petitioners, the deceased and the other Petitioners had

informed the Respondents of the Badulla remand police about the assault, however,

the 1st- 3rd and 5th and 6th Respondents deny the same and state that, had they been

informed they would have taken steps to present the Petitioners to the medical

authorities.

However, the question I encounter is even if the Petitioners had not informed

the Respondents, whether the injuries were not apparent to the said officers. When

the Petitioners were in custody of the Kandaketiya police station the injuries of the

deceased were said to be very severe and even the Respondents seemed to have

noticed the same as the deceased and other Petitioners were presented to the DMO

(even though this was after the request made by the Petitioner). Further as per the

PMR there were visible injuries on the deceased. Accordingly, by this observation did

the Police officers at the time not recognize their duty to present the deceased to

medical attention?

In light of the above facts, I must also note the claim made by the Petitioners

stating that the Magistrate did not provide the lawyer of the Petitioner to present her

case as she had been constantly interrupted by the Respondents. Following which the

Magistrate in the case had proceeded to remand the deceased and the other

SC/ FR/ 157/2014 JUDGEMENT Page 18 of 25

Petitioners for 14 days. As per the records brought before this court it is evident that

the deceased and the Petitioners indeed were innocent and were not in good health

following the torture inflicted. Accordingly, I observe that the Magistrate in the case

should have exercised his/her due diligence in order to approach the situation in a

better manner.

In considering the provision on Health of Prisoners under the Prisons Ordinance

no. 16 of 1877, Section 66 reads,

‘ The names of prisoners desiring to see the medical officer or appearing

out of health in mind or body shall be reported by the officer attending

them to the jailer; and the jailer shall without delay call the attention of

the medical officer to any prisoner desiring to see him, who is ill, whose state

of mind or body appears to require attention and shall carry into effect the

medical officer’s written recommendations respecting alterations of the

discipline or treatment of such prisoner’.

(Emphasis Added)

Accordingly, the section states ‘prisoners desiring medical attention or

appearing out of health in mind or body shall be reported.’ In the current case

considering the severity of the injuries, the Respondents too had this duty. Even if the

Petitioners did not request such attention the Respondents had a duty to do the same.

Further Section 43 of the Prisons Ordinance reads,

‘Every criminal prisoner shall also, as soon as convenient after admission, be

examined by the medical officer who shall into a book to be kept by the jailer

a record of the state of the prisoner’s health and any observations which the

medical officer thinks fit to add.’

Accordingly, the prison officers have a mandatory obligation to examine the

prisoners as soon as convenient. In observing the phrase ‘as soon as convenient’ we

will look at the circumstance surrounding the incident. Considering that the deceased

SC/ FR/ 157/2014 JUDGEMENT Page 19 of 25

was subject to significant assault and there were apparent wounds on the deceased

the prison officers had an obligation to refer the deceased to medical attention

immediately after admission. Especially considering that the Provincial General

Hospital in Badulla is in close proximity to the Badulla Prison, external or inhouse

medical attention could have been provided.

As per the records submitted to the court the deceased and other Petitioners were

admitted to the Badulla remand prison in the evening of 8th of May 2014. On the

following day at 5.30 am the deceased was said to be in very critical condition, however

the deceased was taken to the hospital only after the brother of the deceased had

screamed for help. As per the PMR the death has occurred at 6.00 am on the 9th of

May 2014. Further, it was after the death of the deceased, the other Petitioners were

taken to the Judicial Medical Officer.

As per the PMR of the deceased, early medical attention could have saved the life

of the deceased. While the prison officers could have acted more responsibly in this

regard, I find that there is no violation of Article 13 (2) of the Constitution considering

that its’ essence has been satisfied as the deceased and the other Petitioners were

brought before the Magistrate within twenty-four hours of the arrest.

Alleged infringement of Article 12(1) of the Constitution

Article 12 (1) of the Constitution reads,

“All persons are equal before the law and are entitled to the equal protection

of the law”

As per H.N.J. Perera CJ in SC FR Application no. 351/2018 Supreme Court

minutes dated 13th December 2018, Article 12 (1) of our Constitution offers all

persons protection against arbitrary and mala fide exercise of power and guarantees

natural justice and legitimate expectations. Accordingly, the Article ensures that every

citizen is guaranteed equal protection as a ‘person’ despite how or what another may

consider him/her to be.

SC/ FR/ 157/2014 JUDGEMENT Page 20 of 25

In the situation at hand, even though the deceased and the other Petitioners

were arrested due to an allegation, (which was later proved to be false) the

Respondents did not have any right to use the opportunity to assault them or to treat

them in a degrading manner for the simple reason that, no person should be treated

in such manner. In fact, the very existence of Article 12 (1) of the Constitution ensures

that such conduct is contrary to the law of the country.

Considering the above matters, the 1st– 6th Respondents have violated equal

treatment and equal protection that ought to be given to an ordinary person of this

country, hence have violated Article 12 (1) of the Constitution.

The final question to be dealt by this court is whether the state including the

higher authorities and other senior officers surrounding the actions that took place;7th-

14th Respondents should be held liable for the direct violation of the Fundamental

Rights by the 1st– 6th Respondents by virtue of State Liability.

The principle of State Liability has been discussed in this court in previous

instances including the two possible branches of assessing the same. The first being

the liability of the state by way of the law governing vicarious liability under the law of

delict and secondly, the liability under the sui generis created by the Constitution

under public law, out of which the second approach has been favoured.

The nature of liability imposed was highlighted by Lord Diplock in the case

Maharaj V. The Attorney-General of Trinidad and Tobago, No. 2 [1979] A.C. 385

as follows,

“This is not vicarious liability it is a liability of the State itself. It is not a

liability in tort at all it is a liability in the public law of the State which has

been newly created”.

In the case Lord Diplock emphasised that this was a new liability in Public law

created by the Constitution of Trinidad and Tobago and should not be viewed in the

perspective of any existing bases of liability. In the case Ganeshanathan V. Vivienne

SC/ FR/ 157/2014 JUDGEMENT Page 21 of 25

Goonewardene and Others (1984) 1 Sri LR 319 Soza J, while commenting on the

above stated that the Sri Lankan Constitution too has created this liability under the

public law.

Accordingly, it is well established that the principle of state liability in

Fundamental Right matters is dealt with to hold the state liable for acts committed by

the executive and administrative directly rather than considering the concept of

vicarious liability under the law of delict.

In the case Erandaka And Another V. Halwela, Officer-in-Charge, Police

Station, Hakmana and Others [2004] 1 Sri LR 268 the state was said to be

responsible for the violation of the Petitioners’ Fundamental Rights as it was proved

that the Petitioners sustained the injuries while in the remanded prison.

However, contrary to the above the assault in the current situation; the offence

was committed prior to the deceased and the other Petitioners were brought to the

custody of the station.

It is illogical to hold the state responsible for acts committed by such officers in

pursuing their personal vengeance without the authorization or knowledge of the

persons in authority. This was also highlighted in Goonewardene V. Perera and

Others [1983] 1 Sri LR 305 (Soza, J.) as follows,

“The State no doubt cannot be made liable for such infringements as may

be committed in the course of the personal pursuits of a public officer of to

pay off his personal grudges. But infringements of Fundamental Rights

committed under colour of office by public officers must result in liability

being cast on the State. “

In light of the above, the phrase ‘colour of office’ is not limited to whether or

not the officers were in official uniform but includes factors surrounding the

conduct of the officers and the authority given to them. In the instant case the

SC/ FR/ 157/2014 JUDGEMENT Page 22 of 25

acts committed by the errant officers were not committed under the supervision

or the orders of a senior officer. The state has not in any manner approved nor

shall approve such conduct. In considering the facts laid before this court the

acts of the officers were conducted in their personal capacity and not in the

‘colour of office’. Further I find that the state in the current situation has given

its fullest corporation to serve justice to the Petitioner.

In perusing the judgment by Sharvananda J (as he was then) in

Velmurugu V. AG [1981] 1 SLR 406 , the learned judge has highlighted the

inherent difficulties in proving a case of torture by the Police. One such difficulty

highlighted by the learned judge is quoted below,

‘…where allegations of torture or ill treatment are made the authorities

whether the police or armed services or the ministries concerned must

inevitably feel they have a collective reputation to defend. In

consequence there may be reluctance of higher authorities to admit or allow

inquires to be made into facts which might show that the allegations are

true." (Emphasis Added)

The above situation should be distinguished from the instant case, Contrary to

the above possibility, in the case at hand the higher authorities have taken action

against the 1st – 6th Respondents who were directly linked to the torture.

When the conduct of the errant officers were brought to the attention of the

senior officers, the relevant inquires and investigations were conducted and the errant

officers; 1st- 6th Respondents were indicted for several offences including murder. The

matter was referred to the High Court of Badulla under Case No. 01/2015 and the

said Respondents have been found guilty of the offences including the murder of the

deceased, being members of an unlawful assembly and for causing hurt to the others

arrested and was sentenced to death by the judgement dated 9th January 2017.

SC/ FR/ 157/2014 JUDGEMENT Page 23 of 25

It must be placed on record that the above decision of the High Court of Badulla

did in no way influence my decision in regard to the violation of Fundamental Rights

of the deceased and the other Petitioners. The case presented before this court has

been evaluated independently from the above, assessing the facts, circumstances and

evidence presented before this court.

Accordingly, the state has fulfilled its obligation and in this circumstance the

state cannot be held liable for the conduct of the errant officers. I am convinced that

the state has taken prompt action against 1st – 6th Respondents hence the state is not

liable for the violation of Fundamental Rights.

The police force is one of the key peace keeping forces of the country.

Therefore, it’s dignity and esteem ought to be protected at all times. In order to achieve

the same, it is imperative that the officers conduct themselves with great respect to

their office and the people of this nation while being accountable and transparent

about their actions.

Decision

Considering the aforementioned facts and circumstances, I hold that the 1st

Respondent; D.M. Aberathna, 2nd Respondent; D.P.K. Gamage, 3rd Respondent; S.M.R.P.

Kumara, 4th Respondent; S.J.M. Jayasundara, 5th Respondent; D.M. Wijerathna and 6th

Respondent; R.P. Somarathne have violated the Fundamental Rights of the deceased,

which is guaranteed under Article 11 ,12 (1), 13(1) of the Constitution. The Petitioner

is a poor village woman who was expecting to rest her life with her son whose

unfortunate demise caused her shock, loss of care and support.

For the above reasons I order each of the 1st -6th Respondents to pay

compensation of Fifty Thousand Rupees (Rs. 50,000/=) and litigation costs of Ten

Thousand Rupees (Rs.10,000/=) to the Petitioner. Considering the facts of this case, I

hold that the state has fulfilled its obligation, therefore, the state is not responsible for

the violation.

SC/ FR/ 157/2014 JUDGEMENT Page 24 of 25

In regard to the adjoining cases,

In SC/FR/182/2014 I hold that the 1st Respondent; D.M. Aberathna, 2nd

Respondent; D.P.K. Gamage, 3rd Respondent; S.M.R.P. Kumara, 4th Respondent; S.J.M.

Jayasundara, 5th Respondent; D.M. Wijerathna and 6th Respondent; R.P. Somarathne

have violated the Fundamental Rights of the Petitioner; Gamini Hewanayake

guaranteed under Article 11 ,12 (1), 13(1) of the Constitution and I order to pay Ten

Thousand Rupees (10,000/=) each as compensation and Five Thousand Rupees

(Rs.5000/=) each as litigation costs to the Petitioner.

In SC/FR/183/2014 I hold that the 1st Respondent; D.M. Aberathna , 2nd

Respondent; D.P.K. Gamage, 3rd Respondent; S.M.R.P. Kumara, 4th Respondent; S.J.M.

Jayasundara, 5th Respondent; D.M. Wijerathna and 6th Respondent; R.P. Somarathne

have violated the Fundamental Rights of the Petitioner; Peruma Hewa Kasun Wiraj

Madumadawa guaranteed under Article 11 ,12 (1), 13(1) of the Constitution and I order

to pay Ten Thousand Rupees (10,000/=) each as compensation and Five Thousand

Rupees (Rs.5000/=) each as litigation costs to the Petitioner.

In SC/FR/184/2014 I hold that the 1st Respondent; D.M. Aberathna , 2nd

Respondent; D.P.K. Gamage, 3rd Respondent; S.M.R.P. Kumara, 4th Respondent; S.J.M.

Jayasundara, 5th Respondent; D.M. Wijerathna and 6th Respondent; R.P. Somarathne

have violated the Fundamental Rights of the Petitioner; R. A. Wijeratne guaranteed

under Article 11 ,12 (1), 13(1) of the Constitution and I order to pay Ten Thousand

Rupees (10,000/=) each as compensation and Five Thousand Rupees (Rs.5000/=) each

as litigation costs to the Petitioner.

In SC/FR/185/2014 I hold that the 1st Respondent; D.M. Aberathna , 2nd

Respondent; D.P.K. Gamage, 3rd Respondent; S.M.R.P. Kumara, 4th Respondent; S.J.M.

Jayasundara, 5th Respondent; D.M. Wijerathna and 6th Respondent; R.P. Somarathne

have violated the Fundamental Rights of the Petitioner; Kanda Uda Kularathne

SC/ FR/ 157/2014 JUDGEMENT Page 25 of 25

guaranteed under Article 11 ,12 (1), 13(1) of the Constitution and I order to pay Ten

Thousand Rupees (10,000/=) each as compensation and Five Thousand Rupees

(Rs.5000/=) each as litigation costs to the Petitioner.

Application allowed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

SISIRA J. DE ABREW, J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

MURDU N. B. FERNANDO, PC, J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT