1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Application for Leave to Appeal under and in terms of Article 128 of the Constitution read with Section 5 (2), 6 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No.10 of 1996 read with Chapter LVIII of the Civil Procedure Code seeking Leave to Appeal under and in terms of Section 754 (2) of the Civil Procedure Code

Sri Lanka National Cooperative

Council Limited

No.455, Cooperative House,

Galle Road, Colombo 03

Plaintiff

SC Appeal No.34/2017

SC/CHC/LA 61/2016

HC (Civil) No.110/2015/MR Vs

1. Perera Ramanayake Don Vipula

Perera

No 60/34, Yadessa Cemetery

Road,

Siddamulla, Piliyandala

2. Radiant Trading Company

(Private) Limited

No 1 B, 1-1-10, 9th Lane

Colombo 3

2

3. Radiant AC Cabs (Private) Limited

No 1 B, 1-1-10, 9th Lane

Colombo 03

4. Lakpathirana Ajith Rohana

Kumara

No.24/4, Gammana Road,

Maharagama

5. Gurunnaselage Don Dulani

Chandima Wijesinghe

No.60/34, Yadessa Cemetery

Road Siddamulla,Piliyandala

6. Ranwalage Sudath Priyantha

No.195/32, Weliwita Road,

Malabe

Defendants

AND NOW BETWEEN

Sri Lanka National Cooperative

Council Limited

No.455, Cooperative House,

Galle Road, Colombo 03

Plaintiff-Petitioner-Appellant

Vs

3

1. Perera Ramanayake Don Vipula

Perera

No 60/34, Yadessa Cemetery

Road,

Siddamulla, Piliyandala

2. Radiant Trading Company

(Private) Limited

No 1 B, 1-1-10, 9th Lane

Colombo 3

3. Radiant AC Cabs (Private) Limited

No 1 B, 1-1-10, 9th Lane

Colombo 03

4. Lakpathirana Ajith Rohana

Kumara

No.24/4, Gammana Road,

Maharagama

5. Gurunnaselage Don Dulani

Chandima Wijesinghe

No.60/34, Yadessa Cemetery

Road,

Siddamulla, Piliyandala

6. Ranwalage Sudath Priyantha

No.195/32, Weliwita Road,

Malabe

Defendant-Respondents

4

BEFORE: Buwaneka Aluwihare PC, J.

Preethi Padman Surasena J.

S. Thurairaja PC, J.

COUNSEL: J. M. Wijebandara with Miss Kalpani Pathirage and Sharin

Sohani for the Plaintiff- Petitioner

Maura Gunawansha PC with Prasanna Panawenna and

Miss Dilshani Gunaratne for the Defendant-Respondents

ARGUED ON: 19.06.2019

WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS: 12.09.2019

DECIDED ON: 30.06.2021

JUDGEMENT

Aluwihare PC J.,

(1) The Plaintiff-Petitioner-Appellant (hereinafter sometimes referred to as

the ‘Plaintiff’) filed action before the Commercial High Court against the

Defendant-Respondents (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the

‘Defendants’) seeking judgment against the Defendants jointly and/or

severally to recover a sum of Rs. 48,031,992.92 due, under the

agreements marked ‘P2’ to ‘P5’ together with legal interest.

5

(2) Upon entertaining the Plaint, the learned High Court Judge ordered

summons be issued on the Defendants. Accordingly, the 1st to 6th

Defendants appeared before the court and filed a joint proxy and the

date for filing of answer was fixed for the 19th October 2015. The

Defendants filed a motion (‘X3’) on 15th October 2015 and moved the

court seeking an order to have the Defendants, save for the 2nd

Defendant, discharged from the case as the parties to the agreements

marked and produced along with the plaint, [‘P2’ to ‘P5’], were only the

Plaintiff and the 2nd Defendant.

(3) The learned High Court Judge by his order (‘X6’) discharged all the

Defendants other than the 2nd, requiring only the 2nd Defendant to file

answer.

(4) Aggrieved by this order, the Plaintiff moved this court by way of Leave

to Appeal and Leave was granted on the questions of law referred to in

sub-paragraphs (I), (II), (III), (IV) and (V) of paragraph 16 of the

petition of the Appellant [Plaintiff].

(5) The questions of law in verbatim, are as follows;

I. Has the learned High Court Judge erred in law in ordering to

discharge the 1st, 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th Defendants acting under

Section 22 of the Civil Procedure Code?

II. Are the 1st and 3rd Defendants necessary parties whose presence is

necessary for full and effective adjudication of the cause of action

alleged in the plaint?

III. Are the 4th to 6th Defendants necessary parties whose presence is

necessary for full and effective adjudication of the cause of action

alleged in the plaint?

6

IV. Were not there any tenable grounds before the learned High Court

Judge to come to the conclusion that 1st, 3rd, and 4th to 6th

defendants were not necessary parties to the cause of action alleged

in the plaint, especially in the absence of any oral and/or

documentary evidence?

V. Is the order of the learned High Court Judge contrary to Section 14

and 18 of the Civil Procedure Code?

Facts

(6) The Plaintiff is a Cooperative society registered in terms of the provisions

of the Cooperative Societies Law No.5 of 1972 under the name “Sri

Lanka National Cooperative Council Limited” [hereinafter also referred

to as “the Cooperative Council]. The 1st Defendant, at all times material

to this transaction, was representing the 2nd and 3rd Defendant

companies, Radiant Trading Company (Pvt.) Ltd and Radiant AC Cabs

(Pvt.) Ltd. Respectively. The 4th, 5th and 6th Defendants are the other

Directors of the 2nd and 3rd Defendant companies.

(7) On or about the 20th July 2010, the Plaintiff entered into a verbal

agreement with the 1st Defendant who was representing the 2nd and/or

3rd Defendant companies. Under this agreement, the Plaintiff was to

import and handover stocks of cement to the Defendants and the

Defendants were to sell the stocks of cement so handed over in the local

market and were obliged to pay the Plaintiff the agreed price. [COOP

Cement Project].

(8) This verbal agreement was further reaffirmed by the execution of Sales

Agency agreements (‘P2’- ‘P5’) during the period of 20th July 2010 to

30th September 2013. On the face of these documents only the Plaintiff

and the 2nd Defendant have been named as parties to the agreement. It

is to be noted that, although in two of the four agreements, the 2nd

7

Defendant company has been named as the second party to the

agreement, the seal of the 3rd Defendant company has been placed on

the contract instrument. The 4th to the 6th Defendants have signed one

or more of those agreements as witnesses, in their capacity as the

directors of the 2nd and or 3rd Defendant companies.

(9) The Plaintiff’s case is that, based on the terms and conditions of the

agreements, the Plaintiff imported consignments of cement which were

“delivered to the 1st Defendant and/or 2nd Defendant and/or 3rd

Defendant”. The Plaintiff claims that the “1st Defendant and/or 2nd

Defendant and/or 3rd Defendant” are legally liable to pay a balance of

Rs. 48,301,992.92 to the Plaintiff as sales proceeds of the

aforementioned quantity of cement.

(10) In paragraph 15 of the plaint, the Plaintiff has averred that the

Defendants have settled Rs.293 million [approximately] out of Rs.342

million [approximately] due to the Plaintiff. The Head of Finance of the

2nd Defendant company by his letter dated 13-05-2013 [P6] has only

disputed the amount outstanding.

(11) The Plaintiff states that upon the Defendants jointly and/or severally

defaulting the payment, Letters of Demand were served on all 6

Defendants on 12th December 2014 (‘P9’- ‘P14’). The Defendants had

sent a joint reply (‘P15’) admitting the delivery and acceptance of the

quantity of cement, however, disputing the amount payable. The

Directors have further stated that the Plaintiff had entered into the

agreements marked ‘P2’, to ‘P5’, only with the 2nd Defendant Company.

(12) According to the Plaintiff, it was the 1st Defendant who made

representations and thereby made the Plaintiff believe that he was acting

on behalf of the 2nd and 3rd Defendant companies and that it was the 1st

Defendant who entered into the agreements with the Plaintiff and took

part in the entire process related to the ‘Coop Cement Project’.

8

(13) The Plaintiff further states that the Plaintiff relying on the representation

made by the 1st Defendant as the ‘sole owner’ of the 2nd and 3rd

Defendant companies, the Plaintiff entered into the agreements referred

to.

(14) The Plaintiff contends that, apart from the 1st Defendant, the 4th to 6th

Defendants were directors of the company, who had a direct link to the

actions of the 2nd and 3rd Defendant companies. Therefore, the objective

of naming all 6 Defendants in the Plaint is to claim liability jointly

and/or severally. The Plaintiff asserts that, in that context, the presence

of all defendants is necessary for an effectual, full and final disposal of

the action.

The Contention of the Appellant

(15) One of the main arguments on behalf of the Plaintiff- Appellant was that

the order of the learned High Court Judge’, based on Section 22 of the

Civil Procedure Code [hereinafter referred to as the CPC], discharging

parties [defendants] was blatantly erroneous and contrary to law.

(16) It was further contended on behalf of the Plaintiff, that there was no

legal basis to discharge the defendants from a case, solely on the basis of

a Motion, without it being supported by an affidavit, particularly in an

instance where summons had been served. It was further argued that

such an order [of discharge] can only be made upon the defendants

satisfying court and the Defendants have failed to adduce any material

to substantiate their application to have some of them discharged. It was

also contended that the issue as to whether the plaintiff has a cause of

action against the Defendant can be decided, only after the pleading are

completed and not before and to that extent the learned High Court

Judge erred in making the order of discharge.

9

(17) Another point of contention was that the learned High Court Judge had

failed to appreciate the fact that the Plaintiff had a “valid cause of

action” jointly and or severally against all Defendants and by holding

that some of the Defendants were not necessary parties, had offended

Section 14 of the CPC.

(18) It was the contention of the learned counsel for the Plaintiff that a

motion filed, in terms of section 22 of the CPC “can only lead to a

direction under and in terms of Sections 36 and 37 of the CPC, but not

for dismissal of the Plaint and/or discharge of the defendants”. It was

further contended that the order of discharge of the Defendants,

amounts to a dismissal of the Plaint in respect of those Defendants that

were discharged.

(19) It is to be noted that the learned High Court Judge acted on the motion

[X3] dated 15th October 2015 filed by the Defendants, by which the

Defendants have moved the court for an order of discharge in favour of

all Defendants save for the 2nd Defendant, in terms of Sections 18 and

46 (2) of the CPC. Nowhere in the motion the Defendants have referred

to Section 22 of the CPC.

(20) It was also urged on behalf of the Plaintiff; “that any plaintiff has a right

to join as defendants, against whom the right to any relief is alleged to

exist. Therefore, what is required by pleadings of a Plaint is some kind

of allegation against the Defendants, for them to be necessary parties”

and that the learned High Court Judge had “attempted to try and

adjudicate the allegations without even waiting till the filing of the

answer”.

The Legal Position

(21) It is clear from the Plaint, that the relief the Plaintiff had sought is a

judgement in their favour to recover sums of money due to them in

10

terms of the “Sales Agency agreements” entered between the parties, [P2

to P5]. All those agreements are between the Plaintiff, Sri Lanka

Cooperative Council Ltd (the first Party) and the 2nd Defendant, Radiant

Trading Company (PVT) Ltd. (The second party).

(22) The Chairman and the General Secretary had signed [as witnesses] on

behalf of the first Party the Cooperative Council whilst two directors [1st

and 4th Defendants] of Radiant Trading had signed on behalf of the

second party as witnesses.

(23) There are 22 terms and conditions stipulated under the impugned

agreements and all those conditions refer to the 1st and 2nd parties to the

agreements and no other.

The Questions of Law

(24) The first question on which Leave to Appeal was granted is as to

whether the High Court Judge had “erred in law in ordering to

discharge 1st, 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th Defendants acting under Section

22 of the Civil Procedure Code?”

It must be said that the learned High Court Judge had made order

striking off all the Defendants save for the 2nd Defendant in terms of

Section 20 read with Section 18 of the CPC and not in terms of Section

22 of the CPC. [Page 11 of the impugned order]

The relevant portion of the order is reproduced below;

“… it is hereby ordered to strike out the names of the 1st, 3rd to 6th

defendants from the proceedings in terms of Section 20 read with

Section 18 of the Civil Procedure Code.”

The learned High Court judge had made reference to Section 22 of the

CPC to point out the requirement, that any objection with regard to

‘joinder of parties who have no interest in the action’ must be taken ‘at

the earliest possible opportunity’ [under that section]. The learned High

11

Court Judge had also relied on the decision in the case of John Singho

v. Julis Appu 10 NLR 351, to illustrate that the above position is the

settled law, where it was held that Section 22 requires an objection for

want of parties to be taken at the earliest possible opportunity, and that

“otherwise such objection will be considered to have been waived”.

Considering the above, I conclude that the learned High Court Judge

had not erred with regard to the application of the relevant provisions

in considering the motion filed by the Defendants and I answer the first

question of law on which leave was granted in the negative.

(25) As the ‘(IV)’th question of law on which leave was granted is

connected to the above, I wish to deal with the said question before I

proceed to consider the other questions of law on which leave to

appeal was granted.

(26) The issue raised before us was whether the learned High Court Judge

could have come to the conclusion that the 1st and the 3rd to 6th

Defendants were not necessary parties, in the absence of any oral or

documentary evidence being placed before the court. It was contended

that the learned High Court judge could not have decided the issue

merely on the motion filed by the Defendants.

(27) The Learned High Court Judge had been of the view that an

application for the misjoinder of parties can be made by way of a

motion in terms of Section 22 read with Sections 18 and 91 of the Civil

Procedure Code; “The filing of an affidavit or an answer is not

mandatory for the making of an application under Section 22 of the

Code and the only requirement is to file a motion as required by

Section 22 of the Code.” (Page 7 of ‘X6’). In the case of Uragoda v.

Jayasinghe 2004 (1) SLR 108 it was held that “The issue of misjoinder

of parties ought to have been taken by motion in terms of Section 91

read with Section 18 of the Code.” The learned High Court Judge has

12

relied on the decision in Uragoda v. Jayasinghe (supra) in support of

this legal position. Also see Hapuaratchchi and Another v. Dhanapala

and Another (2005) 3 SLR 141 and London and Lancashire Fire

Insurance Co. v. P. & O Company (18 N.L.R. 15).

(28) The sufficiency of the material before the court, in considering an

application made in terms of Section 22 of the CPC is a question of

fact. Depending on the facts and circumstances of each case, it is

incumbent on the trial judge to decide as to the sufficiency of material,

at the point of considering such application. I do not think that there

is a rule to say, adducing material is ‘sine qua non’. In the case before

us, the Plaintiff had filed 15 documents as a part and parcel of the

plaint including the ‘Sales Agency agreements’ the Plaintiff relied on.

(29) Furthermore, Paragraph 4 and 5 of the Plaint clearly spell out that,

initially there had been an oral agreement between the Plaintiff and

the 2nd and 3rd Defendants and /or with the 1st Defendant, which was

fortified by a notarially executed written agreements [P2 to P5].

(30) The proceedings of 19th October 2015 reflects that the court had been

put on notice of ‘misjoinder parties’ and an application had been made

on behalf of the Defendants seeking permission to file written

submissions to substantiate that position. Although it had been

submitted on behalf of the Plaintiff that all Defendants are necessary

parties, no objection was raised with regard to the application made

on behalf of the Defendants nor an application made, seeking

permission to adduce evidence or other material in order to support

the Plaintiff’s position on the matter, which they very well could have

done. Accordingly, the court ordered both parties to file written

submissions.

(31) In the case of Adlin Fernando v. Lionel Fernando (1995) 2 SLR 25 it

was held; “(1) That provisions of the Civil Procedure Code, relating to

13

the joinder of causes of action and parties are rules of procedure and

NOT substantive law. Courts should adopt a common sense approach

in deciding questions of misjoinder or non-joinder.” [Emphasis Added].

(32) It was also held in the case of Fernando v. Perera 2004 (1) SLR 108

“The issue of misjoinder ought to have been taken by motion in terms

of Section 91 of the CPC read with Section18 of the Code”.

Considering the above, I resolve the (IV) the question of law referred

to above, also in the negative.

The Necessary Parties

(33) Both, the 2nd and 3rd [(i) and (ii)] questions of law on which leave to

proceed was granted relate to the issue as to whether the presence of,

the 1st and the 3rd Defendants and the 4th to 6th Defendants

respectively, is necessary for full and effective adjudication of the

cause of action referred to in the plaint.

(34) The question as to ‘who is a necessary party’ in the context of ‘addition

or striking out of parties’ to an action, is dealt with under Section 18

(1) of the Civil Procedure Code.

Section 18 (1) of the Civil Procedure Code states as follows;

(1) “The court may on or before the hearing, upon the application of

either party, and on such terms as the court thinks just, order that the

name of any party; whether as plaintiff or as defendant improperly

joined, be struck out; and the court may at any time, either upon or

without such application, and on such terms as the court thinks just,

order that any plaintiff be made a defendant, or that any defendant be

made a plaintiff, and that the name of any person who ought to have

been joined, whether as plaintiff or defendant, or whose presence

before the court may be necessary in order to enable the court to

14

effectually and completely to adjudicate upon and settle all the

questions involved in that action, be added.” [Emphasis added].

(35) Our courts have identified that Section 18 has two limbs which

contemplate the addition of two different types of persons

(i) Persons who “ought to have been joined, whether as plaintiff or

defendant.”

(ii) Persons whose “presence before the court may be necessary in

order to enable the court effectually and completely to adjudicate

upon and settle all the questions involved in that action.

(36) In Weeraperuma v. De Silva 61 NLR 481 at page 484, Basnayake C.J.

stated “… the grounds on which a person may be added as a party to

an action are either (i) that he ought to have been joined as a plaintiff

or defendant or (ii) that his presence is necessary in order to enable

the Court effectually and completely to adjudicate upon and settle all

the questions involved in the action.”

In The Chartered Bank v. De Silva 67 NLR 135 at page 137, Sri Skanda

Rajah J. observed; “Section 18 (1) of our Code, like Order 1 Rule 10

(2) of the Indian Code, makes a distinction between the two classes of

persons, viz. persons who ought to have joined, i.e., necessary parties,

and persons whose presence is necessary to enable the Court to

completely and effectually to adjudicate upon and settle all the

questions involved in the suit, i.e., proper parties.”

(37) In Seylan Bank PLC v. New Lanka Merchants Marketing (PVT) Limited

& Others SC Appeal No. 198/2014, it was observed that the type of

persons contemplated in the first limb of section 18 (1) “are persons

who must be added as parties since they are entitled to relief upon or

are liable upon the same cause of action which is the subject matter of

the case”, whilst the second limb contemplated;

15

“persons who may not be entitled to relief upon the cause of action

which is the subject matter of the case (who will be encompassed by

the first limb as set out earlier) but, nevertheless, are persons whose

presence before the Court is necessary to enable the Court to

effectually and completely adjudicate upon and settle all the questions

involved in that action. This type of persons who should be added

under and in terms of the second limb of Section 18 (1), are usually

referred to as “necessary parties”.” (at page 12)

(38) The Plaintiff has contended that the Defendants are those who fall

within the aforementioned 2nd limb. In Seylan Bank PLC case (supra)

the Supreme Court analysed in depth the various tests formulated and

applied in English as well as Sri Lankan Courts to determine whether

a particular party should be added as a ‘necessary party’ to a pending

action. Following an extensive examination of the tests utilized by the

courts to determine whether a particular party should be added as a

‘necessary party’, the Supreme Court summarized the tests which may

be used in determining this question.

The guidelines that were laid down are as follows;

(i) A Court should keep in mind the desirability of reducing the

multiplicity of litigation and, therefore, interpret Section 18 (1)

widely;

(ii) However, the object of preventing the multiplicity of litigation

does not justify the addition of a party if the addition is not

permitted by the words used in Section 18 (1);

(iii) In terms of the first limb of Section 18 (1), a person who must be

added because he is a party “who ought to have been joined,

whether a plaintiff or defendant”, will be a person who should

have been named as a plaintiff in terms of Section 11 of the Civil

Procedure Code or who should have been named as a defendant

in terms of Section 14 of the Civil Procedure Code;

16

(iv) In terms of the second limb of Section 18 (1), a person who

should be added because he is a “necessary party”, is a person

whose presence before the Court is necessary in order to enable

the Court to, effectually and completely, adjudicate upon and

settle all the questions involved in the pending action;

(v) Accordingly, a person will be a “necessary party” if he will be

bound by the determination of the pending action;

(vi) Similarly, a person will be a “necessary party” if the

determination of the pending action will affect his legal right;

(vii) Further, a person will be a “necessary party”, in appropriate

circumstances, if the determination of the pending action will

affect his pecuniary interests or commercial interests;

(viii) A person who is not bound by the determination of a pending

action or whose legal rights, pecuniary interests or commercial

interests are not affected by the Orders sought in that action may,

nevertheless, be added as a “necessary party”, if his presence

before the Court as a party to that action (and not merely as a

witness) is required to, effectually and completely, adjudicate

upon and settle all the questions involved in that action. For

example, to enable one of the parties to effectually and

completely establish their case or to effectually and completely

obtain the reliefs they seek in the action;

(ix) Unless one or more of the circumstances described above exist,

a person should not be added to a pending action upon a claim

that he is a “necessary party” merely because one of the parties

to that pending action had a separate dispute with or claim

against him or merely because he has a separate dispute with or

claim against one of the parties to that action;

(x) A person is not a “necessary party” merely because he has

relevant evidence to give or because he is interested in and

wishes to involve himself in the correct solution of the case or

because he wishes to be

17

(39) Although the application of these guidelines may depend on the facts

of each case, they can be used to provide assistance to the court in

determining whether the 1st, 3rd -6th Defendants who have been

discharged are in fact necessary parties to the action.

(40) I shall now examine the Plaintiff’s contention that the 1st, 3rd -6th

Defendants are ‘necessary parties’ to the action in question, in terms

of the second limb of Section 18 (1) and the tests applied in Seylan

Bank PLC v. New Lanka Merchants Marketing (PVT) Limited & Others

(supra)

(41) The Plaintiff’s cause of action against the Defendants, as referred to

earlier, is for the recovery of monies due to the Plaintiff, in terms of

the Sales Agency agreements [‘P2’ to ‘P5’]. Upon the perusal of the

Plaint, the Agreements which are held out to be the subject matter of

the present action, is clearly between the Plaintiff on the one part and

the 2nd Defendant on the other part.

(42) The 2nd Defendant which is incorporated as a private company is a

juristic person who has the capacity to enter into contracts. Rights and

obligations flowing from the contracts do not in general reach beyond

the two contracting parties. According to Chitty [2nd Edition, Chapter

17] “No one may in general be entitled to rights or bound by

obligations flowing from the terms of a contract to which he is not a

party.” The essence of a registered company is that it has a legal

personality which is separate from its members. The legal foundation

of this concept is found in the case of Salomon v. Salomon & Co. Ltd.

[1897] AC 22 in which the House of Lords laid down the universal

principle that a company is a distinct legal person entirely different

from its members. This principle of separate legal personality is

referred to as the ‘veil of incorporation’. As a result of this case, the

courts have generally considered themselves bound by the concept

18

that a company is a separate legal person distinct from its members

and would generally not go behind the veil of incorporation.

(43) The cause of action in this case is simply a contractual violation where

one party to the contract has failed to settle payments due to the other.

On a perusal of the agreements marked P2-P5 it is clear that the 1st

party to the agreements is the Plaintiff whilst the 2nd party is the 2nd

Defendant Company, namely, Radiant Trading Company (Pvt) Ltd.

Thus evidently, the party liable to make the payment claimed under the

contracts is the 2nd Defendant Company.

(44) The High Court Judge observed that on the perusal of the agreements

marked ‘P2-P5’ it appears that the parties to them are the Plaintiff and

2nd Defendant and that the Directors (4th -6th Defendants) have signed

them only as witnesses are therefore should be discharged.

Considering the above, I am of the view that the Learned High Court

Judge had not erred in arriving at the conclusion referred to above

and thus, I answer the questions of law referred to in sub- paragraphs

(ii) and (iii) of Paragraph 16 of the Petition also in the negative.

(45) The final question that this court is called upon to answer is, as to

whether the impugned order of the Learned High Court Judge is

contrary to Sections 14 and 18 of the CPC.

(46) With regard to the above question of law, the argument of the plaintiff

was twofold.

(a) The words “on or before the hearing” that occurs in Section 18

of the CPC should not be read to mean, “any time before

hearing” but to mean “after pleadings (plaint, answer and

replication if any) are completed”.

19

(b) In terms of Section 14 of the CPC, the plaintiff is permitted to

name the defendants and the argument of the Defendants that

no relief could be obtained against the 1st, and 3rd to the 6th

Defendants, ought not to have been entertained by the learned

High Court Judge as it was premature and the discharging of

those Defendants from the case, offended Section 18 of the CPC.

(47) In order to substantiate their argument, the Plaintiff relied on the

decision in the case of Anil Kumar Singh v. Shiv Nath Mishra (1995)

SCC (3)147, where it was observed that “The object of the rule is to

bring on record all persons who are parties to the dispute relating to

the subject matter so that the dispute may be determined in their

presence at the same time without any protraction, inconvenience and

to avoid multiplicity of proceedings…..” . Relying on the decision in

Seylan Bank PLC v. New Lanka Merchants Marketing (PVT) Ltd and

others SC Appeal 198/2014 it was submitted on behalf of the Plaintiff

that, under the second limb of Section 18 (1), persons who may not be

liable upon the cause of action, but nevertheless, are persons whose

presence before the court is necessary to enable the court to effectually

and completely adjudicate upon and settle all questions in that action

could be added as parties.

(48) The cause of action in this case, which I have referred to earlier in the

judgement, is simply a contractual violation alleged, where one party

to the contract has failed to settle payments due to the other. On the

perusal of the agreements marked P2-P5 it is clear that the 1st party to

the agreements is the Plaintiff whilst the 2nd party is the 2nd Defendant

Company, namely, Radiant Trading Company (Pvt) Ltd. Thus

evidently, the party liable to make the payment claimed under the

agreements, is the 2nd Defendant Company. Thus, the parties to the

20

subject matter relating to the dispute [as referred to in the case of Anil

Kumar Singh (supra)] are the Plaintiff and the 2nd Defendant.

(49) The Learned High Court Judge on a careful examination of the Plaint,

other documents filed along with it and the submissions made, had

arrived at this very conclusion, i.e. that the Plaintiff had the right to

claim the amount stated in the plaint from the 2nd Defendant

Company, which was the only other party to the relevant sales agency

agreements, other than the Plaintiff and that the discharged

Defendants “cannot be considered as necessary parties to adjudicate

the real dispute between the Plaintiff and the 2nd Defendant”.

(50) The submission made on behalf of the Plaintiff that the words “on or

before the hearing” in Section 18 of the CPC should be read to mean

“after the pleadings” is mere ipse dixit and devoid of any merit. I do

not think the legislators had any intention of imposing any restrictions

with regard to the ambit of its application.

(51) Meideen v. Banda [1 NLR 51] is one of the earliest cases decided by

the Supreme Court where the ambit of Section 18 of the CPC came up

for consideration. His Lordship Withers J, observing that Section 18 of

our CPC corresponds with the language of Rule 1 of the Judicature

Rules of 1883 took guidance and followed the judgment of

Lord Esher, M.R., in the case of Byrne v. Brown, reported in (1889) 22

QBD 657, p. 666 where Lord Esher observed;

“One of the chief objects of the Judicature Acts was to secure that,

wherever a Court can see in the transaction brought before it that the

rights of one of the parties will or may be so affected that under the

forms of law other actions may be brought in respect of that

transaction, the Court shall have power to bring all the parties before

it, and determine the rights of all in one proceeding…..”

21

“… Another great object was to diminish the cost of litigation. That

being so, the Court ought to give the largest construction to those Acts

in order to carry out as far as possible the two objects I have

mentioned." [Emphasis added].

(52) Considering the above, I hold that the words “any time before

hearing” in section 18 of the CPC is devoid of any fetters of the nature,

contended on behalf of the Plaintiff, as far as the application of the

said section is concerned. Accordingly, I answer the question of law

referred to in sub-paragraph (v) of paragraph 16 of the Petition in the

negative.

Accordingly, I affirm the order of the learned High Court Judge dated

23.09.2016 and dismiss the Appeal of the Plaintiff-Petitioner

Appellant subject to costs.

Appeal Dismissed

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

PREETHI PADMAN SURASENA, J

I Agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

S. THURAIRAJA, PC. J,

I Agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT