==== BLOCKS ==== 

N.F.N. RAZEEN 1

In the matter of an application made in

terms of Section 5 (c) of the High Courts of

the Provinces (Special Provisions)

(Amendment) Act, No. 54 of 2006.

Liyanaarachchige Jamis

Dissanayake,

No.188, Agalawatta Road,

Matugama.

PLAINTIFF

-Vs-

1. Liyanaarachchige Leelarathna

Dissanayake,

No.126, Agalawatta Road,

Matugama.

2. Kandammilage Dona

Kusumawathie (Deceased),

No.188, Agalawatta Road,

Matugama.

DEFENDANTS

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

SC / APPEAL / 23 / 2022

SC / HCCA / LA / 273 / 2019

WP / HCCA / KALU / 02 / 2014 (F)

DC Matugama: 4008 / L

N.F.N. RAZEEN 2

AND THEN BETWEEN

Liyanaarachchige Leelarathna

Dissanayake,

No.126, Agalawatta Road,

Matugama.

1st DEFENDANT – APPELLANT

-Vs-

Liyanaarachchige Jamis

Dissanayake (Deceased),

No.188, Agalawatta Road,

Matugama.

PLAINTIFF – RESPONDENT

Liyanaarachchige Nandani

Dissanayake,

No.188, Agalawatta Road,

Matugama.

SUBSTITUTED PLAINTIFF –

RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

Liyanaarachchige Jamis

Dissanayake (Deceased),

No.188, Agalawatta Road,

N.F.N. RAZEEN 3

Matugama.

PLAINTIFF – RESPONDENT -

APPELLANT

Liyanaarachchige Nandani

Dissanayake,

No.188, Agalawatta Road,

Matugama.

SUBSTITUTED PLAINTIFF –

RESPONDENT - APPELLANT

-Vs-

Liyanaarachchige Leelarathna

Dissanayake,

No.126, Agalawatta Road,

Matugama.

1st DEFENDANT – APPELLANT –

RESPONDENT

Before : A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J.

Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J. &

K. Priyantha Fernando, J.

N.F.N. RAZEEN 4

Counsel : Ranil Samarasooriya with Wimukthi Weragama

instructed by Upamalika Liyanage for the Substituted –

Plaintiff - Respondent - Appellant.

Chitta Swarnadhipathi with Sanjeewa Dassanayake and

Sasika Premanayake instructed by Lilanthi De Silva for the

01st Defendant - Appellant – Respondent.

Argued &

Decided on : 06.12.2024

A.H. M. D. Nawaz, J.

This Court has heard both the learned counsel for the Substituted-Plaintiff-Respondent-

Petitioner-Appellant (hereinafter known as the Plaintiff) and the 01st Defendant-

Appellant-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter sometimes referred to as “the

1st Defendant” or “the Defendant”).

By a plaint dated 16.05.2011, the Plaintiff instituted an action before the District Court

of Matugama seeking a revocation of a deed bearing No. 5206 dated 01/08/2023 on the

ground of gross ingratitude, among other reliefs that were prayed for. When this matter

was taken up for trial, two admissions were recorded, namely;

1. Jurisdiction of Court to try and determine this matter,

2. The admission that the impugned deed was a deed of gift.

Thereafter, in response to the Plaintiff’s issues, the defendant raised issues on the basis

that since it was a valid deed of gift, he should be declared the owner of the property

that was conveyed through the aforesaid deed.

N.F.N. RAZEEN 5

After the trial, the learned District Judge granted the reliefs prayed for by the Plaintiff.

In other words, the deed of gift was set aside by Court. The Defendant preferred an

appeal to the Civil Appellate High Court of Kalutara where the learned Civil Appellate

High Court judges in a long and comprehensive judgment allowed the appeal of the

Defendant.

This court observes that the learned judges of the Civil Appellate High Court have

indulged in an analysis of facts to ascertain whether the deed was a gift or not in the first

instance. Notwithstanding the fact that the 1st Defendant had pleaded and admitted at

the trial that it was a valid gift, the learned Civil Appellant High Court judges examined

the facts and decided in their judgment dated 11 June 2019 that the impugned deed

was in fact not a deed of gift and took the view that the District Judge should have

dismissed the action instituted by the Plaintiff.

The learned Civil Appellate High Court judges opined that this is not a gift in a strict

sense. It is on that basis that the learned Civil Appellate High Court judges dismissed

the action of the Plaintiff.

When this matter was taken up for argument before this Court, both learned counsel

advanced their respective arguments. Mr. Samarasooriya, the learned counsel for the

Plaintiff contended that once the nature and character of the document was admitted at

the trial by the 1st Defendant a deed of gift by way of a formal admission tendered before

court, there cannot be a withdrawal of such an admission as the admission was based on

facts.

Mr. Swarnadhipathi, learned Counsel for the 1st Defendant, sought to advance a

contrary argument by relying on a segment of the Plaintiff’s own testimony, namely that

the 1st Defendant, his son, had brought improper pressure to bear upon him in the

execution of the deed of gift. This submission is misconceived. Improper pressure is a

vitiating factor recognised by law, and evidence tending to establish such pressure

N.F.N. RAZEEN 6

fortifies the Plaintiff’s challenge to the deed rather than detracts from it. I shall return

to the question of improper pressure presently.

Mr. Swarnadhipathi in supporting the judgment of the Civil Appellate High Court

cited Wille’s Principles of South African Law and he drew our attention to a passage

at page 624 of that treatise where the learned author sets down the ingredients of what

a gift should be. One of the ingredients that was set down by Wille as constituting a deed

of gift is liberality - a large heartedness on the part of the donor.

Mr. Swarnadhipathi, the learned counsel for the 1st Defendant contends that since

admittedly there was fear instilled into the mind of the father (the Plaintiff) which

compelled him to execute this deed of gift, there was no liberality and the ingredient of a

valid gift is totally lacking. The import of this argument was that the deed never came

into existence as a gift but the Defendant must continue to enjoy the property.

These were the rival arguments that this Court heard on this appeal. We would consider

these arguments and determine whether a party who has admitted to the nature and

character of a document in a formal admission can resile from such admission, without

having raised it as a question of fact to be tried before the trier of facts.

The unqualified admission that it was a gift was made before court and it became

admissible against the maker of that admission by virtue of Section 58 of the Evidence

Ordinance. Section 58 refers to formal admissions. Justice Gamini Amaratunga

distinguished between formal admissions such as those found in Section 58 and informal

admissions in the case of Sivaratnam Vs. Dissanayake.

According to this section, an admission of fact made by a party or his agent before the

hearing or at the hearing or in any rule of proceeding in force at the time it has been

made need not be proved in any proceeding. Once a question of fact such as the existence

of a gift is admitted at the trial, that admission takes the place of proof.

N.F.N. RAZEEN 7

A question that has often arisen is how far an admission of fact or law or of a mixed

question of fact and law can bind a client in a civil action? In Uvais vs. Punyawathie

Fernando J. held that;

“It is sometimes permissible to withdraw admissions of questions of law,

but admission on questions of fact cannot be withdrawn. Quite apart

from any question of estoppel or prejudice, to permit admissions to be

withdrawn in these circumstances would subvert some of the most

fundamental principles of the Civil Procedure Code in regard to

pleadings and issues. Section 75 of the Civil Procedure Code not only

requires a defendant to admit or deny the several averments in the

plaint, but also to set out in detail, plainly and concisely the matters of

fact and law, and the circumstances of the case upon which he means to

rely for his defence; sections 46(2), 142D and 142H[2] of the Civil

Procedure Code oblige the Court upon the pleadings or upon the contents

of the documents produced, and after examination of the parties if

necessary, to ascertain the material propositions of fact or of law upon

which the parties are at variance, and thereupon to record issues on

which the right decision of the case depends; Explanation (2) of Section

150 of the Civil Procedure Code prohibits a party from making at the

trial, a case materially different from that which he has placed on record

and which his opponent is prepared to meet; the facts proposed to be

established by a party must in the whole amount to so much of the

material part of his case as is not admitted in his opponent’s pleadings”.

This case was followed by the Court of Appeal in the case of Jayalath vs.

Karunatilakawhere it was reiterated that “It is a well-established principle of law that

parties to a case cannot resile from admissions of fact. While it is sometimes permissible

to withdraw admissions on questions of law, admissions of fact cannot be withdrawn.”

It has to be observed that section 8 (1) of the Evidence (Special Provisions) Act, No. 14

of 1995 also provides that it is not necessary to prove any fact which is admitted by the

N.F.N. RAZEEN 8

opposing party. This subsection concurs with the provisions of section 58 of the Evidence

Ordinance, which states:

‘No fact need be proved in any proceeding which the parties thereto or their agents

agree to admit at the hearing, or which, before the hearing, they agree to admit

by any writing under their hands, or which by any rule of pleading in force at

the time they are deemed to have admitted by their pleadings:

Provided that the Court may, in its discretion, require the facts admitted to be

proved otherwise than by such admissions.”

If the Court is satisfied that the admission has been obtained by fraud or that there is

other good and sufficient cause, it will be in its discretion, under the proviso, to require

the fact to be proved otherwise than by such admission. The Court may require the proof

of facts admitted by the parties under the proviso to section 58 of the Evidence

Ordinance.

No issue or demurrer was raised that the admission was obtained by fraud. In such a

situation all ingredients of a gift have been admitted by the Defendant and a Plaintiff

can subsequently seek to invalidate the deed on the ground of ingratitude or gross

ingratitude, whichever appellation they attach to it. This is one such case founded on

that cause of action but while giving evidence, the Plaintiff also referred to improper

pressure being brought to bear on him by the son to obtain the conveyance in his

favor. But improper pressure was not his cause of action.

Admissions made before Court are binding on the 1st Defendant, and he is precluded

from leading evidence to resile from or rebut such admissions. The Court of Appeal has

drawn a clear distinction between admissions falling within Section 58 and those

contemplated by Section 17 of the Evidence Ordinance. Admissions on questions of fact

made before Court and attracting Section 58 are conclusive for the purposes of the

proceeding and cannot thereafter be withdrawn. By contrast, informal admissions made

outside Court, though admissible in evidence under Section 21 of the Evidence

Ordinance, remain open to explanation or rebuttal.

N.F.N. RAZEEN 9

We take the view that the 2nd admission made by the 1st Defendant in the trial binds him

and there cannot be any evidence led by the Plaintiff to renege on this admission. On

the question of admission I must in passing state that I held in the Court of Appeal that

even averments in pleadings which are uncontradicted in responsive pleadings can also

be acted upon as admissions.

Having dealt with this admission, we now come to the material portion of evidence that

is relied upon by the 1st Defendant-Appellant before this Court namely, the father made

the assertion in his testimony that the son-the 1st Defendant exercised improper pressure

on him to execute this deed. Even though this would provide a basis of invalidating a

deed, in fact the Plaintiff did not raise any issue on this basis to have this deed

invalidated. The only ground relied upon by the Plaintiff to set aside this deed was gross

ingratitude.

A party who comes to court alleging a particular ground of invalidation often gives

evidence which may provide another basis for his claim to succeed. In the quotidian life

of a practitioner and our civil courts, it so happens that such grounds, if they emanate

in the course of the testimonies are not considered by original court judges, because they

are not raised before them as issues.

However, that evidence exists on the record and it is open to an appellate tribunal such

as the High Court or the courts above the High Court to consider that ground and see

whether that will constitute a question of law. In other words, an appellate forum can

raise issues on a question of law because that question of law originates from the facts

that have been already led and are available for court. In such a situation that question

of law will qualify to be a pure question of law.

Quite contrary to the argument placed by the learned counsel for the 1st Defendant I take

the view that the evidence of improper pressure has not been contradicted or rebutted by

the 1st Defendant when the father gave that evidence. An uncontradicted item of evidence

has to be treated as an admission made by the Defendant in such a scenario - see the

N.F.N. RAZEEN 10

decision of H.N.G. Fernando, CJ in the case of Edrick de Silva v. Chandradasa de

Silva.

But the allegation of improper pressure was never the case of the Plaintiff in the District

Court nor was it a case of the Defendant. In fact, the Defendant’s case right

throughout had been one of a valid deed of gift in his favour. By keeping silent in the

face of the in court testimony of the father that the son (the 1st Defendant) pressured

him to convey the property, the son was making an admission that he did not secure a

valid gift born of the liberality of the father. That admitted fact alone is sufficient to

invalidate the deed on the ground of improper pressure or duress. But this was not the

pleaded cause of action by the Plaintiff and he sought a nullification of the deed only

on the ground of gross ingratitude. The learned District Judge found for the Plaintiff as

it was the case that was presented before the District Court.

However, the learned Counsel for the 1st defendant sought to rely on his admission of

improper pressure, adducing his own admission in court in order to show that the father

had not made a valid gift to him. If this was not a valid gift, it is clear as daylight that

the property must revert to the father.

For the reasons I have adumbrated above, that attempt is illogical and destroys the case

of the Defendant. When he was challenged on his gratitude towards his donor, it goes

without saying that his success in retaining the property must depend on his adduction

of evidence to disprove gross ingratitude. When a particular answer and issues were

presented before the original court on the basis that his gift was voluntary and born of

free will of his father, the 1st defendant must be treated as having advanced a case of

the validity of that deed before the learned District judge and it does not lie in his mouth

to deny the existence of a gift. The fact in issue would then be whether there was gross

ingratitude to invalidate the deed.

In contradistinction to a case that a party had put forward in the District Court, he could

not present a different case before the Supreme Court -Explanation 2 to Section 150 of

the Civil Procedure Code makes this patently clear.

N.F.N. RAZEEN 11

Explanation 2

The case enunciated must reasonably accord with the party's pleading, i.e., plaint or

answer, as the case may be. And no party can be allowed to make at the trial a case

materially different from that which he has placed on record, and which his opponent is

prepared to meet. And the facts proposed to be established must in the whole amount to so

much of the material part of his case as is not admitted in his opponent's pleadings.

This Court also finds an assertion by the 1st Defendant in the written submissions

made before the High Court that what he secured was a valid deed of gift.

In the circumstances, we find it quite contrary to logic and law that the judges of the

Civil Appellate High Court had to embark upon an inquiry to hold that this is not a valid

deed of gift. They were prohibited from doing so on the basis of the admissions, the case

presented before the learned District Judge and the written submissions that were

tendered in both the District Court and the Civil Appellate High Court. The first

Defendant could not have blown hot and cold-

If a person is alleged to have exercised duress or improper pressure which remains

uncontradicted and unimpeached by that person in the trial, that person cannot make a

virtue of that vitiating factor and use it in his favour before this Court.

In the circumstances, we are compelled to hold that the learned Civil Appellate High

Court judges were in error when they dismissed the Plaintiff’s case. We set aside the

judgment of the Civil Appellate High Court dated and affirm the judgment of the

District Court dated

In the circumstances, we allow the appeal preferred before this Court by the Plaintiff-

Respondent-Appellant.

The learned District Judge is directed to give effect to the reliefs that had been ordered

by the District Court as soon as this judgment is received by that Court.

N.F.N. RAZEEN 12

Judge of the Supreme Court

Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J. Judge of the Supreme Court

I agree.

K. Priyantha Fernando, J. Judge of the Supreme Court

I agree.