Page 1 of 27

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal from the

Judgement of the Provincial High Court of

the Western Province holden in Negombo

dated 7th November 2016 in HCALT 38/2013,

in terms of the Industrial Disputes Act and

the High Court of Provinces (Special

Provisions) Act, No. 10 of 1990 read with the

Rules of the Supreme Court

Kachchakaduge Frank Romeo Fernando,

No. 17/28, Raja Mawatha,

3rd Kurana, Negombo.

Applicant

S.C. Appeal No. 60/2018

SC/HC/LA 89/2016 Vs.

HCALT 38/2013

L.T. Application No. 21A/998/2010 Brandix Apparel Solutions Limited

(Formerly Brandix Casualwear Ltd),

No. 409, Galle Road, Colombo 03.

(having a factory at 21, Temple Road,

Ekala, Ja-ela).

Respondent

Page 2 of 27

AND BETWEEN

Kachchakaduge Frank Romeo Fernando,

No. 17/28, Raja Mawatha,

3rd Kurana, Negombo.

Applicant-Appellant

Vs.

Brandix Apparel Solutions Limited

(Formerly Brandix Casualwear Ltd),

No. 409, Galle Road, Colombo 03.

(having a factory at 21, Temple Road, Ekala,

Ja-ela).

Respondent-Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

Brandix Apparel Solutions Limited

(Formerly Brandix Casualwear Ltd)

No. 409, Galle Road, Colombo 03.

(having a factory at 21, Temple Road, Ekala,

Ja-ela).

Respondent-Respondent-Petitioner

Vs.

Kachchakaduge Frank Romeo Fernando,

No. 17/28, Raja Mawatha,

3rd Kurana, Negombo.

Applicant-Appellant-Respondent

Page 3 of 27

Before: Jayantha Jayasuriya, P.C., C.J.

Vijith K. Malalgoda, P.C., J.

Janak De Silva, J.

Counsel:

Suren Fernando with Khyati Wickramanayake and Sanjit Dias for the Respondent-

Respondent-Appellant

P.K. Prince Perera for the Applicant-Appellant-Respondent

Written Submissions filed on:

03.07.2019 and 11.08.2021 by the Respondent-Respondent-Appellant

19.06.2019 and 02.08.2021 by the Applicant-Appellant-Respondent

Argued on: 30.07.2021

Decided on: 05.05.2022

Janak De Silva, J.

The Applicant-Appellant-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as “Respondent”) has

joined the Respondent-Respondent-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as

“Appellant”) as a Quality Executive. While serving as Assistant Manager (Finishing)

at the Appellant's plant in Seeduwa, the Respondent was suspended from service

on 07.10.2009. The Respondent was told verbally that the reasons for the

suspension will be communicated later. Subsequently, on 09.10.2009, a notice of

suspension of service (A2) without pay effective 07.10.2009 was served on the

Respondent, which contained two charges.

Page 4 of 27

Thereafter, the Respondent was informed of a disciplinary inquiry (A4) against him

on 27.10.2009. In response, the Respondent pointed out that he had not yet been

served with a charge sheet nor afforded an opportunity to show cause (A5).

Subsequently, the disciplinary inquiry was postponed and the Respondent was

given a formal charge sheet containing three charges and asked to show cause (A8).

After the Respondent responded to the show cause letter, a disciplinary inquiry

was carried out and he was convicted on two charges.

The findings of the disciplinary inquiry were communicated to the Respondent by

letter dated 11.01.2010 (A13). He was advised that as a result of the findings, he is

subject to a punitive transfer to a factory in Polonnaruwa, owned by the Appellant,

effective 18.01.2010. He was also informed that if he does not report to work at

the Polonnaruwa factory, he will be deemed to have vacated post. The letter then

indicated that his work would be monitored for a period of six months. The services

of the Respondent were to be terminated if he failed to comply with the Appellant's

rules and regulations during this period.

In response, by letter dated 28.01.2010 (A16), the Respondent rejected the

contents of the letter dated 11.01.2010 (A13). He claimed that the disciplinary

inquiry was conducted in violation of the principles of natural justice in an unjust

and unreasonable way. The Respondent stated that imposing a punitive transfer

based on the findings of such an inquiry is unfair and unreasonable. The

Respondent requested the Appellant to invalidate the letter dated 11.01.2010

(A13). He indicated his willingness to comply with the transfer order and report to

work at the factory located at Polonnaruwa if the Appellant removed the punitive

conditions contained in the transfer order.

Page 5 of 27

Subsequently by letter incorrectly dated 05.01.2010 (A18), which should read as

05.02.2010, the Respondent informed the Appellant that due to the Appellant’s

failure to reply to his letter dated 28.01.2010 (A16) and as the Appellant is bent on

punishing him for acts he did not commit, he has been compelled to come to the

conclusion that the Appellant has constructively terminated his services with effect

from 01.02.2010. The Respondent concluded by stating that he will accordingly

seek suitable judicial remedies.

The Appellant, by letter dated 10.02.2010 (A21) rejected the contents of the letter

dated 28.01.2010 (A16). The Respondent was informed that he is required to report

to work by 22.02.2010 and that the failure to do so will compel the Appellant to

deem that the Respondent has vacated post.

The Respondent however did not report to work and the Appellant informed him

by letter dated 25.02.2010 (A20) that he is considered to have vacated post.

However, prior to this communication, on 24.02.2010, the Respondent filed an

application with the Negombo Labour Tribunal stating that his services had been

terminated in a constructive manner. The Appellant filed answer denying

termination and maintained that the Respondent had vacated post by failing to

comply with the transfer order.

At the conclusion of the inquiry before the Labour Tribunal, the learned President

dismissed the application on the ground that constructive termination had not

been proved. He went on to observe that the Respondent was in transferable

service and liable to be transferred by his employer in the normal course of

business.

Page 6 of 27

The learned President referred extensively to the judgment of Amaratunga J. in Sri

Lanka Insurance Corporation Ltd. v. Jathika Sewaka Sangamaya [(2011) 2 Sri.L.R.

114], where it was held that if an employee who was issued a transfer order at the

conclusion of a disciplinary inquiry, fails to comply with the said order and keeps

away from work without obtaining leave, he, by his own conduct, secures his own

discharge from the contract of employment with his employer. Accordingly, the

learned President concluded that the Respondent had vacated his post by refusing

to comply with the transfer order unless the punitive terms contained in it is

removed and that there has been no termination of by the Appellant. The learned

President concluded that as such, the Labour Tribunal lacked jurisdiction to inquire

into the application made by the Respondent.

Aggrieved by the order of the Labour Tribunal, the Respondent appealed to the

High Court of the Western Province holden in Negombo which held that the

Appellant had unjustly and unreasonably terminated the services of the

Respondent and ordered reinstatement with back wages.

This Court on 03.04.2018, granted leave to appeal on the following questions of

law contained in paragraph 10 of the Petition of Appeal dated 15.12.2016:

(a) Did His Lordship of the High Court err in law in failing to recognize that

the jurisdiction of the High Court was restricted to questions of law?

(d) Did His Lordship of the High Court err in law in failing to apply principle

of law relating to burden of proof, especially in the context where

termination was denied?

Page 7 of 27

(e) Did His Lordship of the High Court err in law in failing to properly

consider and apply the principles of law applicable to transfer of

employees and the principle of ‘Comply and Complain’?

(f) Did His Lordship of the High Court err in law in failing to recognize

there was no termination of Respondent’s services as alleged?

(g) Did His Lordship of the High Court err in law in failing to recognize that

the Respondent has vacated post?

I shall first address the question of law set out in (d).

Jurisdiction of the Labour Tribunal

The Respondent invoked the jurisdiction of the Labour Tribunal alleging that

constructive termination had taken place. In terms of section 31B(1)(a) of the

Industrial Disputes Act as amended, the jurisdiction of the Labour Tribunal is

engaged only where there has been a termination of the services of the workman

by the employer. In the absence of such termination in law, the Labour Tribunal is

without jurisdiction.

Judicial precedent establishes that the jurisdiction of the Labour Tribunal is also

engaged in cases of constructive termination. Here the workman alleges that the

employer has constructively terminated his services although the employer, as in

this case, denies any termination.

Page 8 of 27

The learned Judge of the High Court proceeded on the basis that the transfer order

was invalid due to the domestic inquiry not been conducted in a just and fair

manner. The learned High Court Judge held that by failing to present the

proceedings of the domestic inquiry to the Labour Tribunal, the Appellant had

failed to establish that it did not act in an unjust and unfair manner towards the

Respondent. He further held that while he is in agreement with the reasoning in Sri

Lanka Insurance Corporation Ltd. v. Jathika Sewaka Sangamaya (Supra.), the

principle of comply and complain did not apply to the instant case as the

disciplinary inquiry was not conducted in a fair manner. The learned High Court

Judge held that the comply and complain principle did not apply where the transfer

order was illegal.

The learned High Court Judge expressed his views as follows:

“වැඩිදුරටත් විනය ච ෝදනාවට අදාළව විනය පරීක්ෂනයක් පවත්වන ලද බවට

වගඋත්තරකාර පර්ශ්වය සාක්ි දුන්න ද, කම්කරු විනිශ් යාධිකරණචේ දී

ඉල්ලුම්කරුට විරුද්ධව ඇති ච ෝදනා සම්බන්ධචයන් කිසිදු සාක්ියක් චෙචෙයවා

නැත. අවෙ වශචයන් විනය පරීක්ෂනචේ සටෙන් චෙෝ වාර්තාවක් ඉදිරිපත් කර නැත.

චම් අනුව, චස්වාචයෝජකයා ඉල්ලුම්කරු චකචරහි අසාධාරණ චෙෝ අයුක්ති සෙගත

චේතනාවකින් කටයුතු චනාකචල්ල යැයි කීෙට කිසිදු කරුණක් අධිකරණයට ඉදිරිපත්

වී චනාෙැති බවට ො තීරණය කරමි. චෙෙ කරුණු අනුව, කම්කරු

විනිශ් යාධිකරණචේ තීන්දුව පාදක වු අවනත වී පැමිණිල්ලල කළ යුතුය යන (Comply

and Complain) රීතිය චෙෙ වගඋත්තරකරු චකචරහි චයාදා ගත චනාෙැකි බව ො

තීරණය කරමි.”

Page 9 of 27

Burden of Proof

In this context, the question arises as to who bears the burden of proving

constructive termination so as to engage the jurisdiction of the Labour Tribunal.

In The Ceylon University Clerical and Technical Association, Peradeniya v. The

University of Ceylon, Peradeniya (72 N.L.R. 84 at 90) and Anderson v. Husny

[(2001) 1 Sri.L.R. 168 at 175] it was held that although Labour Tribunals are not

bound by the provisions in the Evidence Ordinance, the principles contained

therein are a useful guide in determining the matters before it. In Indrajith Rodrigo

v. Central Engineering Consultancy Bureau [(2009) 1 Sri.L.R. 248 at 260] it was

explained that although the equitable nature of the jurisdiction of Labour Tribunals

has consistently been recognized in the decisions of our courts, in the process of

redressing grievances of workmen in a just and equitable manner, one cannot lose

sight of procedural propriety and evidentiary legitimacy.

Section 102 of the Evidence Ordinance reads:

“The burden of proof in a suit or proceeding lies on that person who would

fail if no evidence at all were given on either side.”

Accordingly, the burden is on the workman to establish that there has been a

constructive termination of services so as to vest jurisdiction in the Labour Tribunal

as the workman will fail if no evidence is given on either side. Therefore, the onus

was on the Respondent to prove that his services were constructively terminated

as the Appellant had denied termination.

Page 10 of 27

In this respect the decision in Indrajith Rodrigo v. Central Engineering Consultancy

Bureau (Supra.) is illustrative as it was held that in Labour Tribunal proceedings

where the termination of services of a workman is admitted by the respondent, the

onus is on the latter to justify termination by showing that there were just grounds

for doing so and that the punishment imposed was not disproportionate to the

misconduct of the workman. It was further held that the burden of proof lies on

him who affirms, and not upon him who denies as expressed in the maxim ei

incimbit probatio, qui dicit, non qui negat.

Conversely, where the employer denies termination as in this case, the burden is

on the workman to prove that there was termination as well as that the termination

was unjust and unlawful. The onus is not on the employer to prove that the

termination was just and lawful when the termination is denied.

Accordingly, I hold that the learned High Court Judge erred in law in placing the

burden of proof on the Appellant to establish that it did not act in an unfair and

unjust manner towards the Respondent. Consequently, question of law (d) is

answered in the affirmative.

Next, I will examine question of law (e).

Comply and Complain

The learned counsel for the Respondent submitted that the punishment transfer

given to the Respondent by letter dated 11.01.2010 (A13) is perse mala fide, bad

and misconceived in law as the disciplinary inquiry was held in breach of the

principles of natural justice in an unfair and unjust manner. Furthermore, it was

argued that an employer's general right to transfer an employee within the

organization is not an absolute right.

Page 11 of 27

Relying on the decision in Janatha Estates Development Board and Others v.

Kurukuladitta [(1990) 2 Sri.L.R. 169], the learned counsel for the Respondent

contended that the employee is entitled to disobey the transfer, where the transfer

order is tainted with mala fide intentions and that in these circumstances, the

learned Judge of the High Court did not err in law in holding that the principle of

comply and complain is not applicable to the instant case.

As correctly submitted by the learned counsel for the Respondent, in Janatha

Estates Development Board and Others v. Kurukuladitta (Supra.) it was held that

an employee is justified in refusing to comply with a transfer order if the transfer

order is mala fide. Moreover Weeramantry J., in Ceylon Estates Staffs' Union v.

The Superintendent, Meddecombra Estate, Watagoda (73 N.L.R. 278 at 287),

observed that there is no general principle that an employee is in all cases bound

to accept a transfer order under protest for there may be cases where the mala

fides prompting such order is self-evident or the circumstances of the transfer so

humiliating that the employee may well refuse to act upon it even under protest.

This was cited with approval by Fernando J. in his dissenting judgement in

Nandasena v. The Uva Regional Transport Board [(1993) 1 Sri.L.R. 318 at 327]

where he observed that an employee has a limited right, bona fide to challenge an

improper transfer order.

Nonetheless, Goonewardene J. delivering the majority judgment in Nandasena v.

The Uva Regional Transport Board (Supra.) held that even where the transfer

order was invalid, the employee must obey it. He could appeal against the order

but he cannot refuse to carry it out. He must comply and complain. I must add that

Amaratunga J. in Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation Ltd. v. Jathika Sewaka

Page 12 of 27

Sangamaya (Supra.) was dealing with what he considered to be a legal transfer

order, since he held (at page 125), that the High Court had failed to consider the

legal result of the workman’s total refusal to comply with a disciplinary order made

after a disciplinary inquiry regarding which he had no cause to complain.

Accordingly, the question whether an employee is bound to comply and complain

against an invalid transfer appears to be open for definitive determination.

However, this is not a matter which Court needs to examine in the present case as

I am of the view that the impugned transfer order has not been established by the

Respondent to be invalid. Let me now set out the reasons for this conclusion.

The main thrust of the Respondent’s argument is that the impugned transfer order

is invalid as the disciplinary inquiry that led to it was conducted in breach of the

rules of natural justice. He attempted to justify this position on a number of

grounds.

At the outset, the Respondent complained that he was not given the right of

representation at the disciplinary inquiry. He stated that, by letter dated

31.10.2009 (A9), he had requested permission to have a defence officer. The

Respondent claims that his application was refused by letter dated 19.12.2009

(A11). The issue to be addressed is whether an employee is entitled to

representation at a disciplinary inquiry.

In Chulasubadra De Silva v. The University of Colombo and Others [(1986) 2

Sri.L.R. 288] it was held that a university student appearing before an Examination

Committee on a charge of having committed an examination offence is not entitled

as of right to have legal representation.

Page 13 of 27

A similar approach was adopted in Frazer v. Mudge and Others [ (1975) 3 All E. R.

78] where it was held that a prisoner is not entitled, as of right, to be legally

represented before a Board of Visitors. Lord Denning in Enderby Town Football

Club Ltd. v. The Football Association Ltd. [(1971) 1 All E. R. 215 at 218] observed:

"… is a party who is charged before a domestic tribunal entitled as of right to

be legally represented? Much depends on what the rules say about it. When

the rules say nothing, then the party has no absolute right to be legally

represented. It is a matter for the discretion of the tribunal. It is master of its

own procedure; and if it in the proper exercise of its discretion, decline to

allow legal representation, the courts will not interfere."

S.R. De Silva in Disciplinary Action and Disciplinary Procedures in the Private

Sector [Monograph No. 2, 3rd Edition, page 22] states that under no circumstances

should the accused employee be represented by an outsider, e.g. a lawyer or an

official of his parent union.

It is thus clear that an employee is not entitled as of right to legal representation at

a disciplinary inquiry . Nonetheless, the question remains whether the Respondent

had a right to be represented through a defending officer and if so, whether that

right is subject to any limitations.

In R v. Secretary of State for the Home Department and Others [(1984) 1 All E. R.

799] it was held that although a prisoner appearing before a board of visitors in a

disciplinary charge was not entitled as of right to have legal representation or the

assistance of a friend or advisor, as a matter of natural justice, a board of visitors

had a discretion to allow such representation or assistance before it.

Page 14 of 27

S.R. De Silva in Disciplinary Action and Disciplinary Procedures in the Private

Sector [Supra.] goes on to state that if existing practice allows representation, the

representative of the accused employee should be either a co-employee or an

official of his Branch Union. In my view, such a practice is justified as the facts

leading to a disciplinary inquiry is essentially an internal matter between the

employee and the management and such matters should not reach the public

domain at that stage.

In this context, I observe that although the Respondent testified that he was not

permitted to have a defending officer, it transpired during his evidence that he was

permitted to get a defending officer from within the Appellant’s establishment

[Appeal Brief page 87].

Moreover, it is observed that the prosecuting officer was not a lawyer. No evidence

was adduced to establish that the Appellant's disciplinary rules conferred a right to

outside representation on an employee at a disciplinary inquiry. In these

circumstances, I hold that the rules of natural justice have not been breached on

the alleged ground of non-representation.

The learned counsel for the Respondent then drew our attention to letter dated

12.11.2009 (A19) in which the Respondent complained about the conduct of the

prosecuting officer. However, the alleged unlawful conduct of the prosecuting

officer cannot result in the breach of the rules of natural justice unless it is proved

that the inquiring officer is guilty of such breach. The burden to do so was on the

Respondent which he failed to do.

Page 15 of 27

Further, the learned counsel for the Respondent submitted that the Respondent

had not received a copy of the inquiry proceedings. I am not persuaded that, even

though this allegation is true, it invalidates the disciplinary inquiry. Moreover, S.R.

De Silva in Disciplinary Action and Disciplinary Procedures in the Private Sector

[Monograph No. 2, 3rd Edition, page 27] states that unless it is obligatory to do so

in terms of a Collective Agreement, a transcript of the proceedings of the inquiry

should not be given to the accused employee.

Next the learned counsel for the Respondent submitted that the punishment

transfer given to the Respondent by letter dated 11.01.2010 (A13) is perse mala

fide.

Judicial precedent unequivocally establish that a transfer order made mala fide is

unjustifiable and amounts to constructive termination. [See The Superintendent,

Baranagalle Estate v. Supaiya (S.C 108/69, S.C.M. 11.11.1972), Gurusinghe v.

Ceylon Theatres Ltd. (S.C. 122/69, S.C.M. 19.01.72), Ceylon Estate Staffs’ Union v.

Ratwatte, Superintendent, Frotoft Group, Ramboda (S.C. 186/70, S.C.M.

16.7.74)].

However, I note that the application made by the Respondent to the Labour

Tribunal does not contain any allegation of bad faith against the Appellant.

The burden of proving bad faith on the part of the Appellant, as alleged, was on the

Respondent and the burden is heavy. It is an evidentiary principle recognized in

administrative law.

Page 16 of 27

In Principles of Administrative Law (Jain & Jain, 7th Edition 2011-page 1202) it is

stated as follows:

“While the plea of mala fides is raised quite often before the courts to

challenge discretionary decisions, it succeeds rarely; it is extremely difficult to

prove mala fides. The courts insist that the plaintiff who seeks to invalidate

an order should prove the allegation of bad faith to the court’s satisfaction.

This is quite a difficult task to do and it is only in an exceptional fact-situation

that such plea can be substantiated to the court’s satisfaction.”

This principle has also been used in industrial conflicts. In Ceylon Mercantile Union

v. Ceylon Cold Stores Ltd. and Another [(1995) 1 Sri.L.R. 261 at 269] Wijetunge J.

quoted with endorsement the following statement in Malhotra in the Law of

Industrial Disputes (1968 edition) at 479-481:

"It is, however, for the party alleging mala fides to lead reliable evidence in

support of the said plea. A finding the management has not acted bona fide

will ordinarily not be reached if the materials are such that a reasonable- man

could have come to conclusion which the management has reached.”

Weeramantry J. had in fact earlier in Ceylon Estates Staffs' Union v. The

Superintendent, Meddecombra Estate, Watagoda (Supra. at 282) quoted with

approval the approach taken by the Indian Supreme Court that Industrial Tribunals

should interfere if a transfer order is made mala fide or for the ulterior purpose of

punishing an employee for his trade union activities, and that a finding of mala

fides should be reached by Industrial Tribunals only if there is sufficient and proper

evidence in support of the finding.

Page 17 of 27

To support a plea of mala fides the Court must positively conclude that the

employer could have been acting only with a dishonest motive, and it is not

sufficient to conclude that it was probably so [See Ramankutty v. State of Kerale

((1972) IILJ 509 Ker. at paragraph 26), Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu (1974 A.I.R.

(SC) 555 at 586)]

Notwithstanding the failure on the part of the Respondent to specifically plead

mala fides against the Appellant, a careful examination of the evidence shows that

that no cogent evidence has been led by the Respondent to establish mala fides on

the part of the Appellant.

One of the primary grounds for claiming that the transfer was made in bad faith

was that it was a demotion of the Respondent. The learned counsel for the

Respondent submitted that the transfer of the Respondent from the position of an

“Assistant Manager-Finishing” at Seeduwa plant to the post of “Washing

Coordinator” at the Polonnaruwa plant amounted to a demotion.

However, the Appellant maintained throughout the case that the transfer did not

involve a demotion or a break in service. This position was specifically asserted in

letters dated 11.01.2010 (A13) and 10.02.2010 (A21) sent by the Appellant.

Weeramantry J. in Ceylon Estates Staffs' Union v. The Superintendent,

Meddecombra Estate, Watagoda (Supra. 284) placed much reliance on a similar

assertion by the employer in that case in concluding that the transfer was not a

demotion. Furthermore, this allegation was expressly rejected during the cross-

examination of the witness for the Appellant [Appeal Brief page 308]. Moreover,

the Appellant had by the Letter of Appointment (A1), specifically reserved the right

to transfer the Respondent to any other post of equivalent status. In these

Page 18 of 27

circumstances, the evidence does not establish any demotion or break in service of

the Respondent as a result of the punitive transfer. Thus, the Respondent has failed

to establish mala fides.

On the contrary, the evidence demonstrates the good faith of the Appellant. For

example, by letter dated 10.02.2010 (A21) the Respondent was informed that he

will be paid back wages for the period of suspension and that a mutual transfer to

a place of choice of the Respondent can be considered at the end of the six-month

period specified in letter dated 11.01.2010 (A13). Moreover, the Appellant

rescheduled the disciplinary inquiry and gave the Respondent time to show cause

when it was pointed out that he had not yet been served with a charge sheet nor

afforded an opportunity to show cause.

It is also pertinent to observe that the Respondent complained that the transfer to

Polonnaruwa is unfair, unreasonable and financially detrimental to him.

Nonetheless by letter dated 28.01.2010 (A16) the Respondent informed the

Appellant that he is willing to comply with the transfer order and report to work at

the factory located at Polonnaruwa if the punitive conditions contained in the

transfer order are removed. It is difficult to reconcile the contradictory positions

taken by the Respondent. Such inconsistent positions negate the allegations of

mala fides against the Appellant and fortifies the view that the Respondent was

looking for excuses not to comply with the transfer order.

Another ground relied on by the Respondent to substantiate that the impugned

transfer order was invalid is that it will adversely affect him financially to go and

work at Polonnaruwa.

Page 19 of 27

In Ceylon Estates Staffs' Union v. The Superintendent, Meddecombra Estate,

Watagoda (Supra. at 282) Weeramantry J. took the view that one limitation on the

right of transfer is that the employee cannot be made to suffer financially.

However, S.R. De Silva in Transfer (Monograph No. 7, Revised 1995, page 11)

states that any monetary loss does not render a transfer unjustified. I am in

agreement with this proposition particularly as the Letter of Appointment (A1)

issued to the Respondent by the Appellant states as follows:

“Your appointment will be to the position of Quality Executive on the

Executive grade, with effect from 11.02.2002 in the regular establishment of

the company but the company reserves to itself the right to transfer you to

any other post of equivalent status and responsibility permanently,

temporarily or on secondment within L.M. Apparels (Pvt) Ltd or any of its

Associate companies, subsidiaries or holding company as may be required”

Consequently, the Respondent knew that he was in a transferable position that

could have financial implications. I hold that in these circumstances for a punitive

transfer to be unjustified on the ground that the employee has been made to suffer

financially, the employee must establish that he has been made to suffer

unreasonable financial loss as a result of the punitive transfer. In fact,

Weeramantry J. took this view in Ceylon Estates Staffs' Union v. The

Superintendent, Meddecombra Estate, Watagoda (Supra. 283) by holding that no

material had been placed before the Labour Tribunal by the applicant to support

his submission that his emoluments would be affected to an extent rendering

justifiable his refusal to accept a transfer. The Respondent has failed to adduce any

such evidence in this matter.

Page 20 of 27

Finally, the question arises whether the Respondent could have been given a

punishment transfer. The general right of an employer to transfer an employee

within his service is well recognized in our legal system [Ceylon Estates Staffs'

Union v. The Superintendent, Meddecombra Estate, Watagoda (Supra. 281-282)].

Moreover, the position of the Appellant is that the Respondent is in transferable

service, which has not been challenged by the Respondent probably in view of the

contents of the Letter of Appointment (A1).

I have to add that the Respondent was found guilty of verbal sexual harassment

against an employee of the Seeduwa plant. It should be noted that it is the duty of

an employer to provide a safe and supportive work environment for its employees.

The productivity of the employee and the company will not increase unless such an

environment exists. Sexual harassment in any form should be dealt with severely

because it will otherwise pollute the working environment and affect employee

morale. In these circumstances, it was virtually difficult for the Appellant to retain

the Respondent at the same plant because it would have had a negative impact on

the workplace. Therefore, there was nothing unfair or illegal about the punitive

transfer given to the Respondent.

I hold that where the contract of employment expressly or impliedly provides for a

transfer, and the employee is given a punishment transfer consequent to the

conduct of a valid disciplinary inquiry, the employee cannot reject outright the

transfer order and must comply and complain.

For all the foregoing reasons, I hold that the impugned transfer order is valid and

that the comply and complain principle applies to the Respondent. Accordingly, I

answer question of law (e) in the affirmative.

Page 21 of 27

I will next examine questions of law (f) and (g) together as they are connected.

Constructive Termination

As the position of the Respondent before the Labour Tribunal was that his services

were constructively terminated, it is apposite to scrutinize this concept in some

detail given the dearth of authority on the matter.

The contract of employment attracts certain fundamental principles of the law of

contracts and therefore any examination of this concept must begin with an

examination of a few fundamental principles in the law of contracts relevant to the

matter before us.

A contract may be breached by one party failing to perform an obligation in full or

in part undertaken by him or by one party repudiating the contract.

However, not every breach will entitle the innocent party to terminate the

contract. Where the breach is of a term which goes to the root of the contract, the

innocent party has the right to terminate the contract. Here the breach occurs

where the guilty party fails to render performance at the time of performance of

the term, which goes to the root of the contract. The innocent party has a choice

of deciding whether or not to terminate the contract. The choice must be

communicated to the guilty party.

A contract may also be breached by one party repudiating the contract.

Weeramantry in The Law of Contracts (Volume II, page 879) observes:

“Repudiation may occur either expressly, as where a party states in so many

words that he will not discharge the obligations he has undertaken, or

impliedly, as where by his own act a party disables himself from performance

or makes it impossible for the other party to render performance.”

Page 22 of 27

Here the repudiation occurs prior to the due time of performance. The repudiation

must be of a term which goes to the root of the contract. Where one party has

repudiated the contract, the other party has two options. Firstly, he can accept the

repudiation and treat the contract as having been terminated and seek legal

remedies. Alternatively, the innocent party can waive the repudiation and consider

the contract as still subsisting.

Therefore, repudiation will result in the termination of the contract only where the

innocent party accepts the repudiation for as Asquith L.J., stated in Howard v.

Pickford Tool Co. LD. [(1951) 1 K.B. 417 at 421], “an unaccepted repudiation is a

thing writ in water and of no value to anybody; it confers no legal rights of any sort

of kind.” This position has been accepted in Noorbhai et al. v. Karuppen Chetty (27

N.L.R. 325), Senanayake v. Anthonisz and Another (69 N.L.R. 225 at 229) and by

Weeramantry in The Law of Contracts (Supra. 880).

It has been questioned whether this principle in the law of contracts applies to

contracts of employment. In Vine v. National Dock Labour Board [(1956) 1 Q.B.

658,674] and Sanders v. Ernest A. Neale Ltd. [(1974) L.C.R. 565(N.I.R.C.)] the view

has been taken that as contracts of employment are sui generis, repudiatory

conduct automatically brings an end to the contract of employment and that there

is no right of election on the innocent party. However, in Thomas Marshall

(Exports) Ltd. v. Guinle [(1978) I.C.R. 905] and Gunton v. Richmond-upon-Thames

London Borough Council [(1980) 3 W.L.R. 714] it was held that even where

contracts of employment are concerned the innocent party must accept the

repudiation before the contract is terminated.

Page 23 of 27

It must be borne in mind that the contract of employment provides an employee

with livelihood and as such he must be given the choice of electing to consider

whether the contract of employment should be considered to have been

constructively terminated due to the repudiation by the employer. Similarly, the

employer relies on the services rendered by the employee to his business and

should also be given the choice of electing to consider whether the contract of

employment should be considered to have been constructively terminated due to

the repudiation by the employee. Accordingly, in my view, even in employment

contracts, the innocent party must accept the repudiation for the contract to be

terminated.

Accordingly, where an employee claims that there has been constructive

termination by the employer due to the employer repudiating the contract of

employment, the employee must communicate to the employer that he is

accepting the repudiation. It is only then may he seek to invoke the jurisdiction of

the Labour Tribunal on the ground of constructive termination in terms of section

31A(1)(a) of the Industrial Disputes Act.

The difficult question is what type of conduct may amount to constructive

termination of a contract of employment. It has been held that whether there has

been constructive termination or not depends on the facts and circumstances of

each case [See Pfizer Limited v. Rasanayagam (1991) 1 Sri.L.R. 290; Thaksala

Weavers Ltd. v. Dhanawathie Perera and Others (1994) 3 Sri.L.R. 116; J.H. Jacotine

and Another v. Air Lanka Limited & Others (S.C.(CHC)Appeal 26/2009, S.C.M.

03.02.2012); Christopher W.J. Silva v. Sri Lankan Airlines Limited (S.C. Appeal

212/2016, S.C.M. 22.03.2019]. Although this is correct in principle and is a good

Page 24 of 27

starting point, a more helpful formulation is that the conduct of the guilty party

relied on by the innocent party to establish that there has been repudiation of the

contract must be examined.

In Western Excavating (ECC) Ltd. v. Sharp [(1978) 2 WLR 344 at 349] Lord Denning

enunciated the following formula:

“If the employer is guilty of conduct which is a significant breach going to the

root of the contract of employment; or which shows that the employer no

longer intends to be bound by one or more of the essential terms of the

contract; then the employee is entitled to treat himself as discharged from

any further performance. If he does so, then he terminates the contract by

reason of the employer's conduct. He is constructively dismissed.”

Accordingly, for there to be constructive termination due to the conduct of the

employer, the breach by the employer must go to the root of the contract of

employment or must be an indication that he is no longer bound by an essential

term of the contract of employment. A breach will be considered as going to the

root of the contract of employment if the breach would render the performance of

the rest of the contract by the party in default a thing differing in substance from

what the other party has stipulated for.

Courts have held the following instances to be constructive termination: requiring

the employee to report to a junior officer is tantamount to a demotion [Pfizer

Limited v. Rasanayagam (Supra.)]; reversion of a workman’s post to his former

post amounts to a demotion [Superintendent, Liddesdele Group, Halgranoya v.

Ponniah [C.A. No. 453/83, C.A.M. 14.05.1993]; Where an employer failed to take

disciplinary proceedings and at the same time did not allow the workman to work

Page 25 of 27

[Thaksala Weavers Ltd. v. Dhanawathie Perera and Others (Supra.)]; Sudden,

unforeseen and unnotified long distance transfers [Mahagamage Chandramadu

and Others v. Paradigm Clothing (Private) Limited & Others (S.C. Appeal No.

106/2014, S.C.M. 19.12.2019].

At this point it must be stressed that constructive termination cannot occur where

there has only been a breach of reasonable conduct without there being a breach

of an express or implied term of the contract of employment which goes to its root

or foundation [See Wetherall v. Lynn (1977) IRLR 336 ; Western Excavating (ECC)

Ltd. v. Sharp (Supra.); Christopher W.J. Silva v. Sri Lankan Airlines Limited

(Supra.)].

Accordingly, in order to establish constructive termination, the Respondent should

have proved that:

(a) The Appellant is guilty of conduct which is a significant breach going to

the root of the contract of employment; or

(b) The Appellant has repudiated the contract of employment by showing

that the Appellant no longer intends to be bound by one or more of the

essential terms of the contract going to the root of the contract of

employment.

(c) The Respondent notified the Appellant that he is terminating the contract

of employment due to the breach by the employer or that he is accepting

the repudiation by the employer.

Page 26 of 27

The Respondent has given the required notification in terms of (c). However, for

the reasons discussed more fully above, the Respondent has failed to establish that

the Appellant is guilty of conduct which is a significant breach going to the root of

the contract of employment or that there has been a repudiation of the contract of

employment by the Appellant showing that it no longer intends to be bound by one

or more of the essential terms of the contract going to the root of the contract of

employment. The impugned transfer was not made mala fide or in contravention

of the rules of natural justice or a demotion . Accordingly, the Respondent has failed

to establish that there has been a constructive termination of his services.

On the other hand, the Respondent has failed to comply and then complain against

the valid punitive transfer. In Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation Ltd. v. Jathika

Sewaka Sangamava [Supra.], it was held that if an employee who was issued a

transfer order at the conclusion of a disciplinary inquiry, fails to comply with the

said order and keeps away from work without obtaining leave, he, by his own

conduct, secures his own discharge from the contract of employment with his

employer. Therefore, the learned High Court Judge erred in concluding that there

has been constructive termination.

Accordingly, the questions of law (f) and (g) are answered in the affirmative.

The only remaining question to be answered is (a). In my view, the learned High

Court Judge did appreciate that the jurisdiction of the High Court was limited to

questions of law. However, for the reasons set out above, he answered them

erroneously. Accordingly, question of law (a) must be answered in the negative.

Page 27 of 27

For all the foregoing reasons, I set aside the judgment of the High Court of Western

Province holden in Negombo dated 07.11.2016 and affirm the order of the learned

President of the Labour Tribunal of Negombo dated 14.12.2012.

I make no order as to costs.

Appeal allowed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Jayantha Jayasuriya, P.C., C.J.

I agree.

CHIEF JUSTICE

Vijith K. Malalgoda, P.C., J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT