1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Special Leave to

Appeal from the judgment of the Court of Appeal of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka under and in terms of Article 128(2) of the Constitution. Thuraiappah Nithyanandan No. 12902/1, Nawala Road, Narahenpita, Colombo 5.

Plaintiff SC Appeal No: 101/2009 Vs. SC/SPL/LA Application No. 47/2009 CA/LA Application No: 223/2003 District Court of Colombo Case No. 27115/M

Sherman Sons Limited. No.23, Sri Sangaraja Mawatha, Colombo 10.

Defendant

AND BETWEEN Sherman Sons Limited. No.23, Sri Sangaraja Mawatha, Colombo 10. Defendant-Appellant

Vs. Thuraiappah Nithyanandan. No. 12902/1, Nawala Road, Narahenpita, Colombo 5. Plaintiff-Respondent AND NOW BETWEEN

2

Sherman Sons (Private) Limited. (formerly known as Sherman Sons Limited.) No.23, Sri Sangaraja Mawatha, Colombo 10. Presently of No. 194F, Nawala Road, Narahenpita, Colombo 5.

Defendant-Appellant-Appellant Vs

Thuraiappah Nithyanandan No. 12902/1, Nawala Road, Narahenpita, Colombo 5.

Plaintiff-Respondent- Respondent Before : Priyantha Jayawardena PC, J Achala Wengappuli, J Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

Counsel : Sanjeewa Jayawardena, PC with Ms. Lakmini Warusewitane, Gimhani Aththanayake and Punyajith Dunusinghe for the Defendant-Appellant- Appellant

Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent was absent and unrepresented

Argued on : 18th of July, 2023

Decided on : 29th of February, 2024

3

Priyantha Jayawardena PC, J

This is an appeal filed against the judgment of the Court of Appeal dated 2nd of February, 2009

which affirmed the Order of the District Court of Colombo dated 11th of June, 2003, where it

was held that the alleged cause of action pleaded in the District Court was not prescribed.

The plaint

The plaintiff-respondent-respondent (hereinafter referred to as the respondent) filed a plaint

in the District Court dated 27th of April, 2001. In the said plaint, he stated that on the 22nd of

December, 1986, the defendant-appellant-appellant (hereinafter referred to as the appellant-

company), made a false complaint to the Fraud Investigation Bureau of the Police alleging

that the respondent attempted to fraudulently obtain a sum of Rs. 950/- from the said appellant-

company through a letter dated 17th of December, 1986 by fraudulently and falsely entering a

trade advertisement of the appellant-company in a diary for the year 1987.

The Police stated that the respondent attempted to cheat the appellant-company of Rs. 950/-. It

was alleged that this was done by producing the forged letter dated 17th of December, 1986,

signed by the manager of the appellant-company stating that the said manager had approved

the publication of an advertisement by the appellant company.

Subsequently, based on said complaint, the respondent was arrested on the 22nd of December,

1986 by the Police and was produced in the Magistrates Court of Maligakanda. Thereafter,

the learned Magistrate remanded him. Therefore, the Police instituted proceedings in the

Magistrates Court for the offence of attempting to cheat the appellant-company of a sum of

Rs. 950/-.

The respondent had pleaded not guilty to the said charge, and the case proceeded to trial.

However, at the end of the trial the learned Magistrate, by judgment dated 7th July, 1999

acquitted the respondent of the said charge. Further, the appellant-company had not appealed

against the said judgment.

At the trial, the respondent stated that he never claimed any money in respect of the said

advertisement published by the appellant-company. He further stated that the letter under

reference was neither written by him nor did it contain his signature.

4

Moreover, the respondent stated that, though the appellant-company was well aware that he

never cheated, charges were pursued against him, without a valid reason. Further, the

respondent stated that the appellant-company maliciously set the law in motion against him

without a reasonable cause and initiated the said action bearing No.72587 in the Magistrates

Court against him.

Furthermore, he stated that he was arrested and remanded, and as a result, it adversely affected

his professional work. Further, he suffered loss and damage to his profession, personality,

character, and reputation, and it caused him mental and physical pain. Accordingly, the

respondent stated that he suffered loss and damage valued at Rs.50, 000,000/-.

Further, the respondent stated that he sent a letter of demand to the appellant-company,

demanding a sum of Rs.50,000,000/- as damages. However, the appellant company neglected

and/or failed to pay the said sum of money. Hence, a cause of action has accrued to him to sue

the appellant-company to recover damages valued at Rs.50, 000,000/- with legal interest. In

the circumstances, the respondent prayed, inter alia, for the recovery of Rs.50,000,000/- with

legal interest from the 22nd of December, 1986.

Answer filed in the District Court

The appellant-company filed its answer on the 22nd of January, 2002 denying the allegations

stated in the plaint. Further, it was stated that the respondents action is prescribed in terms of

section 9 of the Prescription Ordinance, and the plaint should be rejected in limine, in terms of

section 46 (2) (i) of the Civil Procedure Code.

The said section 9 of the Prescription Ordinance reads as follows;

No action shall be maintainable for any loss, injury, or damage, unless the

same shall be commenced within two years from the time when the cause of

action, shall have arisen.

The answer filed by the appellant-company further stated that the appellant-company was

unaware of the allegation stated in the plaint and therefore denied the said allegations. Further,

the appellant-company stated that it was unaware that the respondent was an Attorney-at-law

and the fact that he was practicing as an Attorney-at-Law.

5

Furthermore, the appellant-company denied that on the 22nd of December, 1986, it made a false

complaint to the Police alleging that the respondent attempted to fraudulently obtain a sum of

Rs.950/- from the said appellant-company by sending the letter dated 17th December, 1986.

Moreover, the appellant-company stated that it was unaware that, on the basis of a complaint

made by it, the respondent was taken into custody by the Police on 22nd of December, 1986.

The appellant-company further stated that the Police investigated the complaint made by the

appellant-company against the respondent because the Police officers were of the opinion that

there was a prima facie case against the respondent. Accordingly, the appellant-company

denied that it falsely initiated the criminal proceedings against the respondent. However, the

appellant-company admitted that the respondent was acquitted after the trial of the said case.

Further, the appellant-company admitted that it did not appeal against the said judgment. In the

circumstances, the appellant-company pleaded, inter alia, for the plaint to be rejected and to

dismiss the respondents action.

Subsequently, the appellant-company had moved the court to answer the selected issues No. 9

and 10 as questions of law in terms of section 147 of the Civil Procedure Code which states;

When issues both of law and of fact arise in the same action, and the court

is of the opinion that the case may be disposed of on the issues of law only,

it shall try those issues first, and for that purpose may, if it thinks fit,

postpone the settlement of the issues of fact until after the issues of law have

been determined.

Order of the District Court

The District Court delivered its Order dated 11th of June, 2003 in respect of the aforementioned

issues No. 9 and 10 and held that it is not clear whether the cause of action is based on malicious

prosecution or setting the law in motion. The learned District Judge in his judgement held as

follows;

,

.

6

.

, :02 1999.07.07 .

1999.07.07 ,

2001.04.27

. 09

"" 10

"" . 11

09

11

"" .

Further, it was held that the respondents action is not prescribed under and in terms of section

9 of the Prescription Ordinance and the case was fixed for further trial on the 29th of September

2003.

Appeal to the Court of Appeal

Being aggrieved by the said judgment of the District Court, the appellant-company made an

application for leave to appeal to the Court of Appeal against the said judgment of the District

Court. Thereafter, the Court of Appeal granted leave to appeal and heard the appeal.

Judgment of the Court of Appeal

After considering the submissions made by the parties, the Court of Appeal upheld the said

judgment of the District Court, which stated that the cause of action set out in the plaint is on

the delict of malicious prosecution.

It was further held that in order to institute an action to recover damages in respect of malicious

prosecution, the criminal case should be terminated, and only if it is terminated in favour of the

accused. Further, the cause of action arises from the date of the acquittal of the accused by the

court.

7

Moreover, it was held that making a complaint to the Police does not give rise to a cause of

action, and a cause of action would accrue to the respondent only upon criminal proceedings

being terminated in his favour.

Appeal to the Supreme Court

Being aggrieved by the said judgment of the Court of Appeal, the appellant made an application

for Special Leave to Appeal to the Supreme Court, and after considering the submissions of

the appellant company, this court granted Special Leave to Appeal on the following questions

of law;

1. Did the Court of Appeal err by failing to recognise the fact that no

action could be maintained for damages for delict/tort unless there is

(a) injuria and malicious intent and (b) patrimonial loss?

2. Did the Court of Appeal err by failing to recognise and identify that

there is only one paragraph in the plaint which speaks of patrimonial

loss and that paragraph is paragraph 12, which speaks of setting in

motion, the law, as a result of which the Respondent was arrested and

remanded, thereby directly resulting in alleged loss and damage in a

sum of Rupees Fifty Million (Rs. 50,000,000/-) (patrimonial loss?)

3. Did the Court of Appeal fail to appreciate that the Respondent had

elected, of his own volition not to seek damages nor to claim patrimonial

loss for the criminal action/prosecution, but limited his claim of loss and

damage (patrimonial loss) and recovery of money on account of the

arrest and remand alone?

4. Did the Court of Appeal fall into substantial error by failing to consider

that the wrong for redress of which an action was brought, was the

tort of abuse of process and not malicious prosecution, on the

Respondents own showing?

5. Did the Court of Appeal fall into substantial error by completely

ignoring the provisions of Section 9 of the Prescription Ordinance?

8

6. Did the Court of Appeal err by failing to appreciate that the

Respondents action is prescribed in terms of section 9 of the

Prescription Ordinance, in as much as on the respondents own

admission, his stated cause of action that patrimonial loss of Rupees

Fifty Million (Rs. 50,000,000/-) has only been claimed in respect of

setting the law in motion by an allegedly unjustified complaint, leading

to the Respondents arrest and remand?

Did the Court of Appeal fall into substantial error by failing to consider that the wrong for

redress of which an action was brought, was the tort of abuse of process and not malicious

prosecution, on the Respondents own showing?

Trial in the District Court begins with making admissions and raising issues under section 146

of the Civil Procedure Code

Once the admissions are marked and the issues are raised in a trial, the trial will proceed based

on the said admissions and issues marked at the trial. However, if a need arises the parties may

mark new admissions and raise new issues during the course of the trial with the permission of

court. Further, once the admissions and issues are raised, the pleadings filed in the court will

not be taken into consideration in deciding the case. A similar view was expressed in

Dharmasiri vs. Wickrematunga (2002) 2 SLR 218, where it was held;

1. Once issues are framed and accepted, pleading recede to the background.

Further, in Bank of Ceylon vs. Chellaiahpilli 64 NLR 25, it was held;

A case must be tried upon the issues on which the right decision appears

to the court to defend, and it is well settled that the framing of such issues

is not restricted by pleadings.

Accordingly, the admissions marked and issues raised at the trial will be considered first in this

judgment in considering the questions of law where Special Leave to Appeal was granted by

this court.

The respondent instituted action in the District Court of Colombo against the appellant-

company, seeking damages in a sum of Rs. 50 million and legal interest from the 22nd of

9

December, 1986. Thereafter, the appellant-company filed its answer denying the averments in

the plaint and raised preliminary objections with regard to the maintainability of the plaint.

After the pleadings were completed, the trial had commenced by marking admissions and

raising issues.

Admissions marked at the trial

The admissions marked in the District Court were as follows;

1) .

2) 2 ,

,

3) 9

72857

.

4)

.

Issues raised in the District Court

After the admissions were marked, the following issues were raised by the respondent and were

accepted by the District Court;

10

1) 1

?

2) 4

: 950/-

?

3) 5

1986.12.22

?

4)

72857

4

?

5) 11

?

6) 72857

?

7) 72857

12

?

11

8)

?

The prayer to the plaint, stated as follows;

(. 50,000,000/=) , 1986

22 ,

, ,

Thereafter, the following issues, inter alia, were raised on behalf of the appellant-company and

were accepted by the District Court;

09) 1()

9 ?

10)

46(2) ?

11) 1()

?

12) () 12

72857

?

()

?

12

13) 9 13

?

Paragraph 1() of the Answer filed by the appellant company stated;

1. :-

() , ,

9

,

,

,

46(2)(1)

.

The learned Presidents Counsel for the appellant-company submitted that the cause of action

and relief prayed by the respondent were based not on the delict of malicious prosecution but

on the delict of abuse of process/setting the law in motion and as such, on the face of the plaint

the alleged cause of action is prescribed. Further, it was submitted that the delict of malicious

prosecution is distinct and different to the delict of abuse of process/setting the law in motion.

In Roman Dutch Law, which is the common law in Sri Lanka, there is a clear distinction

between the delict of setting the law in motion and abuse of process, as opposed to malicious

prosecution.

In The Law of Delict by R. G. McKerron (7th Edition), at page 259, it states;

Every person has a right to set the law in motion, but a person who

institutes legal proceedings against another maliciously, without

reasonable and proper cause abuses that right and commits an actionable

wrong.

The chief classes of proceedings to which the rule applies are: 1. malicious

criminal prosecution: 2. malicious imprisonment or arrest 3. malicious

13

execution against property 4. Malicious insolvency and liquidation

proceedings and 5. malicious civil actions.

Furthermore, at page 259 it states;

It is also an actionable wrong to procure the imprisonment or arrest of

anyone by setting the law in motion against him maliciously and without

reasonable cause.

Section 5 of the Civil Procedure Code as amended, defined the cause of action as;

"cause of action" is the wrong for the prevention or redress of which an

action may be brought, and includes the denial of a right, the refusal to

fulfill an obligation, the neglect to perform a duty and the infliction of an

affirmative injury

A careful consideration of the aforementioned issues show that the cause of action is set out in

issue number 5 raised at the trial. Further, the issue numbers 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 were based on

the delict of setting the law in motion with the intent of malice.

The plaint filed in the District Court

In the plaint filed in the District Court, the respondent alleged that the arrest and remand

affected his profession, and the damages are claimed from the date of his arrest, which took

place on the 22nd of December, 1986. Moreover, the claim of damages pleaded in the prayer to

the plaint is linked to the averments in the plaint in respect of the arrest and remanding of the

respondent.

Further, the cause of action set out in averments 12, 13 and 14 of the plaint, was based on the

delict of setting the law in motion and the claim for damages is linked to the arrest and

remanding of the respondent. Thus, the cause of action stated in averment 12 of the plaint are

followed by averments 13 and 14, and also connected to the prayer (a), which stated that the

respondent sought damages in a sum of Rs. 50 million and interest to be calculated from the

22nd of December, 1986.

Furthermore, the cumulative effect of the issues raised by the respondent show that the 22nd of

December, 1986 was the date on which the respondent was arrested and remanded upon the

14

complaint made by the appellant-company. Thus, it is apparent that the cause of action is based

on the appellant-company making a complaint to the Police against the respondent, and setting

the law in motion against the respondent which resulted in arresting and remanding him.

Did the Court of Appeal fall into substantial error by completely ignoring the provisions

of Section 9 of the Prescription Ordinance?

Moreover, in terms of section 9 of the Prescription Ordinance, action for damages should be

filed within 2 years of the arrest. However, the alleged arrest and remanding of the respondent

had taken place on the 22nd of December, 1986 and he filed the action on the 27th of April,

2001. Hence, the alleged cause of action is ex facie time barred by a positive rule of law.

However, the District Court and the Court of Appeal have held that, the cause of action pleaded

by the respondent is for damages arising from the delict of malicious prosecution and that the

prescriptive time period, should be calculated not from the date of arrest and remanding him,

but from the date of acquittal from the Magistrates Court which was the 7th of July, 1999.

Hence, the action instituted on 27th of April, 2001 was within the two year prescriptive period

as set out in the Prescription Ordinance. As stated above, a careful consideration of the

averments in the plaint and particularly the issues raised at the trial shows that the District Court

and the Court of Appeal erred in law by holding that the cause of action pleaded by the

respondent is the delict of Malicious Prosecution.

In the circumstances, I set aside the judgments delivered by the learned District Judge dated

11th of June, 2003 and the learned Judges of the Court of Appeal dated 2nd of February, 2009

and answer the questions of law as follows;

4. Did the Court of Appeal fall into substantial error by failing to consider that the wrong for redress of which an action was brought, was the tort of abuse of process and not malicious prosecution, on the Respondents own showing?

Yes

15

5. Did the Court of Appeal fall into substantial error by completely ignoring the provisions of Section 9 of the Prescription Ordinance?

Yes

Further, taking into consideration the aforementioned legal position, I answer the 6th question of law as follows;

6. Did the Court of Appeal err by failing to appreciate that the Respondents action is prescribed in terms of section 9 of the Prescription Ordinance, in as much as on the respondents own admission, his stated cause of action that patrimonial loss of Rupees Fifty Million (Rs. 50,000,000/-) has only been claimed in respect of setting the law in motion by an allegedly unjustified complaint, leading to the Respondents arrest and remand?

Yes

In view of the answers given to the above questions of law, it is not necessary to answer the

other questions of law where Leave to Appeal was granted. In these circumstances, I answer

the following issues raised in the District Court as follows;

Issue no. 9; 1()

9

?

Yes

Issue no. 10;

46(2) ?

Yes

Issue no. 11; 1()

?

Yes

16

Issue no. 13; 9 13

?

Yes

Appeal is allowed. The aforementioned plaint filed in the District Court is

dismissed.

No costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Achala Wengappuli, J

I agree

Judge of the Supreme Court

Arjuna Obeyesekere, J

I agree

Judge of the Supreme Court