==== BLOCKS ==== 

Page 1 of 14

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal under and in terms of Section 5C of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990 as amended by the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) (Amendment) Act No. 54 of 2006.

S.C. Appeal No: Migunthenna Kariyakaranage

14/2020 Sirisena Wadugedarawatte,

Panagoda, Neluwa.

SC Case No: PLAINTIFF

SC/HCCA/LA/62/2019 Vs.

Civil Appellate Case No. 1. Soma Jayasinghe (Deceased)

SP/HCCA/GA/106/2013(F) 1A. Arambegoda Lokugamage

Ajith Pushpa Kumara,

DC Case No: No. 175/29, Weeramawatha,

DC/Galle/14925/L Depanama, Pannipitiya.

DEFENDANT

AND BETWEEN

Migunthenna Kariyakaranage

Sirisena Wadugedarawatte,

Panagoda, Neluwa.

PLAINTIFF-APPELLANT

Vs.

1. Soma Jayasinghe (Deceased)

1A. Arambegoda Lokugamage

Ajith Pushpa Kumara,

Page 2 of 14

No. 175/29, Weeramawatha,

Depanama,

Pannipitiya.

DEFENDANT-RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

Arambegoda Lokugamage

Ajith Pushpa Kumara,

No. 175/29, Weeramawatha,

Depanama,

Pannipitiya.

DEFENDANT-RESPONDENT-

APPELLANT

Vs.

Migunthenna Kariyakaranage

Sirisena Wadugedarawatte,

Panagoda,

Neluwa. (Deceased)

1a. Somawathie Jayasekara

1b. Migunthenna Kariyakaranage

Nimalsiri

1c. Wijenayaka Gamage Janakee

Amitha

1d. Migunthenna Kariyakaranage

Heshani Rumeshika

1e. Migunthenna Kariyakaranage

Lahiru Dilshan

All of Wadugedarawatte, Panagoda, Neluwa.

SUBSTITUTED PLAINTIFF-

APPELLANT-RESPONDENTS

Page 3 of 14

Before : Janak De Silva, J.

: Sobhitha Rajakaruna, J.

: Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

Counsel : Chinthaka Mendis with Dinisuru Gamlath and Ms.

Panchali Illankoon instructed by Bushra Hashim

for the Defendant-Respondent-Appellant.

: Dr. Sunil Coorey instructed by Ms. Roshanara

Jayampathy for the Substituted Plaintiff-Appellant-

Respondents.

Argued on : 27-08-2025

Written Submissions : 06-03-2020 (By Defendant-Respondent-Appellant)

: 11-01-2023 (By Substituted Plaintiff-Appellant-

Respondents)

Decided on : 20-02-2026

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

This is an appeal preferred by the defendant-respondent-appellant

(hereinafter referred to as the defendant) on being aggrieved of the judgment

dated 16-01-2019 pronounced by the Provincial High Court of the Southern

Province holden in Galle while exercising its civil appellate Jurisdiction.

From the impugned judgment, the High Court set aside the judgment

pronounced by the learned Additional District Judge of Galle on 18-12-2013

where the action initiated before the Court by the plaintiff-appellant-

respondent (hereinafter referred to as the plaintiff) was dismissed, while

allowing the reliefs prayed for by the plaintiff in the plaint filed before the

District Court.

Page 4 of 14

When this matter was considered for the granting of leave to appeal before

this Court on 23-01-2020, leave was granted on the questions of law set out

in paragraph 19(1) of the petition of appeal dated 25-02-2019.

In addition to the above, the learned Counsel for the defendant was allowed

to raise an additional question of law, while the learned Counsel for the

plaintiff was also allowed to raise two other questions of law.

The said questions of law read as follows.

1. Did the learned High Court Judge err in law when it was held that the

land claimed by the respondent has been clearly identified by failing to

give due consideration to the evidence of the surveyor that the

boundaries of the entire land constituting Lots A, B, C, D are not

definite and that it is not possible to state definitively whether the land

surveyed was the land set out in the commission and that there is no

way of explaining the increase in extent of the land?

2. Did the learned High Court Judge err in law in failing to appreciate that

no evidence of encroachment on the part of the defendant-respondent-

petitioner has been established at the trial?

3. Has the Hon. District Court Judge erred in law in dismissing the action

of the plaintiff purely on the ground of non-identification of the corpus?

4. Did the Hon. District Court Judge err in law ascertaining the

prescriptive title of the parties when the District Court decided that

there is no proper identification of the corpus?

At the hearing of the appeal, this Court heard the submissions of the learned

Counsel as to their respective stands and also had the benefit of considering

the written submissions tendered to the Court in that regard.

The facts that led to the judgment of the learned Additional District Judge

and the views expressed by the learned Judges of the High Court when

allowing the appeal can be summarized in the following manner.

Page 5 of 14

The plaintiff has initially filed his plaint on 16-01-2004 seeking a declaration

of title to the land morefully described in the 2nd paragraph of the plaint which

was a land with an extent of 1 acre 1 rood and 2 perches, and for the ejectment

of the defendant from a portion of land towards the Southern boundary,

among other incidental reliefs. It has been claimed that the defendant

encroached upon the said portion of land and commenced possessing it

somewhere around 06-12-1996.

After the subject matter of the land was surveyed for the purposes of the

action, the plaintiff has filed an amended plaint on 07-05-2007 describing the

land in question in accordance with the survey plan No-2716 dated 26-02-

2005 prepared by licensed surveyor Anton Samararathne. The plaintiff has

described Lot D mentioned in the said plan as the portion of land the

defendant is in occupation. The surveyor has described the land, which is the

subject matter of the action, as Lot A, B, C, D of the plan with an extent of 2

acres and 4 perches.

In the meantime, the original defendant has passed away, and her son has

been substituted as the substituted defendant.

He, in his answer dated 02-01-2009, has denied that a cause of action has

accrued to the plaintiff against the defendant and has stated that the land

surveyed for the purposes of this action is not the land claimed by the plaintiff

as Wadugedarawatte, but part of the land called Pangiri Hena with an extent

of 50 acres which is owned and possessed by the defendant based on her title

to an undivided 1/24 share of the said Pangiri Hena.

The substituted defendant has set out the title to the said land he claims as

Pangiri Hena and has also claimed prescriptive title to the same. He has also

averred that as a result of the plaintiff trying to encroach part of the land

possessed by his mother, the original defendant initiated action in terms of

section 66 of the Primary Court Procedure Act in 1997 where his mother was

given possession of the land. He has prayed for the dismissal of the action.

Page 6 of 14

At the trial before the District Court, there had been no admissions recorded

and accordingly, the plaintiff has raised issue No. 01 to 07. The issues relating

to the identity of the corpus has been recorded on the basis that the defendant

encroached upon the earlier mentioned Lot D of the surveyor plan. The

plaintiff has raised a single issue as to his title on the basis that he owns the

land by prescription.

For matters of clarity, I would reproduce the said 3rd issue of the plaintiff

which reads as follows,

03. පැමිණිලිකරු එකී ඉඩම බුක්ති විද පැමිණිලිකරු එකී ඉඩමට වලංගු කාලාවර ාධී හිමිකම්

ලබා ිරේද?

The defendant has raised issue No. 08 to 16 on the basis of the averments in

his answer claiming reliefs as prayed for, which includes the dismissal of the

plaintiff’s action.

After the closure of the plaintiff’s case, although the defendant has raised

issues claiming title, he has not called any evidence to substantiate his issues.

In his judgment, the learned Additional District Judge has considered

whether the plaintiff has identified the land, which is the subject matter of

the action, and whether he has established the disputed portion of the land

as stated in the pleadings as part of the subject matter. It has been the

determination of the learned District Judge that the plaintiff has failed to

explain the disparity between the extent of the land mentioned in the original

plaint and that of the land surveyed by the surveyor for the purpose of this

action, which was a land of 3 roods in excess.

After analysing the evidence of the plaintiff, it has been determined that there

was no evidence before the Court to satisfy that the disputed land has been

identified as the land depicted in the survey plan marked P-01 due to the

discrepancies in evidence.

The learned District Judge was not required to consider the title pleaded by

the plaintiff in such a scenario as the action of the plaintiff should in anyway

Page 7 of 14

fail on account of his failure to establish the identity of the corpus for which

he is seeking a declaration of title. However, the learned District Judge has

also proceeded to consider whether the plaintiff has established the claimed

prescriptive title to the land and his claim that the defendant encroached

upon Lot D of the plan marked P-01 as claimed by him. On the basis that the

plaintiff has failed to establish the identity of the land as well as the title as

claimed by him, the plaintiff’s action has been dismissed. Although the

defendant has raised issues as to his title, since no evidence has been called

in that regard, the defendant’s action has also been dismissed.

In determining the appeal preferred by the plaintiff challenging the judgment

of the learned Additional District Judge, the learned Judges of the High Court,

of their judgment dated 16-01-2019, have determined that the plaintiff has

sufficiently identified the subject matter by referring to metes and bounds and

it is not always necessary to rely on a survey plan in accordance with section

41 of the Civil Procedure Code to identify the land.

It has been determined that although the land described in the plaint and the

land described in the amended plaint after the survey have a difference in

extent, since the boundaries are the same, there was no difficulty for the

learned Additional District Judge to identify the land. In this regard, the High

Court has extensively considered the survey plan and the report.

Having determined as to the corpus, the High Court has considered whether

the plaintiff has proved the prescriptive title claimed by him and has held that

according to his evidence and other documentary evidence, the plaintiff and

his father have possessed the land for over 60 years and he has proved the

prescriptive title to the land.

On the basis that the defendant has failed to give evidence in support of his

claim to the land and has failed to establish that he has a better title than the

plaintiff, the learned Judges of the High Court have set aside the judgment of

the learned Additional District Judge awarding reliefs prayed for by the

plaintiff in his amended plaint.

Page 8 of 14

Having considered the above factual matrix, the question before me now is

whether the plaintiff has proved the identity of the land and his claimed

prescriptive title as determined by the learned High Court Judges or whether

it is the judgment of the learned Additional District Judge that should stand.

The amended plaint of the plaintiff clearly suggests that the action initiated

by him was a vindicatory suit in order to get a declaration that he is the owner

of the land morefully described in the 2nd paragraph of the amended plaint

and to eject the defendant from Lot D of the plan prepared for the purposes

of the action on the basis that the defendant is in unauthorized occupation of

the said Lot which belongs to him.

It is settled law that in a case for declaration of title and ejectment, it is not

only the title of the land as claimed by a plaintiff that should be proved on a

balance of probability, but also the identity of the land pleaded as the subject

matter of the action. It is my considered view that it is of paramount

importance for a plaintiff in a rei vindicatio action to properly identify the land

he is claiming title before proceeding to establish his title to the land, since it

would be a futile exercise to consider title in a situation where the identity of

the land has not been established.

It is clear from the judgment of the learned District Judge that the evidence

has been considered in order to determine whether those basic requirements

have been established before the Court on a balance of probability.

In the case of Jamaldeen Abdul Latheef Vs. Abdul Majeed Mohomad

Mansoor and Another (2010) 2 SLR 333, the requirement of properly

identifying the corpus of an action in a vindicatory suit was considered.

Held:

1. It is trite law that the identity of the property with respect to which a

vindicatory action is instituted is fundamental to the success of the

action as to the proof of ownership (dominion) of the owner (dominus).

Page 9 of 14

Where the property sought to be vindicated consists of a land, the land

sought to be vindicated must be identified by reference to a survey

plan or other equally expeditious method.

2. In a rei vindicatio action, it is not necessary to consider whether the

defendant has any title or right to possession, where the plaintiff has

failed to establish his title to the land sought to be vindicated, the

action ought to be dismissed without more.

I find that in this context, what the plaintiff has stated in the original plaint

as to the extent of the land becomes very much relevant as considered by the

learned District Judge in his judgment, although the High Court has gone on

the basis that despite the disparity, the boundaries as claimed are the same,

hence, the plaintiff has proved the identity of the land.

In the same context, it must be stated that although section 41 of the Civil

Procedure Code provides for the description in a plaint in relation to a land so

far as possible by reference to physical meets and bounds or by reference to

a sufficient sketch, map or plan to be appended to the plaint, whether

considering the meets and bounds only would suffice to identify a land is a

matter that depends on the facts and circumstances of each case.

In the original plaint, the plaintiff, having identified the land as

Wadugedarawatte, and after describing the four boundaries, has specifically

stated the specific extent of the land claimed by him as a land of 1 acre, 1

rood, 2 perches, which is an obvious reference to a survey plan. For a reason

only known to the plaintiff he has chosen not to identify the plan or give any

reason for it. Therefore, it is clear that although the plaintiff has not identified

the land in relation to a plan, he has been very specific as to the extent which

has been mentioned up to the last perch. He has also averred that the

defendant encroached a portion of land towards the Southern boundary.

In the amended plaint, the plaintiff has identified the alleged encroached

portion as Lot D of plan No. 2716 dated 26-02-2005. However, the land which

has been surveyed as shown by the plaintiff was a land of 2 acres and 4

perches, which amounts to an excess of 3 roods in extent.

Page 10 of 14

The portion of the land identified by the plaintiff as the encroached portion in

itself is a portion of about 10 perches less than 3 roods, which means that

the remainder of the land identified by him before the surveyor almost equals

to the land he has claimed prescriptive title in his original plaint.

The Commissioner who executed the survey has given evidence in this action

and has stated that he was unable to separately pinpoint the portion of the

land alleged to have been forcibly occupied by the defendant as both the

defendant and the plaintiff claimed rights to the entire land.

Although the defendant has not given evidence at the trial to substantiate the

issues raised on behalf of him, it appears that his position at the trial has

been in line with the answer filed, to assert that the land claimed by the

plaintiff is a part of a larger land of about 50 acres, where the defendant has

claimed undivided rights to the said land based on some deeds.

On behalf of the plaintiff, it was the son of the plaintiff who has given evidence.

He has identified the subject matter of the action as Wadugedarawatte and

has stated that the said land depicts as Lot A, B, C, and D in the previously

mentioned plan which has been marked as P-01 at the trial. The said witness

too had failed to explain the reasons for the excess extent of 3 roods than the

land specifically mentioned in the original plaint. At one point, the said

witness has stated that the action was filed in relation to 1 acre, 1 rood, 2

perch land. He has also spoken about a plan prepared by the Survey General

in relation to this portion of the land. However, such a plan has never been

produced, nor has it been tendered to the surveyor enabling him to identify

the land mentioned in the commission issued to him.

I find that the learned District Judge has well analyzed the evidence placed

before the Court to determine that the plaintiff has failed to identify the

subject matter of the action as pleaded in his plaint for which I have no

reasons to disagree.

Page 11 of 14

When it comes to the appellate judgment pronounced by the High Court, it is

clear that the learned Judges of the High Court have gone on the basis that

the boundaries given to the land in the plaint as well as the amended plaint

are the same. It has been determined that although the original plaint depicts

a specific portion of land, it is the amended plaint that describes the subject

matter properly. I find that the learned Judges of the High Court have failed

to analyze the significant difference in extent of the land mentioned in the

original plaint and the amended plaint filed after the survey was conducted.

The stand of the plaintiff was that the defendant is in forceable occupation of

Lot D only, which nearly amounts to the additional portion of land that has

taken in as the subject matter in comparison to the original plaint. It needs

to be emphasized that the plaintiff, who gave the extent of the land he is

claiming up to the last perch in his original plaint, cannot have a basis to

amend the plaint to add an additional extent of land as the subject matter to

claim a declaration of title. It is my view that for the Court to accept the

additional extent of land also as part of the corpus, there should be clear

evidence before the Court as to why the plaintiff gave a different specific extent

of land as the corpus in the plaint and as to why he changed his stand after

the survey was done for the purposes of the action. I find that without such

an explanation, there was no basis for the learned High Court Judges to

conclude that the plaintiff has proved the identity of the land.

At the same time, it needs to be noted that the plaintiff has claimed title to

the land on prescription. Therefore, it becomes necessary for him, even if he

has established the identity as claimed, to prove that he has acquired

prescriptive title to the land.

In the case of Sirajudeen and Others Vs. Abbas (1994) 2 SLR 365, it was

held;

“Where the evidence of possession lack consistency the fact of occupation

alone or the payment of municipal rates by itself is insufficient to

establish prescriptive possession.

Page 12 of 14

As regards to mode of proof of prescriptive possession, mere general

statements of witnesses that the plaintiff possessed the land in dispute

for a number of years exceeding the prescriptive period are not evidence

of the uninterrupted and adverse possession necessary to support a title

by prescription. It is necessary that the witness should speak of specific

facts and the question of possession has to be decided thereupon by the

Court.

One of the essential elements of the plea of prescriptive title as provided

for in section 3 of the Prescription Ordinance is proof of possession by a

title adverse to or independent of that of the claimant or plaintiff.”

It was also observed in the case of Wanigaratne Vs. Johanis Appuhami 65

NLR 167 that;

“In an action rei vindicatio, the plaintiff must prove and establish his title.

He cannot ask for a declaration of title in his favour merely on the

strength that the defendant’s title is poor or not established.”

In his judgment, the learned District Judge had not only considered whether

the plaintiff has proved the identity of the land, but has considered the

prescriptive title claimed by him to find out whether there can be any

justification for such a claim.

The witness called on behalf of the plaintiff has stated that his father Sirisena

became the owner of the land through his paternal inheritance. As observed

clearly by the learned District Judge, this is in total contrast to the plaintiff’s

position that he became the owner of the land through prescription.

I find that the learned Judges of the High Court have merely gone on the basis

that the plaintiff has possessed the land over a long period of time and has

therefore, prescribed to the land. I find that this was not the way a claim of

prescription should be considered in a case where the right to ownership has

been based on prescription and especially when there is a counter-claim to

the said claim. The High Court has failed to consider the evidence of the

Page 13 of 14

witness called on behalf of the plaintiff where he has claimed the title based

on inheritance as relevant.

Another factor which needs consideration is the deed marked 2V2 by the

defendant when the son of the plaintiff was under cross-examination. This is

a deed where the plaintiff has been given title to a land similar to the land

claimed by the plaintiff where an undivided portion of land out of a land in

extent of 50 acres has been transferred to him. For some reason, the plaintiff

has not relied on this deed to claim title to the land under litigation. It is clear

that if this deed was produced as evidence to claim title, the plaintiff will have

to be considered as a person who owns an undivided right of a larger land

and where the mode of proof of ownership by prescription against the other

co-owners would be different. That may be the very reason why the plaintiff

has not relied on a title deed but on prescription to claim the land.

When the above factual matters are considered in its totality, it clearly

establishes that there cannot be any reason to conclude that the plaintiff can

succeed on a claim of prescription to the land either.

I find that this was a matter that the learned Judges of the High Court have

failed to consider after determining that the plaintiff has proved the identity

of the land.

For the above reasons as considered, I find no basis to allow the judgment of

the learned Judges of the High Court to stand.

Accordingly, I answer the 1st and the 2nd question of law in the affirmative,

and the 3rd question of law in the negative.

Answering the 4th question of law, I hold that although there was no necessity

for the learned District Judge to consider the title after determining that the

identity of the subject matter of the action has not been established, no

prejudice has been caused to the plaintiff by the learned District Judge’s

decision to examine the title as well.

Page 14 of 14

Accordingly, the appellate judgment dated 16-01-2019 is set aside and the

judgment dated 18-12-2013 by the learned Additional District Judge of Galle

is affirmed.

There will be no costs of the appeal.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Janak De Silva J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Sobhitha Rajakaruna, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court