(SC Appeal 53/2014) - Page 1 of 13

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an appeal to the Supreme

Court under Article 128 of the Constitution

of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka.

Ceylon Paper Sacks Limited,

47, Maligawa Road,

Etulkotte.

APPELLANT

Vs

Commissioner General of Inland Revenue,

Department of Inland Revenue,

Sir Chittampalam A Gardiner Mawatha,

Colombo-2.

RESPONDENT

And now between

Ceylon Paper Sacks Limited,

47, Maligawa Road,

Etulkotte.

APPELLANT-APPELLANT

Vs

Commissioner General of Inland Revenue,

SC Appeal 53/2014

SC/ SPL/LA/No. 70/2012

CA Case No: 2/2008 (Tax)

BRA/ BTT - 27

(SC Appeal 53/2014) - Page 2 of 13

Department of Inland Revenue,

Sir Chittampalam A Gardner Mawatha,

Colombo-2.

RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT

Before : P. PADMAN SURASENA J

KUMUDINI WICKREMASINGHE J

MAHINDA SAMAYAWARDHENA J

Counsel : Romesh De Silva PC with Shanaka Cooray for the Appellant

instructed by Santhoshi S. Herath Associates and Deepika

Herath for the Appellant-Appellant.

Farzana Jameel PC, ASG with Indumini Radeny for the

Respondent-Respondent.

Argued on : 06.06.2022

Decided on : 04.04.2023

P. Padman Surasena J

The Appellant-Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Appellant) is a limited liability

company, incorporated under the laws of Sri Lanka, engaged inter alia, in the business

of manufacturing multi-walled kraft paper sacks for the bulk packing of tea. The

Appellant then sells these paper sacks to regional plantation companies in Sri Lanka.

The Appellant claimed exemption from Turnover Tax on the sale of these paper sacks

to the aforesaid companies claiming that the said companies export bulk tea packed

in these paper sacks.

(SC Appeal 53/2014) - Page 3 of 13

The dispute arose when the Appellant had submitted its Tax returns for certain taxable

periods claiming exemption from payment of Turnover Tax under section 4 of the

Turnover Tax Act No. 69 1981. To facilitate the easy reference and comprehension by

the reader, I would at this initial stage itself reproduce below, section 4 of the Turnover

Tax Act No. 69 1981.

Section 4 of the Turnover Tax Act No. 69 of 1981.

(1).The Minister may, if he is of opinion that it is essential for the economic

progress of Sri Lanka, exempt by Order published in the Gazette any business

or such business as may be specified, which is carried on by any person, from

the turnover tax.

(2). Every Order under subsection (1) shall come into force on the date of its

publication in the Gazette or on such later date as may be specified in such

Order and shall be brought before Parliament within a period of three months

from the date of the publication of such Order in the Gazette or, if no meeting

of Parliament is held within such period, at the first meeting of Parliament held

after the expiry of such period, by a motion that such Order shall be approved.

(3). Any Order which Parliament refuses to approve shall, with effect from the

date of such refusal, be deemed to be revoked but without prejudice to the

validity of such Order until the date of such refusal, and the notification of the

date on which such Order is deemed to be revoked shall be published in the

Gazette.

The Minister acting under the powers vested in him under the above section then

published the Gazette (Extraordinary) No 432/03 dated 16.12.1986. The part of the

said Gazette notification relevant to the questions of law in the instant case reads as

follows.

By virtue of powers vested in me under Section 4 of the Turnover Tax

Act, No. 69 f 1981, I Ronal Joseph Godfrey de Mel, minister of Finance

and Planning, being of opinion that it is essential for the economic

(SC Appeal 53/2014) - Page 4 of 13

progress of Sri Lanka, do by this Order, with effect from midnight of

31 December 1986/ 1 January, 1987 exempt the following from

Turnover Tax:

1) .

2) .

3) .

4) any business for the export of any manufactured or processed article;

5) .

.

24) .

Relying on the item (4) [above mentioned clause], the Appellant had claimed that the

paper sacks it manufactured are exclusively for export of tea, and therefore it was

entitled to an exemption under item (4) of the above Gazette read with section 4 of

the Turnover Tax Act. The Assessor had rejected the Appellants claim for exemption

on the basis that the local supply of such paper sacks to plantation companies does

not constitute export as contemplated under the Gazette notification No. 432/03

dated 16.12.1986, which was relied upon by the Appellant. The Assessor had taken

the view that any exemption under Section 4 of the Turnover Tax Act No. 69 of 1981,

is only available to a business which exports its products, and as the Appellant

company does not export paper sacks, and only sells the paper sacks locally to

plantation companies, the sales of the Appellant company will not qualify for an

exemption under Section 4 of the Turnover Tax Act.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid decision of the assessor, the Appellant appealed to

the Commissioner General of Inland Revenue (hereinafter sometimes referred to as

the Commissioner General). The Commissioner General, by the Determination dated

03.09.2001 (produced marked X1) had dismissed the said appeal.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid Determination of the Commissioner General, the

Appellant appealed to the Board of Review under Section 119 of the Inland Revenue

Act No. 28 of 1979, as provided for, by Section 18 of the Turnover Tax Act No. 69 of

1981. The said appeal was presented on the basis that, the Appellant was either an

(SC Appeal 53/2014) - Page 5 of 13

exporter or an indirect exporter-supplier, and therefore was entitled for an exemption

from Turnover Tax under Section 4 of the Turnover Tax Act No.69 of 1981. The Board

of Review having heard the submissions of the parties, by its Determination dated

31.03.2008 (produced marked X3) had confirmed the assessment issued by the

Assessor and dismissed the said appeal of the Appellant.

Being dissatisfied with the Determination of the Board of Review, the Appellant then

appealed to the Court of Appeal by stating a case for the opinion of the Court of

Appeal.

The question of law formulated for the opinion of the Court of Appeal by the Board of

Review is as follows,

Is the Assessee an exporter and/or an indirect exporter-supplier to claim tax

exemption under the Turnover Tax Act No. 69 of 1981 when it did not export

but supplied its paper sacks to companies inter alia exporting bulk tea.

The Court of Appeal by its judgment dated 23.02.2012 (produced marked X5), upheld

the order of the Board of Review which had concluded that the Appellant is neither a

direct nor indirect exporter and was not in an activity that was exempted form turnover

tax.

Being dissatisfied with the opinion of the Court of Appeal, the Appellant sought Special

Leave to Appeal from this Court. This Court, upon hearing the learned counsel for the

Appellant and the learned Deputy Solicitor General, by its order dated 01.04.2014,

had granted Special Leave to Appeal only on the following question of law:

Is the Appellant exempt from turnover tax in terms of Section 4 of the

Turnover Tax Act No. 69 of 1981 as reflected in the Gazette No. 432/ 3 dated

16.12.1986?

I will now move on to discuss the question whether the business of the Appellant will

classify as any business for the export of any manufactured or processed article in

order for that business to fall under the exemption set out in clause 4 of the above

mentioned Gazette.

The Appellant claims that he is entitled to the above exemption claiming that it is an

exporter of a manufactured article on the following basis: the paper sacks

(SC Appeal 53/2014) - Page 6 of 13

manufactured by the Appellant is not sold for local consumption and is solely used for

the export of tea; the paper sacks manufactured by the Appellant are an integral part

of the export process of the tea; and therefore, the paper sacks manufactured by the

Appellant are an integral part of the export itself.

The Gazette notification (Extraordinary) No. 432/03 dated 16.12.1986 exempts any

business for the export of any manufactured or processed article. When taken the

literal meaning, it is evident that the Gazette explicitly intends to cover a business for

the export of any manufactured article, and therefore is imperative that to come under

this exemption, the relevant business must be capable of being classified entirely as a

business for the export of the article it manufactures.

Let me next consider whether the Appellants business is a business for export. The

Appellant in order to qualify itself as an exporter must satisfy all the characteristics of

an exporter, i.e., being engaged in international trade, the existence of an overseas

buyer, the relevant shipping documents as well as standard payment methods

involved in international trade transaction. Furthermore, the presence of the earned

foreign exchange which is the price for the goods exported would be an integral

characteristic of an exporter. The Appellant if indeed is carrying on with a business of

export, can easily provide proof of at least one of the followings: an international sales

arrangement; invoice or an export order; any letter of credit opened; any shipping/air

freight document etc., presence of any such evidence would have indicated at least

some confirmation of the fact that the Appellant is engaged in exporting of the items

it manufactures. However, the Appellant has not provided any such evidence and

hence has not established any of the above characteristics of an exporter.

The multi-walled kraft paper sacks manufactured by the Appellant are simply sold to

the regional plantation companies. The regional plantation companies do not export

the multi-walled kraft paper sacks manufactured by the Appellant, but merely use

them for packing the article they endeavour to export, which is tea. Thus, neither the

regional plantation companies nor the Appellant is engaged in any business for the

export of the multi walled kraft paper sacks manufactured by the Appellant. The

(SC Appeal 53/2014) - Page 7 of 13

Appellant also does not carry on its business of manufacturing paper sacks either to

be exported or for the export market. The Appellant manufactures their paper sacks

to be sold to local plantation companies to bulk pack tea. What may be gleaned from

the available material is that this tea is then sent to Colombo tea auctions where the

tea may or may not be exported. Therefore, the paper sacks sold to the regional

plantation companies are not the articles being exported. Thus, I am not satisfied that

the Appellant is engaged in exporting of the items it manufactures.

Moreover, as has been already mentioned above, in order to be eligible for an

exemption under this section it is imperative that the relevant business must be a

business of manufacturing or processing articles for export. I can observe that there

are two limbs present in Clause 4 of the relevant Gazette notification. The Clause

states: any business for the export of any manufactured or processed article. This

means firstly, that the business from which the relevant turnover is derived must be

a business for export. That is the first limb. The second part of the Clause 4 sets out

clearly as to what kind of goods should be exported by such business. The goods

exported must be manufactured or processed articles. That is the second limb.

The next question is, as to who should have manufactured the articles referred to in

Clause 4. The first observation I make is that any article must have been manufactured

by somebody at some point of time for articles cannot fall from the sky. If this aspect

of Clause 4 is forgotten, export of anything would attract the exemption granted under

that provision. That is the reason as to why the law has only empowered the Minister

to exempt by Order published in the Gazette any business from turnover tax only if

he is of opinion that the exemption of such business would be essential for the

economic progress of Sri Lanka. In the instant situation, what the Minister has

exempted is any business for the export of any manufactured or processed article.

This must be understood as a business which exports any manufactured or processed

article. In the instant case, a business which exports any manufactured article. The

Appellant is not engaged in any such business.

(SC Appeal 53/2014) - Page 8 of 13

The Appellant referring to both direct export as well as indirect export in its written

submissions1, has sought to argue that the Court of Appeal had failed to consider the

definition of both direct and indirect export. Let me now consider this aspect.

When the Appellant sells the paper sacks to the Plantation Companies, the sale

transaction between them has been completed as the property in the goods stand

transferred to the Plantation Companies. Therefore, at that point itself the relevant

transaction is completed between the Appellant and the plantation companies. The

Appellant thereafter is not entitled to monitor or to know the use to which the

plantation companies would put the paper sacks they had purchased. In any case, the

argument of the Appellant is not that the plantation companies export the paper sacks

they had purchased but that the plantation companies export tea packed in the paper

sacks they had purchased.

The paper sacks are manufactured by the Appellant and then sold to local plantation

companies to bulk pack tea which is then sent to Colombo tea auctions where the tea

may or may not be exported. Indeed, the Appellant has not adduced any evidence to

establish as to what really happens to the multi-walled kraft paper sacks after they

are sold to the regional plantation companies. Be that as it may, one thing is clear;

the Appellant cannot be regarded as either a direct or indirect exporter of the multi-

walled kraft paper sacks it manufactures. The Appellant plays no part in the part of

any transaction involving any export. The Appellant was only the manufacturer who

supplied their finished product to the local plantation companies, who then use these

paper sacks for packing their tea and therefore, the Appellant cannot be classified as

an indirect exporter.

Therefore, I am unable to accept the argument of the Appellant that they do not sell

any of the manufactured paper sacks for local consumption itself and all of the

manufactured paper sacks are used for the export of tea and hence the paper sacks

manufactured by the Appellant form an integral part of the export process of the tea.

It must be stressed that the relevant exporters, export tea and not paper sacks. On

1 Written submissions Dated 02.10.2015 filed before this Court by Ceylon Paper Sacks Limited.

(SC Appeal 53/2014) - Page 9 of 13

this basis, I am unable to conclude that the Appellants business is a business for the

export of any manufactured article within the meaning of the Gazette (Extraordinary)

No 432/03 dated 16.12.1986.

Before I part with this judgment, let me also refer to the case of Perera & Silva Ltd.

Vs. Commissioner General of Inland Revenue,2 which had considered the question

whether a business for supplying material for the packaging of export goods will also

classify as a business for export.

Although the question of law in this case was based on a subsequent statute, the basis

for argument for the exemption of turnover tax by the Appellant in the case of Perera

& Silva, was similar to the argument advanced by the Appellant in the instant case.

Perera & Silva Ltd. was a firm manufacturing wooden boxes and shooks (a component

part used in assembling wooden boxes). A part of its production was on orders by

persons who exported goods such as tea, batteries, and spices from Sri Lanka. The

dispute in that case was whether the turnover relating to the sale of wooden boxes

and shooks by Perera & Silva Ltd., which were subsequently used by buyers for the

export trade, should be excluded from the liability of turnover tax of Perera & Silva

Ltd. The Commissioner General of Inland Revenue had held that those transactions of

Perera & Silva Ltd. are liable to business turnover tax and confirmed the tax charged

by the Assessor.

The Board of Review on Appeal held that: the wooden boxes and shooks though

manufactured in Ceylon were not exported by the assessee; the assessee became

liable to pay tax on the proceeds of sale, immediately after the sale was concluded,

whether the proceeds of sale, were actually received or only became receivable; the

proceeds of sale which are liable to tax at the time the turnover is made cannot by a

process of interpretation be converted into proceeds of sale which would be exempted

from tax.

2 79 NLR (Volume II) page 164.

(SC Appeal 53/2014) - Page 10 of 13

At the time of the case of Perera & Silva Ltd. the turnover tax was payable in respect

of the completed transactions, unless those transactions came within one of the

exceptions provided under section 121 (1) of the Finance Act No. 11 of 1963. For easy

reference for the reader, I would set out below, Section 121 (1) of the Finance Act.

(1) The Minister may by order published in the Gazette declare any article

specified in such Order to be an excepted article for the purposes of this

Part of the Act. Different articles may be declared to be excepted articles in

respect of different classes or descriptions of businesses.

(2) Where an article is, under subsection (1), declared to be an excepted

article in respect of any class or description of business, the sum realized

from the sale of such article shall not be taken into account for the purpose

of ascertaining the turnover from such class or description of business.

Just like in the instant case, in Perera & Silvas case also the then Minister acting under

Section 121 (2) had declared by the Schedule to the Gazette notification No. 14,864/9

of 02.08.1969 that "articles manufactured in Ceylon and exported" be excluded from

the liability of turnover tax.

Upon the application of Perera & Silva Ltd. The Board of Review had stated a case for

the opinion of the Supreme Court under section 138A (1) of the Finance Act, No. 11

of 1963. The questions of law stated for the opinion of the Supreme Court in that case

are,

i. Does "articles manufactured in Ceylon and exported " in the order

published in Gazette No. 14,864/9 of 2.8.69, mean articles manufactured

in Ceylon and exported in a single business.

ii. Is the turnover arising from wooden boxes and shooks, sold by the

assessee during the quarters 31.12.69, 31.3.70, 30.6.70 and exported

by others exempt from business turnover tax under the order made

under 121 (1) published in the Gazette Extraordinary 14,864/9 of 2.8.69.

(SC Appeal 53/2014) - Page 11 of 13

Thamotheram J giving the opinion of the Supreme Court in Perera and Silvas case,

stated as follows.

In our opinion the business carried on by Perera and Silva Ltd. was only

one of manufacture. It is only when the business in question includes both

manufacture and export that the exception to liability can arise; the

turnover tax is in respect of the turnover made by that person (Perera &

Silva Ltd.) from that business (manufacture of wooden boxes). The

exception is when that business includes both manufacture and export.

Our opinion therefore is as follows :

(1) " Articles manufactured in Ceylon and exported " in the order published

in Gazette No. 14,864/9 of 2.8.69 means articles manufactured in Ceylon

and exported in a single business;

(2) The turnover arising from wooden boxes and shooks sold by the

assessee during the quarters 31.12.64, 31.3.70 and 30.6.70 and exported

by others are not exempted from business turnover tax under the order

made under 121 (1) published in the Gazette Extraordinary No. 14,864/9

of 2.8.69.

I may also add that in our view when an article, e.g., tea, is exported in

wooden boxes, it is wrong to say that the boxes in which tea is exported

are themselves exported it is true the literal meaning of ' export' is

'sending out' but export connotes a business transaction between some

person in Sri Lanka with a person outside. If a Sri Lankan firm exports tea

to a firm abroad, I think, it does violence to the English language to say

that the firm also exported wooden boxes in which the tea was sent. It is

not any part of the particular export business.

The order made by the Minister on 2.8.69 had been amended by an order

published in Gazette No. 83/8 of 1.11.73. One of the excepted articles

(SC Appeal 53/2014) - Page 12 of 13

mentioned in the latter order is "articles manufactured in Sri Lanka and

exported by the manufacturer."

This amendment was no doubt due to the point taken in the present case

being taken by many an assessee. We however do not think that the

statute was not express or that it was ambiguous.

It was on the above basis that this Court in that case held that the words

"manufactured in Ceylon" and "exported" should be read conjunctively and accordingly

the exemption is available only in respect of articles manufactured in Ceylon and

exported in the course of the same business.

In the instant case too, undoubtedly when the Appellants sell these paper sacks they

manufacture to local plantation companies, there is no element of export involved in

that business transaction. This could be further illustrated by referring to Section 5 of

the Turnover Tax Act No. 69 of 1981 which stipulates the meaning of turnover as

being, the total amount received or receivable from transactions entered into in

respect of that business or for services performed in carrying on that business. The

transaction in relation to the Appellants business namely the sale of the multi-walled

kraft paper sacks to the plantation companies for the packaging of tea was a

completed transaction entered into, in respect of that business. It is at that point that

the Appellant becomes liable for the payment of turnover tax.

For the foregoing reasons, I am of the view that the Appellant is not entitled for the

relevant exemption under Section 4 of the Turnover Tax Act No. 69 of 1981. Therefore,

I hold that the Board of Review has correctly concluded that the Appellant is not

entitled to any exemption under Section 4 of the Turnover Tax Act No. 69 of 1981. I

also hold that the Court of Appeal too has correctly taken the same view.

Accordingly, I answer the question of law in respect of which this Court has granted

Special Leave to Appeal as follows:

(SC Appeal 53/2014) - Page 13 of 13

The Appellant is not entitled for an exemption from turnover tax in terms of

Section 4 of the Turnover Tax Act No. 69 of 1981 read with the Gazette No.

432/ 3 dated 16.12.1986.

I affirm the judgment dated 23.02.2012 of the Court of Appeal and dismiss this Appeal

with costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J I agree,

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J I agree,

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT