IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

Stella Gwendelline Hycinth Wijesinghe,

No. 05, Railway Avenue,

Nugegoda.

Plaintiff

SC APPEAL NO: SC/APPEAL/154/2017

SC LA NO: SC/HCCA/LA/59/2017

HCCA BADULLA NO: WP/HCCA/MT/42/2013(F)

DC NUGEGODA NO: 179/2008/L

Vs.

Lalith Wickramarathne,

No. 51/1,

Stanley Thilakaratne Mawatha,

Nugegoda.

Defendant

AND BETWEEN

Lalith Wickramarathne,

No. 51/1,

Stanley Thilakaratne Mawatha,

Nugegoda.

Defendant-Appellant

Vs.

Stella Gwendelline Hycinth Wijesinghe,

No. 05, Railway Avenue,

2

SC/APPEAL/154/2017

Nugegoda.

Plaintiff-Respondent

AND NOW BETWEEN

Stella Gwendelline Hycinth Wijesinghe,

No. 05, Railway Avenue,

Nugegoda.

Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant

Vs.

Lalith Wickramarathne,

No. 51/1, Stanley Thilakaratne Mawatha,

Nugegoda.

Defendant-Appellant-Respondent

Before: P. Padman Surasena, J.

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J.

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Counsel: J.P. Gamage with Nisansala Pathirana for the Plaintiff-

Respondent-Appellant.

Hemasiri Withanachchi with Shantha Karunadhara for the

Defendant-Appellant-Respondent.

Argued on: 12.01.2022

Written submissions:

by the Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant on 20.10.2017 and

23.02.2022

by the Defendant-Appellant-Respondent on 21.10.2020 and

08.02.2022

Decided on: 21.11.2022

3

SC/APPEAL/154/2017

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

The plaintiff instituted this action against the defendant in the District

Court of Nugegoda, seeking a declaration that lot 4 in the final decree

entered in partition case No. 5399/P belongs to the parties to that action,

and the defendant has no right of way over lot 4. The defendant filed

amended answer seeking dismissal of the plaintiff’s action. He also made

a cross-claim in the answer stating that he has acquired prescriptive title

to lot 4 (not right of way by prescription) and/or he is entitled to use lot

4 as a way of necessity.

At the trial it was recorded as an admission (admission No. 3) that the

said lot 4 had been given as a road to the parties to that partition action

by the final decree. It is common ground that the defendant was not a

party to that partition action.

The plaintiff raised the following issues at the trial:

1. 5399 බෙදුම් නඩුබේ අවසාන තීන්දදු ප්‍රකාශය පරිදි පැමිණිල්බල්

උපබල්ඛණගත බල්ඛණබේ අයිතිවාසිකම් ලැබූ පාර්ශවකරුවන්ද

පමණක් එකී බේපල මාර්ගයක් වශබයන්ද භාවිතා කරන ලේබේ ද?

2. විත්තතිකරුවන්ද 2008.08.13 වන දින බ ෝ ඊට ආසන්දන දිනක එකී

මාර්ගබේ පැමිණිලිකාරියබේ බුක්තියට නීති විබරෝධී බලස ආරවුල්

කරන ලේබේ ද?

3. ඉ ත සඳ න්ද විසඳනාවන්දට ලැබෙන පිළිතුරු ඔේ නම් පැමිණිලිකාරියට

පැමිණිල්බල් අයාචනබේ ස න ලො ගත ැකිද?

The defendant raised the following issues:

4. පැමිණිල්ල සිවිල් නඩු විධාන සංග්‍ර බේ 18 වගන්දතිබේ ප්‍රතිපාදන වලට

පට ැනිව ඉදිරිපත්ත කර ඇේද?

4

SC/APPEAL/154/2017

5. පැමිණිල්ල සිවිල් නඩු විධාන සංග්‍ර බේ 35 වගන්දතිබේ ප්‍රතිපාදන වලට

පට ැනිව ඉදිරිපත්ත කර ඇේද?

6. ඉ ත කී 7 ස 8 විසඳනාවන්දට එබේ යයි පිළිතුරු ලැබේ නම්

පැමිණිලිකාරිය එම නඩුව පවරා ැකි ආකාරබයන්ද පවත්තවා බගන යා

බනා ැකිද?

7. අංක 5399/ටී දරණ නඩුබේ අවසාන තීන්දදු ප්‍රකාශය මගින්ද මීට වසර

60 කට බපර එම නඩුබේ පාර්ශවකරුවන්දට පමණක් මාර්ග අයිතියක්

ලො දී තිබුනද කාලයාබේ ඇවෑබමන්ද බමම නඩුබේ විෂයගත මාර්ගය

පැමිණිලිකාරියද යාෙද ඉඩම් හිමියන්දද, නුබේබගාඩ නගර වාසීන්දද

බපාදු පාරක් බලස ොවිතා කර ඇේද?

8. අදාල මාර්ගය පුරා වසර 30 කට අධික කාලයක් බකෝට්බට් ම නගර

සභාව විසින්ද නඩත්තතු කර ඇත්තද?

9. සංබශෝධිත උත්තතරබේ 17 වන බේදබේ කියා ඇති පරිදි විත්තතිකරුවන්ද

විසින්ද පුරා වසර 10කට අධික කාලයක් බපාදු පාරක් බලස අදාල

මාර්ගය පරි රණය කර ඇේද?

10. පුරා වසර ගණනාවක් තිේබේ නගර සභාබවන්ද නඩුවට අදාල මාර්ගයට

තාර දමා විදුලි ආබලෝකය ලො දී ම ජන මුදලින්ද වැඩිදියුණු කිරීම

සමගම බම් පාර බපාදු ම ජන මුදලින්ද නඩත්තතු වන මාර්ගයක් ෙවට

පත්ත වී ඇේද?

11. ඉ ත කී විසඳිය යුතු ප්‍රශ්න එකකට බ ෝ වැඩිගනනකට විත්තතිබේ

වාසියට තීන්දදු වූබේ නම් උත්තතරබේ අයාචනබේ අයැද ඇති ස න

විත්තතිකරුට හිමිකම් ඇත්තද?

Although the defendant in the prayer to the answer claimed lot 4 on

prescription and/or use of lot 4 as a way of necessity as the substantive

relief, he changed the character of his case by way of the issues. By way

of the issues, he took up the position that lot 4 is now a public road and

therefore the plaintiff’s action shall fail. He confined his case only to that

5

SC/APPEAL/154/2017

issue. His last issue (issue No. 11) is, if one or all of the said issues are

answered in the affirmative, whether the defendant is entitled to the

reliefs as prayed for in the prayer to the answer. In other words, if the

defendant fails to prove that lot 4 is a public road, the defendant’s case

fails.

After trial, the District Court entered judgment for the plaintiff. The

defendant preferred an appeal to the Hight Court of Civil Appeal of Mt.

Lavinia. On appeal he again changed his case. He abandoned all his

defences taken in the answer and issues and took up an entirely new

position, that is: what the plaintiff filed in the District Court was an action

known as actio negatoria; only an owner having soil rights can file such

an action; since the plaintiff does not have soil rights to lot 4, the

plaintiff’s action must fail. The High Court accepted this new position

taken for the first time on appeal and set aside the judgment of the

District Court and directed the District Court to enter judgment for the

defendant granting all the reliefs as prayed for in the answer. It may be

recalled that the defendant’s first cross-claim is that he is the owner of

lot 4 by prescription.

The plaintiff is before this Court against the judgment of the High Court.

This Court granted leave to appeal on the following questions of law as

formulated by learned counsel for the plaintiff.

a. Did the Learned Provincial High Court Judges err in law in deciding

that an issue on the nature of a case is a question of Law?

b. Did the Learned Provincial High Court Judges err in law in allowing

a new issue in Appeal which affects the nature of the case?

c. Did the Learned Provincial High Court Judges err in law in deciding

that the Plaintiff-Petitioner’s case is in the nature of actio negatoria?

d. Did the Learned Provincial High Court Judges err in law in not

considering that neither the Plaintiff-Petitioner nor the Defendant-

6

SC/APPEAL/154/2017

Respondent has raised any issue on the basis of actio negatoria at

the trial?

e. Did the Provincial High Court Judges err in law in deciding that the

Plaintiff-Petitioner has no soil rights to the subject matter to the case

(lot No. 4, corpus morefully described in the schedule to the plaint)?

f. Did the Learned Provincial High Court Judges err in law in not

considering that the concept of actio negatoria in Roman Dutch Law

cannot be applied on the subject matter which was partitioned in

terms of the provisions of the Partition Law?

g. Did the Learned Provincial High Court Judges err in law in not

considering the admission by the parties which is marked as “P14”

in allowing the Appeal of the Defendant-Respondent?

A party to an action cannot change his position as he pleases to suit the

occasion. Firstly, a party cannot present by way of issues a different case

from what he has pleaded in his pleadings. However, if the opposing party

does not object, the Court can accept the issues since once issues are

raised pleadings recede to the background. Secondly, once issues are

raised and accepted by Court, a party cannot present a new case when

leading evidence at the trial from what he has raised by way of issues.

Thirdly, once the judgment is delivered by the trial Court, a party cannot

present a new case before the appellate Court from what was presented

before the trial Court, unless any new ground is on a pure question of

law and not on a question of fact or on a mixed question of fact and law.

Two questions arise in this context: (a) is the new issue raised for the first

time on appeal a pure question of law; and (b) if the answer to the

aforesaid is in the affirmative, is the answer given to that question by the

High Court correct.

According to the third admission recorded, the defendant admitted at the

trial that lot 4 was allotted to the parties to the partition action as a road

7

SC/APPEAL/154/2017

by the final decree. it is common ground that the plaintiff’s mother was

the plaintiff in that partition action, and she transferred a defined portion

from her lot to the plaintiff by a deed.

In my view, the Courts below should not have allowed the defendant to

change positions to suit the occasion. The purported new position taken

up by the defendant on appeal is not a pure question of law but a mixed

question of fact and law. It is by analysing the averments in the plaint

and the evidence led at the trial that learned counsel for the defendant

says that what the plaintiff filed was an action known as actio negatoria.

That is how he classifies the plaintiff’s case. Since this matter was not

put in issue before the trial Court, the plaintiff did not lead any evidence

to meet that argument. The plaintiff rejects the position of the defendant

that she filed an action in the nature of actio negatoria. I am not inclined

to take the view that it is a pure question of law. If the new matter raised

for the first time on appeal is not a pure question of law, the matter shall

end there and the judgment of the High Court shall be set aside and the

judgment of the District Court shall be restored.

But let us assume for the sake of argument that what the plaintiff filed

was an action in the nature of actio negatoria and that the plaintiff ought

to have soil rights to file such an action. The High Court held that the

parties to the partition action obtained soil rights only to the specific

allotments of land allotted to them in lieu of their undivided shares and

that they are not entitled to soil rights to lot 4 which was left to be used

by the allottees in common as a road. Then who has soil rights to lot 4 –

the neighbours? In the final decree of partition marked P1 at the trial, lot

4 has been referred to mainly in two places. In the first place it says “The

lot No. 4 being reservation for a road twenty feet wide morefully described

in the schedule hereto declared to be in common between the parties.” In

the other place it says “The Lot No. 4 reservation for a road twenty feet

8

SC/APPEAL/154/2017

wide is declared a private road or a right of way which is in common to the

parties and which said lot No. 4 is according to the said plan No. 942

bounded on the North east by Railway Avenue on the south east by

properties now of Albert Perera and Malwattage Simon Peiris on the south

west by lot No. 3 on the North west by Lots Nos 1 and 2 containing in extent

twenty point eight seven perches (A0-R0-P.20.87).” There is no scintilla of

doubt that according to the final decree of partition, lot 4 has been left to

the allottees who got separate allotments of the land, to be used as a

“private road”. That portion has been separated as a common road only

for the benefit of the said allottees, not for outsiders. The portion of land

subject to lot 4 is the land of the allottees. It is preposterous to even think

the allottees of the specific lots lost their soil rights to lot 4 after the final

decree of partition was entered. All the allottees have soil rights to lot 4

in common.

I answer the questions of law in the affirmative. I set aside the judgment

of the High Court and restore the judgment of the District Court and allow

the appeal with costs in all three Courts, which I fix at rupees two

hundred and fifty thousand.

Judge of the Supreme Court

P. Padman Surasena, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court