[SC FR 51/2021] - Page 1 of 19

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application in terms of Article

126 read with Article 17 of the Constitution of the

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

SC FRA NO. 51/2021

1. Mayomi Ranawaka, AAL

41/1,

Belmont Street,

Colombo 12.

For and on behalf of:

2. W. U. C. Premasiri

No. 214,

Weragodamulla,

Horampella,

Minuwangoda.

3. K.A. Shanika Madurangi

No. 214,

Weragodamulla,

Horampella,

Minuwangoda.

PETITIONERS

Vs.

1. Gotabaya Rajapakshe

His Excellency the President of the Republic and

Hon. Minister of Defence,

15/5, Baladaksha Mawatha, Colombo 03.

2. SSP Nishantha De Zoysa

[SC FR 51/2021] - Page 2 of 19

Director Criminal Investigation.

2(a). SSP Kavinda Piyasekera

Director Criminal Investigation.

3. CI Lalith Dissanayake

Officer-in-Charge,

Special-Unit.

2, 2(a) and 3 above all of:

Criminal Investigation Department,

Colombo 01.

4. CI Waduge Krishantha Ruwan Kumara

Officer-in-Charge (Acting),

Police Narcotic Bureau,

Colombo 01.

4(a). CI Jayasekara

Officer-in-Charge,

Police Narcotic Bureau,

Colombo 01.

5. CI Rohan Mahesh

Officer-in-Charge,

Police Station,

Minuwangoda.

6. Hon. Attorney General

Attorney Generals Department,

Hulftsdorp,

Colombo 12.

[SC FR 51/2021] - Page 3 of 19

RESPONDENTS

BEFORE : P. PADMAN SURASENA J.

A. L. SHIRAN GOONERATNE J.

MAHINDA SAMAYAWARDHENA J.

COUNSEL : Chrishmal Warnasooriya with Pramodya Thilakarathne

instructed by Mayomi Ranawaka for the Petitioners.

Dileepa Peiris, SDSG for the Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 14-03-2024, 26-03-2024, 01-04-2024, 29-04-2024.

DECIDED ON : 30-01-2025

P. PADMAN SURASENA J.

Out of the three Petitioners mentioned in the caption, the 1st Petitioner is the Attorney-

at-Law who had filed this Petition on behalf of the 2nd Petitioner who was in detention

at the time of filing this Petition. The 2nd Petitioner is a Sub-Inspector of Police

attached to the Police Narcotics Bureau (hereinafter referred to as the PNB). The 3rd

Petitioner is the wife of the 2nd Petitioner.

The 2nd Petitioner alleges that he was arrested on 23-06-2020, by the officers of the

Criminal Investigations Department (hereinafter referred to as the CID). The 2nd

Petitioner further alleges that the CID officers gave no reason for his arrest. The 2nd

Petitioner has also alleged that he was thereafter detained under the Prevention of

Terrorism Act No. 48 of 1979 as amended (hereinafter referred to as PTA), under

three consecutive Detention Orders each of which was for ninety days. The Petitioners

have produced these three consecutive Detention Orders marked P 2(a), P 2(b)) and

[SC FR 51/2021] - Page 4 of 19

P 2(c). The 3rd Respondent has also produced the same Detention Orders marked 3

R 9(E), 3 R 14(E), 3 R 15(E).

In contradistinction to the Petitioners version, the position taken up by the 3rd

Respondent is that it was on 26-06-2020, that the CID had summoned the 2nd

Petitioner to the premises of the CID. It is also the position of the 3rd Respondent that

the CID arrested the 2nd Petitioner on 26-06-2020 upon reasonable suspicion of his

involvement in certain crimes.

Upon this Petition being supported, this Court by its order dated 29-04-2021, had

granted Leave to Proceed in respect of the alleged infringements of the Fundamental

Rights of the Petitioners guaranteed under Articles 11, 12(1), 13(1), 13(2), 13(3),

13(5), 14(1)(g) and 14(1)(h) of the Constitution.

In light of the above assertions, the primary issue I have to address in this proceeding

is the issue as to whether the claim by the 2nd Petitioner that he was arrested by the

CID on 23-06-2020 has been established. It is to the said issue that I would now

turn.

It is the position of the 2nd Petitioner that he was suddenly placed under arrest,1 along

with four other police officers attached to the PNB, by the 3rd Respondent who had

accompanied several individuals clad in civil attire claiming to be from the CID. The

submission of the learned Counsel who appeared for the Petitioners in the course of

the hearing was that the 2nd Petitioner was kept under arrest from 23-06-2020, in the

premises of PNB which is his own workplace. Seeking to substantiate this position, the

Petitioners have produced a copy of the complaint, the father of the 2nd Petitioner had

made to the Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka, marked P 9. The contents of the

said complaint also reveals that the father of the 2nd Petitioner had alleged therein

that the 2nd Petitioner was kept under arrest at the place of his work which is PNB.

1 Paragraph 09 of the Petition dated 04th March 2021.

[SC FR 51/2021] - Page 5 of 19

However, I observe that the Petitioners have chosen not to name any PNB officer as

a Respondent and also chosen not to attribute any responsibility to any PNB officer

for placing the 2nd Petitioner under arrest inside the PNB premises itself. Although the

2nd Petitioner has made CI Ruwan Kumara of PNB as the 4th Respondent in his Petition,

that has been done on the basis that it was his complaint which had led to initiate the

investigations against the 2nd Petitioner by the CID and not on the basis that the 4th

Respondent is responsible for his physical arrest and detention in PNB premises.

As stated above, it is the 2nd Petitioners stated position in this case that he was kept

under arrest in the premises of the Police Narcotics Bureau. Therefore, whoever who

was instrumental in placing the 2nd Petitioner under arrest, had physically kept him in

custody within the PNB premises. In such a scenario, the primary responsibility or at

its least, a considerable amount of some shared responsibility for such illegal act must

be placed in the hands of those who are responsible for the administration of the PNB

premises for it is not the case of the Petitioners that the PNB is a part of the CID. If

that is the case, why didnt the Petitioners make/name any or all officers responsible

for the affairs of the PNB as persons who are responsible for keeping the 2nd Petitioner

under arrest within the PNB premises. This lapse on the part of the Petitioners in my

view, is fatal to the maintainability of this Petition. This is because it is those

responsible for running the affairs of the PNB who would not only become responsible

for such an act but would also be the best persons to explain (if such an incident had

in fact taken place), the circumstances under which such incident had occurred within

the precincts of the PNB. This is further aggravated by the fact that the 3rd Respondent

has denied that the CID had kept the 2nd Petitioner under arrest within the PNB

premises since 23-06-2020. On the above material, I am unable to hold that the

Petitioners have succeeded in establishing that the 2nd Petitioner was kept under arrest

from 23-06-2020, in the premises of PNB which is his own workplace.

As a result of the above conclusion, what prevails before me now, is only the position

taken up by the CID that it had summoned the 2nd Petitioner to the CID on 26-06-

2020 and subsequently arrested the 2nd Petitioner on the same day i.e., on 26-06-

2020. Thus, the next issue I have to decide in this proceeding is the issue as to

[SC FR 51/2021] - Page 6 of 19

whether there was any justification for the CID to cause the arrest of the 2nd Petitioner

on 26-06-2020.

Although the CID has arrested the 2nd Petitioner under the provisions of the PTA, let

me first consider the power to arrest a person conferred on a Police officer under the

Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979. Under section 32(1)(b) of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act, a Police Officer is authorized to arrest without a warrant, any

person:

i. who has been concerned in any cognizable offence or

ii. against whom a reasonable complaint has been made or

iii. against whom a credible information has been received or

iv. against whom a reasonable suspicion exists of his having been so concerned.

Suffice it to state here at this stage that the 4th Respondent CI Ruwan Kumara of PNB

had made a complaint to the CID disclosing that the 2nd Petitioner, with some other

officers of the PNB were complicit in illicit drug trafficking which is prima facie, a

ground to cause the arrest of the 2nd Petitioner even in terms of Section 32(1)(b) of

the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.

As would be shown shortly in this Judgment, the power of arrest under the PTA is

wider than that under the Code of Criminal Procedure Act. Section 6(1) of the PTA

which is found in its Chapter Investigation of Offences and which is reproduced

below, would show this difference.

Section 6(1) of the PTA.

Any police officer not below the rank of Superintendent or any other police

officer not below the rank of Sub-Inspector authorized in writing by him in that

behalf may, without a warrant and with or without assistance and

notwithstanding anything in any other law to the contrary-

(a) arrest any person;

(b) enter and search any premises;

[SC FR 51/2021] - Page 7 of 19

(c) stop and search any individual or any vehicle, vessel, train or

aircraft; and

(d) seize any document or thing,

connected with or concerned in or reasonably suspected of being

connected with or concerned in any unlawful activity.

The phrase emphasized above shows that while Section 32(1)(b) of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act has specified the threshold requirement to be a suspicion or

being concerned in any cognizable offence, Section 6 of the PTA has specified

the threshold requirement to be a suspicion or being concerned in a different category

of things identified as an unlawful activity".

The Interpretation Section of the PTA (Section 31) has defined this term in the

following manner.

Section 31 of the PTA.

unlawful activity" means any action taken or act committed by any means

whatsoever, whether Within or outside Sri Lanka, and whether such action was

taken or act was committed before or after the date of Coming into operation

of all or any of the provision of this Act in the commission or in connection

with the commission of any offence under this Act or any act committed

prior to the date of passing of this Act, which act would, if committed after such

date, constitute an offence under this Act.2

This means that any action taken or act committed, in connection with the commission

of any offence under this Act, would be an unlawful activity. Thus, such action taken

or act committed although on its own may not constitute an offence (therefore would

not constitute a cognizable offence in any case), would still fall under the definition of

an Unlawful Activity, if such action taken or act committed, was done in connection

with the commission of any offence under PTA.

2 Emphasis added.

[SC FR 51/2021] - Page 8 of 19

In the case of Dissanayaka v Superintendent Mahara Prison and others,3 Kulatunga,

J. held as follows:

"The expression "unlawful activity" as defined in Section 31 of the (Preven-

tion of Terrorism) Act is of wide import and encompasses any person

whose acts "by any means whatsoever" are connected with "the commis-

sion of any offence under this Act". This would include a person who

has committed an offence under the Act".4

Therefore, one could observe that the threshold requirement under section 32(1)(b)

of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act for the existence of a reasonable suspicion or

being concerned of any cognizable offence has been reduced under Section 6(1) of

the PTA to a threshold requirement of the existence of a reasonable suspicion or being

connected with or concerned in any unlawful activity. The said unlawful activity"

could be any action taken or act committed by any means whatsoever, in the

commission or in connection with the commission of any offence under this Act.

Let me now consider whether the decision of the 3rd Respondent to proceed to arrest

the 2nd Petitioner, in terms of Section 6(1) of the PTA could be justified.

In Dissanayakas case,5 Kulatunga, J. stated the following to highlight the importance

of examining the material to decide the validity of the arrest.

Nevertheless, it is for the Court to determine the validity of the arrest

objectively. The Court will not surrender its judgement to the executive

for if it did so, the fundamental right to freedom from arbitrary arrest

secured by Article 13(1) of the Constitution will be defeated. The executive

must place sufficient material before the Court to enable the Court to make

a decision, such as the notes of investigation, including the statements of

3 1991 (2) SLR 247, 248-249. 4 Emphasis added. 5 Supra.

[SC FR 51/2021] - Page 9 of 19

witnesses, observations etc. without relying on bare statements in

affidavits".

Having that in mind, let me now turn to some of the material placed before Court, by

the 3rd Respondent who was the Officer-in-Charge of the Special Unit of the Criminal

Investigation Department. He is the officer who had conducted the investigation into

the complaint received, from the 4th Respondent (Chief Inspector Ruwan Kumara of

PNB). He has filed an affidavit explaining the circumstances which led to the arrest of

the 2nd Petitioner. He has also annexed all relevant documentation marked from 3 R

1 to 3 R 18.

Let me now refer to the circumstances which led to the arrest of the 2nd Petitioner. It

was the 4th Respondent CI Ruwan Kumara of PNB who had disclosed that the 2nd

Petitioner, a Sub-Inspector of Police attached to PNB who with some other officers of

the PNB were complicit in illicit drug trafficking. It was on that basis that the CID had

summoned the 2nd Petitioner to the CID on 26-06-2020. This was because the CID

had found the contents revealed from CI Ruwan Kumaras statement credible. It was

on that basis that the CID had proceeded to arrest the 2nd Petitioner as the CID officers

had entertained a reasonable suspicion that the 2nd Petitioner was involved in some

unlawful activities within the meaning of the PTA.

The 3rd Respondent has inspected the 2nd Petitioners residence on 28-06-2020 in

Minuwangoda in Gampaha District. The CID investigators led by the 3rd Respondent

in the course of that raid, had taken into custody, several items from the residence of

the 2nd Petitioner. It was on that material that the CID had proceeded to obtain

Detention Orders in terms of Section 7 of the PTA. The 3rd Respondent has produced

the first Detention Order to detain the 2nd Petitioner for ninety days from 29-06-2020,

marked 3 R 9(E).

While the 2nd Petitioner has admitted that the CID team had conducted the search of

his residence, he himself has produced a list of items ceased by the CID raiding team.

This list is contained in the document produced by the 2nd Petitioner, marked P 11.

[SC FR 51/2021] - Page 10 of 19

i) Cash amounting to Rupees 940,000.00,

ii) Bank of Ceylon Visa card,

iii) Bank of Ceylon Gold card,

iv) Bank card issued by the Commercial Bank,

v) GPS receiver,

vi) Satellite phone and

vii) several vehicles.

The 2nd Petitioner himself has identified his vehicles as follows (reproduced in

verbatim);6

a) Motorcycle bearing Registration No. BIJ 2712

b) SUV bearing Registration No. 32-2067 (registered under previous owners

name, used by their family)

c) Van bearing Registration No. SP PF 0015 (registered under previous owners

name, used for the 2nd Petitioners fathers aforesaid transport services)

d) Lorry bearing Registration No. WP LJ 1966 (registered under 2nd Petitioners

immediate family member, namely Thilanka, which was under repair, also

used for the above business of their parents)

e) Freezer Lorry bearing Registration No. WP LO 1373 (registered under 3rd

Petitioners mother, namely Seetha Jayawardana, also used for the

aforesaid business by the 2nd Petitioners father)

f) Lorry bearing Registration No. LI 9127 (registered under 2nd Petitioners

father, also used in the above business which has now been released back

to the 2nd Petitioners father)

g) Car bearing Registration No. WP KP 4524 (registered under the 2nd

Petitioner for personal use confiscated on a later date by the 5th

Respondent)

6 Paragraphs 15 to 18 of the Petitioner dated 04-03-2021.

[SC FR 51/2021] - Page 11 of 19

h) Car bearing Registration No. WP CBF 1056 (registered under the 2nd

Petitioners sister namely, Chitra Padmini, for personal use confiscated on a

later date from the 2nd Petitioners brother-in-law and his family)

It is the position of the 2nd Petitioner that his father is a retired school Principal, who

had thereafter engaged in a commercial enterprise investing in a business of renting

out vehicles to Cargills Kist (Pvt) Ltd. for delivery and transport purposes with an

approximately monthly return of Rs. 200,000. The 2nd Petitioner has also stated in his

Petition7 that his mother too is a retired teacher who thereafter assisted in her

husbands aforesaid business. It is the position of the 2nd Petitioner that at any

particular time several vehicles remained parked in his premises for this purpose. The

2nd Petitioners father has submitted an affidavit which was marked P 7.

I observe that the CID raiding team has taken into custody, a satellite phone and a

GPS receiver from the residence of the 2nd Petitioner. However, neither the 2nd

Petitioner nor his father has explained the presence of the satellite phone and the GPS

receiver in their residence. Moreover, it must be noted at this juncture that several

witnesses whose statements the CID had recorded, had divulged the use of items

such as satellite phones, GPS receivers in the illegal activities in which the 2nd

Petitioner was said to be involved. These illegal activities include mid-sea transfer of

heroin allegedly at the instance of the 2nd Petitioner.

As regards the fact of so much of cash and number of vehicles being found in their

house, the explanation offered by the 2nd Petitioner and his father is only limited to

bare averments in their respective affidavits. The Petitioners have failed to support

these averments with any other documentary evidence.

In Dissanayakas case,8 Kulatunga, J. stated that it is not the duty of the Court to

determine whether on the available material the arrest should have been made or

not. This statement is included in the following excerpt taken from that Judgment.

7 Paragraph 8 of the petition dated 04-03-2021 8 Supra.

[SC FR 51/2021] - Page 12 of 19

. Where the power to arrest without a warrant is couched in the

language of Section 6(1) of the PTA it is well settled that the validity of

the arrest is determined by applying the objective test. This is so whether

the arrest is under the normal law....., under the Emergency

Regulations..... or under the P.T.A. However, it is not the duty of the Court

to determine whether on the available material the arrest should have

been made or not. The question for the Court is whether there was

material for a reasonable officer to cause the arrest.... Proof of the

commission of the offence is not required; a reasonable suspicion or a

reasonable complaint of the commission of the offence suffices.....

In my view, having regard to the facts and circumstances of this case, the explanation

offered by the 2nd Petitioner and his father as to why so much of cash and number of

vehicles were found in their house when the CID team raided their residence is not

strong enough to dispel the existence of the reasonable suspicion entertained by the

3rd Respondent that the 2nd Petitioner could be reasonable suspected of or be

concerned in any unlawful activity. Moreover, I must also be mindful that the time at

which the 3rd Respondent had entertained the afore-said reasonable suspicion was the

time of the arrest of the 2nd Petitioner and the said reasonable suspicion was confirmed

by the subsequent raid conducted at the house of the 2nd Petitioner.

While the credibility of the witnesses must be left for the trial Court, I am unable at

this stage, to accept the submission of the learned Counsel for the Petitioners that the

CID or PNB had fabricated evidence against the Petitioner. As has already been stated

above, the Petitioners have not made PNB officers as Respondents in their Petition. I

have no reason not to allow the law to take its own course in this instance. In these

circumstances, I hold that the arrest of the 2nd Petitioner caused by the CID is justified

in terms of Section 6(1) of the PTA.

Another argument advanced by the learned Counsel for the Petitioners is that it was

unlawful for the CID not to have produced the 2nd Petitioner before any Court of law

[SC FR 51/2021] - Page 13 of 19

up until the filing of the Petition dated 04-03-2021.9 This is, therefore, the submission

made by the learned Counsel for the Petitioners that the CID had failed to produce

the 2nd Petitioner before a competent Court within the time limits specified either under

the PTA or ordinary law (Section 37, CCPA).

It is necessary first to reproduce here, Section 7 of the PTA which deals with the

applicable law pertaining to the stage at which a person arrested under Section 6(1)

of the PTA must be produced before a Magistrate.

Section 7 of the PTA:

(1) Any person arrested under subsection (1) of section 6 may be kept in

custody for a period not exceeding seventy-two hours and shall, unless a

detention order under section 9 has been made in respect of such person,

be produced before a Magistrate before the expiry of such period and the

Magistrate shall, on an application made in writing in that behalf by a

police officer not below the rank of Superintendent, make order that such

person be remanded until the conclusion of the trial of such person :

Provided that, where the Attorney-General consents to the release, of such

person from custody before the conclusion of the trial, the Magistrate shall

release such person from custody.

(2) Where any person connected with or concerned in or reasonably

suspected to be connected with or concerned in the commission of any

offence under this Act appears or is produced before any court other than

in the manner referred to in subsection (1), such court shall order the

remand of such person until the conclusion of the trial:

Provided that, if an application is made under the hand of a police officer

not below the rank of Superintendent to keep such person in police

9 Para 1(b) of the Petition dated, 04-03-2021.

[SC FR 51/2021] - Page 14 of 19

custody for a period not exceeding seventy-two hours, the Magistrate shall

authorise such custody and thereupon the order of remand made by the

Magistrate shall remain suspended for the period during which such

person is in police custody.

(3) A police officer conducting an investigation under this Act in respect

of any person arrested under subsection (1) of section 6 or remanded

under subsection (1) or subsection (2) of this section-

(a) shall have the right of access to such person and the right to take such

person during reasonable hours to any place for the purpose of

interrogation and from place to place for the purposes of investigation;

and

(b) may obtain a specimen of the handwriting of such person and do all such

acts as may reasonably be necessary for fingerprinting or otherwise

identifying such person;

In the case of Weerawansa v The Attorney-General and others,10 Fernando, J. held

that if a Detention Order under section 9(1) is obtained within 72 hours of arrest,

there is no necessity to produce the detainee before the Magistrate. In Fernando Js

words, it is as follows:

If a Detention Order under section 9(1) is obtained within 72 hours of

arrest, non-production before a judicial officer is excused by section 7(1).

However, I must also mention here for the sake of completeness that in Weerawansas

case, Fernando, J. went on to hold that the CID had no right to keep the Petitioner in

that case in custody without producing him before a Magistrate, in terms of Section

7(1) as Court had not accepted the assertion by the Respondent in that case that the

Petitioner had been arrested by the CID in accordance with Section 6(1) of the PTA.

10 2000 (1) SLR 387.

[SC FR 51/2021] - Page 15 of 19

As stated above, the CID had arrested the 2nd Petitioner on 26-06-2020. The CID as

per Section 7(1) of the PTA has kept the 2nd Petitioner in custody for a period not

exceeding seventy-two hours. Thereafter, the CID had kept him in custody till the

Detention Order dated 29-06-2020 (P 2(a)) was made in terms of Section 9 of the

PTA. Thus, the said period of custody in CID has not exceeded seventy-two hours as

per Section 6(1) of the PTA. Therefore, there is no violation of law by the CID in that

instance.

Another argument advanced by the learned Counsel for the Petitioners is that some

of the Detention Orders issued against the 2nd Petitioner are not valid. The 2nd

Petitioner was detained under three consecutive Detention Orders, i.e., the detention

orders dated 29-06-2020 (P 2(a)); the detention order dated 26-09-2020 (P 2(b));

the detention order dated 25-12-2020 (P 2(c)).11

Let me now reproduce below, Section 9 of the PTA which empowers the Minister to

order detention of a person connected with or concerned in any unlawful activity.

Section 9 of the PTA (Detention Orders)

1) Where the Minister has reason to believe or suspect that any person is

connected with or concerned in any unlawful activity, the Minister may order

that such person be detained for a period not exceeding three months in the

first instance, in such place and subject to such conditions as may be

determined by the Minister, and any such order may be extended from time to

time for a period not exceeding three months at a time:

Provided, however, that the aggregate period of such detention shall not

exceed a period of eighteen months.

2)

11 The 3rd Respondent has produced these Detention Orders marked 3 R 9(E), 3 R 14(E), 3 R 15(E).

[SC FR 51/2021] - Page 16 of 19

(a) At any time after an order has been made in respect of any person under

subsection (1), the Minister may direct that the operation of such order be

suspended and may make an order under subsection (1) of section 11.

(b) The Minister may revoke any such direction if he is satisfied that the person in

respect of whom the direction was made has failed to observe any condition

imposed or that the operation of the order can no longer remain suspended

without detriment to public safety.

In Weerawansas case12, Fernando, J. took the following view:

"Not only must the Minister of Defence, subjectively, have the required

belief or suspicion, but there must also be, objectively, 'reason' for

such belief.

I have already adverted to above, the material placed against the 2nd Petitioner. I am

of the view that the said material is sufficient to pass on the objective test, the decision

made by the Minister of Defence that there was sufficient basis for the issuance of the

Detention Order.

The leaned Counsel for the Petitioner also advanced another argument with regard to

the validity of the Detention Orders marked P 2(a), P 2(b) and P 2(c). It is the

submission of the learned Counsel for the Petitioner that it is only the Minsters of

Defence who has been empowered in terms of Section 9(1) of the PTA, to make

Detention Orders. It is also his submission that some of the Detention Orders [marked

P 2(a), P 2(b)] issued to detain the 2nd Petitioner have been signed by the President

and therefore not valid in law.

I observe that the designation of the signatory of the Detention Orders marked P 2(a)

and P 2(b), has been mentioned on those two Detention Orders as President and

12 Supra at page 378.

[SC FR 51/2021] - Page 17 of 19

the designation of the signatory of the Detention Orders marked P 2(c) has been

mentioned therein as President and Minister of Defence.

While it is correct that Section 9(1) of the PTA empowers the Minster of Defence to

issue detention orders I cannot forget the fact that in terms of Article 44(3) of the

Constitution it is always the President who must hold the portfolio of the Minister of

Defence in this country.

Further, Article 44(3) of the Constitution requires that the position of the Minister in

charge of the subject of Defence be filled by the President. It is as follows:

(3) The President shall be the Minister in charge of the subject of

Defence and may exercise, perform and discharge the powers, duties and

functions of any Minister of the Cabinet of Ministers or any Minister who is

not a member of the Cabinet of Ministers, subject to the provisions of the

Constitution, for not exceeding fourteen days during a period within which

any subject or function is not assigned to any such Minister under the

provisions of paragraph (1) of this Article or under paragraph (1) of Article

45 and accordingly, any reference in the Constitution or any written law to

the Minster to whom such subject or function is assigned, shall be read and

construed as a reference to the President:

Provided however, preceding provisions of this paragraph shall not

preclude the President from assigning any subject or function to himself in

consultation with the Prime Minister and accordingly, any reference in the

Constitution or any written law to the Minister to whom such subject or

function is assigned, shall be read and construed as a reference to the

President. [emphasis added]

In SC/SD/06/2001, this Court in determining the Constitutionality of the Seventeenth

Amendment to the Constitution, stated obiter regarding the exercise of the functions

of Minister of Defence, which is as follows:

[SC FR 51/2021] - Page 18 of 19

The relevant provision as to the exercise of the sovereignty of the People in

relation to executive power is contained in Article 4(b), which reads thus:

executive power of the People, including the defence of Sri Lanka, shall

be exercised by the President of the Public elected by the People,

Therefore the executive power of the People including defend [sic] is exercised

[by] the president of [the] Republic who is elected by the People.

Therefore, I am satisfied that the Detention Orders have been issued by the Minster

of Defence who was also the President of the Country at that time.

The condition precedent to the issuance of the Detention Order is that the issuer, the

Minister of Defence, must have been satisfied that there were adequate grounds to

detain the 2nd Petitioner. In the instant case, it was just the same individual who held

the posts of both the President and the Minister of Defence of the country. Therefore,

irrespective of the designation written underneath the signature, it was the same

individual who had signed. The said individual should have signed the Detention

Orders after being satisfied that there were adequate grounds to detain the 2nd

Petitioner. Therefore, the main issue for the validity of the Detention Orders would be

whether there were such grounds for the issuer to detain the 2nd Petitioner in custody.

This is because the person who had signed the Detention Orders was indeed the

Minister of Defence. I have no basis or justification to hold the Detention Orders P

2(a) and P 2(b) are invalid merely because the designation of the issuer has been

mentioned as the President and not as the Minister of Defence in the Detention Orders

P 2(a) and P 2(b). Moreover, I am of the view that this argument is so technical in

nature and is not capable of persuading me to declare these Detention Orders invalid

on that basis, particularly in view of the material available against the 2nd Petitioner

calling for the necessity to detain him in custody pending investigation into very

serious crimes.

For the foregoing reasons, I hold that the Respondents have not infringed any of the

Fundamental Rights of the Petitioners guaranteed by the Constitution. In the above

[SC FR 51/2021] - Page 19 of 19

circumstances, the Petitioners are not entitled to succeed with their Petition. I proceed

to dismiss this Petition with costs.

The Petitioner in this Petition has stated that he was placed under interdiction on the

allegations some of which were discussed in the course of this Judgment.13 However,

in the course of the argument, Court was informed by the learned counsel who

appeared for the Petitioner that the Petitioner has been reinstated and therefore has

resumed working as a Police officer but neither the learned Counsel for the Petitioner

nor the learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General has offered any explanation acceptable

to Court as to how a person who is suspected to be concerned with offences of that

magnitude came to be re-employed as a Police officer. I cannot forget the fact that

the learned Senior Deputy Solicitor General resisted this application against granting

relief to the Petitioner on the basis that there is evidence to justify both his arrest and

detention. I cannot turn a blind eye to the above situation. Therefore, I direct the

Inspector General of Police to look in to those matters with a view of deciding the

legality/ suitability of allowing the Petitioner to continue to be employed as a Police

officer. The 6th Respondent is also directed to examine the relevant facts pertaining

to the aforesaid aspects and consider giving necessary advices to the Inspector

General of Police.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

A. L. SHIRAN GOONERATNE, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

MAHINDA SAMAYAWARDHENA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

13 Paragraph 20 of the Petition dated 04-03-2021.