IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.

In the matter of an application under and in terms of Article 17 and 126 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

C.S. Niles 16 Village Drive, Quincy MA, 02169, USA. Petitioner S.C.(FR) Application No, 237/2013

Vs. 1. Commander of the Army Army Headquarters, Colombo 03. 1A General Shavendra Silva Commander of the Army Army Headquarters, Sri Jayawardenepura, Colombo. 2. Commanding Officer Security Forces, Jaffna Division, Palaly. 2A. Major General W.L.P.W. Perera Commanding Officer Security Forces, Jaffna Division, Palaly. 3. Chief Co-ordinator Civil Affairs Unit, Sri Lanka Security Forces, Hospital Road, Jaffna. 4. The Secretary- Ministry of Defence and Urban Development,

S.C. (FR) No. 237/2013

2

No. 15/5, Baladaksha Mawatha, Colombo 03. 4A. General G.D.H. Kamal Gunaratne (Retd.) The Secretary- Ministry of Defence and State Ministry of National Security, Home Affairs and Disaster Management, No. 15/5, Baladaksha Mawatha, Colombo 03. 5. Hon. Attorney General, Attorney Generals Department, Colombo 12. 6. Divisional Secretary- Jaffna Jaffna Town-West, G.S. Division J/73, Divisional Secretariat, Main Street, Chundikuli, Jaffna. (Opposite St. John s College Jaffna). 6A. Mr. Kanapathipillai Mahesan Divisional Secretary- Jaffna Jaffna Town-West, G.S. Division J/73, Divisional Secretariat, Main Street, Chundikuli, Jaffna. (Opposite St. John s College Jaffna). 7. Land Commissioner General Land Commissioner Generals Department, Mihikatha Madura, No.1200/6, Rajamal Waththa Road, Battaramulla. 7A. R.P.R. Rajapaksha Land Commissioner General Land Commissioner Generals Department, Mihikatha Madura, No.1200/6,

S.C. (FR) No. 237/2013

3

Rajamal Waththa Road, Battaramulla. Respondents

**********

BEFORE : P. PADMAN SURASENA, J.

ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

MAHINDA SAMAYAWARDHENA, J. COUNSEL : Viran Corea with Pasindu Silva & Ms. Thilini Vidanagamage for the Petitioner instructed by Sanjeewa Kaluarachchi. Ms. Kanishka de Silva Balapatabendi SSC for the Hon. Attorney General.

ARGUED ON : 21st October, 2021 DECIDED ON : 27th October, 2023

********** ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

The Petitioner in SC (FR) No. 236 of 2013, Surendrani Amirthanathan,

is alleging continued infringement of her fundamental rights guaranteed

to her under Articles 12(1) and 14(1)(h) of the Constitution. The impugned

act of administrative or executive action is that one or more of the

Respondents forcefully and illegally seized her property located in Jaffna

town, over which she has paper title.

It was stated by the Petitioner that her father bought the said

property in 1969 and built a dwelling house on it. She lived in that house

with her parents until her marriage in 1987, after which she moved to

Peradeniya with her husband. In 1988, her parents too had come to live

S.C. (FR) No. 237/2013

4

with her after renting out their house in Jaffna to an elderly couple. In 1990,

their house became uninhabitable due to damages it had sustained

consequent to the war situation that erupted between the LTTE and Sri

Lanka Army. With hostilities continuing unabated, it was not possible for

the Petitioner to repair their house at that point of time. The Petitioner

further states that due to the situation that prevailed at the time in the

Jaffna peninsula, she and her family had moved to Australia in 2003, but her

father had arranged a caretaker to look after the said property during their

absence.

The Petitioner alleges that in October 2012, the Sri Lanka Army had

illegally entered into her property and occupied same by erecting a fence

around the property denying any access to the land by her agent. The

Petitioner claims that her property had not been acquired by the State in

terms of law and therefore asserts that she still is its lawful owner. It is also

alleged by the Petitioner in SC (FR) No. 236/2013 that, in addition to her

property, the Army had fenced off two other allotments of land that abuts

her land. These two allotments of land are also depicted in Plan No. 665A

by T. Candiah, as lot Nos. 2B and 3 respectively (said plan was annexed to

the petition marked P1(b)).

The Petitioners in SC (FR) Nos. 237 of 2013 and 238 of 2013,

Constance Selvaranee Niles and Thevanayaki Kunanayagam, made similar

allegation in their respective petitions claiming that the Army had

unlawfully seized their lands by fencing off them. These Petitioners further

allege that the Army, with its continued illegal occupation of their lands,

S.C. (FR) No. 237/2013

5

infringed fundamental rights guaranteed to them under Article 12(1) of the

Constitution.

The Petitioner in SC (FR) No. 237 of 2013, Constance Selvaranee Niles

claims that she and her late husband, Rev. Wesley Dayalagunan Niles,

purchased lot No 2B (as depicted in Plan No. 665A dated 9th July 1969

(drawn by Tirunavukarasu Candiah, Licensed Surveyor and also depicted in

Plan No. 2021 by Perimpanayagam Licensed Surveyor dated 23rd June 1973),

which is in an extent of about 17 perches, on Deed of Transfer No. 810

attested by Gnanapragasam Notary Public on 26th October 1970. The

Petitioner, Thevanayaki Kunanayagam, had purchased the southern half of

lot No 3 on Deed of Transfer No. 801, attested by Devarajan Notary Public

on 3rd August 1969. Northern half of the same Lot was purchased on Deed

of Transfer No. 1351, attested by Notary Public Saravanamuttu Selvarajah on

27th November 1961 and thus became the owner of Lot No. 3, which is in

an extent of about 40 perches, in its entirety. These two Petitioners support

the claim of the Petitioner in SC (FR) No. 236/2013, that in 2012, the Army

had illegally entered their lands and continued to occupy them.

After hearing the parties, this Court granted leave to proceed under

Article 12(1) of the Constitution, in respect of SC(FR) No. 236 of 2013 and

fixed the matter for hearing along with the other two applications. On 21st

October 2021, when the three applications were taken up for hearing,

learned Counsel who represented the three Petitioners as well as the

learned Senior State Counsel, who represented the Respondents, invited

this Court to amalgamate the three applications and to pronounce a

common Judgment in respect of them, in view of the fact that the attendant

S.C. (FR) No. 237/2013

6

circumstances are almost identical to each other, except for the three

separate allotment of lands in respect of which the three Petitioners claim

title.

The Respondents have resisted the three applications and in the

Statement of Objections of the 1st Respondent, it is stated after 1996, the

year in which Operation Riviresa was conducted by Sri Lanka Army, Jaffna

Town was liberated from the clutches of LTTE and civil administration in

Jaffna peninsula was restored. It is further averred by the 1st Respondent

that, after the termination of military operations against LTTE on 19th May

2009, the Army had periodically released such private lands it had to

occupy for strategic reasons in order to minimize inconvenience caused to

those land owners, but, it did so only after conducting threat assessments

and redeployment of its troops to other locations.

However, it was decided by the Army that the Jaffna town had to be

secured with deployment of military units stationed at strategic locations

and, with a view to achieve this objective, an abandoned land near Jaffna

Hospital, that adjoins the playground of Sinhala Maha Vidyalaya, was

occupied. The said occupied parcel of land which is in an extent of about

20 perches is located within the larger land depicted in Plan No. 665A

dated 09.07.1969 and situated within the Grama Niladhari division of J 73

Jaffna. After occupying the land, it was utilised by constructing a building

on it, which is being used as the official residence of the 512 Brigade

Commander of the 51 Division.

The 1st Respondent also disclosed that the Minister of Land and

Land Development had, by letter dated 7th May 2014, directed the 6th

S.C. (FR) No. 237/2013

7

Respondent, Divisional Secretary of Jaffna, to publish a public notice in

terms of Section 2 of the Land Acquisition Act with a view to acquire the

said parcel of land for the public purpose described therein. It is asserted

by the 1st Respondent that once the acquisition process is completed in

terms of law, compensation would be paid to the rightful owner of the

land under the occupation of the Army.

The Petitioners in their counter affidavits, denied of any pending

acquisition process in respect of their lands and further asserted that they

had not received any such notice.

At the hearing, it was contended by the learned Counsel for the

Petitioners that the material presented by them clearly established that the

lands belong to them were illegally occupied by the Army in view of the

fact that there was no legally sanctioned process of acquisition. It was

therefore submitted that the continued illegal occupation of their lands is

an infringement of their fundamental rights under Article 12(1) of the

Constitution. Learned Counsel further submitted that if the lands under

occupation of the Respondents could not be released back to the

Petitioners, they must at least be compensated adequately in order to

mitigate the loss of their property.

Learned Senior State Counsel sought to counter the said contention

by submitting that the Petitioners could have vindicated their rights before

the District Court by instituting action, which is the proper legal remedy in

a situation where any one of them were denied of their rights to property,

consequent to an act of illegal occupation. It appears that, in advancing the

said contention, the Petitioners seek to differentiate themselves from a

S.C. (FR) No. 237/2013

8

litigant, who had been illegally dispossessed from his or her property by a

trespasser, by placing reliance on the fact that the Respondents, in

depriving them of their rights, had acted under the colour of office.

The three Petitioners, in the prayer to their respective petitions, had

prayed for the grant of following reliefs;

a. declare that any one or more of the Respondents violated their

fundamental rights guaranteed to them under Articles 12(1) and

or 14(1)(h) of the Constitution,

b. direct any one or more of the Respondents to release the property

reflected in the respective petitions with vacant possession

forthwith.

In view of the allegation of the Petitioners of an illegal denial of their

right to property, I wish to quote from the judgment of Manawadu v The

Attorney General (1987) 2 Sri L.R. 30, where Sharvananda CJ held that (at p.

43) [A]mong the important rights which individuals traditionally have enjoyed

is the right to own property. This right is recognised in the Universal Declaration

of Human Rights (1948). Article 17 (1) of which states that everyone has the right

to own property and Article 17(2) guarantees that no one shall be arbitrarily

deprived of his property. Thus, this Court had recognised the traditional

right to own property, although not included in Chapter III of the

Constitution as a fundamental right, and it could only be denied by a

process prescribed by law.

In view of the nature of the declaratory reliefs sought by the

Petitioners, it becomes their responsibility to satisfy this Court on a

S.C. (FR) No. 237/2013

9

balance of probability that they hold valid legal title to the individual

tenements in respect of which such declarations were sought, and that one

or more Respondents are in illegal occupation of each of these specific

parcels of land. If those factors had been established to the required degree

of proof, the Petitioners are entitled to a declaration that they were

arbitrary deprived of their right to property in denial of equal protection of

law, a fundamental right guaranteed to them by Article 12(1).

The Petitioners had relied on their title deeds to establish ownership

over the three individual tenements referred to in them. The Petitioner in

SC (FR) No. 236/2013, Surendrani Amirthanathan, had relied on Deed of

Gift No. 107, executed by her father Reginald Jeremiah Dharmaratnam

Ariyaratnam and attested by Sharmini Mecheta Dushanthi Kamaragoda,

Notary Public on 1st March 1991, in proof of her legal ownership to a

parcel of land in an extent of two Lachcham (20 perches), described in its

schedule as lot No. 2A of Plan No. 665A, drawn by Tirunavukarasu Candiah,

Licensed Surveyor, on 9th July 1969.

Land claimed to be owned by Constance Selvaranee Niles (the

Petitioner in SC (FR) No. 237/2013) and her late husband, Rev. Wesley

Dayalagunan Niles, is depicted as Lot No. 2B in Plan No. 665A, together

with rights over the road reservations depicted therein as Lot Nos. 1C and

2C. She relied on Deed of Transfer No. 810, attested by David

Gnanapragasam, Notary Public, on 26th October 1970, in proof of her title to

the said land. The Petitioner in SC (FR) No. 238/2013, Thevanayaki

Kunanayagam, also claims that her land is occupied by the Sri Lanka Army

and relied on Deeds of Transfer Nos. 1351 and 801, through which she

S.C. (FR) No. 237/2013

10

received title to both northern and southern half of lot No. 3, as depicted in

the Plan No. 665A. The said Deed of Transfer No. 1351 was attested by S.

Selvarajah, Notary Public, on 27th November 1961. The said Deed conferred

title to the said lot in favour of her father Mylvaganam Sabaratnam, who

died without leaving a will. The Petitioner, being the only child of

Mylvaganam Sabaratnam, claims to be his sole heir.

In his Statement of Objections, the 1st Respondent specifically denied

the claim of title made by the Petitioners to the three allotments of lands

and put them in strict proof of same. The title deeds that were relied upon

by the three Petitioners were notarially executed instruments and

registered in the relevant Land Registries. Except for the Deed of Gift No.

107 (relied on by the Petitioner in SC (FR) No.236/2013), other deeds were

executed more than thirty years ago. Therefore, the Petitioners have placed

material before this Court seeking to establish title to the individual

allotments of lands referred to in their respective petitions.

Perusal of plan No. 665A, relied on by both parties, indicate that it

had been drawn for the purpose of subdivision of a larger land, which was

in an extent of 13 Lachchams and 06 Kulies (over 130 perches). The said

larger land was since subdivided into six individual allotments consisting

of lot Nos. 1A, 1B, 2A, 2B, and 3, along with the road reservation shown as

Lot Nos. 1C and 2C. The three Petitioners claim title to Lot Nos. 2A, 2B and

3, that are located adjacent to each other and separated by a common

boundary, forming the southern part of the said larger land, while lot Nos.

1A, 1B consists of the northern part. The Lot No. 2A is about 20 perches in

extent, Lot No. 2B is about 17 perches and Lot No. 3 is about 40 perches.

S.C. (FR) No. 237/2013

11

Collectively these three allotments form a land area of 77 perches from the

total extent of the said larger land of over 130 perches.

The 1st Respondent admitted in his Statement of Objections that a

building was constructed by the Army on the 20 perch parcel of land it

occupied. The 1st Respondent further stated that the said 20 perch land is

located within the Grama Niladhari Division of J 73 JaffnaWest, and

depicted in Plan No. 665A, marked as RX-1. This is the identical plan

relied on by the three Petitioners in support of their claims. The 1st

Respondent, despite making a reference to Plan No. 665A, did not make

any reference to a particular lot number, in order to denote a particular

parcel of land under occupation, in relation to the said plan.

The three Petitioners collectively assert that the Army had occupied

their land and erected fences around them. It is observed that the

Petitioners did not carry out any survey in order to indicate the exact

location of these fences in relation to their respective lands vis a vis the 20

perch land occupied by the Army. The difficulties of the Petitioners in

making out such a survey plan, demarcating the exact location of the

fences, is understandable given the practicalities involved in such an

exercise.

However, none of the Petitioners thought it fit to indicate the

location of the fences that have been erected around their properties or to

the location of the buildings put up by the Army in relation to their

respective lots, either by way of a sketch or an indication of same on Plan

No. 665A itself, in view of the bare admission made by the 1st Respondent

in his Statement of Objections. The Petitioner in SC (FR) No. 236/2013, in

S.C. (FR) No. 237/2013

12

fact did refer to a sketch in her letters P2 to P5 but did not think it

necessary to annex same to the instant petition. When the Respondents

claim that they built a residence for the Brigade Commander on that 20

perch land, the Petitioners have merely reiterated what they alleged in the

petitions in their counter affidavits that the land was fenced off and did

not make any reference to a building erected on any of their lands.

With the said admission of the 1st Respondent in his Statement of

Objections, it becomes clear that the Army is in fact occupying a parcel of

land in extent of 20 perches within the larger land depicted in Plan No.

665A, with a building constructed by it. The fact of Army occupying a land

in extent of only 20 perches from the said larger land is supported by the

direction issued by the Minister of Lands to the 6th Respondent, directing

the latter to initiate acquisition process. Each of the three Petitioners claim

that the Army is occupying their lands. The question whether the land

admittedly occupied by the Army belong to any of the three Petitioners.

In the absence of a specific admission to that effect, a question

necessarily arises whether the land occupied by the Army belongs to any

one or more of the Petitioners. The determination of the exact location of

the said occupied land in relation to the three parcels of land to which the

Petitioners individually claim title could be one way of determining that

issue. It must be noted that the admission made by the 1st Respondent in

turn give rise to several probabilities that this Court should consider

before it ventures to answer the said question.

Lot No. 2A consists of 20 perches in extent and accordingly the

occupied land could well fit into that parcel of land. That is one

S.C. (FR) No. 237/2013

13

probability. The occupied 20 perch could also be located completely within

the demarcated Lot No. 3, which is over 40 perches in extent and thus

presents another probability. The occupied land could also be located in lot

No. 2B consuming it in totality as the said parcel of land is only about 17

perches. There exists another probability that the 20 perch land is located

well within land area covered by all three lots. It appears that the

likelihood of occurring any one of these probabilities are of equal in value.

In addition to the probabilities that are referred to, there is yet

another probability that exists. The larger land, as per Plan No. 665A,

consists of about 130 perches in total. As already noted, the three lots to

which the Petitioners claim ownership, forms the southern part of the said

larger land. The said three allotments are about 77 perches in its total

extent, leaving a balance of 53 perches for the remaining lot Nos. 1A and

1B, which forms its northern part. It could well be that the said 20 perch lot

with a building standing on it is located within the land area forming the

said northern part, to which none of the Petitioners could claim title to. If

the 20 perch land, occupied by the Army, is located within the said

northern part of the larger land, then none of the Petitioners are entitled to

the declaration they sought from this Court.

The 1st Respondent specifically avers that the Army had carried out

construction work on the said occupied land and had annexed building

plans and several photographs of the buildings that had been put up on

that land to his Statement of Objections (photographs marked RX2 to RX5).

The photographic evidence tends to indicate that the construction activities

of the building are already completed. The building plan of the said

S.C. (FR) No. 237/2013

14

construction is annexed to the Statement of Objections as RX-8 and is

indicative of the fact that the Army had constructed the said building from

its foundation level as totally a new construction and not merely repaired a

damaged or an uninhabitable building that stood on the occupied land.

Strangely, none of the Petitioners did offer any additional material

to indicate that the 20 perch land occupied by the Army with a building on

it falls within the boundaries of any or more of the three lots to which they

claim title. In other words, it was imperative for the Petitioners to satisfy

this Court that any one or more of them had title to the 20 perch land

occupied by the Army. The Petitioners have filed their petitions in 2013.

Statement of Objections of the 1st Respondent were tendered to Court in

2017 and the Petitioners countered the assertions made in the objections

with their counter affidavits filed in 2018.

Given the fact that the existence of a building is clearly visible

through a fence, unlike a building constructed within a premises

surrounded by high parapet walls and thereby totally blocking any visual

access, the reason as to why none of the Petitioners referred to a building

put up by the Army on their lands and thus limiting their allegation only

to the act of fencing is somewhat intriguing. If the building was

constructed after the petitions were tendered to this Court, the Petitioners

could have easily clarified that position, despite the absence to any

reference to a construction in their original petitions.

In these circumstances, I am of the considered view that each of the

Petitioners have failed to satisfy this Court on a balance of probabilities

that their lands were occupied by one or more of the Respondents as

S.C. (FR) No. 237/2013

15

alleged. Their failure to exclude the probability of the location of the 20

perch land under occupation within the northern part of the larger land

depicted in plan No. 665A, makes the 1st Respondents claim that no land

belonged to any of the Petitioners is being occupied by Army, a more

probable one when compared with the others.

In view of the above considerations, the Petitioners in SC (FR) Nos.

236/2013, 237/2013 and 238/2013, have either individually or collectively

failed to satisfy their allegation that the Respondents have deprived their

rights to property by illegally occupying their lands infringing their

fundamental rights, guaranteed under Article 12(1) of the Constitution, as

described in the three petitions.

Accordingly, I dismiss the said three petitions without costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

PADMAN SURASENA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

MAHINDA SAMAYAWARDHENA, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT