==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application under and in terms of Article 17 read with Article 126(2) of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

SC (FR) Application No: 158/2012

1. Kuruppu Mullage Priyantha, No. 40, MDH Pura, Thalangama South, PelawaƩa, BaƩaramulla. 2. Nimal Amarasiri Meegammana, No. 64, Heennakade

Owilikandha, Matale. 3. Habarakadage Chandrapala, No. 337/A2, MaƟ Imbuwa, AngampiƟya, Padukka.

PETITIONERS

Vs. 1. Sri Lanka Transport Board 2. Chairman, Sri Lanka Transport Board 3. D.A.P. Senevirathne Chief ExecuƟve Oﬃcer 3A. R.V.D. Piyathilake 3B. P.D. Balasooriya 3C. Sagara H. Waduge 3D. Mahesh Karunathilake

3 – 3D Respondents - Chief ExecuƟve Oﬃcer, Sri Lanka Transport Board THE CAPTION GOES ON TILL PAGE 26 – I HAVE NOT ANNXED THOSE PAGES TO THE DRAFT

2

4. L.A. Wimalarathne, Vice Chairman, Director 4A. Bandula Dias,

Vice Chairman, Director 4B. Ramal Siriwardhane,

Chairman/Director 4C. K.D. Karunaratne 5. S.B. UdawaƩe 5A. B.G.B.P. Jayasiri 5B. N.W. Nathavitharana 5C. Ruwan R. Thilakarathne 6. Ivan Tissera 6A. H.H. Erantha Priya Sudesh De Silva 6B. D.C.W. Hapugoda 6C. P.H.A.S. Wijerathne 7. Prasanna Kumara de Silva 7A. J.M. Thilakarathne Banda 7B. A.D. Jayasekara 7C. J.M. Thilakarathne Banda 7D. N. Nathavitharana 8. Nihal Jayathilake 8A. M. Nathawitharana 8B. H.M.A. Piyasudes De Silva 8C. B.G.B.P. Jayasiri

3

8D. A.P.L.P. Samarasinghe 8E. Buddhika Iddamalgoda 8F. Nurajith Singh

4th to 8F Respondents all Directors of the Sri Lanka Transport Board. 9. Thisani Thenabadu 9A. A.K.C. Dhammika Silochana 9B. A.K.T.D. Thilochana 9C. O.W.D. Nimasha Ayanthi

9th – 9C Respondents are Secretary of the Sri Lanka Transport Board 10. U.R. Perera 10A. Premalal Peiris 10B. H.G.Samantha Kumara 10C. Champika Malkanthi

10th – 10C Respondents are Chief Human Resources Manager, Sri Lanka Transport Board. 11. M.S.S. Vaidyathilake,

Chief Finance Manager 11A. Sumith Hettiarachchi,

Chief Finance Manager (Acting) 11B. Chandana Kumara Herath,

Chief Human Resources Manager 12. N.K.C. Wijayasiri Silva,

Manager, Approved Provident Fund 12A. Bandula De Silva,

4

Manager, Approved Provident Fund 13. S.M. Sunila Malkanthi,

AccounƟng Oﬃcer/Treasurer of the Approved Provident Fund 14. B.A.B. Jayasinghe,

Secretary of the Approved Provident Fund 15. Nimal Abeysiri 16. H.M. Chandrasiri Perera 17. D. Lakshman Nanayakkara 18. K.P. Kithsiri 19. S. Ranasinghe 20. H.K. Dissanayake

9th to 20th Respondents all members of the CommiƩee of Management of the Approved Provident Fund 1st – 20th Respondents at No. 200, Kirula Road, Colombo 5. 21. Hon. Prime Minister D.M. Jayaratne,

Minister of Buddhasasana and Religious Aﬀairs 22. Hon. Ratnasiri Wickremanayake,

Minister (Senior) for Good Governance And Infrastructure 23. Hon. D.E.W. Gunasekara,

Minister (Senior) for Human Resources 24. Hon. Athauda Seneviratne,

Minister (Senior) for Rural Aﬀairs 25. Hon. P. Dayaratne,

Minister (Senior) for Food Security 26. Hon. A.H.M. Fowzie,

Minister (Senior) for Urban Aﬀairs 27. Hon. Milroy Fernando,

Minister (Senior) for Social Servies

5

28. Hon. S.B. Navinne,

Minister (Senior) for Consumer Welfare 29. Hon. Piyasena Gamage,

Minister (Senior) for NaƟonal Resources 30. Hon. (Prof.) Tissa Vitharana,

Minister (Senior) for ScienƟﬁc Aﬀairs 31. Hon. Dr. Sarath Amunugama,

Minister (Senior) for InternaƟonal Monetary CorporaƟon.

22nd to 31st Respondents at Secretariat for Senior Ministers, No. 356B, (Carlwil Place), Galle Road, Colombo 3. 32. Hon. Nimal Siripala de Silva,

Minister of IrrigaƟon and Water Resources Management 33. Hon. Maithripala Sirisena,

Minister of Health 34. Hon. A.D. Susil Premajayantha,

Minister of Petroleum Industries 35. Hon. Arumugam Thondaman,

Minister of Livestock and Rural Community Development 36. Hon. Dinesh Gunawardena,

Minister of Water Supply and Drainage 37. Hon. Douglas Devananda,

Minister of TradiƟonal Industries and Small Enterprise Development 38. Hon. A.L.M. Athaullah,

Minister of Local Government and Provincial Councils 39. Hon. Abdul Rishad Bathiudeen,

6

Minister of Industry and Commerce 40. Hon. Patali Champika Ranawaka,

Minister of Power and Energy 41. Hon. Wimal Weerawansa,

Minister of ConstrucƟon, Engineering Services, Housing and Common AmeniƟes 42. Hon. Rauﬀ Hakeem,

Minister of JusƟce 43. Hon. Basil Rajapaksa,

Minister of Economic Development 44. Hon. Vasudeva Nanayakkara,

Minister of NaƟonal Languages and Social IntegraƟon 45. Hon. S.B. Dissanayake,

Minister of Higher EducaƟon 46. Hon. (Prof.) G.L. Peiris,

Minister of External Aﬀairs 47. Hon. W.D.J. Seneviratna,

Minister of Public AdministraƟon and Home Aﬀairs 48. Hon. Mrs. Sumedha G. Jayasena,

Minister of Parliamentary Aﬀairs 49. Hon. Jeevan Kumaranatunga,

Minister of Postal Services 50. Hon. Mrs. Pavithra Wanniarachchi,

Minister of Technology and Research 51. Hon. Anura Priyadarshana Yapa,

Minister of Environment 52. Hon. Tissa Karalliyadda,

Minister of Child Development and Women’s Aﬀairs

7

53. Hon. Gamini Lokuge,

Minister of Labour And Labour RelaƟons 54. Hon. Bandula Gunawardena,

Minister of Education 55. Hon. Mahinda Samarasinghe,

Minister of PlantaƟon Industries 56. Hon. (Dr.) Rajitha Senaratne,

Minister of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources Development 57. Hon. Janaka Bandara Tennakoon,

Minister of Lands and Land Development 58. Hon. Felix Perera,

Minister of Social Services 59. Hon. R.M.C.B. Ratnayake,

Minister of Private Transport Services 60. Hon. Mahinda Yapa Abeywardena,

Minister of Agriculture 61. Hon. (Dr) Keheliya Rambukwella,

Minister of Mass Media and InformaƟon 62. Hon. Kumara Welgama,

Minister of Transport 63. Hon. Dallus Alahapperuma,

Minister of Youth Affairs & Skills Development 64. Hon. Johnston Fernando,

Minister of Co-operaƟve and Internal Trade 65. Hon. Chandrasiri Gajadeera,

Minister of RehabilitaƟon and Prison Reforms 66. Hon. Salinda Dissanayake,

Minister of Indigenous Medicine, 67. Hon. Reginald Cooray,

Minister of Minor Export Crop PromoƟon

8

68. Hon. Dilan Perera,

Minister of Foreign Employment PromoƟon & Welfare 69. Hon. Jagath Pushpakumara,

Minister of Coconut Development & Janata Estate Development 70. Hon. T.B. Ekanayake,

Minister of Culture & AestheƟc Aﬀairs 71. Hon. Hon. Mahinda Amaraweera,

Minister of Disaster Management 72. Hon. S.M. Chandrasena,

Minister of Agrarian Services & Wildlife 73. Hon. M.H. Gunarathne Weerakoon,

Minister of ReseƩlement 74. Hon. (Dr.) Mervyn Silva,

Minister of Public RelaƟons & Public Aﬀairs 75. Hon. Mahindananda Aluthgamage,

Minister of Sports 76. Hon. Dayashritha Tissera,

Minister of State Resources and Enterprise Development 77. Hon. Ranjith SiyambalapiƟya,

Minister of TelecommunicaƟon & InformaƟon, Technology 78. Hon. (Dr.) Jagath Balasooriya,

Minister of NaƟonal Heritage 79. Hon. Lakshman Senevirathne,

Minister of ProducƟvity PromoƟon 80. Hon. Naveen Dissanayake,

Minister of Public Management Reforms 81. Hon. Priyankara Jayaratne,

9

Minister of Civil AviaƟon 82. Mr. Sumith Abeysinghe 82A. Mr. A. Amarasekara 82B. Mr. W.M.D.J. Fernando,

Secretary to the Cabinet of Ministers

32nd - 82nd Respondents at Office of the Cabinet of Ministers, Republic Square, Sir Baron JayaƟlleke Mawatha, Colombo 01. 83. Secretary,

Ministry of Transport 83A. Secretary,

Ministry of Internal Transport 84. Commissioner General of Labour,

Ministry of Labour and Labour RelaƟons 85. Dr. P.B. Jayasundera 85A. Dr. R.H.S. Samaratunga 85B. S.R. Attygalle

85th – 85B Respondents are Secretary to the Treasury and Secretary of Ministry of Finance & Planning, Ministry of Finance & Planning, the Secretariat Building, Colombo 1. 86. Hon. AƩorney General,

Colombo 12

RESPONDENTS

1. Hon. Ranil Wickremasinghe, Minister of Policy Planning, Economic Affairs, Child, Youth and Cultural Affairs

2. Hon. Ravi Karunanayake, Minister of Finance

10

3. Hon Mangala Samaraweera,

Minister of Foreign Affairs 4. Hon. Wijeyadasa Rajapakshe,

Minister of Justice Minister of Buddha Sasana 5. Hon. D. M. Swaminathan,

Minister of Rehabilitation, Resettlement, Reconstruction and Hindu Affairs 6. Hon. John Amaratunga

Minister of Tourism and Christian Affairs 7. Hon. Gamini Jayawickrama Perera,

Minister of Sustainable Development and Wildlife 8. Hon. Lakshman Kiriella,

Minister of Universities, Education and Highways

9. Hon. Tilak Marapana,

Minister of Law & Order and Prison Reforms 10. Hon. Rajitha Senaratne,

Minister of Health, Nutrition and Indigenous Medicine 11. Hon. Vajira Abeywardena,

Minister of Internal Affairs 12. Hon. S. B. Nawinne,

Minister of Internal Affairs Cultural Affairs and Wayamba Development

13. Hon. P. Harrison,

Minister of Rural Economic Affairs 14. Hon. R. M. Ranjith Madduma Bandara,

Minister of Public Administration and Management 15. Hon. Gayantha Karunathilaka,

11

Minister of Media 16. Hon. Sajith Premadasa,

Minister of Housing and Development 17. Hon. Arjuna Ranatunga,

Minister of Ports and Naval Affairs 18. Hon. Chandrani Bandara Jayasinghe,

Minister of Women and Child Affairs 19. Hon. Thalatha Atukorale,

Minister of Foreign Employment 20. Hon. Akila Viraj Kariyawasam,

Minister of Education 21. Hon. Sagala Ratnayaka,

Minister of Southern Development 22. Hon. Harin Fernando,

Minister of Telecommunications and Digital Infrastructure 23. Hon. Daya Gamage,

Minister of Primary Industries 24. Hon. Malik Samarawickrama,

Minister of Development Strategy and International Trade 25. Hon. Kabir Hashim,

Minister of Public Enterprise Development 26. Hon. Navin Dissanayake,

Minister of Plantation Industries

27. Hon. M. H. A. Haleem,

Minister of Postal and Muslim Affairs 28. Hon. M. K. A. D. S. Gunawardana,

Minister of Lands 28(a) Hon. John Amarathunga, Minister of Lands

12

29. Hon. Rauff Hakeem,

Minister of City Planning and Water Supply 30. Hon. Champika Ranawaka,

Minister of Megapolis and Western Development 31. Hon. Risad Badhiutheen,

Minister of Industry and Commerce 32. Hon. Mano Ganesan,

Minister of National Dialogue 33. Hon. Palani Digambaran,

Minister of Estate Infrastructure Development 34. Hon. Nimal Siripala de Silva,

Minister of Transport 35. Hon. S. B. Dissanayake,

Minister of Social Empowering and Welfare 36. Hon. John Seneviratne,

Minister of Labour and Trade Union Relations 37. Hon. Faiszer Musthapha,

Minister of Local Government 38. Hon. Anura Priyadharshana Yapa,

Minister of Disaster Management 39. Hon. Vijith Vijayamuni Soysa,

Minister of Irrigation and Water Management 40. Hon. Susil Premajayanth,

Minister of Technology, Technology Education and Employment 41. Hon. Mahinda Samarasinghe,

Minister of Skills Development and Vocational Training

13

42. Hon. Mahinda Amaraweera,

Minister of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources 43. Hon. Ranjith Siyambalapitiya,

Minister of Power and Renewable Energy

44. Hon. Duminda Dissanayake,

Minister of Agriculture 45. Hon. Chandima Weerakkody,

Minister of Petroleum Resources Development 46. Hon. Dayasiri Jayasekara,

Minister of Sports

C/O Secretary to the Cabinet of the Ministers Republic Square, D.B. Jayathilake Mawatha, Colombo 01 47. Hon. Sarath Fonseka,

Minister of Regional Development, ADDED RESPONDENTS

1. Hon. Maithripala Sirisena, Minister of NaƟonal IntegraƟon & ReconciliaƟon, Defence and Mahaweli Development & Environment 2. Hon. Ranil Wickremesinghe, Minister of NaƟonal Policies and Economic Aﬀairs 3. Hon. John Amaratunga, Minister of Tourism Development and ChrisƟan Religious Aﬀairs 4. Hon. Gamini Jayawickrama Perera, Minister of Sustainable Development and Wildlife, Buddhasashana 5. Hon. Nimal Siripala De Silva, Minister of Transport and Civil AviaƟon

14

6. Hon. Thilak Marapana, Minister of Foreign Aﬀairs and Development Assignments

7. Hon. S.B. Dissanayake, Minister of Social Empowerment, Welfare and Kandyan Heritage 8. Hon. W.D.J. Seneviratne, Minister of Labour, Trade Union RelaƟons and Sabaragamu Development

9. Hon. Lakshman Kiriella, Minister of Higher EducaƟon and Highways 10. Hon. (Dr.) Sarath Amunugama,

Minister of Special Assignments

11. Hon. Rauﬀ Hakeem,

Minister of City Planning and Water Supply 12. Hon. Anura Priyadharshana Yapa,

Minister of Disaster Management 13. Hon. A.D. Susil Premajayantha,

Minister of Science Technology and Research 14. Hon. (Dr.) Rajitha Senaratne,

Minister of Health, NutriƟon and Indigenous Medicine 15. Hon. Mangala Samaraweera,

Minister of Finance and Mass Media 16. Hon. Chandima Weerakkodi

Minister of Skills Development and VocaƟonal Training

17. Hon. Vajira Abeywardana,

Minister of Home Aﬀairs

18. Hon. S.B. Navinne,

Minister of Internal Aﬀairs, Wayamba Development and Cultural Aﬀairs

15

19. Hon. Rishad Bathiudeen,

Minister of Industry and Commerce 20. Hon. Patali Champika Ranawaka,

Minister of Megapolis and Western Development 21. Hon. Mahinda Amaraweera,

Minister of Fisheries and AquaƟc Resources Development 22. Hon. Navin Dissanayake,

Minister of PlantaƟon Industries 23. Hon. Ranjith SiyambalapiƟya,

Minister of Power and Renewable Energy 24. Hon. Duminda Dissanayake,

Minister of Agriculture

25. Hon. Vijith Vijayamuni Zoysa,

Minister of IrrigaƟon and Water Resources Management 26. Hon. (Mrs.) Thalatha Atukorale,

Minister of JusƟce and Foreign Employment

27. Hon. P. Harrison,

Minister of Rural Economy 28. Hon. Kabir Hashim,

Minister of Public Enterprise Development

29. Hon. Ranjith Madduma Bandara,

Minister of Public AdministraƟon and Management 30. Hon. Sajith Premadasa,

Minister of Housing and ConstrucƟon 31. Hon. Mahinda Samarasinghe,

Minister of Ports and Shipping 32. Hon. Gayantha Karunathilaka,

Ministry of Lands and Parliamentary Reforms

16

33. Hon. U. Palany Thigambaram,

Minister of Hill Country New Villages, Infrastructure and Community Development 34. Hon. (Mrs.) Chandrani Bandara,

Minister of Women and Child Aﬀairs 35. Hon. Akila Viraj Kariyawasam,

Minister of EducaƟon

36. Hon. M.H.A. Haleem,

Minister of Posts, Postal Services and Muslim Religious Aﬀairs 37. Hon. Faiszer Musthapha,

Minister of Provincial Counsel and Local Government 38. Hon. D.M. Swaminathan,

Minister of Provincial Counsel and Local Government 39. Hon. Arjuna Ranathunga,

Minister of Petroleum Resources Development 40. Hon. Dayasiri Jayasekara,

Minister of Sports

41. Hon. Sagala Ratnayaka,

Minister of Law & Order and Southern Development 42. Hon. Harin Fernando,

Minister of TelecommunicaƟon and Digital Infrastructure 43. Hon. Mano Ganesan,

Minister of NaƟonal Co-existence Dialogue and Oﬃcial Languages 44. Hon. Daya Gamage,

Minister of Primary Industries 45. Hon. Malik Samarawickrama,

17

Minister of Development Strategies and InternaƟonal Trade 46. Hon. Field Marshal Sarath Fonseka,

Minister of Regional Development

ADDED RESPONDENTS COMPRISING OF THE CABINET MINISTERS AS PRESENTLY CONSTITUTED

01. Hon. Maithripala Sirisena,

Minister of Defence and Mahaweli Development & Environment

02. Hon. Ranil Wickremesinghe,

Minister of NaƟonal Policies and Economic Aﬀairs 03. Hon. John Amaratunga,

Minister of Tourism Development and ChrisƟan Religious Aﬀairs 04. Hon. Gamini Jayawickrama Perera,

Minister of Buddhasashana 05. Hon. Nimal Siripala De Silva,

Minister of Transport and Civil AviaƟon 06. Hon. Mangala Samaraweera,

Minister of Finance and Mass Media 07. Hon. Lakshman Kiriella,

Minister of Public Enterprise and Kandy City Development 08. Hon. (Dr.) Sarath Amunugama,

Minister of Science, Technology Research, Skills Developments and VocaƟonal Training and Kandyan Heritage 09. Hon. Rauﬀ Hakeem,

Minister of City Planning and Water Supply 10. Hon. Thilak Marapana,

Minister of Foreign Aﬀairs

18

11. Hon. (Dr.) Rajitha Senaratne,

Minister of Health, NutriƟon and Indigenous Medicine 12. Hon.Mahinda Samarasinghe,

Minister of Ports and Shipping 13. Hon. Vajira Abeywardana,

Minister of Home Aﬀairs 14. Hon. S.B. Navinne,

Minister of Internal Aﬀairs, and Wayamba Development 15. Hon. Rishad Bathiudeen,

Minister of Industry and Commerce 16. Hon. Patali Champika Ranawaka,

Minister of Megapolis and Western Development 17. Hon. Mahinda Amaraweera,

Minister of Agriculture 18. Hon. Navin Dissanayake,

Minister of PlantaƟon Industries 19. Hon. Ranjith SiyambalapiƟya,

Minister of Power and Renewable Energy 20. Hon. Duminda Dissanayake,

Minister of IrrigaƟon and Water Resources and Disaster Management 21. Hon. Vijith Vijayamuni Zoysa,

Minister of Fisheries & AquaƟc Resources Development and Rural Economic Aﬀairs 22. Hon. Dr. Wijeyadasa Rajapakshe,

Minister of Higher educaƟon and Cultural Aﬀairs, 23. Hon. P. Harrison,

Minister of Social Empowerment

19

24. Hon. Kabir Hashim,

Minister of Highways and Road Development 25. Hon. Ranjith Madduma Bandara,

Minister of Public AdministraƟon and Management and Law & Order 26. Hon. Gayantha Karunathilaka,

Ministry of Lands and Parliamentary Reforms 27. Hon. Sajith Premadasa,

Minister of Housing and ConstrucƟon 28. Hon. Arjuna Ranathung,a

Minister of Petroleum Resources Development 29. Hon. U. Palany Thigambaram,

Minister of Hill Country New Villages, Infrastructure and Community Development 30. Hon. (Mrs.) Chandrani Bandara,

Minister of Women and Child Aﬀairs 31. Hon. (Mrs.) Thalatha Atukorale,

Minister of JusƟce and Prison Reforms 32. Hon. Akila Viraj Kariyawasam,

Minister of EducaƟon 33. Hon. M.H.A. Haleem,

Minister of Posts, Postal Services and Muslim Religious Aﬀairs 34. Hon. Faiszer Musthapha,

Minister of Provincial Councill, Local Government and Sports 35. Hon. D.M. Swaminathan,

Minister of Re seƩlement, RehabilitaƟon, Northern Development and Hindu Religious Aﬀairs 36. Hon. Sagala Ratnayaka,

Minister of Youth Aﬀairs, Project Management and Southern Development

20

37. Hon. Harin Fernando,

Minister of TelecommunicaƟon, Digital Infrastructure and Foreign Employment 38. Hon. Mano Ganesan,

Minister of NaƟonal IntegraƟon, ReconciliaƟon and Oﬃcial Languages 39. Hon. Daya Gamage,

Minister of Social, Welfare and Primary Industries 40. Hon. Malik Samarawickrama,

Minister of Development Strategies and InternaƟonal Trade 41. Hon. Field Marshal Sarath Fonseka,

Minister of Sustainable Development, Wildlife and Regional Development 42. Hon. Ravindra Samaraweera,

Minister of Labor and Trade Union Relations

ADDED RESPONDENTS COMPRISING OF THE CABINET MINISTERS AS PRESENTLY CONSTITUTED

1. Honourable Ranil Wickremasinghe, Prime Minister Minister of NaƟonal Policies, Economic Aﬀairs, ReseƩlement & RehabilitaƟon, Northern Province Development, VocaƟonal Training & Skills Development and Youth Aﬀairs 2. Honourable John Amarathunga, Minister of Tourism Development, Wildlife and ChrisƟan Religious Aﬀairs, 3. Honourable Gamini Jayawickrema Perera, Minister of Buddhasasana & Wayamba Development, 4. Honourable Mangala Samaraweera, Minister of Finance and Mass Media,

21

5. Honourable Lakshman Kiriella, Minister of Public Enterprise, Kandyan Heritage and Kandy Development, 6. Honourable Rauﬀ Hakeem, Minister of City Planning, Water Supply and Higher EducaƟon 7. Honourable Thilak Marapana, Minister of Foreign Aﬀairs, Republic Building, 8. Honourable (Dr) Rajitha Senaratne, Minister of Health, NutriƟon and Indigenous Medicine, 9. Honourable Ravi Karunanayake, Minister of Power, Energy and Business Development, 10. Honourable Vajira Abeywardena,

Minister of Internal & Home Aﬀairs and Provincial Council & Local Government 11. Honourable Rishad Bathiudeen,

Minister of Industry & Commerce, ReseƩlement of Protracted Displaced Persons and Co-OperaƟve Development, 12. Honourable Patali Champika Ranawaka,

Minister of Megapolis and Western Development, 13. Honourable Navin Dissanayake,

Minister of PlantaƟon Industries, 14. Honourable P. Harison,

Minister of Agriculture, Rural Economic Aﬀairs, Livestock Development, IrrigaƟon and Fisheries & AquaƟc Resources Development 15. Honourable Kabir Hashim,

Minister of Highways & Road Development and Petroleum Resources Development,

22

16. Honourable Ranjith Madduma Bandara,

Minister of Public AdministraƟon &Disaster Management, 17. Honourable Gayantha Karunathilaka,

Minister of Lands and Parliamentary Reforms, 18. Honourable Sajith Premadasa,

Minister of Housing, ConstrucƟon and Cultural Aﬀairs, 19. Honourable Arjuna Ranatunga,

Minister of Transport and Civil AviaƟon, 20. Honourable U. Palani Digambaram,

Minister of Hill Country New Villages, Infrastructure and Community Development, 21. Honourable (Mrs.) Chandrani Bandara,

Minister of Women & Child Aﬀairs and Dry Zone Development, 22. Honourable (Mrs.) Thalatha Atukorale,

Minister of JusƟce & Prison Reforms, 23. Honourable Akila Viraj Kariyawasam,

Minister of EducaƟon, 24. Honourable M.H.A. Haleem,

Minister of Postal Services and Muslim Religious Aﬀairs, 25. Honourable Sagala Ratnayake,

Minister of Ports & Shipping and Southern Development, 26. Honourable Harin Fernando,

Minister of TelecommunicaƟon, Foreign Employment and Sports 27. Honourable Mano Ganesan,

Minister of NaƟonal IntegraƟon, Oﬃcial Languages, Social Progress and Hindu Religious Aﬀairs

23

28. Honourable Daya Gamage,

Minister of Labour, Trade Union RelaƟons and Social Empowerment, 29. Honourable Malik Samarawickrema,

Minister of Development Strategies and InternaƟonal Trade, ADDED RESPONDENTS COMPRISING OF THE CABINET MINISTERS AS PRESENTLY CONSTITUTED

1. Hon. Mahinda Rajapakse, Minister of Finance, Economy and Policy Development, Minister of Buddhasasana, Cultural and Religious Aﬀairs, Minister of Urban Development, Water 2. Hon. Nimal Siripala De Silva, Minister of JusƟce, Human Right & Legal Reforms 3. Hon. Arumugan Thondaman, Minister of Community Empowerment and Estate Infrastructure Development 4. Hon. Dinesh Gunawardena, Minister of Foreign RelaƟons, Skills Development, Employment and Labour RelaƟons 5. Hon. Douglas Devananda, Minister of Fisheries & AquaƟc Resources 6. Hon. (Mrs.) Pavithra Devi Wanniarachchi, Minister of Women & Child Aﬀairs and Social Security, Healthcare and Indigenous Medical Service 7. Hon. Bandula Gunawardena, Minister of InformaƟon and CommunicaƟon Technology, Higher EducaƟon, Technology and InnovaƟon

24

8. Hon. Janaka Bandara Tennakoon, Minister of Public AdministraƟon, Home Aﬀairs, Provincial Councils & Local Government 9. Hon. Chamal Rajapakse, Minister of Mahaweli, Agriculture, IrrigaƟon and Rural Development, Internal Trade, Food Security and Consumer Welfare 10. Hon. Dullas Alahapperuma,

Minister of EducaƟon, Sport & Youth Aﬀairs 11. Hon. Johnston Fernando,

Minister of Roads and Highways, Ports & Shipping 12. Hon. Wimal Weerawansa,

Minister of Small & Medium Business and Enterprise Development, Industries and Supply Chain Management 13. Hon. Mahinda Amaraweera,

Minister of Passenger Transport Management Minister of Power & Energy 14. Hon. S.M.Chandrasena,

Minister of Environment and Wildlife Resources, Lands & Land Development 15. Hon. Ramesh Pathirana,

Minister of PlantaƟon Industries and Export Agriculture 16. Hon. Prasanna Ranatunga,

Minister of Industrial Export and Investment PromoƟon, Tourism and Civil AviaƟon

ADDED RESPONDENTS COMPRISING OF THE CABINET MINISTERS AS PRESENTLY CONSTITUTED

25

1. Hon. Mahinda Rajapaksa Minister of Finance Minster of Buddha Sasana, Religious and Cultural Affairs 2. Hon. Nimal Siripala De Silva, Minister of Labour, 3. Hon. Prof. G.L Peiris, Minister of Education 4. Hon. Pavithradevi Wanniarachchi, Minister of Health 5. Hon. Dinesh Gunawardana, Minister of Foreign Relations 6. Hon. Douglas Devananda, Minister of Fisheries 7. Hon. Gamini Lokuge, Minister of Transport 8. Hon. Bandula Gunawardana, Minister of Trade 9. Hon. R.M.C.B. Rathnayake, Minister of Wildlife and Forest Conservation 10. Hon. Janaka Bandara

Tennakoon, Minister of Public Services, Provincial Councils and Local Government 11. Hon. Keheliya Rambukwella, Rambukwella

Minister of Mass Media 12. Hon. Chamal Rajapaksa,

Minister of Irrigation 13. Hon. Dullas Alahapperuma,

Minister of Power 14. Hon. Johnston Fernando,

Minister of Highways

26

15. Hon. Wimal Weerawansa,

Minister of Industries 16. Hon. Mahinda Amaraweera,

Minister of Environment 17. Hon. S.M. Chandrasena,

Minister of Land 18. Hon. Mahindananda Aluthgamage,

Minister of Agriculture 19. Hon. Vasudeva Nanayakkara,

Minister of Water Supply 20. Hon. Udaya Prabhath Gammanpila,

Minister of Energy 21. Hon. Ramesh Pathirana,

Minister of Plantation 22. Hon. Prasanna Ranatunga,

Minister of Tourism 23. Hon. Rohitha Abeygunawardena,

Minister of Ports and Shipping 24. Hon. Namal Rajapaksa,

Minister of Youth and Sports Affairs 25. Hon. M.U.M. Ali Sabry PC,

Minister of Justice

ADDED RESPONDENTS COMPRISING OF THE CABINET MINISTERS AS PRESENTLY CONSTITUTED

01. Hon.Basil Rajapaksa, Minister of Finance 02. Hon.Sarath Weerasekara

Minister of Public Security ADDED RESPONDENTS COMPRISING OF THE CABINET MINISTERS AS PRESENTLY CONSTITUTED

27

Before: S. Thurairaja, PC, J Janak De Silva, J Arjuna Obeyesekere, J Counsel: Saliya Peiris, PC with Anjana Ratnasiri for the Petitioners

Senaka De Saram with Tharindu Balasuriya for the 1st – 20th Respondents Kanishka De Silva Balapatabendi, Deputy Solicitor General for the 31st – 132nd Respondents Argued on: 30th October 2024 Written Tendered on behalf of the Petitioners on 6th September 2023 Submissions: Tendered on behalf of the 1st – 20th Respondents on 28th May 2024 and 7th January 2025

Tendered on behalf of the 84th Respondent on 29th July 2022 and 8th November 2024 Decided on: 11th March 2026 Obeyesekere, J (1) The PeƟƟoners are employees of the 1st Respondent, Sri Lanka Transport Board.

Together with several other employees of the 1st Respondent, the PeƟƟoners were members of the Approved Provident Fund of the Sri Lanka Transport Board [the Approved Provident Fund]. (2) On 23rd November 2011, the Cabinet of Ministers had approved the proposals

contained in the Cabinet Memorandum [P17] submiƩed by the Minister of Labour that the approval granted by the Commissioner General of Labour [the Commissioner General] in terms of SecƟon 27(2) of the Employees Provident Fund Act, No. 15 of 1958, as amended [the EPF Act] for the Approved Provident Fund be revoked and for the funds available in the Approved Provident Fund be transferred inter alia to the Employees Provident Fund established under the EPF Act.

28

(3) Aggrieved by the said decision of the Cabinet of Ministers [P21], the PeƟƟoners ﬁled

this applicaƟon on 26th March 2012, complaining that the said decision is a violaƟon of their fundamental rights guaranteed under ArƟcle 12(1) of the ConsƟtuƟon and seeking inter alia the following relief:

(a) Quash the said decision of the Cabinet of Ministers and the consequenƟal direcƟves; (b) A declaraƟon that the Approved Provident Fund be restored and for funds

which have already been transferred to the Employees Provident Fund to be re-transferred to the Approved Provident Fund; and (c) A declaraƟon that the calculaƟon of the rate of interest payable on their contribuƟons to the Approved Provident Fund be at a rate higher than what is paid to members of the Employees Provident Fund. (4) On 2nd September 2016, the PeƟƟoners ﬁled an amended peƟƟon seeking inter alia

the following relief:

(a) A declaraƟon that the decision of the Cabinet of Ministers is contrary to law;

(b) A declaraƟon that interest on their contribuƟons to the Approved Provident

Fund be calculated at the rate of 18% per annum; and

(c) A declaraƟon that the balances lying to their credit in the Approved Provident Fund should have been transferred to the Employees Provident Fund without deducƟng their liabiliƟes arising from the loans that they have taken. (5) Leave to proceed for the alleged infringement of ArƟcle 12(1) was granted on 26th

January 2022. (6) The primary argument of the learned President’s Counsel for the PeƟƟoners was that

the power to revoke the approval granted by the Commissioner General to a provident fund is vested with the Commissioner General but that by permiƫng the Cabinet of Ministers to take the said decision, the Commissioner General has allowed himself to be dictated to by the Cabinet of Ministers and that the Commissioner General has thereby abdicated the statutory duty vested in him by

29

SecƟon 27(10) of the EPF Act. The other relief sought by the PeƟƟoners is conƟngent upon a ﬁnding by this Court that the decision of the Cabinet of Ministers is violaƟve of the fundamental rights of the PeƟƟoners guaranteed under ArƟcle 12(1).

(7) While submiƫng that the impugned decision was in fact taken by the Commissioner

General, the learned Counsel for the 1st Respondent and the learned Deputy Solicitor General appearing for the Commissioner General raised an objecƟon that this applicaƟon has not been ﬁled within the sƟpulated period of one month from the decision of the Cabinet of Ministers and that this applicaƟon is therefore liable to be dismissed in limine. The PeƟƟoners do not dispute that the applicaƟon has been ﬁled outside the Ɵme period speciﬁed in ArƟcle 126(2) but claim that the infringement complained of is a conƟnuing infringement and hence, the Ɵme bar shall not apply. Thus, I cannot rule on the said objecƟon in isolaƟon of the facts of this applicaƟon.

(8) I shall at the outset refer to the circumstances that led to the impugned decision in

order to place in its proper perspecƟve the respecƟve posiƟons of the parƟes. The Approved Provident Fund (9) The predecessor of the 1st Respondent, the Ceylon Transport Board had been

established by SecƟon 2 of the Motor Transport Act, No. 48 of 1957, as amended. SecƟon 6 thereof contained the powers of the Ceylon Transport Board and in terms of SecƟon 6(1)(iv), the Board had the power to establish a provident fund for its employees. It is admiƩed that the provident fund which is the subject maƩer of this applicaƟon was established under the Motor Transport Act. (10) Provisions with regard to a provident fund or a contributory pension scheme

established prior to the enactment of the Act is found in SecƟon 27 of the EPF Act. Accordingly, the Commissioner General is empowered to declare such a scheme that existed prior to 1958 as an approved provident fund provided he is of the opinion that such fund or scheme saƟsﬁes the prescribed requirements and that it is expedient that such fund or scheme should be declared to be an approved provident fund. That process having been followed, the aforemenƟoned Provident Fund established under the Motor Traﬃc Act has been declared as an approved provident fund under the EPF Act [i.e. the Approved Provident Fund].

30

(11) The Motor Transport Act was repealed by the Transport Board Law, No. 19 of 1978.

In terms of SecƟon 8(1)(iv) thereof, the Central Board had the power to establish a provident fund. In terms of SecƟon 25(c), the Provident Fund established and maintained by the Ceylon Transport Board under the Motor Transport Act shall be deemed to be a provident fund established and maintained by the Central Board for the oﬃcers and servants. Even though the Transport Board Law was repealed by the Sri Lanka Transport Board Act, No. 27 of 2005, the laƩer Act too recognised the Approved Provident Fund. Decision to revoke the declaration (12) The powers that the Commissioner General could exercise over an approved

provident fund have been set out in SecƟon 27 of the EPF Act. In terms of SecƟon 27(10) thereof:

“Where the Commissioner is dissatisfied with the management of any approved provident fund or approved contributory pension scheme, he may revoke the declaration made under subsection (1) or subsection (2) of this section in respect of that fund or scheme, and, if such declaration is revoked, he shall in writing (a) communicate the revocation to the administrators of that fund or scheme, and (b) direct those administrators to transfer to the Employees' Provident Fund all such contributions and interest thereon as have been paid to that fund or scheme, and those administrators shall comply with the Commissioner's direction.” (13) I have already stated that the primary argument of the learned President’s Counsel

for the PeƟƟoners was that with the power to revoke the approval granted to the Approved Provident Fund being vested with the Commissioner General, he has abdicated his power by permiƫng the Cabinet of Ministers to take the decision to revoke the declaraƟon relaƟng to the Approved Provident Fund. (14) The posiƟon of the learned Deputy Solicitor General appearing for the Commissioner

General was that the decision was in fact taken by the Commissioner General. She submiƩed that the Commissioner General had received several complaints in 2011 [R1 – R4] that the aﬀairs of the Approved Provident Fund are being mismanaged by

31

the CommiƩee of Management of the Approved Provident Fund [the CommiƩee] in that large sums of money are being used for purposes that are not permiƩed and that the Commissioner General had summoned the Chairman of the CommiƩee on several occasions to inquire into such complaints. On 18th August 2011, the Commissioner General had issued a direcƟve to the Chairman of the CommiƩee informing him that he has been apprised of a decision to transfer a sum of Rs. 2.4 billion from the Approved Provident Fund for a purpose which was not permiƩed and therefore to immediately suspend the transfer of such monies. (15) The Employees Provident Fund Division of the Department of Labour had thereaŌer

inquired into the aﬀairs of the Approved Provident Fund and recommended the following:

(a) To act in terms of SecƟon 27(10) and revoke the declaraƟon granted recognising the Approved Provident Fund; (b) Communicate the decision pertaining to the revocaƟon to the administrator of

the Approved Provident Fund; and (c) Direct the administrator of the Approved Provident Fund to transfer to the Employees Provident Fund all such contribuƟons and interest thereon as have been paid to the Approved Provident Fund. (16) The above recommendaƟons which are in accordance with SecƟon 27(10) of the EPF

Act have been communicated in wriƟng on 30th August 2011 to the Commissioner General [R6], who in turn has communicated such decision to the Secretary, Ministry of Labour by his leƩer dated 8th September 2011 [R7]. (17) It is only thereaŌer that the Minister of Labour presented the Cabinet Memorandum

dated 21st October 2011 [P17] seeking a policy decision from the Cabinet of Ministers to inter alia revoke the declaraƟon made by the Commissioner General recognising the Approved Provident Fund in terms of SecƟon 27(10) and to transfer all contribuƟons and interest thereon that have been contributed by the members including the PeƟƟoners to the Employees Provident Fund.

32

(18) I must state that the above proposals in P17 are consistent with SecƟon 27(11) which

provides as follows:

“The Monetary Board shall, where the administrators of an approved provident fund or approved contributory pension scheme have complied with a direction issued by the Commissioner under subsection (10) of this section, open an individual account in the Employees' Provident Fund for each employee who was a contributor to that approved provident fund or approved contributory pension scheme when such administrators complied with such direction, and shall credit to that individual account such part of the sum transferred from that approved provident fund or approved contributory pension scheme to the Employees' Provident Fund in compliance with the Commissioner's direction as was to the credit of that employee's account in that approved provident fund or approved contributory pension scheme.“ (19) Having considered P17, the Cabinet of Ministers granted policy approval on 23rd

November 2011 [P21] to the ﬁrst three recommendaƟons of the Minister of Labour in P17. The Commissioner General had thereaŌer issued leƩer dated 2nd December 2011 [R8] to the 1st Respondent revoking the declaraƟon of the Approved Provident Fund with eﬀect from 1st December 2011 and a further direcƟve in terms of SecƟon 27(10)(b) to the administrator of the Approved Provident Fund to transfer to the Employees Provident Fund all such contribuƟons that have been made to the Approved Provident Fund by its members including the PeƟƟoners together with the interest that had accumulated on such contribuƟons. (20) In transferring funds to the Employees Provident Fund, the 1st Respondent has

included the contribuƟon made by each member together with interest thereon but had set oﬀ the loans that the PeƟƟoners have taken. The PeƟƟoners however have not impugned R8 in their amended peƟƟon, and hence, in transferring the monies lying to the individual credit of each PeƟƟoner, whether the outstanding loan balances of such members could have been deducted is not a maƩer that can be gone into in this applicaƟon.

33

(21) It is in the above factual circumstances that the learned Deputy Solicitor General

submiƩed that the genesis of the decision in P21 can be traced to the complaints that were received by the Commissioner General of mismanagement of funds of the Approved Provident Fund, and that the decision in R8 was arrived at independently by the Commissioner General. She submiƩed further that any decision in terms of SecƟon 27(10) of the Act must be taken carefully especially in view of the important role played by the Sri Lanka Transport Board and that policy approval of the Cabinet of Ministers has been sought since cohesive acƟon was required prior to such an important decision being taken.

(22) I have carefully considered the sequence of events leading to P17 and I am saƟsﬁed

that the decision to revoke the declaraƟon made in favour of the Approved Provident Fund is a decision of the Commissioner General and that by seeking policy approval of the Cabinet of Ministers, the Commissioner General has neither abdicated his statutory role nor been dictated to. (23) In view of the above conclusion, the necessity for me to consider the objecƟon that

this applicaƟon is Ɵme-barred does not arise. However, I must state that the violaƟon complained of is not of a conƟnuing nature and the Respondents were enƟtled to succeed with its objecƟon that the applicaƟon has not been ﬁled within one month of the infringement since the decision of the Cabinet of Ministers had been taken on 23rd November 2011 and R8 had been issued on 2nd December 2011 whereas this applicaƟon had been ﬁled only on 26th March 2012. Transfer of funds towards gratuity payments (24) There is one other maƩer that I wish to advert to. It is admiƩed that a sum of Rs. 1.5

billion had been remiƩed by the Government towards meeƟng the gratuity obligaƟons of the 1st Respondent. By P21, the Cabinet of Ministers had directed that any balance sums of money remaining aŌer the transfer of the contribuƟons of the members of the Approved Provident Fund to the Employees Provident Fund be uƟlised for the payment of gratuity of the employees of the 1st Respondent. It was submiƩed by the PeƟƟoners that the said direcƟon is illegal. However, by an order made on 20th February 2013, this Court has granted permission for the excess funds

34

to be appropriated towards meeƟng the gratuity obligaƟons of the 1st Respondent, and hence the said decision cannot be reviewed at this stage.

(25) In terms of an audit carried out in respect of the funds of the Approved Provident

Fund, even though the total value of the Fund as at 1st December 2011 was Rs. 4.95 billion, the aggregate value of the contribuƟons of the members together with interest which is the sum of money that the PeƟƟoners and other members of the Approved Provident Fund are enƟtled to was Rs. 1.55 billion. This laƩer sum of money has been transferred to the Employees Provident Fund thus securing the interests of the PeƟƟoners. Conclusion (26) In the above circumstances, I am of the view that the fundamental rights of the

PeƟƟoners guaranteed under ArƟcle 12(1) have not been infringed by the Respondents. This applicaƟon is accordingly dismissed, without costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT S. Thurairaja, PC, J I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT Janak De Silva, J I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT