Page 1 of 18

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of

Articles 154P of The Constitution read

with Section 31DD of the Industrial

Disputes Act (as amended), and Section

9 of the High Court of the Provinces

(Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990.

SC/Appeal No: Ranil Chinthana Wagiswara,

10/2022 825/10, Ethul Kotte,

Kotte.

SC/HC/LA 029/2019 APPLICANT

Vs.

High Court Case No:

HC(ALT) No. 36/2016

Sri Lankan Airlines Limited,

LT Colombo Case No: Level 22, East Tower,

LT/Col/01/05/2009 World Trade Centre,

Echelon Square,

Colombo 01

RESPONDENT

AND BETWEEN

Ranil Chinthana Wagiswara,

825/10, Ethul Kotte,

Kotte.

APPLICANT-APPELLANT

Vs.

Page 2 of 18

Sri Lankan Airlines Limited,

Level 22, East Tower,

World Trade Centre,

Echelon Square,

Colombo 01

RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

Sri Lankan Airlines Limited,

Level 22, East Tower,

World Trade Centre,

Echelon Square,

Colombo 01

RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT-

APPELLANT

Vs.

Ranil Chinthana Wagiswara,

825/10, Ethul Kotte,

Kotte.

Presently residing at;

No. 25, School Road,

Hounslow, Middlesex TW3 1QU,

United Kingdom.

By his Attorney Wahaltantrige Srijanaka

Roshan Wagiswara of No. 825/10,

Ethul Kotte, Kotte.

APPLICANT-APPELLANT-

RESPONDENT

Page 3 of 18

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SC/Appeal No: Ranil Chinthana Wagiswara,

11/2022 825/10, Ethul Kotte,

Kotte.

High Court Case No: APPLICANT

HC(ALT) No. 36/2016 Vs.

LT Colombo Case No:

LT/Col/01/05/2009 Sri Lankan Airlines Limited,

Level 22, East Tower,

World Trade Centre,

Echelon Square,

Colombo 01

RESPONDENT

AND BETWEEN

Ranil Chinthana Wagiswara,

825/10, Ethul Kotte,

Kotte.

APPLICANT-APPELLANT

Vs.

Sri Lankan Airlines Limited,

Level 22, East Tower,

World Trade Centre,

Echelon Square,

Colombo 01

RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

Page 4 of 18

Ranil Chinthana Wagiswara,

825/10, Ethul Kotte,

Kotte.

Presently residing at;

No. 25, School Road,

Hounslow, Middlesex TW3 1QU,

United Kingdom.

By his Attorney Wahaltantrige Srijanaka

Roshan Wagiswara of No. 825/10,

Ethul Kotte, Kotte.

APPLICANT-APPELLANT-

APPELLANT

Vs.

Sri Lankan Airlines Limited,

Level 22, East Tower,

World Trade Centre,

Echelon Square,

Colombo 01

RESPONDENT-RESPONDENT-

RESPONDENT

Before : Janak De Silva, J.

: Menaka Wijesundera, J.

: Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

Counsel : Manoli Jinadasa with Dilini Reeves instructed by

Rasika Wellappili for the Respondent-Respondent-

Appellant in SC Appeal No. 10/2022, and for the

Respondent-Respondent-Respondent in SC Appeal

Page 5 of 18

No. 11/2022.

: Uditha Egalahewa, P.C. with Thilini Payagala

Bandara instructed by H. Chandrakumar de Silva

For the Applicant-Appellant-Respondent in SC

Appeal No. 10/2022, and for the Applicant-

Appellant-Appellant in SC Appeal No. 11/2022.

Argued on : 19-05-2025

Written Submissions : 25-08-2022 (By the Applicant-Appellant-

Respondent in Case No. SC/Appeal 10/2022)

: 25-08-2022 (By the Applicant-Appellant-Appellant

in Case No. SC/Appeal 11/2022)

: 04-03-2022 (By the Respondent-Respondent-

Respondent in Case No. SC/Appeal 11/2022)

: 04-03-2022 (By the Respondent-Respondent-

Appellant in Case No. SC/Appeal 10/2022)

Decided on : 01-09-2025

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

When this Court considered the Special Leave to Appeal applications in

relation to the above two appeals on 26-01-2022, the parties agreed for the

consideration of both the applications together. Accordingly, after having

considered the submissions in relation to the respective cases, this Court

granted Leave to Appeal on the following common questions of law applicable

to both appeals.

I. Whether the Provincial High Court had erred in law in the analysis of

the evidence and reached findings, which are perverse.

Page 6 of 18

II. Whether the Provincial High Court has erred in law in the granting of

relief.

III. Whether the learned High Court Judges of the High Court erred in law

by failing to consider the burden of proof.

At the hearing of the appeal before this Court, parties agreed that both the

appeals can be considered together and one judgment can be pronounced by

the Court.

The Court heard the submissions of the learned Counsel appearing for the

respondent-respondent-appellant in case No. SC/Appeal 10/2022 and the

respondent-respondent-respondent in SC/Appeal No. 11/2022 (hereinafter

referred to as the respondent).

This Court also heard the submissions of the learned Presidents Counsel who

represented the applicant-appellant-respondent in SC/Appeal No.10/2022

and the applicant-appellant-appellant in the SC/Appeal No. 11/2022

(hereinafter referred to as the applicant).

This Court also had the benefit of considering the written submissions

tendered by the parties in respect of their respective appeals.

The applicant was employed as the Manager (Marketing Services) at the time

his services were terminated by the respondent Sri Lankan Airlines Ltd, after

finding him guilty of all the charges preferred against him by the show cause

letter dated 03-10-2008 issued in that regard.

As a result of the said termination, the applicant has preferred the application

relevant to this appeal before the relevant Labour Tribunal, challenging his

dismissal.

At the inquiry held in that regard, the respondent has admitted the

termination, and had led evidence to justify its action.

The position taken up had been that the respondent company lost the trust

and confidence it placed on the applicant due to the misconduct of sending

an abusive email containing derogatory and abusive language to a superior

female officer, using the company-provided computer and resources.

Page 7 of 18

The respondent had led evidence of several witnesses to establish that the

said email was sent by the applicant using his official computer, and has

marked documents from R-1 to R-38(a) in support of the said contention.

When it was the turn of the applicant to present his evidence, he has given

evidence on his own behalf and has marked documents from A-1 to A-25.

At the conclusion of the inquiry, after having considered the evidence placed

before the Labour Tribunal, and also the respective submissions, the learned

President of the Labour Tribunal of the order dated 30-06-2016, has

proceeded to dismiss the application of the applicant on the basis that the

dismissal was justified.

Being aggrieved of the said order the applicant has preferred an appeal before

the Provincial High Court of the Western Province holden in Colombo.

The learned High Court Judge of Colombo in his brief order dated 26-04-2019

in relation to the appeal, has ordered that the Labour Tribunal should hold a

de novo inquiry, although there is nothing in the said order to suggest that

the order of the learned President of the Labour Tribunal has been set aside.

However, I am of the view that since a de novo inquiry has been ordered, a

presumption can be reached that the order has been set aside.

The respondent, being the appellant in case No. SC/Appeal/10/2022 has

preferred the appeal on the basis of being aggrieved by the decision of the

learned High Court Judge to order a de novo inquiry. It has been the position

of the respondent that there was no basis for the learned High Court Judge

to make such an order, as the learned President of the Labour Tribunal has

pronounced her order after having well considered the evidence placed before

the Labour Tribunal and in accordance with the law.

In SC/Appeal/11/2022, the applicant who was the appellant before the High

Court has preferred the appeal challenging the decision by the learned High

Court Judge to order a de novo inquiry, on the basis that the appeal should

have been decided in favour of him rather than ordering a de novo inquiry.

Page 8 of 18

Interestingly, when scrutinizing the order of the learned High Court Judge, it

appears that the only reason given for the ordering of a de novo inquiry has

been that the learned President of the Labour Tribunal has failed to draw her

attention to the document that has been marked as R-10 at the inquiry by

the respondent. It has been determined that the said document marked R-10

suggests that, apart from the time where the recipient the senior official of the

respondent company is said to have received the email, the same has been

sent on several occasions previously to that given time, and a question arises

as to who has sent those earlier emails.

With the above factual matrix in mind, and also the questions of law upon

which the two leave to appeal applications were allowed, I will now proceed to

consider the two appeals preferred.

The applicant having joined the respondent company on 20-04-1992 had

been functioning as its Manager (Marketing Services) during the time relevant

to the incident which led to disciplinary proceedings against him.

On 01-09-2008, the Acting Head of the Commercial Division of the respondent

Sri Lankan Airlines Limited has received an email which contains the

following,

.. is the Dumb, Stupid Bitch of the Commercial Division

who thinks she is Gods gift to the Aviation Industry. The so-called

Harvard graduate (who has only followed a 6-week course at

Harvard) is responsible for all the losses at Sri Lankan Airlines

Commercial division with her dumb decisions.

Do something you can do, you dumb, barren bitch without ruining

so many young lives by closing this airline with your folly. You are

now trying to ruin another entire department by trying to head

that division.

Shame on you, you bloody Arrogant, Ambitious, Barren Bitch.

(the identity of the receiver was withheld by me to protect her privacy).

Page 9 of 18

The evidence led before the Labour Tribunal establishes the fact that as a

result of the investigations conducted by the respondent company with the

assistance of two information technology experts, it has been revealed that

the said email originated from the company-provided computer belonging to

the applicant. It is clear that based on the said findings, the respondent has

been issued with the relevant show cause letter to the applicant.

The evidence also reveals that the applicant having left the country without

obtaining prior approval of the respondent, has found overseas employment

and has resigned from the company soon thereafter. The relevant inquiry has

been held allowing him to appear via electronic means from overseas in order

to give a fair hearing as to the allegation of misconduct. The evidence also

establishes that when the computer of the applicant was checked by the

investigators, it has been found that all the sent messages have been deleted,

which was highly unusual for a computer given to an employee to use for

official purposes.

However, having examined the user history of the computer, the investigators

have been able to ascertain that in fact, the said derogatory email has

originated from the computer assigned to the applicant, and it has been

mailed at 9.05 a.m. to the recipient with copies to several other officials of the

office. I find that the respondent company has well established the timeline of

receiving the said email to the Sri Lankan Airline portal through which the

mail entered the Sri Lankan server, and the Yahoo website through which the

mail was sent.

The explanation given by the applicant during the domestic inquiry as well as

before the Labour Tribunal, that he had no opportunity to access his

computer during the relevant time period because he was at a meeting, has

been well explained before the Labour Tribunal by the respondent to show

that it was possible for the applicant to access his computer and send the

message within a short span of time since it has been previously prepared

and stored.

Page 10 of 18

I do not find any basis for the applicants claim that somebody else may have

accessed his computer and sent this message, due to the fact that this was a

computer with a password maintained only by the holder of the computer,

and it was the duty of the applicant as the holder of the computer to prevent

unauthorized access to the computer.

It is clear from the order, that the learned President of the Labour Tribunal

has well considered all these aspects in order to find out whether it was the

applicant who has sent this email after having analysed the evidence placed

before the Tribunal in its correct perspective. The learned President has well

considered the evidence of the applicant before the Tribunal to come to a firm

finding that such evidence cannot be accepted in view of the overwhelming

evidence, both factual and scientific, produced on behalf of the respondent.

There cannot be any doubt that a derogatory, abusive, and malicious email of

this nature sent to a higher female official of an institution with copies to

others is a clear misconduct on the part of the sender, while he himself being

a senior official of the same institution. Such behaviour would invariably

result in the institution losing the trust and the confidence placed on such a

person. I am of the view that the termination of services of such a person is

justifiable under any circumstances.

In the case of Baur & Co. Ltd Vs. Ceylon Manure Industries Workers

Union, SC/43/62 decided on 24-05-1962, the Supreme Court observed,

The applicant had abused the Overseer and the place of work in the

presence of other employees in indecent language. This is a serious

breach of discipline on her part in these circumstances the company

was justified in dismissing her.

In the Indian case of Cooper vs. Central Bank of India (1949) Bombay

Industrial Court Reports, 115 at 21.3 the Court stated:

the reason for discharge, viz that he had imputed to the Board of

Directors a senile mentality in the circular which he had published

Such an imputation by a subordinate of the Bank, besides undermining

the reputation of the Bank, was bound to breed a sense of disrespect,

Page 11 of 18

indiscipline and insubordination among the employees of the Bank but

the moment he indulged in a malignant and to some extend a libelous

invective of the kind appearing in his circular, he laid himself open to the

charge of misconduct and entailed upon himself the penalty of either a

dismissal or discharge.

It was the submissions of the learned Counsel for the respondent that the

learned High Court Judge has failed to consider the evidence placed before

the Tribunal, and the order of the learned President of the Labour Tribunal in

its correct perspective. It was submitted that it was a finding based on a single

document (R-10), rather than considering the evidence in its totality in

deciding to refer the matter for a de novo inquiry, which she termed as a

perverse decision. It was her contention that the appeal should have been

dismissed in view of the overwhelming evidence the respondent produced

before the Labour Tribunal, which established the conduct of the applicant,

rather than ordering a de novo inquiry. It was contended further, the

document marked R-10 was never a disputed document and the document

has been well explained by the expert witnesses called on behalf of the

respondent.

The learned Presidents Counsel who represented the applicant agreed that

any sender of the derogatory email sent to a higher official of the respondent,

deserves punishment. However, it was his position that although the email

address which has sent the email to the receiver was the applicants, there

was no proof that it was he who logged into the email during the timeline

provided. It was his submission that it was not the applicant who logged into

the computer at 9.05 am, and that aspect has not been properly investigated.

It was his position that if properly investigated, it would have been revealed

that the applicant had no opportunity to send such an email.

It was submitted further that the evidence of Rohini Srimali Ethel De Silva

who was in charge of the legal division of the respondent company, establishes

the real reason why the applicants services were terminated (Page 368 of the

appeal brief). It was pointed out that the said witness has stated that she

made a recommendation to terminate the services of the applicant because of

Page 12 of 18

the misuse of the company computer, which is a matter considered as a grave

misconduct, where she has referred to several previous cases of terminating

the services of employees on such misconduct.

The learned Presidents Counsel argued that his appeal was on the basis that

the learned High Court Judge should have considered these matters, and if

considered in its correct perspective, there were ample grounds for the learned

High Court Judge to set aside the order of the Labour Tribunal and to grant

relief to the applicant.

Under the circumstances, he urged the Court to set aside both orders

pronounced by the learned High Court Judge, as well as the learned President

of the Labour Tribunal, and grant relief to the applicant as sought in his

application.

Since the primary argument in both the appeals preferred before the Court

was that the learned High Court Judge was wrong when he decided to order

a de novo inquiry, I will now consider under what circumstances an Appellate

Court can interfere with a decision of a Labour Tribunal.

This aspect was well considered in the judgement pronounced in Jayasuriya

Vs, Sri Lanka State Plantation Corporation (1995) 2 SLR 379, which held,

2. In the context of the principle that the Court of Appeal will not

interfere with a decision of a Labour Tribunal unless it is "perverse"

it means no more that the court may intervene if it is of the view

that, having regard to the weight of evidence in relation to the

matters in issue, the Tribunal has turned away arbitrarily or

capriciously from what is true and right and fair in dealing even-

handedly with the rights and interests of the workman, employer

and, in certain circumstances, the public. The Tribunal must make

an order in equity and good conscience, acting judicially, based on

legal evidence rather than on beliefs that are fanciful or irrationally

imagined notions or whims. Due account must be taken of the

evidence in relation to the issues in the matter before the Tribunal.

Page 13 of 18

Otherwise, the order of the Tribunal must be set aside as being

perverse.

3. The Industrial Disputes Act No. 43 of 1950 Section 31D states that

the order of a Labour Tribunal shall be final and shall not be called

in question in any court except on a question of law. While appellate

courts will not intervene with pure findings of fact, they will review

the findings treating them as a question of law: if it appears that the

Tribunal has made a finding wholly unsupported by evidence, or

which is inconsistent with the evidence and contradictory of it; or

where the Tribunal has failed to consider material and relevant

evidence; or where it has failed to decide a material question or

misconstrued the question at issue and had directed its attention to

the wrong matters; or where there was an erroneous misconception

amounting to a misdirection; or where it failed to consider material

documents or misconstrued them or where the Tribunal has failed

to consider the version of one party or his evidence; or erroneously

supposed there was no evidence.

In Ceylon Cinema and Film Studios Employees Union Vs. Liberty Cinema

Ltd (1994) 3 SLR 121 the Court held,

The question of assessment of the evidence is within the province of the

Labour Tribunal and if there is evidence on record to support its findings

the appellate court cannot review those findings even though on its own

perception to the evidence it may be inclined to come to a different

conclusion. If the case contains anything ex facie which is bad in law and

which bears upon the determination it is obviously on a point of law; but

without any misconception appearing ex facie, it may be that the facts

found are such that no person acting judicially and properly instructed

as to the relevant law could have come to the determination under

appeal. In these circumstances, the appellate court must intervene. Thus,

in order to set aside a determination of facts by the Tribunal limited as

this court is, only to setting aside a determination which is erroneous in

law, the appellant must satisfy this court that there is no legal evidence

Page 14 of 18

to support the conclusion of facts reached by the Tribunal or that the

finding is not rationally possible and is perverse having regard to the

evidence on record.

As I have considered previously, the learned President of the Labour Tribunal

has considered the evidence in its totality and has come to her findings with

clear reasoning. The document marked R-10 has never been taken up by the

applicant to substantiate his position that he did not send the derogatory

email.

I find that the learned High Court Judge has failed to consider the manner in

which the evidence placed before a Tribunal must be considered and the

standard of proof that should be applied. In his brief order, it appears that

the learned High Court Judge has taken the document marked R-10 at its

isolation and on the face value. It appears that the learned High Court Judge

has raised a question by himself to the effect that, based on R-10 a question

arises as to who sent the email.

However, it is my considered view that if the learned High Court Judge took

care to consider the evidence placed before the Tribunal in its totality, and the

order of the learned President of the Labour Tribunal as he should have, no

such question or doubt would have arisen to justify ordering a de novo

inquiry.

The two witnesses called by the respondent as expert witnesses on

information technology in order to establish the investigations done to identify

the sender of the email are clearly experts on the subject with wide experience

and qualifications.

Witness Hewalunuwilage Chandika had obtained a 2nd Class Upper Division

Degree on Electronic and Telecommunications Engineering from the

University of Moratuwa, and has begun his career as a Research Engineer at

Arthur C. Clarke Centre before joining Sri Lankan Airlines as a Network

Engineer attached to its computer division. He was functioning as the Senior

Messaging Engineer when he gave evidence before the Tribunal.

Page 15 of 18

The other expert witness, namely, Thusitha Sampath was also a graduate of

the University of Moratuwa in Electronic and Telecommunications

Engineering. After graduation, he has joined the private sector as a Computer

Engineer and has joined the Sri Lankan Airlines as a Messaging Engineer and

he had been functioning as a Computer Network Engineer during the time

relevant to this incident.

Their evidence has clearly established the fact that the same email being sent

previously cannot be considered as a factor to doubt the sender of the email

during the time relevant to this incident.

The evidence has revealed that the email has been received by the receiver at

9.06 am. It has been established that it entered the Sri Lankan Airlines server

at 9.05 am and was received by the receiver at 9.06 am. It has also been

revealed that the email has been processed via Yahoo website and entered the

Sri Lankan Airlines server through Sri Lankan portal using the senders

computer, which was the computer assigned to the applicant. It has been

proved that the said computer, which had a specific username and a

password known only to the applicant has been used to log into the Yahoo

website at 9.03 am. There cannot be any other person other than the

applicant who could have accessed his own computer in such a manner.

I find that the evidence before the Tribunal has well explained the contents of

R-10 as well. Since it becomes necessary to consider a series of events to come

to a finding as to the author of the email, which has been established before

the Labour Tribunal and well considered by the President of the Labour

Tribunal, I am unable to find any justification in considering the document

marked R-10 in its isolation, which in my view is a decision that can be

considered perverse.

On behalf of the applicant, who is the appellant in case No.

SC/Appeal/11/2022, the question of law number III has been raised when

this matter was supported for Special Leave, on the basis that the learned

High Court Judge erred in law by failing to consider the burden of proof.

Page 16 of 18

It is well settled law that a Labour Tribunal must take into consideration the

interests of all parties in a matter before it and pronounce a just and equitable

order.

The case of Associated Battery Manufacturers (Ceylon Ltd) Vs. United

Engineering Worker Union 77 NLR 451 was a case, where in an inquiry

before a Labour Tribunal, it was alleged that the reason for the termination of

employment was that the workman was guilty of a criminal act involving in

moral turpitude.

It was held that such an allegation need not be established by proof beyond

reasonable doubt as in a criminal case, such an allegation has to be decided

on a balance of probabilities, the very elements of the gravity of the charge

becoming a part of the whole range of circumstances which are weighed in a

balance, as in every other civil proceeding.

Per Vythialingam, J.,

The whole object of labour adjudication is that of balancing the several

interests involved, that of the worker in job security, since loss of his job

may mean loss of his and his familys livelihood; that of the employer in

retaining authority over matters affecting the efficient operations of the

undertaking; that of the community in maintaining peaceful labour

relations and avoiding unnecessary dislocations due either to

unemployment or unproductive economic units. Each is equally

important. None of these objectives can be achieved by the adoption of

the standard of proof required in criminal cases in the determination of

the facts which have to be established before a Labour Tribunal before it

can exercise its jurisdiction to make an order which in all the

circumstances of the case is just and equitable. This difficulty was

realised in the University of Ceylon case for the learned Judge while

ordering the reinstatement of the nurse nevertheless; gave the University

the option to terminate her services and to pay back wages and

compensation in lieu of reinstatement.

Page 17 of 18

I am therefore unable to agree, with great respect, that where the reason

for the termination of the employment is an allegation that the employee

was guilty of a criminal act involving moral turpitude, that allegation

should be established by proof beyond reasonable doubt as in a criminal

case in order to establish the validity of the reason for the termination of

the employment. It has to be decided on a balance of probability, the very

elements of gravity of the charge becoming a part of the whole range of

circumstances which are weighed in the balance, as in every other civil

proceeding.

(The Ceylon University Clerical and Technical Association, Peradeniya

Vs. University of Ceylon Peradeniya 72 NLR 84 not followed.)

Having considered the judgment of the learned High Court Judge, it is my

view that there had been no consideration of the evidence placed before the

Labour Tribunal with a view of finding out whether the order of the learned

President of the Labour Tribunal has been reached after considering the

available evidence in its correct perspective. It doesnt appear to me that the

learned High Court Judge had drawn his attention to the necessity of

considering the evidence in its totality, and to consider whether the

respondent has established that the termination of services of the applicant

was justified by applying the necessary standard of proof, which is on balance

of probabilities.

For the reasons as considered above, I find no reason to agree with the

decision of the learned High Court Judge to send the matter for a de novo

inquiry. I find that if the evidence placed before the Tribunal was correctly

considered, as it should have been, there were ample evidence to justify the

order of the learned President of the Labour Tribunal.

Accordingly, the three questions of law formulated at the hearing of the appeal

are answered in the affirmative.

Thus, I set aside the order dated 26-04-2019 pronounced by the learned High

Court Judge of Colombo while exercising appellate jurisdiction, as it cannot

Page 18 of 18

be allowed to stand, and allow the appeal preferred by the respondent in

SC/Appeal/10/2022.

I affirm the order dated 30-06-2016 pronounced by the learned President of

the Labour Tribunal, where the applicants application was dismissed.

Hence, the appeal preferred by the applicant in SC/Appeal/11/2022 is

dismissed for the reasons considered, as I find no merit in the appeal.

There will be no costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Janak De Silva, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Menaka Wijesundera, J.

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court