SC. Appeal No. 105/2018

1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

SC. Appeal No. 105/2018

SC Case: SC/HCCA/LA 254/17 In the matter of an application for Special

HCCA Case No: SP/HCCA/TA/23/2015(F) Leave to Appeal to the Supreme Court

DC Case No: M/10351/2009 under Article 128(2) of the Constitution

of the Democratic Socialist Republic of

Sri Lanka from the Judgment dated 25th

of August 2015 made by

SP/HCCA/TA/23/2015(F).

1. Godawela Gamage Dulani Kamal

Renuka

2. Kaushika Sandasara

3. Chamod Sandamal

All are at No. 10B, Kurunduwatta,

Isadeen Town, Matara.

2nd and 3rd Plaintiffs are appearing by

their next fried the 4th Plaintiff

4. Walpita Mudiyanselage Mahinda

Kithsiri Walpita

No. 1/179, Borella Road, Godagama,

Homagama.

Plaintiffs-Appellants-Petitioners

SC. Appeal No. 105/2018

2

Vs.

1. Amarakoon Dissanayake Wasantha

No. 277, Kuttikala, Padalangala.

2. Amarakoon Dissanayake Chandana

No. 769, Viharagala, Sooriyawewa.

Defendants-Respondents-Respondents

BEFORE : SISIRA J. DE ABREW, J.

PRIYANTHA JAYAWARDENA, PC. J. &,

P. PADMAN SURASENA, J.

COUNSEL : Kumar Dunusinghe for the Plaintiff-Appellant-

Petitioners.

Shehan Gunawardane with Dulanjana Gamage

instructed by S.A.G. Dharshana for the Defendant-

Respondent-Respondents.

ARGUED &

DECIDED ON : 06.02.2019

-------------

SISIRA J. DE ABREW, J.

Heard both Counsel in support of their respective cases.

SC. Appeal No. 105/2018

3

This is an appeal against the judgment of the learned Judges of the Civil

Appellate High Court of Tangalle. The learned Judges of the Civil Appellate

High Court by their judgment dated 30.03.2017 affirmed the judgment of the

learned District Judge dated 25.08.2015. Learned District Judge by the said

judgment decided that the Plaintiff had not established the negligence of the 2nd

Defendant who drove the vehicle No. SP HT 6182.

Being aggrieved by the said judgments of the learned Judges of the Civil

Appellate High Court, the Plaintiff-Appellants have appealed to this Court. This

Court by its order dated 12.06.2018 granted Leave to Appeal on questions of law

set out in paragraph 8 (i) to (x) of the Petition dated 08.05.2017, which are as

follows;

i. Have their Lordshiips in the High Court of Civil Appeal erred in law and

in fact to observe that the 2nd Defendant was the driver of the vehicle

bearing No. SP JT 8161 which was the Tipper halted on the road with the

lorry actually driven by the 2nd Defendant.

ii. Have their Lordships in High Court of Civil Appeal erred in observing

that Dilip Wedarachchi who is an eye witness has not made a

contemporaneous police statement to corroborate the facts stated by him

in his evidence, whereas the said witness is listed in the list of witnesses in

the Magistrates Court proceedings marked as P5 which is invariably after

a statement is made to Police.

iii. Have their Lordships in the High Court of Civil Appeal erred in law and

fact by holding that the evidence of the said eye witness has failed the test

of spontaneity and contemporanity as his evidence has been recorded

SC. Appeal No. 105/2018

4

after 3 years, whereas the said eye witness has stated in the evidence in

chief that in addition to making a police statement and being listed as a

witness in the Magistrates Court he had given evidence at the Inquest

which has not been contradicted in the cross examination.

iv. Have their Lordships in the High Court of Civil Appeal erred in law and

in fact by misinterpreting P6, the police statement of the 2nd Defendant.

v. Have their Lordships in the High Court of Civil Appeal failed to evaluate

the consistency of the eye witness and the inconsistency of the evidence of

the 2nd Defendant in comparison to his answer and to his police statement.

vi. Have their Lordships in the High Court of Civil Appeal erred in law to

evaluate the ingredients of Section 149(1) of the Motor Traffic Act which

include the component of negligence to which the 2nd Defendant has

voluntarily pleaded guilty.

vii. Have their Lordships in the High Court of Civil Appeal erred in law in the

failure of considering the requirements of section 187 of the Civil

Procedure Code.

viii. Have their Lordships in the High Court of Civil Appeal erred in finding

that issues No. 5 and 6 have been answered in the negative on wrong

findings.

ix. Have their Lordships in the High Court of Civil Appeal arrived at a wrong

assumption that the deceased was under the influence of alcohol and was

attempting to board the lorry driven by the 2nd Defendant whereas no

such evidence was elicited in the evidence of the entire case.

SC. Appeal No. 105/2018

5

x. Have their Lordships in the High Court of Civil Appeal come to

unwarranted assertion that all the individuals assembled at the wedding

at the time of the accident were under the influence of alcohol and as such

people of Tangalle are proved to be a violent and a murderous mob which

some times even is capable of drawing international wroth and attention

and interventions.

Learned Counsel appearing for the Plaintiff-Appellants in the course of his

submissions submitted to this Court that he is only canvassing questions of law

set out in paragraph 8(vi) of the Petition of Appeal.

According to the facts of this case, Vehicle No. SP HT 6182 driven by the 2nd

Defendant was stopped at Tangalle facing Kataragama. At the same time,

another Vehicle bearing No. SP JT 8161 was also stopped facing Colombo due to

traffic congestion. At this time the deceased person who was walking towards

Kataragama decided to creep through the space between 02 Vehicles. When the

deceased person was creeping through the space between 02 Vehicles, the 2nd

Defendant started moving his Vehicle towards Kataragama. It has to be noted

here that at this time the deceased person was in the middle of the road and

between 02 Vehicles. According to the evidence led at the trial, the space

between 02 Vehicles was 1 ½ – 2 feet. When the 2nd Defendant was moving his

Vehicle towards Kataragama, the deceased person who was between 02 Vehicles

got crushed and as a result he died.

The Attorney General has decided not to charge the 2nd Defendant under Section

298 of the Penal Code. The 2nd Defendant was not charged even under Section

151(3) of the Motor Traffic Act which reads as follows;

SC. Appeal No. 105/2018

6

“ No person shall drive a Motor Vehicle on a High Way negligently or

without reasonable consideration for other persons using the High Way”

Thus, the 2nd Defendant has not been charged for negligent driving under

Section 151(3). On the instructions of the Attorney General, the 2nd Defendant

was charged under Section 149(1) of the Motor Traffic Act which reads as

follows;

“notwithstanding anything contained in Section 148, it shall be the duty of

the driver of every Motor Vehicle on a high way to take such action as

may be necessary to avoid any accident.”

From the above facts it can be concluded that the 2nd Defendant who drove the

Vehicle No. SP HT 6182 was charged only for failure to avoid an accident for

which he pleaded guilty in the Magistrate's Court. The learned District Judge

after trial concluded that the said accident has not taken place due to the

negligence of the 2nd Defendant. Learned Judges of the Civil Appellate High

Court too affirmed the said judgment. According to the Post Mortem Report of

the deceased person, stomach contents of the deceased person were having the

smell of liquor. This shows that at the time of the accident, the deceased person

had consumed liquor. As I pointed out earlier, at the time of the accident, the

deceased person was in the middle of the road and was trying to walk through

the space between the two Vehicles. (1 ½ – 2 feet)

When we consider all the above facts, we feel that the accident has taken place

due to the complete negligence of the deceased person. Therefore, we agree with

the conclusion reached by the learned District Judge and the learned High Court

Judges.

SC. Appeal No. 105/2018

7

Learned Counsel appearing for the Plaintiff-Appellants tried to advance an

argument that when a person is found guilty under Section 149 (1) of the Motor

Traffic Act, the said conviction would lead to the conclusion that the driver who

drove the Vehicle was negligent in driving the Vehicle.

I now advert to this said question. Although the learned Counsel for the

Plaintiff-Appellants tried to advance an argument, we are mindful of the fact that

the 2nd Defendant was not charged under Section 298 of the Penal Code and/or

under Section 151(3) [negligent driving] of the Motor Traffic Act. When we

consider all the above facts, we are unable to agree with the contention

advanced by the learned Counsel for the Plaintiff-Appellants. We hold that

when a person is found guilty under Section 149(1) of the Motor Traffic Act, no

conclusion can be drawn from such conviction that he had driven the Vehicle

negligently. The fact that he was not charged for negligent driving under Section

151(3) of the Motor Traffic Act operates against such a conclusion.

For the aforementioned reasons, we answer the above question of law set out in

paragraph 8(vi) of the Petition of Appeal in the negative.

Learned Counsel for the Plaintiff-Appellants did not make submissions with

regard to the other questions of law and he submitted that he would confine to

question of law set out in 8(vi) of the Petition of Appeal.

For the above reasons, we affirm the judgment of the learned Judges of the Civil

Appellate High Court and dismiss this appeal.

SC. Appeal No. 105/2018

8

Appeal dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

PRIYANTHA JAYAWARDENA, PC. J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

P. PADMAN SURASENA, J.

I agree

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

NT/-