==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

“IMMIGRATION BILL”

Dinidu de Alwis,

Molawatta Road,

Ihala Mahawewa,

Mahawewa.

Petitioner

SC/SD/82/2024

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney General’s

Department,

Colombo 12.

Respondent

Before: Hon. Justice Yasantha Kodagoda, P.C.

Hon. Justice Achala Wengappuli

Hon. Justice Mahinda Samayawardhena

Counsel: Pulasthi Hewamanna with Harini Jayawardhana, Fadhila

Fairoze and Linuri Munasinghe for the Petitioner.

Manohara Jayasinghe, Deputy Solicitor General with Sajith

Bandara, State Counsel and Medhaka Fernando, State

Counsel for the Respondent.

2

SC/SD/82/2024

Introduction

A Bill titled “Immigration Bill” (hereinafter referred to as “the Bill”) has

been published in the Gazette on 12 June 2024, and was subsequently

placed on the Order Paper of Parliament on 20 June 2024. This is in

accordance with Article 78(1) of the Constitution.

The petitioner invoked the jurisdiction vested in this Court under Article

121(1) of the Constitution on 3 July 2024 challenging the

constitutionality of several Clauses of the said Bill.

The Attorney General was Noticed by this Court in terms of Article 134(1)

of the Constitution.

The hearing commenced at 10.30 am on 5 July 2024 and concluded by

5.00 pm on the same day. Written submissions of both parties were filed

at approximately 4.30 pm on 8 July 2024.

Outline of the Bill

This Bill does not introduce a completely new legislative regime governing

immigration and emigration or matters relating to passports and exit

permits. Instead, while consolidating the provisions of those laws into

one Act, it aims to also upgrade the existing laws to meet with

contemporary requirements. The purpose of the Bill is discernible from

its long title, which reads as follows:

A Bill to make provisions for controlling the entry into and departure

of persons from Sri Lanka; controlling the stay of persons in Sri

Lanka who are not citizens of Sri Lanka; for the issue of travel

documents; for the repeal of the Immigrants and Emigrants Act

(Chapter 351) and the Passport (Regulation) and Exit Permit Act, No.

53 of 1971; and to provide for matters connected therewith or

incidental thereto.

3

SC/SD/82/2024

The existing Immigrants and Emigrants Act, No. 20 of 1948, had been

enacted shortly after independence was granted to the Dominion of

Ceylon on 4 February 1948. Since then, the scope of immigration and

emigration has drastically expanded, presenting unprecedented

challenges such as threats and attacks on national security, human

smuggling, human trafficking, drug trafficking, money laundering,

transnational organized crime, cybercrime and the spread of infectious

diseases.

The Passport (Regulation) and Exit Permit Act, No. 53 of 1971, was

enacted prior to Ceylon becoming a Republic.

The Bill has ten parts, each addressing different legal aspects of

immigration and emigration.

The short title of the Bill and dates of operation are set out in Clause 1.

Part I of the Bill contains Clause 2 and Clause 3 and deals with

preliminary matters. Clause 2 sets out the objects of the Bill and Clause

3 sets out the power of the Minister to grant exemptions to certain

persons specified in that clause from the operation of certain Parts of the

Bill.

Part II of the Bill contains Clause 4 to Clause 8, and deals with the

administrative arrangements of the Bill including the officers who shall

be appointed in order to exercise the powers under the Act, including

Coast Guard Officers of the Department of Coast Guard, and their

respective powers, duties and functions, as well as the power of the

Minister to confer authorization to act on his behalf.

Part III of the Bill contains Clause 9 to Clause 40, and deals with matters

pertaining to the issuance of visa and electronic travel authorization to

every person other than a citizen of Sri Lanka or a person who has been

4

SC/SD/82/2024

exempted from the application of this Act, including the statutory

procedure, requirements, validity period, disqualification and cessation

of the validity of a visa as well as the registration of a category of persons

identified as Overseas Ex-Sri Lankans and matters related therewith.

Part IV of the Bill contains Clause 41 to Clause 61, and deals with the

substantive legal principles and procedures applicable to entry into Sri

Lanka and departure from Sri Lanka for both citizens and non-citizens,

inclusive of identification, requirements upon entry and endorsements

for entry and departure. Most notably, Clause 42 of this Part stipulates

the right of entry of citizens of Sri Lanka. Further, this section stipulates

the powers of the Minister and those of an immigration officer in relation

to an entry or departure of persons.

Part V of the Bill contains Clauses 62 to 93, and stipulates the procedural

requirements which ought to be followed on arrival in or departure of any

person from Sri Lanka. Part V also sets out the capacity of immigration

officers to examine persons on entry, as well as the procedure to detain

persons for the purpose of examination and inspection by immigration

officers.

Part VI of the Bill contains Clauses 94 to 101 and deals with the

procedures applicable to the supervision of activities of persons other

than citizens of Sri Lanka or any person who is exempted from the

provisions of this Part by any Order under Part I. This Part confers on the

Minister the power to direct removal and deport non-citizens from Sri

Lanka.

Part VII of the Bill contains Clauses 102 to 123, and deals with the

procedure to obtain a Sri Lankan travel document, emergency

certificates, identity certificates, diplomatic passports or official

passports from the immigration authorities and sets out certain offences

5

SC/SD/82/2024

relating to travel documents. The powers of the Controller General in

respect of the issuance, endorsement, cancellation and refusal etc. of a

Sri Lankan travel document is also set out in Part VII.

Part VIII of the Bill contains three Chapters.

Chapter I deals with General Offences, and such offences are contained

in Clauses 124 to 135. This Chapter also sets out general offences

contained in the Bill and the procedure that would be applicable for the

trying of such offences and the procedure with respect to granting bail.

Chapter II contains Clauses 136 to 139, and sets out the specific offence

of human smuggling, including aggravated offences of human smuggling

and documentary offences relating to human smuggling.

Chapter III comprises Clauses 140 to 160. It sets out procedures

applicable to combatting the committing of offences specified in the Bill,

including the procedures applicable for the arrest, detention, impounding

of travel documents, seizure of suspicious travel documents and entry

and search of vessels and premises. Further, this Chapter empowers the

Minister and the Controller General authorized by the Minister, to rely

on classified information relating to security or criminal conduct in order

to make decisions and determine proceedings under the Act.

Part IX of the Bill comprises Clauses 161 to 167, which contains

provisions pertaining to transnational proceedings in respect of the

offences listed under the Bill.

Part X of the Bill, containing Clauses 168 to 185, is the General Part of

the Bill. This Part deals with the power of the Minister to issue

Regulations and the procedures applicable to the collection, use,

processing, storage and disclosure of identifying information. It also

includes provisions for the establishment of the Immigration Officers’

6

SC/SD/82/2024

Reward Fund and contains interpretation to be given to certain key terms

contained in the Bill. Additionally, this part sets out the provisions for

the repeal and savings of the Immigrants and Emigrants Act, and

Passport (Regulation) and the Exist Permit Act No. 53 of 1971.

We shall now consider the clauses challenged by the petitioner for their

constitutionality, based on oral submissions of learned counsel and post-

hearing written submissions submitted. We note that in certain respects,

the content of the written submissions tendered on behalf of the

petitioner differs from oral submissions, in that the learned counsel for

the petitioner has dropped some of the clauses initially raised at the

hearing and added new ones in the post-hearing written submissions. In

the circumstances, we are compelled to consider the positions raised on

behalf of the petitioner as contained in the written submissions. However,

we are mindful that this places learned Deputy Solicitor General (DSG)

at a distinct disadvantage, particularly as he has crafted his written

submissions based on the oral submissions made by learned counsel for

the Petitioner. Therefore, we shall be extremely conscious in that regard,

so as to prevent any injustice to the respondents.

Clause 3

Clause 3 of the Bill reads as follows:

3. (1) Every person who-

(a) is a member of the Armed Forces of Sri Lanka; or

(b) is duly accredited to the Government of Sri Lanka by the

Government of any other country; or

(c) is sent to Sri Lanka on a special mission by the Government

of any other country; or

7

SC/SD/82/2024

(d) is an expert, adviser, technician, or official of any

organization whose salary or principal emolument is not

payable by the Government of Sri Lanka and who is brought

to Sri Lanka by the Government of Sri Lanka through any

Specialized Agency of the United Nations Organization, or

under the Point Four Assistance Programme of the

Government of the United States of America, or through the

Colombo Plan Organization (including its Technical Assistance

Bureau), or any similar organization approved by the Minister;

or

(e) is any trainee from abroad who is sent to Sri Lanka under

any of the Technical Co-operation Programmes of the United

Nations Organization and its Specialized Agencies or of the

Colombo Plan Organization, or of any similar organization

approved by the Minister; or

(f) has entered or is under an agreement to enter the service of

the Government of Sri Lanka; or

(g) is a member of the official staff or household of any person

referred to in any of the foregoing paragraphs (a) to (f); or

(h) is the wife or any dependent child of any person referred

to in any of the foregoing paragraphs (a) to (g); or

(i) is a member of the crew of a ship in the territorial waters of

Sri Lanka,

shall be exempted from the operation of Parts III, IV, V, VI and VII of

this Act to such extent or subject to such conditions or restrictions as

may be specified by an Order made by the Minister and published

in the Gazette.

8

SC/SD/82/2024

An Order under this subsection may be either an Order in respect of

any person or group of persons, or an Order applicable to any class

or description of persons, being in either case persons referred to in

this subsection.

(2) The Minister may, by Order published in the Gazette exempt any

person or class or description of persons for such specified period of

time on the occurrence of any public emergency from any of the

provisions of the Act to such extent or subject to such terms,

conditions or restrictions as may appear to him to be necessary in

the public interest.

The complaint of learned counsel for the petitioner is that this Clause as

a whole is vague and overbroad, and the Minister’s power to exempt

persons from the provisions of the Act is unguided and unfettered, hence

violative of Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

It is now settled law that vague and overbroad provisions in an

enactment, which confer unguided and unfettered powers or discretion

upon administrative officials, violate Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

However, we are not inclined to think that Clause 3 violates Article 12(1).

The legislature cannot pass legislation that covers all possible

contingencies in detail. Clause 3 empowers the Minister to make

provisional orders to such extent or subject to such conditions or

restrictions as may be specified by an Order made by the Minister and

published in the Gazette. There are several inbuilt restrictions within this

Clause.

Classification among persons does not violate Article 12(1) so long as it

is based on an intelligible differentia. Reasonable classifications for

legitimate purposes and differential treatment between such

9

SC/SD/82/2024

classifications are permissible. What Article 12(1) seeks to prevent is

differential treatment within the same classification.

Learned DSG explains that the objective to be achieved by this Clause is

to provide the State with the necessary flexibility to exempt persons

and/or groups of persons from the operation of certain parts of the Bill

for certain operational and/or administrative needs, subject to

conditions. We have no reason to disagree with this explanation.

The same provision is found in section 2 of the Immigrants and

Emigrants Act, No. 20 of 1948, as amended, since 1948, which

represents the existing law.

Section 2 of the Immigrants and Emigrants Act reads as follows:

2. (1) Every person who

(a) is a member of the Armed Forces of Sri Lanka; or

(b) is duly accredited to the Government of Sri Lanka by the

Government of any other country; or

(c) is sent to Sri Lanka on a special mission by the Government

of any other country; or

(d) is any expert, adviser, technician, or official whose salary

or principal emolument is not payable by the Government of

Sri Lanka and who is brought to Sri Lanka by the Government

of Sri Lanka through any Specialized Agency of the United

Nations Organization, or under the Point Four Assistance

Programme of the Government of the United States of America,

or through the Colombo Plan Organization (including its

Technical Assistance Bureau), or any similar organization

approved by the Minister; or

10

SC/SD/82/2024

(e) is any trainee from abroad who is sent to Sri Lanka under

any of the Technical Co-operation Programmes of the United

Nations Organization and its Specialized Agencies or of the

Colombo Plan Organization, or of any similar organization

approved by the Minister; or

(f) has entered or is under an agreement to enter the service of

the Government of Sri Lanka; or

(g) is a member of the official staff or household of any person

referred to in any of the foregoing paragraphs (a) to (f); or

(h) is the wife or any dependent child of any person referred

to in any of the foregoing paragraphs (a) to (g); or

(i) is a member of the crew of a ship in the territorial waters of

Sri Lanka, shall be exempt from the operation of Parts III, IV,

V, VI, and VII of this Act to such extent or subject to such

conditions or restrictions as may be specified by order of the

Minister. An order under this subsection may be either a

special order in respect of any person or group of persons, or

a general order applicable to any class or description of

persons, being in either case persons referred to in this

subsection.

(2) In accordance with any regulations made under this Act for the

purpose of prescribing

(a) the classes or description of persons, other than those

specified in subsection (1), to whom exemption may be granted

from any of the provisions of this Act; and

(b) the extent to which or the terms, conditions or restrictions

subject to which such exemption may be granted, the Minister

11

SC/SD/82/2024

may by order exempt any prescribed class or description of

persons or any person belonging to any such prescribed class

or description, to the prescribed extent or subject to the

prescribed terms, conditions or restrictions:

Provided that in the absence of any such regulations or on the

occurrence of any public emergency, the Minister may so exempt any

person or class or description of persons from any of the provisions

of this Act to such extent or subject to such terms, conditions or

restrictions as may appear to him to be necessary in the public

interest.

In fact, according to the existing provision (section 2 of the Immigrants

and Emigrants Act), the Minister can exempt such persons from the

operation of Parts III, IV, V, VI, and VII of the Act by way of an Order, not

by an Order that should be published in the Gazette, as the Bill proposes

to do. The new provision advances the rights of the people rather than

detracts from them. However, the presence of an almost identical

provision in existing legislation is not a basis to conclude that the

proposed provision is constitutional.

We note that this clause does not and in any event no provision of the

law can confer unfettered discretionary authority on any official. Power

must be exercised in terms of the law and the purpose for which such

power is conferred on the relevant official by Parliament. The exercise of

power must be in consonance with the object and purposes of the law,

and must be exercised in good faith and in public interest. Furthermore,

the Minister is expected to exercise this power of exemption in special

situations, not as a routine measure and in conformity with the afore-

stated principles. However, the written law need not make any reference

to these principles, as the unwritten common law shall apply.

12

SC/SD/82/2024

In view of the foregoing, we are in agreement with learned DSG that there

is no necessity to interfere with Clause 3 of the Bill.

Learned DSG in his written submissions has stated that the term “wife”

in Clause 3(1)(h) of the Bill (which is also found in the Immigrants and

Emigrants Act since 1948) will be changed to “spouse” at the Committee

Stage of Parliament.

Clauses 7 and 8

Clauses 7 and 8 read as follows:

7. (1) The President may, upon request of the Minister, for the

purposes of this Act, by Order published in the Gazette, designate

all or any of-

(a) the members of the Sri Lanka Army raised and maintained

in accordance with the provisions of the Army Act (Chapter

357);

(b) the members of the Sri Lanka Navy raised and maintained

in accordance with the provisions of the Navy Act (Chapter

358); and

(c) the members of the Sri Lanka Air Force raised and

maintained in accordance with the provisions of the Air Force

Act (Chapter 359),

as authorised members of the Forces.

(2) Within the area specified under subsection (4), an authorised

member of the Forces shall, in respect of-

(a) any offence under section 46;

(b) any offence under section 51;

13

SC/SD/82/2024

(c) any offence under section 124;

(d) any offence under section 126;

(e) any offence under section 136;

(f) any offence under section 137;

(g) any offence under section 138; and

(h) any offence under section 139,

be deemed to be a Peace Officer within the meaning of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act for the purpose only of exercising any power

conferred upon a Peace Officer by that Act.

(3) The powers and duties conferred and imposed upon authorised

members of the Forces by this section shall be exercised and

discharged notwithstanding that such powers and duties are not

conferred or imposed upon them by the provisions of the Army Act

(Chapter 357), the Navy Act (Chapter 358), or the Air Force Act

(Chapter 359).

(4) The Minister may, by Order published in the Gazette, specify the

areas which the powers and duties under this Act may be exercised

and discharged by the authorised members of the Forces.

(5) An authorised member of the Forces making an arrest without a

warrant shall forthwith –

(a) notify the arrest to the Controller General; and

(b) hand over the person so arrested, to the custody of a police

officer.

8. (1) The President may upon request by the Minister, for the

purposes of this Act, by Order published in the Gazette, designate

14

SC/SD/82/2024

all or any of the Coast Guard Officers of the Department of Coast

Guard, raised and maintained in accordance with the provisions of

the Department of Coast Guard Act, No. 41 of 2009, as authorised

Coast Guard Officers of the Department of Coast Guard.

(2) Within the area specified under subsection (4), an authorised

Coast Guard Officer of the Department of Coast Guard shall, in

respect of-

(a) any offence under section 46;

(b) any offence under section 51;

(c) any offence under section 124;

(d) any offence under section 126,

(e) any offence under section 136;

(f) any offence under section 137;

(g) any offence under section 138; and

(h) any offence under section 139,

be deemed to be a Peace Officer within the meaning of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act for the purpose only of exercising any power

conferred upon a Peace Officer by that Act.

(3) The powers and duties conferred and imposed upon authorised

Coast Guard Officers of the Department of Coast Guard by this

section shall be exercised and discharged notwithstanding that such

powers and duties are not conferred or imposed upon them by the

provisions of the Department of Coast Guard Act, No. 41 of 2009.

(4) The Minister may, by Order published in the Gazette, specify the

area in which the powers and duties under this Act may be exercised

15

SC/SD/82/2024

and discharged by the authorised Coast Guard Officers of the

Department of Coast Guard.

(5) An authorised Coast Guard Officer of the Department of Coast

Guard making an arrest without a warrant shall forthwith-

(a) notify the arrest to the Controller General; and

(b) hand over the person so arrested, to the custody of a police

officer.

Clauses 7 and 8 deal with the authorisation of members of the Forces

and the Coast Guard Officers to exercise certain powers under this Act

for the purpose of assisting immigration officers to apprehend offenders

under the provisions of this Act. The main difference between these two

Clauses is that the former is applicable to Tri-Forces and the latter to

Coast Guard Officers.

Learned counsel for the petitioner impugns these Clauses on several

grounds. The main allegation is that those provisions are vague and

overbroad and therefore violative of Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

Clause 7 is similar to section 7A of the existing Immigration and

Emigration Act, which reads as follows:

7A. (1) The President may, for the purposes of this Act, by Order

published in the Gazette designate all or any of

(a) the members of the army raised and maintained in

accordance with the provisions of the Army Act,

(b) the members of the Sri Lanka Navy raised and maintained

in accordance with the provisions of the Navy Act, and

16

SC/SD/82/2024

(c) the members of the Sri Lanka Air Force raised and

maintained in accordance with the provisions of the Air Force

Act, as authorized members of the Forces.

(2) The powers and duties conferred and imposed upon authorized

members of the Forces by this section shall be exercised and

discharged notwithstanding that such powers and duties are not

conferred or imposed upon them by the provisions of the Army Act,

the Navy Act, or the Air Force Act.

(3) The Minister may, by Order published in the Gazette, specify the

area or areas in which the powers and duties under this Act may be

exercised and discharged by authorized members of the Forces.

(4) Within the area specified under subsection (3), an authorized

member of the Forces shall, in respect of

(a) any offence under paragraph (a) of subsection (1) of section

45,

(b) any offence under subsection (2) of section 45 so far as it

relates to paragraph (a) of subsection (1) of that section, and

(c) any offence under subsection (1) or subsection (2) of section

45A, be deemed to be a peace officer within the meaning of

the Code of Criminal Procedure Act for the purpose only of

exercising any power conferred upon a peace officer by that

Act.

(5) An authorized member of the Forces making an arrest without

warrant shall without delay hand the person so arrested to the

custody of a police officer.

17

SC/SD/82/2024

Coast Guard Officers were introduced by the Department of Coast Guard

Act, No. 41 of 2009 to assist, inter alia, as stated in section 4(b), “the

Customs and other relevant authorities in combating anti-smuggling and

anti-immigration operations”.

Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that phrases such as “all or

any”, “authorized members of the Forces”, “specify the areas”, “deemed

to be a peace officer”, “for the purpose only of exercising any power”,

“custody of a police officer” found in Clauses 7(1), 7(2), 7(4), 7(5), 8(1),

8(2), 8(4), 8(5), are vague, resulting in an inconsistency with Article 12(1)

of the Constitution. Learned counsel further asserts that the Minister has

been given unfettered discretion to designate all or any of the Armed

Forces and Department of Coast Guard as authorized members of the

Forces and Coast Guard Officers to specified areas within which such

authorized members are empowered to act which might even be the entire

island. He states that this raises the concern of increased militarization

of civilian matters.

Learned counsel for the petitioner states that in Clauses 7(2) and 8(2),

members of the Tri-Forces and Coast Guard Officers are deemed to be

Peace Officers solely for exercising any “power” conferred upon a Peace

Officer under the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, without corresponding

reference to the “duties” imposed on such Peace Officers under the same

Act, such as the use of minimum force and reasonableness.

He points out that different phraseology has been used within the Bill to

cover similar situations, in that, in Clauses 7(5) and 8(5), “hand over the

person so arrested to the custody of a police officer” has been used,

whereas in Clause 144(1), “hand over such person to the nearest police

station” has been used. Section 7A(5) of the existing Immigration and

Emigration Act states that “An authorized member of the Forces making

18

SC/SD/82/2024

an arrest without warrant shall without delay hand the person so arrested

to the custody of a police officer.”

He also states the word “forthwith” used in Clauses 7(5) and 8(5) is vague

and open to (mis)interpretation.

Learned counsel for the petitioner also points out that, when the offences

set out in Clauses 7(2) and 8(2) are compared with those of Clause 144(1),

offences under sections 47, 142 and 143 have not been included into

Clauses 7(2) and 8(2), without any rational basis.

Learned DSG states that the objective of Clauses 7 and 8 is to empower

authorized members of the Forces and authorized Coast Guard Officers

to make arrests without warrant in respect of specified offences to provide

necessary assistance to immigration officers and police officers by

enhancing the capacity to enforce the law and deal with offences under

the Act. For instance, specified offences such as Human Smuggling into

and from Sri Lanka (Clauses 136 and 137) and aggravated Human

Smuggling (Clause 137) inevitably fall into the category of transnational

crimes due to being committed not only within the Sri Lankan territorial

waters but also in the High Seas. These are some of the primary

transnational maritime crimes in dire need of penalization and

deterrence. Therefore, learned DSG submits that these Clauses

supplement the necessary expansion of authority for immigration officers

and law enforcement to effectively implement the law.

We wish to note that, the policy of empowering members of the Armed

Forces and the Coast Guard to assist immigration officers and police

officers, is indeed a reasonable policy and can be recognized as very much

in public interest. Given the fact that Sri Lanka is an island nation

surrounded by a sea, it would be extremely challenging to call upon only

immigration officers and police officers to enforce provisions of the

19

SC/SD/82/2024

proposed law. The reliance on the Armed Forces and the Coast Guard is

quite reasonable.

Clauses 7(5) and 8(5) include adequate safeguards ensuring that

authorized members of the Forces and Coast Guard Officers “forthwith”

notify the Controller General of any arrest and hand over the arrested

person or persons to the custody of a police officer. Clause 144(2) requires

the police to produce such persons before a Magistrate within 24 hours.

We must note that, in comparison with the existing provisions, the

safeguards have been strengthened through the Bill, not reduced.

However, we agree with learned counsel for the petitioner that due to

vagueness in certain aspects, Clauses 7 and 8 are inconsistent with

Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

These inconsistencies will cease to exist if amendments are made in the

following manner:

In Clause 7(2),

I. to include to the scope of offences listed thereunder, Clauses 47,

142 and 143 and;

II. to include the words “and duties” after the words “any power”

mentioned in the Clause so that Clause 7(2) will read as;

Within the area specified under subsection (4), an authorized

member of the Forces shall, in respect of-

(a) any offence under section 46;

(b) any offence under section 47;

(c) any offence under section 51;

(d) any offence under section 124;

20

SC/SD/82/2024

(e) any offence under section 126;

(f) any offence under section 136;

(g) any offence under section 137;

(h) any offence under section 138,

(i) any offence under section 139;

(j) any offence under section 142; and

(k) any offence under section 143,

be deemed to be a Peace Officer within the meaning of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act for the limited purpose of exercising any

powers and duties conferred upon a Peace Officer by that Act.

In Clause 7(5),

I. to add the phrase “as may be reasonably possible in the given

circumstances and in any case, not later than twenty-four hours

from the time of arrest” after the word “forthwith” mentioned in the

Clause and;

II. to substitute the phrase “to the custody of a police officer”

mentioned in Clause 7(5)(b) with the words “to the nearest police

station to be dealt with in terms of the law”, so that Clause 7(5) will

read as;

An authorised member of the Forces making an arrest without a

warrant shall forthwith as may be reasonably possible in the given

circumstances and in any case, not later than twenty-four hours

from the time of arrest-

(a) notify the arrest to the Controller General; and

21

SC/SD/82/2024

(b) hand over the person so arrested, to the nearest police

station to be dealt with in terms of the law.

In Clause 8(2),

I. to include to the scope of offences listed thereunder, Clauses 47,

142 and 143 and;

II. to include the words “and duties” after the words “any powers”

mentioned in the Clause, so that Clause 8(2) will read as;

Within the area specified under subsection (4), an authorised Coast

Guard Officer of the Department of Coast Guard shall, in respect of-

(a) any offence under section 46;

(b) any offence under section 47;

(c) any offence under section 51;

(d) any offence under section 124;

(e) any offence under section 126;

(f) any offence under section 136;

(g) any offence under section 137;

(h) any offence under section 138,

(i) any offence under section 139;

(j) any offence under section 142; and

(k) any offence under section 143,

be deemed to be a Peace Officer within the meaning of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act for the limited purpose of exercising any

powers and duties conferred upon a Peace Officer by that Act.

22

SC/SD/82/2024

In Clause 8(5),

I. to add the phrase “as may be reasonably possible in the given

circumstances and in any case, not later than twenty-four hours

from the time of arrest” after the word “forthwith” mentioned in the

Clause and;

II. to substitute the phrase “to the custody of a police officer” with the

words “to the nearest police station to be dealt with in terms of the

law” in Clause 8(5)(b), so that Clause 8(5) will read as;

An authorised Coast Guard Officer of the Department of Coast Guard

making an arrest without a warrant shall forthwith as may be

reasonably possible in the given circumstances and in any case, not

later than twenty-four hours from the time of arrest –

(a) notify the arrest to the Controller General; and

(b) hand over the person so arrested, to the nearest police

station to be dealt with in terms of the law.

Clause 144

Clause 144 reads as follows:

144. (1) Any authorised member of the Forces or any authorised

Coast Guard Officer of the Department of Coast Guard may take into

custody without a warrant a person who is suspected of committing

any offence under section 47, 136, 137, 138, 139, 142 or 143 and

shall forthwith hand over such person to the nearest police station.

(2) The officer in charge of the police station shall within twenty-four

hours produce such person before a Magistrate having jurisdiction.

23

SC/SD/82/2024

(3) The Magistrate may notwithstanding the provision of Code of

Criminal Procedure Act, No. 15 of 1979 upon a certificate being filed

by a police officer not below the rank of a Superintendent of Police to

the effect that it is necessary to detain such person in custody for

the purpose of carrying out investigations, order the detention of

such person for a further period which shall not exceed forty-eight

hours.

This Clause strengthens greater procedural safeguards which were non-

existent in the Immigrants and Emigrants Act.

Clause 144(1) requires an authorized member making an arrest without

a warrant for the listed offences to hand over the arrested person to the

“nearest police station”, offering greater protection compared to the

current Act, which mandates handing over to the custody of a police

officer.

Furthermore, the Bill stipulates that the officer-in-charge of the police

station shall adhere to the twenty-four-hour time limit stipulated in the

Code of Criminal Procedure Act in producing such person before a

Magistrate. This is an essential procedural safeguard afforded to detained

persons. In terms of section 48 of the present Act, a person can be

detained for a period of two weeks without being produced before a

Magistrate.

Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that Clause 144 violates

Article 12(1) due to inherent inconsistencies between the marginal note

and the substantive provision, as well as inconsistencies between this

clause and Clauses 7 and 8.

Learned counsel also submits that Clause 144(2) violates Article 13(2)

because the word “nearest” is not in this sub-clause.

24

SC/SD/82/2024

Another point raised by learned counsel is the absence of a specific

provision requiring persons arrested under Clauses 7 and 8 to be

produced before the relevant Magistrates. This argument is based on

different terminologies being used in Clause 144 on the one hand and

Clauses 7 and 8 on the other. Learned counsel submits that drafting of

Clauses 7, 8 and 144 reveals two enabling provisions for making an arrest

without a warrant.

Moreover, learned counsel for the petitioner states that the absence of

the requirement to notify the Controller General in Clause 144(1)

contrasted with the inclusion of it in Clause 7(5) and Clause 8(5) gives

rise to inconsistencies in the procedure, which is deemed to be one

process by the State.

The inconsistency between Clause 144 and Clauses 7 and 8 has already

been dealt with under the previous subheading “Clauses 7 and 8”.

Learned DSG points out that Clauses 7 and 8 and Clause 144 constitute

one process, not two different processes.

The marginal note denotes that the substantive provision is applicable to

non-citizens whereas it does apply to both citizens and non-citizens.

We accept that Clause 144 contains several ambiguous aspects which

offend Article 12(1).

There are inconsistencies between Clauses 7(5) and 8(5) on the one hand

and Clause 144(1) on the other although learned DSG states that such

Clauses deal with one process.

Clauses 7(5)(a) and 8(5)(a) require notifying only the Controller General

of the arrest. These provisions do not mandate informing the Controller

General of the subsequent steps taken. It is important to understand that

these authorized officers are not police officers but members of the Forces

25

SC/SD/82/2024

and Coast Guard Officers, who may lack the knowledge of procedure

established by law that police officers expected to possess.

Accordingly, we take the view that those inconsistencies can be

reconciled and the Article 12(1) violation will cease to exist if,

(a) the marginal note of Clause 144 is amended as “Procedure and

powers in relation to the taking into custody of a person without a

warrant”,

(b) the proposed amendments to Clauses 7 and 8 are effected,

(c) Clause 144(1) is amended by adding at the end the phrase “and

notify such handing over also to the Controller General” or words

to the similar effect,

(d) in Clause 144(2) the phrase “to whom such suspect is handed

over” is inserted after the words “police station”,

(e) in Clause 144(2) the phrase “of receiving his custody” is inserted

after the words “twenty-four hours”,

(f) further, in Clause 144(2) “a Magistrate” is replaced with “the

nearest Magistrate”, and

(g) in Clause 144(3) the phrase “and upon being satisfied that there

exists sufficient material to justify the allegation against the

suspect,” is inserted after the word “investigations”.

Thereafter, the amended Clause 144 will read as follows:

144. (1) Any authorised member of the Forces or any authorised

Coast Guard Officer of the Department of Coast Guard may take into

custody without a warrant a person who is suspected of committing

any offence under section 47, 136, 137, 138, 139, 142 or 143, and

26

SC/SD/82/2024

shall forthwith hand over such person to the nearest police station,

and notify such handing over also to the Controller General.

(2) The officer in charge of the police station to whom such suspect

is handed over shall within twenty-four hours of receiving his

custody produce such person before the nearest Magistrate having

jurisdiction.

(3) The Magistrate before whom such suspect is produced may,

notwithstanding the provision of Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.

15 of 1979, upon a certificate being filed by a police officer not below

the rank of a Superintendent of Police to the effect that it is necessary

to detain such person in custody for the purpose of carrying out

investigations, and upon being satisfied that there exists sufficient

material to justify the allegation against the suspect, order the

detention of such person for a further period which shall not exceed

forty-eight hours.

It is to be noted that learned DSG has stated in the written submission

that the marginal note of Clause 144 will be amended as above at the

Committee Stage of Parliament.

Clauses 53(c) and 55(4)

Clause 53(c) and Clause 55(4) read as follows:

53. Except in such circumstances as may be prescribed, no

departure endorsement shall be granted to any person –

(…)

(c) who is a citizen of Sri Lanka and if such person has not

been vaccinated against any disease or fulfilled any

requirement under section 56 of this Act; or

27

SC/SD/82/2024

(…)

55. (4) No endorsement shall be granted to a citizen of Sri Lanka if

such person has not been vaccinated against any disease or fulfilled

any other requirement as specified by an Order made under section

56.

Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the use of the phrase

“any disease” is overbroad and lacks reasonable excuses or qualifiers,

thereby violating Articles 10 and 11 (degrading treatment).

Clauses 53 and 55 refer to “any requirement under Clause 56”. It is

further submitted on behalf of the petitioner that Clause 56 is applicable

to citizens and non-citizens, and also uses the phrase “any specific

disease” as opposed to “any disease” in Clause 53(c) and 55. The counsel

for the petitioner also raises concern regarding the use of the word “an

emergency”, as being overbroad.

The objective of this Act, as per Clause 2, is “to regulate immigration and

emigration in a manner that is consistent with the national interest.”

It is established that concerns of public health and safety are related to

national interest. The fact that a country’s national interest directly

translates itself into the collective interest of the country’s citizens,

encompassing the citizenry’s health and security is a well-established

doctrine of belief, especially during a time consequent to the global

turmoil faced by the world due to the Covid-19 pandemic.

As stated in Article 15(7) of the Constitution, the fundamental rights of

Articles 12, 13(1), 13(2) and 14 may be restricted, inter alia, in the

interests of “protection of public health”. Further, as per Article 14A(2),

the protection of health is one of the basis on which restrictions shall be

placed on the right recognized by Article 14A, the right to information as

28

SC/SD/82/2024

well. This encapsulates the importance of public health in furtherance of

national interests and the obligation of the state to cooperate with other

states towards the elimination of infectious diseases. Therefore, the

requirement of vaccination against any disease by a person on entry or

departure may be necessary, is quite reasonable, and does not become

violative of any fundamental right.

Clause 58

Clause 58 reads as follows:

58. (1) A person to whom this Part applies shall –

(a) if required by an immigration officer, at the time of his entry

into or departure from Sri Lanka, make a declaration whether

he is carrying any written document, or any electronic device;

and

(b) if required by an immigration officer, produce such

document or electronic device for the examination by that

officer.

(2) An immigration officer may –

(a) search any such person and any baggage belonging to him

or under his control for any written document or electronic

device;

(b) examine any written document or electronic device

produced or detected under this section; or

(c) detain such person until the immigration officer finalizes

any search or examination of any written document or

electronic device.

29

SC/SD/82/2024

(3) For the purposes of this section “written document” includes any

letter, written message, memoranda, plan, photograph, or any

pictorial representation.

This Clause is applicable to both citizens and non-citizens. Learned

counsel for the petitioner states that use of the terms such as “any

written document”, “any electronic device”, “detain” etc. without any

guidelines is vague which could lead to arbitrary application of such

provision, thereby violating Article 12(1). He says this permits

immigration officers to search and examine any electronic device having

private information without any rational basis.

This Clause is similar to section 19 of the Immigrants and Emigrants Act

which reads as follows:

19. A person to whom this Part applies shall, on being required so to

do by an authorized officer, at the time of his entry into Sri Lanka,

make a declaration as to whether or not he is carrying or conveying

any letters, written messages, memoranda or any written or printed

matter, including plans, photographs and other pictorial

representations, and if so required, shall produce to that officer any

such letters, messages, memoranda or written or printed matter, and

the officer may search any such person and any baggage belonging

to him or under his control with a view to ascertaining whether such

person is carrying or conveying any such letters, messages,

memoranda or written or printed matter, and may examine and

detain, for such time as that officer may think proper for the

purposes of such examination, any letters, messages, memoranda

or written or printed matter produced to him or found on such search.

Since electronic devices are now used inter alia to store private

information by persons, it appears that granting uncontrolled power to

30

SC/SD/82/2024

search, examine and detain people at the time of entry and departure

from Sri Lanka can violate Article 12(1).

Learned DSG in the written submission indicates to Court that Clause

58 will be amended to reflect the following changes at the Committee

Stage of Parliament.

(1) A person to whom this Part applies shall, if required by an

immigration officer, at the time of his entry into or departure from Sri

Lanka, make a declaration whether he is carrying any written

document, or any electronic device.

(2) An immigration officer may, where he has reasonable suspicion

that any person has committed an offence under this Act or any other

Act:

(1) search any such person and any baggage belonging to him

or under his control for any written document or electronic

device;

(2) require such person to produce such document or electronic

device for the examination by that officer;

(3) examine any written document or electronic device

produced or detected under this section; or

(4) detain such person until the immigration officer finalizes

any search or examination of any written document or

electronic device.

The existing inconsistency in Clause 58 can be avoided if Clause 58 is

amended in the above stated manner.

31

SC/SD/82/2024

Clause 78

Clause 78 reads as follows:

78. Any immigration officer, any police officer not below the rank of

a Sub-Inspector of Police authorised by a Superintendent of Police or

any prescribed medical officer may enter or board any vessel or

aircraft, as the case may be, and detain and examine any person

arriving or leaving Sri Lanka and require the production of any

document by such person.

This Clause is similar to Clause 39 of the Immigrants and Emigrants Act

which reads as follows:

39. Every authorized officer is hereby empowered to enter or board

any ship, and to detain and examine any person arriving in or

leaving Sri Lanka, and to require the production of any documents

by such person.

This Clause applies to both citizens and non-citizens. Learned counsel

for the petitioner argues that when this Clause is read together with

Clauses 42 and 43, it violates Articles 12(1) and 14(1)(i) of the

Constitution. According to Clause 42, any citizen can enter Sri Lanka

without a visa as long as such person can establish his or her citizenship,

and according to Clause 43, a citizen may be asked to produce a travel

document at the point of entry.

We accept this argument and hold that unless “any document” in Clause

78 is amended in line with Clauses 42 and 43 in respect of citizens,

Clause 78 shall be passed by the special majority of Parliament.

Clause 79

Clause 79 reads as follows:

32

SC/SD/82/2024

79. For the purposes of any examination or inspection to decide

whether a person shall be entitled to enter Sri Lanka under the

provisions of this Act, any Order or regulation made thereunder, an

immigration officer may direct a person to disembark and enter any

place of the relevant approved port for such period as may be

reasonably necessary for completing such examination or

inspection: Provided that, an immigration officer shall endeavour to

conclude such examination or inspection within a period of twenty

four hours and decide whether a person shall be entitled to enter Sri

Lanka under the provisions of this Act, any Order or regulation made

thereunder.

This Clause is similar to section 20 of the Immigrants and Emigrants Act

which reads as follows:

20. For the purposes of any examination or inspection under the

preceding sections, a person who is directed by an authorized officer

to disembark and enter any place on shore, may be detained at any

place approved in that behalf by the Minister for such length of time

as may be necessary for completing such examination or inspection.

This Clause is also applicable to citizens and non-citizens. When this

Clause is read with Clauses 42 and 43, it violates Articles 12(1) and

14(1)(i) of the Constitution since, according to Clause 42, a citizen can

enter Sri Lanka without a visa so long as he or she establishes

citizenship, and according to Clause 43, a citizen can be asked to produce

the travel document at the point of entry. According to Article 14(1)(i) of

the Constitution, “the freedom to return to Sri Lanka” is a fundamental

right guaranteed to every citizen. Therefore, once citizenship is

established to the satisfaction of the immigration officer, along with the

travel document, the entitlement to enter Sri Lanka cannot be left to the

discretion of the immigration officer.

33

SC/SD/82/2024

Unless Clause 79 is amended in line with Clauses 42 and 43 in respect

of citizens, Clause 79 shall be passed by the special majority of

Parliament.

Clause 81

Clause 81 reads as follows:

81. (1) Any person who arrives in Sri Lanka or who is about to depart

Sri Lanka shall for the purposes of this Act –

(a) answer all questions and inquiries put to him by an

immigration officer or any other officer authorised under this

Act fully and truthfully, directly or indirectly, to establish his

identity, nationality or occupation or bearing on any of the

restrictions contained in this Act; and

(b) disclose and produce to any such officer referred to in

paragraph (a) on demand all documents, articles or things in

his possession.

(2) All such answers, documents, articles or things shall be

admissible in evidence in any proceedings under this Act against the

person making, disclosing or producing the same.

(3) Nothing in this section shall be construed as rendering any such

answer inadmissible in any other proceedings in which they would

otherwise be admissible.

(4) Any person who –

(a) refuses to answer any question or enquiry put to him under

subsection (1);

34

SC/SD/82/2024

(b) knowingly gives any false or misleading answer to any

such question or enquiry;

(c) refuses or fails to produce any document or article in his

possession when required to do so under subsection (1); or

(d) knowingly produces any false or misleading document,

commits an offence.

(5) Any person who commits an offence under subsection (4) –

(a) in the case of an offence under paragraph (a), (b) or (c) of

that subsection, shall be liable on conviction, to a fine not

exceeding five hundred thousand rupees or to imprisonment

for a term not exceeding six months or to both such fine and

imprisonment; or

(b) in the case of an offence under paragraph (d) of that

subsection, shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding

five hundred thousand rupees or to imprisonment for a term

not exceeding two years or to both such fine and

imprisonment.

This Clause applies to both citizens and non-citizens. Clause 81(2)

permits answers, documents, articles or things given by any person

(whether citizen or non-citizen) to be admissible as evidence in any

proceedings under the Act to be passed.

Learned counsel for the petitioner states that such unqualified provision

will lead to violate several fundamental principles in law including the

doctrine against self-incrimination, Article 13(3) which guarantees fair

trial, and sections 24-26 of the Evidence Ordinance which make

confessions made under certain circumstances inadmissible. We agree

with this submission.

35

SC/SD/82/2024

This violation will cease to exist if at the end of Clause 81(2), the words

“subject to the provisions of the Constitution and of any law” are added.

Clause 160

Clause 160 reads as follows:

160. (1) Classified information may be relied on, in making decisions

or determining proceedings under this Act, if the Minister determines

that the classified information relates to the matters of security or

criminal conduct.

(2) Where the provisions of subsection (1) apply, the Minister may

authorise the Controller General to rely on the information to make a

decision on the –

(a) issuance of visa;

(b) arrival and departure processing;

(c) removal and deportation process; and

(d) supervision of activities of persons who are not citizens of

Sri Lanka while in Sri Lanka.

(3) Classified information relied on for the purpose of making any

decision or determining any proceedings under this Act shall be kept

confidential and shall not be disclosed.

(4) All such classified information shall be securely recorded and

maintained under the custody of the Controller General.

(5) (a) For the purposes of this Act, “classified information” means

information that the head of a relevant agency certifies in writing as

36

SC/SD/82/2024

being information that cannot be disclosed under the provisions of

this Act, except as expressly provided for, because-

(i) the information is information of a kind specified in

paragraph (b); and

(ii) disclosure of the information would be a disclosure of a

kind specified in paragraph (c).

(b) Information falls within this subsection if it-

(i) might lead to the identification or provide details of the

source of the information, the nature, content, or scope of the

information, or the nature or type of the assistance or

operational methods available to the relevant agency;

(ii) is about particular operations that have been undertaken,

or are being or are proposed to be undertaken, in pursuance

of any of the functions of the relevant agency; or

(iii) has been provided to the relevant agency by the

government of another country, an agency of the government

of another country, or an international organisation, and this

information that cannot be disclosed by the relevant agency

because the government, agency, or organisation from which

the information has been provided will not consent to the

disclosure.

(c) Disclosure of information falls within this subsection if the

disclosure would be likely-

(i) to prejudice the national security or defence of Sri Lanka or

the international relations of Sri Lanka;

37

SC/SD/82/2024

(ii) to prejudice the entrusting of information to the Government

of Sri Lanka on a basis of confidence by the government of

another country, an agency of a government of another

country, or an international organisation;

(iii) to prejudice the maintenance of the law, including the

prevention, investigation and detection of offences, and the

right to a fair trial; or

(iv) to endanger the safety of any person.

This Clause applies to both citizens and non-citizens.

Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that while classified

information need not be disclosed as a matter of right, the principles of

natural justice require provisions for its disclosure to ensure a fair trial;

otherwise, it violates Article 13(3) of the Constitution.

This Clause deals with the use of confidential information in making

decisions or determining proceedings under this Bill in relation to

security and criminal conduct.

It is thus submitted by learned DSG that, given no State would allow the

entry of a person into its country who poses a threat to national security

or is deemed undesirable due to criminal conduct, this clause aims to

authorize border control authorities to rely on confidential information

when exercising their powers under this Act.

Learned DSG further asserts that the Clause provides for adequate

safeguards against the abuse of the process, including the requirement

for the Minister to determine whether the confidential information relates

to security or a person’s criminal conduct and specifying the purposes

for which such information could be used.

38

SC/SD/82/2024

Although the petitioner contended that Clause 160(3) violates a person’s

fundamental rights by not allowing them to know the confidential reasons

for decisions regarding their visa, entry, or departure etc., learned DSG

submits that non-citizens cannot complain as they are not entitled to a

right of entry and are subject to the prerogative of the State in making

such decisions.

Learned DSG asserts that in the event the Clause applies to citizens, any

citizen aggrieved by a decision would be able to recourse to legal remedies

to reverse, remedy or rectify such decision. He further submits that as

per the Right to Information Act No, 12 of 2016, information can

legitimately be denied when such confidential information relates to

either security or a person’s criminal conduct.

We are in agreement with the submission of learned DSG and are of the

view that there is no basis to conclude that this Clause as presently

constituted violates the Constitution.

Clause 142

Clause 142 reads as follows:

142. (1) The Minister shall for the purpose of the detention of persons

whose detention has been required or authorised under this Act,

establish detention centres, in suitable locations appropriate for

such purpose by Order published in the Gazette.

(2) The conditions to be maintained in a detention centre and the

manner of administration of such centres shall be as prescribed.

(3) Any person who violates a detention order and escapes the

detention centre commits an offence under this Act and shall on

apprehension be subject to the general law of the country.

39

SC/SD/82/2024

Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the term “detention” is

used in several places of the Bill with different meanings affecting the

rights of both citizens and non-citizens, and the use of the term “violates

a detention order” is unspecific, and violates Article 12(1).

We are in agreement with learned counsel that it is not clear in the

scheme of the Bill who is empowered to issue specific “detention orders”

and under what provision of law such orders can be issued. If any order

which requires a person to be detained is to be considered as a detention

order, we are of the view that a distinction should be drawn between

citizens and non-citizens to avoid unconstitutionality.

Learned DSG in his written submission has informed Court that Clause

142(3) will be replaced with the following at the Committee Stage of

Parliament.

Clause 142(3). Any person detained in terms of Section 145(2) who

escapes or attempts to escape a detention center commits an offence

under this Act and shall on apprehension be subject to the general

law of the country.

Persons detained under section 145(2) are non-citizens.

We are of the view that the inconsistency will cease to exist and this

Clause shall be passed by simple majority if Clause 142(3) is amended in

the above manner.

Clause 143

Clause 143 reads as follows:

143. (1) The Minister may for the purpose of the temporary holding

of persons whose detention has been required or authorised under

this Act, establish holding facilities, in suitable locations appropriate

40

SC/SD/82/2024

for such purpose by Order published in the Gazette inside a seaport

or an airport until the detainee is handed over to the relevant

agencies.

(2) The standards to be maintained at such holding facilities and the

manner of administration of such facilities may be as prescribed.

(3) Any person who escapes a holding facility commits an offence

under this Act and shall on apprehension be subject to the general

law of the country.

Learned counsel for the petitioner drawing attention of Court to the term

“holding facilities” used in Clause 143 and “holding centers” used in the

interpretation section 183 states that various terms used throughout the

Bill with no explanation or reasons as to their difference lacks clarity and

thus violate Article 12(1).

We are unable to agree with this submission. Holding facility means the

temporary holding of persons inside a seaport or an airport until the

detainee is handed over to the relevant agencies, and holding center

means a centre located anywhere other than at an airport or seaport for

persons whose detention has been required or authorized under this Act.

Clause 149

Clause 149 reads as follows:

149. (1) A customs officer may seize a travel document if –

(a) a travel document is in the possession or control of any

individual or not; and

(b) the travel document is inside a container, and irrespective

of whether the container is in the possession or control of any

41

SC/SD/82/2024

individual, the customs officer may search the container for

the purposes of determining whether such document is inside.

(2) A customs officer may seize a travel document and arrest a

person if without the permission of the Controller General under this

Act, the said person carries a travel document which has been

issued to another person.

(3) The customs officer shall produce the travel document seized and

the person arrested under subsections (1) and (2) to the Controller

General forthwith.

(4) This section does not authorise a customs officer to enter into any

premises that such officer would not otherwise be authorised to

enter.

(5) For the purposes of this section - (a) “container” includes baggage,

a mail receptacle, and any other thing that could be used for the

carriage of goods whether or not designed for that purpose; and (b)

“customs officer” means an officer within the meaning of the

Customs Ordinance (Chapter 235).

Learned counsel for the petitioner states that there is a difference

between the marginal note of this Clause and the substantive Clause.

While the marginal note uses “seizure of suspicious travel documents by

customs officers”, the word “suspicious” is absent in the substantive

Clause. This absence allows customs officers to seize any travel

document, regardless of suspicion, which is alleged to be violative of

Article 12(1).

We see merit in this argument.

42

SC/SD/82/2024

However, in the written submission, learned DSG has informed the Court

that the following amendment will be made at the Committee Stage of

Parliament to Clause 149(1):

Clause 149(1): A customs officer may seize a suspicious travel

document whether such travel document is in the possession or

control of any individual or not.

Provided that where such travel document is inside a container, and

irrespective of whether the container is in possession or control of

any individual, the customs officer may, for the purpose of seizing

the same, search the container to determine whether such document

is inside.

The amendment proposed by learned DSG will, in our view, resolve any

existing inconsistency in Clause 149(1). This will allow the Clause to be

passed by a simple majority of Parliament.

Clause 65

Clause 45, which is the precursor of Clause 65, reads as follows:

45. (1) The Minister may, by an Order published in the Gazette,

declare any place in Sri Lanka to be an approved port of entry or an

approved port of departure (hereinafter referred to as an “approved

port”) for the purposes of this Act.

(2) The Minister may specify in the Order made under subsection (1),

that an approved port or any part of an approved port is to be an

approved place for entry processing generally, or only for a fixed

period or for fixed periods of time in any day.

(3) The Minister may specify in the Order made under subsection (1),

that an approved port or any part of an approved port is to be an

43

SC/SD/82/2024

approved place for departure processing generally, or only for a fixed

period or for fixed periods of time in any day.

(4) The Minister may, in case of an emergency, by Order made under

subsection (1), specify that an approved port or any part of an

approved port is to be an approved place –

(a) for entry or departure processing or entry and departure

processing generally; or

(b) only for the separate and exclusive entry or departure

processing of a particular person or class of persons: Provided

that, the Minister shall, as soon as practicable and no later

than within forty days of making such Order, place such Order

before Parliament for approval and notification of such

approval by Parliament shall be published in the Gazette. Any

such Order which is not so approved shall be deemed to be

rescinded from the date of such disapproval, without prejudice

to the validity of anything previously done thereunder.

Notification of the date on which an Order is deemed to be

rescinded shall be published in the Gazette.

(5) Without prejudice to subsection (1), (2), (3) or (4) where a person,

or a carrier requests for a separate and exclusive entry or departure

processing of a person or a class of persons referred to in subsection

(2), (3), or (4) or an entry or departure processing outside normal

processing times, the Controller General may, require such person or

carrier who makes the request to pay to the Controller General an

administration fee at such intervals, and at such amounts or rates,

as may be prescribed by the Minister by regulations.

(6) The person or the carrier referred to in subsection (4) shall pay

the administrative fees for-

44

SC/SD/82/2024

(a) the purpose of separate and exclusive entry or departure

processing of a person or class of persons referred to in

subsection (4);

(b) the entry or departure processing outside normal

processing times; or

(c) in connection with immigration clearance performed by

immigration officers at the place or part thereof.

Clause 65 reads as follows:

65. (1) The Minister may, issue a written notice requiring the owner

or occupier of any approved port declared under section 45 as the

relevant owner or occupier–

(a) to designate an area as an immigration area or zone as

directed by the Minister;

(b) to provide and maintain in the immigration area or zone, at

the relevant owner’s or occupier’s cost, such facilities and

resources as the Minister considers necessary for the proper,

secure and efficient functioning of the immigration area or

zone including the provision of such facilities to the

immigration officers whose duties require their presence

within or at the perimeter of the immigration area or zone; and

(c) to permit the establishment of immigration offices and

facilities within the immigration area or zone.

(2) The Minister may issue the relevant owner or occupier with such

written directions as may be necessary –

45

SC/SD/82/2024

(a) to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Act and the

regulations made thereunder; or

(b) for the proper, secure and efficient functioning of the

immigration and emigration area or zone.

(3) The relevant owner or occupier shall comply with the written

notice or direction issued to him under subsections (1) and (2).

(4) Any relevant owner or occupier who fails to comply with

subsection (3), commits an offence and shall be liable on conviction

to a fine of not less than five hundred thousand rupees and not more

than one million rupees and, in the case of a continuing offence, to a

further fine of not exceeding hundred thousand rupees for each day

or part thereof, during which the offence continues after conviction.

(5) Where an offence under subsection (4) is committed by a body

corporate or a firm as the case may be, any person who is at the

time of the commission of the offence, a director, manager, partner

or other similar officer of the body corporate or the firm shall be

deemed to be guilty of that offence unless such person proves that

such offence was committed without his knowledge or connivance or

that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of that

offence as he ought to have exercised having regard to the nature of

his functions and all the circumstances of the case.

(6) In this section, “owner” in relation to any premises or place means

any person who has an estate or interest in the premises or place

and whose permission is necessary for the other person to enter

such premises or place.

Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that maintenance of

immigration areas or zones at the relevant owner’s or occupier’s cost,

46

SC/SD/82/2024

places an unreasonable burden on an owner or occupier and is violative

of Article 12(1). There is force in this submission. We find no provision in

the Bill for private ports. According to Clause 45, approved ports for the

purposes of the Act can be declared by the Minister. What is meant by

maintaining such approved ports at the relevant owner’s or occupier’s

cost is unclear and unreasonable, thus violative of Article 12(1).

Unless those concerns are properly addressed, we take the view that

Clause 65 as presently constituted needs to be passed by the special

majority of Parliament.

Clauses 171(1)(o) and 172(2)(h)

These Clauses read as follows:

171. (1) Identifying information collected under this Act may be used

for the purposes of –

(…)

(o) any other purpose the use of which is required or

authorised by or under any other written law; and

(…)

172. (2) The Minister may specify one or more of the following

purposes in the Order made under this section, as the purpose or

purposes for which access or disclosure is authorised in accordance

with any written law relating to data protection in Sri Lanka:-

(…)

(h) any other purpose for which the disclosure is required or

authorised by any written law;

47

SC/SD/82/2024

(…)

Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the use of identifying

information for “any other purpose” is overly broad and susceptible to

abuse, thus violating Article 12(1). We are not inclined to think so. Clause

170(1) specifies that identifying information is collected from non-citizens

and individuals suspected or alleged to have committed an offence under

the Act. The scope of legislation cannot feasibly encompass every possible

contingency.

Clauses impacting non-citizens

Learned counsel for the petitioner drawing the attention of Court to

Clauses 21(1)(a),(b),(f),(i),(j),(k), 50(1)(a),(b),(f),(g),(m), 99(1)(a)(i),(ii),(iii)

submits that the Controller General of Immigration and the Minister has

been given unabridged discretion without any guidelines regarding

disqualification for visa, endorsement of entry and deportation, which

makes those provisions “unconstitutionally overbroad”.

It is relevant to note that similar provisions are found in sections 11(2)

and 31 of the Immigrants and Emigrants Act.

Section 11(2) of the Act reads as follows:

11. (2) Except in such circumstances as may be prescribed, no

endorsement or visa shall be granted or issued to any person who

(a) is, in the opinion of the authority empowered to grant or

issue any such document of entry, unable to support himself

and his dependants; or

(b) is a person of unsound mind, or is mentally defective; or

48

SC/SD/82/2024

(c) is certified by a prescribed medical officer to be a person

whom, for medical reasons, it is undesirable to admit into Sri

Lanka; or

(d) has been sentenced outside Sri Lanka for an extraditable

offence within the meaning of any law which was or is in force

in Sri Lanka relating to fugitive persons and their extradition;

or

(e) is a prostitute or procurer or person living on the prostitution

of others; or

(f) fails to fulfill such other requirements as the Minister may

impose in the public interest by special or general instructions

issued in that behalf; or

(g) is the subject of a deportation order in force under this Act;

or

(h) is a stowaway; or

(i) is declared by order of the Minister under section 12 to be a

prohibited immigrant or a prohibited visitor.

Section 31 of the Act reads as follows:

31. (1) The Minister may in any of the following cases make an order

(in this Act referred to as a deportation order) requiring any person

to whom this Part applies to leave Sri Lanka and to remain thereafter

out of Sri Lanka;

(a) where that person is shown, by evidence which the Minister may

deem sufficient, to be

49

SC/SD/82/2024

(i) a person incapable of supporting himself and his

dependants;

(ii) a person of unsound mind or a mentally defective person;

(iii) a prostitute, procurer or person living on the prostitution of

others;

(iv) (a) a person whom, for medical reasons, it is undesirable

to allow to remain in Sri Lanka;

(b) where that person has been convicted in Sri Lanka

or in any other country and has not received a free

pardon in respect of an offence for which a sentence of

imprisonment has been passed and, by reason of the

circumstances connected therewith, is deemed by the

Minister to be an undesirable person to be allowed to

remain in Sri Lanka;

(c) where that person has been sentenced outside Sri

Lanka for an extraditable offence within the meaning of

any law which was or is in force in Sri Lanka relating

to fugitive persons and their extradition;

(d) where the Minister deems it to be conducive to the

public interest to make a deportation order against that

person.

(2) An order made under this section may be made subject to such

terms and conditions as the Minister may think, proper.

(3) A person with respect to whom a deportation order is made shall

leave Sri Lanka in accordance with the order, and shall thereafter

so long as the order is in force remain out of Sri Lanka.

50

SC/SD/82/2024

(4) A person with respect to whom a deportation order is made may

be detained in such manner as may be directed by the Minister, and

may be placed on a ship about to leave Sri Lanka.

(5) The master of a ship about to call at any port outside Sri Lanka

shall, if so required by the Minister or by an authorized officer,

receive a person against whom a deportation order has been made

and his dependants, if any, on board the ship, and afford that

person and his dependants a passage to that port and proper

accommodation and maintenance during the passage.

(6) Any powers conferred by an order made by the Minister under

this section may be exercised, in relation to any person,

notwithstanding that such person is serving a sentence of

imprisonment imposed by a court under this Act, or under any other

law.

We are mindful of the fact that these Clauses are applicable only to non-

citizens. As previously noted, in terms of Article 14(1)(i) of the

Constitution, only “Every citizen is entitled to the freedom to return to Sri

Lanka.” As learned DSG correctly submits, two important matters can be

drawn from this expression: one is, citizens have the right only to return

to Sri Lanka but they have no right to leave Sri Lanka. In the case of non-

citizens, they do not have either. In that light, it is neither unreasonable

nor unconstitutional to grant discretion, to be exercised fairly based on

the facts and circumstances of each case, to the Controller General of

Immigration and the Minister. This discretion allows them to make

decisions regarding the entry and stay of non-citizens in Sri Lanka, in the

interest of the State and its citizens.

Citizens and non-citizens are placed in different categories. Reasonable

classification is not obnoxious to Article 12(1). In respect of non-citizens,

51

SC/SD/82/2024

the movement into, out of and within a country is subject to special

scrutiny, worldwide. Non-citizens cannot demand these rights as their

entitlements. This can be regarded as a special feature of sovereignty.

Hence, we do not think those Clauses are unconstitutional by being

overbroad.

Clause 145

Clause 145 reads as follows:

145. (1) An immigration officer or a police officer may arrest a person

who is not a citizen of Sri Lanka, suspected of committing an offence

under subsection (1) of section 124 of this Act.

(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any other written

law, the Controller General or any police officer not below the rank

of an Assistant Superintendent of Police may authorise in writing the

detention of a person arrested under subsection (1), in any place

established under section 142 or 143, until that person establishes

his innocence or an Order is made by the Minister against that

person under section 98 or 99:

Provided however, if such person remains in detention at the expiry

of a period of two weeks from the date from which he was first

detained, such person shall be produced forthwith before a

Magistrate to make any appropriate order.

This is not a completely new section to be introduced for the first time.

Section 48 of the Immigrants and Emigrants Act reads as follows:

Where any person is suspected of the commission of an offence

under paragraph (a) of subsection (1) of section 45, it shall be lawful,

notwithstanding anything in any other written law, for the Controller

or any police officer of a rank not below that of an Assistant

52

SC/SD/82/2024

Superintendent, to authorize in writing the detention of that person

in any place of detention approved by the Minister for the purpose of

this section, until that person has established his innocence or an

order is made against that person by the Minister in terms of section

28(2);

Provided that if such person remains in custody at the expiry of a

period of two weeks from the date on which he was first taken into

custody, he shall be produced forthwith before a Magistrate who

shall make such order as he deems appropriate.

According to Clause 145(1), an immigration officer or a police officer may

arrest a person who is not a citizen of Sri Lanka, suspected of committing

an offence under subsection (1) of section 124 of this Act. Clause 124(1)

deals with unlawful entry or remaining in Sri Lanka by non-citizens. It

reads as follows:

124. (1) (a) Any person other than a citizen of Sri Lanka who enters

and remains in Sri Lanka in contravention of any provision of this

Act or any regulation made thereunder,

commits an offence and shall on conviction after summary trial by a

Magistrate be liable to a fine not exceeding fifty thousand rupees or

to imprisonment of either description not exceeding six months or to

both such fine and imprisonment.

(b) Any person other than a citizen of Sri Lanka who enters Sri

Lanka in accordance with the provisions of this Act or any regulation

made thereunder, but remains in Sri Lanka after the expiry of the

period for which he is authorised to remain under the provisions of

this Act, commits an offence and be liable to a fine not exceeding fifty

thousand rupees or to an imprisonment of either description not

exceeding three months or to both such fine and imprisonment.

53

SC/SD/82/2024

What is contemplated in Clause 124(1)—i.e., how a non-citizen entered

Sri Lanka and how he or she remains in the country—is likely to be within

the exclusive knowledge of such non-citizen. Therefore, the burden is on

the non-citizen to prove it.

Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that Clause 145 is

unconstitutional on several grounds.

Firstly, learned counsel states as follows:

Clause 145(1) empowers an immigration officer and a police officer

to arrest for an offence under Clause 124(1), and by Clause 145(2)

those arrested under Clause 145(1) may also be detained. However,

Clause 124(1) is an offence for which authorised members of the

Forces and Coast Guard officers, are also empowered to arrest [vide

Clause 7(5) & 8(5) read with Clause 7(2) and 8(2)]. Yet, Clause

145(2), which provides an opportunity to prove one’s innocence, is

denied to a category of non-citizens simply on the basis that they

were not arrested by an immigration officer or police officer. Thus,

Clause 145(2) is inconsistent with Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

According to this submission, learned counsel has no objection to the

burden of proof being shifted to non-citizens arrested by an immigration

officer or police officer. However, his concern lies in the denial of this

opportunity to prove innocence when non-citizens are arrested by

authorized members of the Tri-Forces and Coast Guard Officers. We

think that this argument is artificial but acceptable on principle.

When non-citizens are arrested by authorized members of the Tri-Forces

and Coast Guard Officers for an offence under Clause 124(1), pursuant

to Clauses 7(5) and 8(5) in conjunction with 7(2) and 8(2), they must

promptly hand them over to a police officer (as we now propose, to the

nearest police station). It is naive to assume that upon such handover by

54

SC/SD/82/2024

authorized members of the Tri-Forces and Coast Guard Officers, the

opportunity to explain innocence would be denied to non-citizens. If such

an opportunity is denied, then clearly the burden of proof would shift to

the police to prove guilt.

To dispel any doubt regarding inconsistency with Article 12(1), we

propose that Clause 145(2) explicitly include the requirement of proof of

innocence when arrests are made by authorized members of the Tri-

Forces and Coast Guard Officers. By doing so, any apparent

inconsistency will cease to exist.

The next argument of learned counsel for the petitioner on Clause 145

too is artificial. It reads as follows:

“in any place established under section 142 or 143”: Clause 145(2)

permits for detention up to two (2) weeks at a place under Clause

142 or 143. However a ‘holding facility’ under Clause 143 is for the

‘temporary holding of persons’ within a ‘seaport or airport’ until the

detainee is handed over to a relevant agency. We respectfully submit

that under these circumstances, permitting the detention of a person

under Clause 145(2) who has to prove his innocence and could be

detained up to two (2) weeks, at a ‘holding facility’ (inside an airport

or seaport) is unreasonable, overbroad and is thus inconsistent with

Articles 12(1) and 13(1) of the Constitution.

According to this argument, learned counsel has no objection to sending

non-citizens straight to a detention centre, but objects to detaining them

at a holding facility inside the airport or seaport. However, we find this

argument without merit. These alternative arrangements are intended for

the benefit of the arrestee. If the arrestee can establish that his or her

entry to or stay in Sri Lanka is lawful, he or she is not required to be sent

to a detention centre, which is typically meant for longer-term detention.

55

SC/SD/82/2024

The final argument of learned counsel on Clause 145 is that requirement

for a non-citizen to establish his or her innocence violates Article 13(5),

which ensures fair trial. We are unable to agree with this contention

because, as previously stated, how a non-citizen enters and remains in

Sri Lanka is within the special knowledge of the non-citizen, not the

State. Non-citizens have no right of free entry or remainder in Sri Lanka.

The concept of shifting the burden of proof of a fact within the exclusive

knowledge of the suspect or the accused is not a novel concept to the Sri

Lankan Law and has a rational basis. It is to be noted that, the proviso

to Article 13(5) of the Constitution provides that the burden of proving

particular facts may, by law, be placed on an accused person. Section

106 of the Evidence Ordinance deals with facts which are especially

within the knowledge of the accused. It states “When any fact is especially

within the knowledge of any person, the burden of proving that fact is upon

him.” It is impracticable and often impossible to prove the negative.

Learned DSG submits that even internationally, the burden of proof in

relation to similar claims have been vested with the person seeking entry

or remainder in such country. He quotes 8 USC § 1361 of the United

States Code on a similar matter, which reads as follows:

Whenever any person makes application for a visa or any other

document required for entry, or makes application for admission, or

otherwise attempts to enter the United States, the burden of proof

shall be upon such person to establish that he is eligible to receive

such visa or such document, or is not inadmissible under any

provision of this chapter, and, if an alien, that he is entitled to the

nonimmigrant, immigrant, special immigrant, immediate relative, or

refugee status claimed, as the case may be. If such person fails to

establish to the satisfaction of the consular officer that he is eligible

to receive a visa or other document required for entry, no visa or other

56

SC/SD/82/2024

document required for entry shall be issued to such person, nor shall

such person be admitted to the United States unless he establishes

to the satisfaction of the Attorney General that he is not inadmissible

under any provision of this chapter. In any removal proceeding

under part IV of this subchapter against any person, the burden of

proof shall be upon such person to show the time, place, and manner

of his entry into the United States, but in presenting such proof he

shall be entitled to the production of his visa or other entry document,

if any, and of any other documents and records, not considered by

the Attorney General to be confidential, pertaining to such entry in

the custody of the Service. If such burden of proof is not sustained,

such person shall be presumed to be in the United States in violation

of law.

Even in the United Kingdom, the burden of proving any status related to

citizenship, the right of entry or the right of abode rests on the applicant

asserting such a claim. This is statutorily sustained by section 3(8) and

section 3(9) of the Immigration Act, 1971, which read as follows:

3. (8) When any question arises under this Act whether or not a

person is a British citizen, or is entitled to any exemption under this

Act, it shall lie on the person asserting it to prove that he is.

(9) A person seeking to enter the United Kingdom and claiming to

have the right of abode there shall prove it by means of-

(a) a United Kingdom passport describing him as a British

citizen,

(b) a United Kingdom passport describing him as a British

subject with the right of abode in the United Kingdom, or

(e) a certificate of entitlement.

57

SC/SD/82/2024

This position is reinforced through section 24 of the above Act, which sets

out the law relating to illegal entry and similar offences. Section 24(4) and

24(5) reads as follows:

24. (4) In proceedings for an offence under subsection (B1) above of

entering the United Kingdom without leave,-

(a) any stamp purporting to have been imprinted on a passport

or other travel document by an immigration officer on a

particular date for the purpose of giving leave shall be

presumed to have been duly so imprinted, unless the contrary

is proved;

(b) proof that a person had leave to enter the United Kingdom

shall lie on the defence.

(5) In proceedings for an offence under subsection (D1) above of

arriving in the United Kingdom without a valid entry clearance-

(a) any document attached to a passport or other travel

document purporting to have been issued by the Secretary of

State for the purposes of providing evidence of entry clearance

for a particular period is to be presumed to have been duly so

issued unless the contrary is proved;

(b) proof that a person had a valid entry clearance is to lie on

the defence.

Learned DSG has informed the Court in his written submission that the

existing Clause will be amended at the Committee Stage of Parliament in

the following manner:

Clause 145(1) - An immigration officer or a police officer may arrest

a person who is not a citizen of Sri Lanka, suspected of committing

58

SC/SD/82/2024

an offence under subsection (1) of section 124 of this Act and the

burden of proving that his entry into Sri Lanka or his remaining

within Sri Lanka is in accordance with the provisions of this Act or

any regulation made thereunder shall lie upon such person.

Clause 145(2) - Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any

other written law, the Controller General or any police officer not

below the rank of an Assistant Superintendent of Police may

authorize in writing the detention of a person arrested under

subjection (1), in any place established under section 142 or 143,

until that person proves that his entry into Sri Lanka or his remaining

within Sri Lanka is in accordance with the provisions of this Act or

any regulation made thereunder, or an Order is made by the Minister

against that person under section 98 or 99:

Provided however, if such person remains in detention at the expiry

of a period of two weeks from the date from which he was first

detained, such person shall be produced forthwith before a

Magistrate to make any appropriate order.

It is our view that any existing inconsistency with Article 12(1) of the

Constitution of this Clause shall cease to exist if Clauses 145(1) and

145(2) are amended to read as follows:

145. (1) An immigration officer or a police officer may arrest a person

who is not a citizen of Sri Lanka, suspected of committing an offence

under subsection (1) of section 124 of this Act. Upon being

questioned by such officer, the burden of proving that his entry into

Sri Lanka or his remaining within Sri Lanka is in accordance with

the provisions of this Act or any regulation made thereunder shall lie

upon such person.

59

SC/SD/82/2024

(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any other written

law, the Controller General or any police officer not below the rank

of an Assistant Superintendent of Police may, upon application being

made to him by the immigration officer or police officer who caused

the arrest of such person, if he is satisfied that such person has

entered Sri Lanka illegally or remains in Sri Lanka contrary to the

provisions of this Act, authorize in writing the detention of such

person arrested under subjection (1), in any place established under

section 142 or 143, until that person proves that his entry into Sri

Lanka or his remaining within Sri Lanka is in accordance with the

provisions of this Act or any regulation made thereunder, or an Order

is made by the Minister against that person under section 98 or 99:

Provided however, it shall be the duty of such immigration officer or

police officer who caused the arrest to provide facilities as may be

reasonably necessary to the arrested person to have access to any

documentation to satisfy such immigration officer or police officer

that his entry into Sri Lanka and remaining within Sri Lanka is

lawful.

Provided further, if such person remains in detention at the expiry of

a period of two weeks from the date first detained, such person shall

be produced forthwith before a Magistrate, and such Magistrate

shall be entitled to make any order as provided by law.

Clause 151(1)(a) and 151(2)

Clause 151(1)(a) and 151(2) read as follows:

151. (1) (a) Any police officer or any authorised member of the Forces

not below the rank of corporal or leading seaman or an authorised

officer of the Department of Coast Guard, or an immigration officer,

may enter and search any vessel not being an aircraft in the

60

SC/SD/82/2024

territorial waters of Sri Lanka or in the contiguous zone and arrest

and take into custody any person on board such vessel who is

suspected of the commission of any offence under section 46, 47, 51,

124, 126, 136, 137, 138 or 139 of this Act.

(…)

(2) Any immigration officer or police officer or any authorised member

of the Forces not below the rank of a corporal or leading seaman or

an authorised member of the Department of Coast Guard may

forthwith seize and detain any vehicle, vessel or other means of

transport, together with any equipment and accessories thereof,

where any such officer has reasons to believe that any vehicle,

vessel or other means of transport has been used in, or in connection

with, the commission of any offence referred to in section 46, 47, 51,

124, 126, 136, 137, 138 or 139 of this Act.

Learned counsel for the petitioner argues that empowering certain

authorized members of the Forces or Coast Guards under Clauses

151(1)(a) and 151(2) to enter, search, arrest, and seize for offences under

Clause 47, despite Clause 47 not being listed under Clauses 7(2) and

8(2), is unreasonable. This is contrary to the scheme of the Bill, which

designates these officers as Peace Officers only for offences specified in

Clauses 7(2) and 8(2), thus potentially inconsistent with Article 12(1) of

the Constitution. We agree with this submission. This inconsistency

would be resolved if Clause 47 is included within the list of offences

specified under Clauses 7(2) and 8(2).

Summary

(1) Clauses 7 and 8 are inconsistent with Article 12(1) of the

Constitution due to vagueness in certain aspects of the Clauses

and shall only be passed by the special majority of Parliament.

61

SC/SD/82/2024

However, the said inconsistencies shall cease to exist if Clauses

7(2), 7(5), 8(2) and 8(5) are amended to read as follows:

7. (2) Within the area specified under subsection (4), an authorized

member of the Forces shall, in respect of-

(a) any offence under section 46;

(b) any offence under section 47;

(c) any offence under section 51;

(d) any offence under section 124;

(e) any offence under section 126;

(f) any offence under section 136;

(g) any offence under section 137;

(h) any offence under section 138,

(i) any offence under section 139;

(j) any offence under section 142; and

(k) any offence under section 143,

be deemed to be a Peace Officer within the meaning of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act for the limited purpose of exercising any

powers and duties conferred upon a Peace Officer by that Act.

(…)

(5) An authorised member of the Forces making an arrest without a

warrant shall forthwith as may be reasonably possible in the given

circumstances and in any case, not later than twenty-four hours

from the time of arrest-

(a) notify the arrest to the Controller General; and

62

SC/SD/82/2024

(b) hand over the person so arrested, to the nearest police

station to be dealt with in terms of the law.

8. (2) Within the area specified under subsection (4), an authorised

Coast Guard Officer of the Department of Coast Guard shall, in

respect of-

(a) any offence under section 46;

(b) any offence under section 47;

(c) any offence under section 51;

(d) any offence under section 124;

(e) any offence under section 126;

(f) any offence under section 136;

(g) any offence under section 137;

(h) any offence under section 138,

(i) any offence under section 139;

(j) any offence under section 142; and

(k) any offence under section 143,

be deemed to be a Peace Officer within the meaning of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act for the limited purpose of exercising any

powers and duties conferred upon a Peace Officer by that Act.

(…)

(5) An authorised Coast Guard Officer of the Department of Coast

Guard making an arrest without a warrant shall forthwith as may

be reasonably possible in the given circumstances and in any case,

not later than twenty-four hours from the time of arrest –

63

SC/SD/82/2024

(a) notify the arrest to the Controller General; and

(b) hand over the person so arrested, to the nearest police

station to be dealt with in terms of the law.

(2) Clause 144 is violative of Article 12(1) and Article 13(2) of the

Constitution and shall only be passed by the special majority of

Parliament. The aforementioned inconsistencies shall, however,

cease if the marginal note of Clause 144 is amended to read as

“Procedure and powers in relation to the taking into custody of a

person without a warrant”, and Clause 144 is further amended to

read as follows:

144. (1) Any authorised member of the Forces or any authorised

Coast Guard Officer of the Department of Coast Guard may take into

custody without a warrant a person who is suspected of committing

any offence under section 47, 136, 137, 138, 139, 142 or 143 and

shall forthwith notify the arrest to the Controller General and hand

over such person to the nearest police station, and notify such

handing over also to the Controller General.

(2) The officer in charge of the police station to whom such suspect

is handed over shall within twenty-four hours of receiving his

custody produce such person before the nearest Magistrate having

jurisdiction.

(3) The Magistrate before whom such suspect is produced may,

notwithstanding the provision of Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.

15 of 1979, upon a certificate being filed by a police officer not below

the rank of a Superintendent of Police to the effect that it is necessary

to detain such person in custody for the purpose of carrying out

investigations, and upon being satisfied that there exists sufficient

material to justify the allegation against the suspect, order the

64

SC/SD/82/2024

detention of such person for a further period which shall not exceed

forty-eight hours.

(3) Clause 58 is inconsistent with Article 12(1) of the Constitution and

therefore shall only be passed by the special majority of Parliament.

However, the existing inconsistency shall cease to exist if Clause

58 is amended to read as follows:

58. (1) A person to whom this Part applies shall, if required by an

immigration officer, at the time of his entry into or departure from Sri

Lanka, make a declaration whether he is carrying any written

document, or any electronic device.

(2) An immigration officer may, where he has reasonable suspicion

that any person has committed an offence under this Act or any other

Act:

(1) search any such person and any baggage belonging to him

or under his control for any written document or electronic

device;

(2) require such person to produce such document or electronic

device for the examination by that officer;

(3) examine any written document or electronic device

produced or detected under this section; or

(4) detain such person until the immigration officer finalizes

any search or examination of any written document or

electronic device.

(4) Clause 78 is inconsistent with Article 12(1) and Article 14(1)(i) of

the Constitution and shall only be passed by the special majority

of Parliament. The inconsistencies shall cease to exist if the phrase

65

SC/SD/82/2024

“any document” in Clause 78 is amended to be in line with Clauses

42 and 43 with respect to citizens.

(5) Clause 79 is inconsistent with Article 12(1) and Article 14(1)(i) of

the Constitution, due to its contradiction with Clauses 42 and 43,

and shall only be passed by the special majority of Parliament.

However, if Clause 79 is amended in line with Clause 42 and 43,

such inconsistencies shall cease to exist.

(6) Clause 81 is inconsistent with Article 13(3) of the Constitution and

therefore shall only be passed by the special majority of Parliament.

However, if an amendment is made to the end of Clause 81 to

include the phrase “subject to the provisions of the Constitution

and of any law”, the said inconsistency shall cease to exist.

(7) Clause 142(3) is inconsistent with Article 12(1) of the Constitution

and therefore, requires to be passed by the special majority of

Parliament. However, if Clause 142(3) is amended to read as

follows, such inconsistency shall cease to exist.

Clause 142(3). Any person detained in terms of Section 145(2) who

escapes or attempts to escape a detention center commits an offence

under this Act and shall on apprehension be subject to the general

law of the country.

(8) Clause 149 is inconsistent with Article 12(1) of the Constitution

and thus shall only be passed by the special majority of Parliament.

The said inconsistency shall cease to exist if Clause 149(1) is

amended to read as follows:

Clause 149(1): A customs officer may seize a suspicious travel

document whether or not such travel document is in the possession

or control of any individual.

66

SC/SD/82/2024

Provided that where such travel document is inside a container, and

irrespective of whether the container is in possession or control of

any individual, the customs officer may, for the purpose of seizing

the same, search the container to determine whether such document

is inside.

(9) Clause 65 is inconsistent with Article 12(1) of the Constitution

since what is meant by maintaining approved ports at the relevant

owner’s or occupier’s cost is unclear and unreasonable. Unless

those concerns are properly addressed, Clause 65 as presently

constituted needs to be passed by the special majority of

Parliament.

(10) Any existing inconsistency with Article 12(1) of the Constitution of

Clause 145 shall cease to exist if Clauses 145(1) and 145(2) are

amended to read as follows:

145. (1) An immigration officer or a police officer may arrest a person

who is not a citizen of Sri Lanka, suspected of committing an offence

under subsection (1) of section 124 of this Act. Upon being

questioned by such officer, the burden of proving that his entry into

Sri Lanka or his remaining within Sri Lanka is in accordance with

the provisions of this Act or any regulation made thereunder shall lie

upon such person.

(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any other written

law, the Controller General or any police officer not below the rank

of an Assistant Superintendent of Police may, upon application being

made to him by the immigration officer or police officer who caused

the arrest of such person, if he is satisfied that such person has

entered Sri Lanka illegally or remains in Sri Lanka contrary to the

provisions of this Act, authorize in writing the detention of such

67

SC/SD/82/2024

person arrested under subjection (1), in any place established under

section 142 or 143, until that person proves that his entry into Sri

Lanka or his remaining within Sri Lanka is in accordance with the

provisions of this Act or any regulation made thereunder, or an Order

is made by the Minister against that person under section 98 or 99:

Provided however, it shall be the duty of such immigration officer or

police officer who caused the arrest to provide facilities as may be

reasonably necessary to the arrested person to have access to any

documentation to satisfy such immigration officer or police officer

that his entry into Sri Lanka and remaining within Sri Lanka is

lawful.

Provided further, if such person remains in detention at the expiry of

a period of two weeks from the date first detained, such person shall

be produced forthwith before a Magistrate, and such Magistrate

shall be entitled to make any order as provided by law.

(11) Clause 151(1)(a) and Clause 151(2) are inconsistent with Article

12(1) of the Constitution and shall only be passed by the special

majority of Parliament. The said inconsistency shall cease,

however, if Clause 47 is included in the listed offences under

Clause 7(2) and Clause 8(2).

We wish to place on record our deep appreciation for the invaluable

assistance provided by Mr. Manohara Jayasinghe, learned Deputy

Solicitor General, representing the Hon. Attorney General, and Mr.

Pulasthi Hewamanna, learned counsel for the petitioner, in the

deliberations on this Bill.

Yasantha Kodagoda, P.C., J.

Judge of the Supreme Court

68

SC/SD/82/2024

Achala Wengappuli, J.

Judge of the Supreme Court

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

Judge of the Supreme Court