==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application under and in terms of Article 126 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. Shreemath Muthukumara Algawatte, No.154/1, Anagiyawatte, Gabadagoda, Payagala

Petitioner S.C.(F.R.) Application No. 325/2013. Vs. 1. Chamika Kulasiri, Inspector of Police, Officer-in-Charge, Payagala Police Station. 2. Wijepala, Sub-Inspector of Police Payagala Police Station. 3. Gunasiri, Police Sergeant 25317, Payagala Police Station. 4. Subasinghe, Police Constable 13429, Payagala Police Station . 5. Chamara, Police Constable 81658, Payagala Police Station.

S.C.(FR) Application No. 325/2013

2

6. Dhammika, Sub-Inspector of Police Payagala Police Station. 7. N.K. Illangakoon, Inspector General of Police, Police Headquarters, Colombo 01. 8. Hon. Attorney General, Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12. Respondents *********

BEFORE : PRIYANTHA JAYAWARDENA, PC J. YASANTHA KODAGODA, PC., J. ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J. COUNSEL : Hirannya Damunupola for the Petitioner.

Ms. I Punchihewa SC for the 1st, 3rd, 4th, 6th and

8th Respondents.

ARGUED ON : 16th September, 2022 DECIDED ON : 22nd February, 2024 ********* ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

The Petitioner invoked the jurisdiction conferred on this Court under

Article 17 and 126 of the Constitution seeking inter alia a declaration that the

1st to 6th Respondents, have acted in infringement of his fundamental rights

S.C.(FR) Application No. 325/2013

3

guaranteed under Articles 12(1), 13(1) and 13(2). When this matter was

supported on 29.03.2016 by the learned Counsel for the Petitioner, this Court

granted leave to proceed against the 1st, 3rd, 4th and 6th Respondents, as prayed

for by the Petitioner.

The allegation of the Petitioner on infringement of his fundamental

rights stems from the arrest made by the 3rd Respondent on 13.08.2013 and his

detention at Payagala Police Station. The Petitioner claims that his arrest and

detention were conducted in a manner contrary to the procedure laid down in

Section 32(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 (as

amended). He alleged that his arrest was illegal as it was made even without a

complaint being entertained against him. Thus, the Petitioner alleged that, in

the absence of any credible information on which the police officers could

have entertained a reasonable suspicion to form the opinion that his arrest

was necessary or expedient, the arrest made by the 3rd Respondent becomes

illegal which then rendered his detention too to an illegal detention.

The Petitioner specifically alleged that his arrest was made out of malice

and over the “animosity” harboured against him particularly by the 1st

Respondent, the Officer in Charge of the Payagala Police Station. The

Petitioner attributed the cause for harbouring such an ‘animosity’ to his act of

making a complaint against the 1st Respondent to the Senior Deputy Inspector

General of Police. The Petitioner made that complaint against the 1st

Respondent over the latter’s failure to apprehend a suspect, who had

physically assaulted his sister. In addition, the Petitioner further alleged that

the close relationship that existed between the 1st Respondent and a relative of

one of his neighbours, who had initiated legal proceedings against his father,

claiming him to be a lunatic, also contributed for that animosity. He relied on

S.C.(FR) Application No. 325/2013

4

several factual assertions and documents marked P1 to P4 in support of said

allegations.

The 1st, 3rd, 4th, 6th and 8th Respondents have resisted the application of

the Petitioner and sought its dismissal. Only the 1st Respondent tendered a

Statement of Objections setting out the circumstances that led to the arrest and

detention of the Petitioner. In the said Statement of Objections, the 1st

Respondent admitted that the Petitioner was in fact been arrested and

detained at his station. He further averred that the arrest of the Petitioner was

made based on a complaint received by the Police Station, implicating him to

an incident of physical assault and acted on the statement of Gabadage Udaya

Wasudewa. The 1st Respondent further denied the allegation of malice or of

any animosity. The 1st Respondent relied on relevant information book

extracts, medical reports, and copies of Court proceedings (marked as R1 to

R10) in support of his position, while moving for the dismissal of the

application. In his counter affidavit, the Petitioner made a general denial of

the averments made by the 1st Respondent.

At the hearing of this application, the learned Counsel for the Petitioner

made an allegation of fabrication of information book notes, a position taken

up by the Petitioner in his counter affidavit. He submitted to Court that the

reference to the Petitioner in the entry regarding the complaint made to

Payagala Police on 13.08.2013, by the wife of Udaya Wasudeva, is a part that

had deliberately been inserted into the said entry, after the instant application

was filed. Moreover, the learned Counsel for the Petitioner submitted that

Udaya Wasudeva, during an inquiry held at the Police Station at a subsequent

point of time, had admitted to the Petitioner that he never made any

complaint. Placing reliance on the strength of that assertion, learned Counsel

S.C.(FR) Application No. 325/2013

5

for the Petitioner contended that there was no credible information available

to the Respondents at the time of his arrest, on which they could have

entertained a reasonable suspicion to form an opinion that his arrest was

necessary or expedient.

Learned Counsel relied on the dicta of this Court in the judgments of

Dissanayaka v Superintendent, Mahara Prison and Others (1991) 2 Sri L.R.

247, Gamlath v Neville Silva and Others (1991) 2 Sri L.R. 267 and Channa

Peiris v Attorney General (1994) 1 Sri L.R. 1, to impress upon this Court that

the fundamental rights of the Petitioner were infringed by the 1st, 3rd, 4th and

6th Respondents.

In her reply submissions, learned State Counsel who represented the 1st,

3rd, 4th, 6th and 8th Respondents, submitted to Court that none of the

Respondents had any personal animosity towards the Petitioner and his arrest

was made only after having followed the procedure laid down by law. She

relied on the judgment of Landage Ishara Anjali (Minor), Wijesinghe

Chulangani v Waruni Bogahawatta, Matara Police Station and Others

(SC(FR) Application No. 677/2012 – decided on 12.06.2019) where this Court

made certain pronouncements in relation to the proper exercise of powers

conferred on peace officer in making an arrest without a warrant, in terms of

Section 32(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979

(hereinafter referred to as the Code of Criminal Procedure Act). She further

submitted that the circumstances as revealed in the pleadings before Court

would clearly satisfy the said requirements were fulfilled by the Respondents.

The complaint presented to this Court by the Petitioner over the

allegation of infringement of his fundamental rights is twofold. First, the

Petitioner alleged that his arrest and detention were violative of the

fundamental rights guaranteed to him under Articles 13(1) and 13(2).

S.C.(FR) Application No. 325/2013

6

Secondly, he alleged that he was denied of his right to equal protection of law,

when he was arrested and detained due to a personal animosity harboured

against him by the 1st Respondent, which occasioned a violation of his

fundamental rights guaranteed under Article 12(1).

Of the two contentions referred to above, I shall consider the first at the

very outset of this judgment.

It is evident from the several averments contained in the petition of the

Petitioner that his allegation of infringement of fundamental rights was

primarily directed at the 1st Respondent, who functioned as the Officer-in-

Charge of the Payagala Police Station, during the relevant period of time. The

3rd Respondent, PS 25317 Gunasiri, is the officer who investigated into a

complaint made by Ayoma Janaki alleging of an attack on her husband

Gabadage Udaya Wasudeva using a stone, and arrested the Petitioner. However,

perusal of the information book extracts marked as R1, R2, R3, R4 and R7 by

the 1st Respondent, did not reveal any involvement of the 4th and 6th

Respondents in the arrest of the Petitioner or for his detention. The Petitioner,

in his petition, did not attribute any specific act or omission, by which the 4th

and 6th Respondents had contributed to any of the alleged infringements of

his fundamental rights.

Article 13(1) guarantees that no person shall be arrested except

according to law, while the said Article further offers a guarantee that a

person so arrested shall be informed of the reason for his arrest. The term

“according to law”, as appears in Article 13(1), is referable to the statutory

provision which govern the arrests and detention of persons. Section 5 of the

Code of Criminal Procedure Act specifies that all offences under the Penal

Code or any other law “ … shall be investigated, inquired into, tried and otherwise

dealt with according to the provisions of this Code.” This provision ensures that

S.C.(FR) Application No. 325/2013

7

the police officers, being officers of the executive and who are empowered to

make arrests, should carry out their official functions strictly according to the

procedure laid down by the said law.

In the context of powers of investigation that are invested on the

agencies of the executive, Prof Peiris, in his work titled Criminal Procedure in

Sri Lanka Under the Administration of Justice Law (1st Ed, p. 35) stated that “ [T]he

primary objectives of the rules applicable to criminal procedure in this area involve a

compromise between efficiency and restraint. The public interest demands the

discovery and punishment of crime with greater energy and expedition, but not at the

expense of rights which, in fairness to the accused, are guaranteed from the outset. It

is the aim of the law of procedure to ensure that the liberty of the individual

is not eroded by actions taken during the course of the preliminary

investigation” (emphasis added).

Thus, the arrest and detention of a person (except in the instances

where the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act provisions are

applicable) must necessarily be carried out according to the procedure laid

down in the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.

Section 32 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act specifically provides

for as to how and when a peace officer may arrest a person without a warrant.

Admittedly the Petitioner was arrested without a warrant and therefore his

arrest should be in compliance with the procedure as laid down in that

Section. The applicable part of the statutory provisions in Section 32(1)(b) in

relation to arrests, states that any peace officer may, without an order from a

Magistrate and without a warrant, arrest any person ;

“who has been concerned in any cognizable offence or against whom a

reasonable complaint has been made or credible information has been

S.C.(FR) Application No. 325/2013

8

received or a reasonable suspicion exists of his having been concerned;

…”

The 1st Respondent stated that the Petitioner was arrested after

receiving a complaint which revealed his complicity to an offence. Thus, the

relevant part of Section 32(1)(b) in relation to the instant application is

denoted by the phrase “against whom a reasonable complaint has been made”. The

scope of this particular segment in the said Section was already considered by

this Court in Ven. Dharmaratana Thero and Another v Sanjeewa Mahanama

and Others (2013) 1 Sri L.R. 81. In the said judgment, Dep J (as he then was)

made the following pronouncement (at p. 89);

“[I]n order to arrest a person under this subsection there should be a

reasonable complaint, credible information or a reasonable suspicion.

Mere fact of receiving a complaint or information does not permit a

peace officer to arrest a person. Police Officer upon receipt of a

complaint or information is required to commence investigations and

ascertain whether the complaint is a reasonable complaint, the

information is credible, or the suspicion is reasonable before proceeding

to arrest a person.”

In view of the statutory provisions contained in Section 32(1)(b), the

questions that must be decided by this Court in relation to the instant

application are; whether the 3rd Respondent had a “reasonable compliant”

against the Petitioner before he made the arrest and whether the 3rd

Respondent made an attempt to ascertain the reasonableness of the complaint

he received, before proceeding to arrest him on that complaint. The

assessment of the reasonableness of a complaint too was considered by this

Court in the judgment of Seneviratne v Rajakaruna and Others (2003) 1 Sri

L.R. 410. The Court, having observed (at p. 419) that the “… wording in section

S.C.(FR) Application No. 325/2013

9

32 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act refers to a 'reasonable complaint' or

'credible information' or a 'reasonable suspicion'. Therefore, the legislature has been

emphatic that a mere suspicion alone would not be sufficient to arrest a person in

terms of section 32 of the Code”, thereafter proceeded to quote the following

segment from Shoni on Indian Criminal Procedure Code (18th edition, Volume 1,

pg.240);

"[A] general definition of what constitutes reasonableness in a complaint

or suspicion and credibility of information cannot be given. But both

must depend upon the existence of tangible legal evidence within the

cognizance of the police officer and he must judge whether the evidence

is sufficient to establish the reasonableness and credibility of the charge,

information or suspicion. What is a reasonable complaint or suspicion

must depend on the circumstances of each particular case, but it must be

at least founded on some definite fact tending to throw suspicion on the

person arrested and not on mere surmise or information.”

This had been the view consistently taken by the superior Courts for a

long time, in dealing with the legality of arrests of individuals and of their

detention. Citing an English judgment, of Mc Ardle v Egan (1933) 30 Cox C. C.

67, Gratiaen J, stated in Muttusami et al v Kannangara, Inspector of Police

(1951) 52 NLR 324 (at p. 327) “A suspicion is proved to be reasonable if the facts

disclose that it was founded on matters within the police officer's own knowledge or

on statements by other persons in a way which justify him in giving them credit.” It

is important to note that this pronouncement was made by Gratiaen J, in

relation to the scope of the Section 32(1) of the Criminal Procedure Code, long

before this Country even recognised the freedom of a person from arbitrary

arrest as a justiciable fundamental right.

S.C.(FR) Application No. 325/2013

10

The judicial precedents thus far quoted in this judgment, indicate the

position that if an arrest of a person is to be made upon a complaint of

committing a cognizable offence, the arresting officer is expected to satisfy

himself as to the reasonableness of that complaint by assessing whether that

complaint is a credible one or, placed at its lowest in the scale, it “… must be at

least founded on some definite fact tending to throw suspicion on the person arrested

and, not on mere surmise or information” per Seneviratne v Rajakaruna and

Others (supra). Mark Fernando J, in Dhanapala Fernando v Attanayaka,

officer in charge, Kandana police station and others (2003) 1 Sri L.R. 196,

insisted that (at p. 203) “[U]nder Section 32(1 )(b) a mere suspicion is not enough. A

reasonable suspicion or credible information is required”.

The reason for the insistence of credible information could be

understood from the pronouncement made in Piyasiri and Others v Nimal

Fernando, ASP and Others (1988) 1 Sri L.R. 173 (at p.184) that “[N]o Police-

Officer has the right to arrest a person on vague general suspicion, not knowing the

precise crime suspected but hoping to obtain evidence of the commission of some crime

for which they have the power to arrest”.

The question, whether there was a “reasonable complaint” at the time of

the arrest of the Petitioner, should be determined by this Court by examining

whether there was a complaint made to Police providing a credible

information against him. Whether the complaint of Wasudeva qualifies to be

taken as a “reasonable complaint” for the arresting officer to make the arrest

would in turn depends on the reliability or credibility of that complaint.

Reasonableness of a complaint must be decided by application of an objective

test, as this Court, in Gamlath v Neville Silva and Others (1991) 2 Sri L.R. 267,

held (at p. 274) “[A]n arrest based purely on the subjective satisfaction of the police

officer would be arbitrary and violative of Article 13(1)”. Amerasinghe J described

S.C.(FR) Application No. 325/2013

11

the applicable test, in the judgment of Senaratne v Punya de Silva and Others

(1995) 1 Sri L.R. 272, as follows(at p. 284);

“[W]ere there circumstances, objectively regarded the subjective

satisfaction of the officer making the arrest is not enough that should

have induced the First respondent to suspect that the petitioner was

concerned in the commission of those offences?”

Thus, the legality of the arrest of the Petitioner made by the 3rd

Respondent, would have to be determined this Court by objectively assessing

whether the material available at the time of arrest was sufficient to induce the

officer to act on that complaint, by treating same as a “reasonable complaint”.

In determining this question, the extracts from the relevant Information

Book of Payagala Police Station provides a clear insight into the attendant

circumstances that existed at the time of the Petitioner’s arrest. The Petitioner

does not challenge the accuracy of the notes of the multiple investigations that

were carried out by the Respondents, except to state that implication of him in

R7 is a fabrication.

Returning to the Petitioner’s complaint of illegal arrest in violation of

Articles 13(1) and (2), in order to impress upon this Court that there was no

reasonable complaint against him at the time of arrest, he totally relies on his

own factual assertion of there was no complaint made by Wasudeva, at the

time of his arrest, implicating him of any form of assault.

In paragraph 12 and 13 of his Petition, the Petitioner asserts that during

an inquiry conducted by the 1st Respondent on 24.08.2013, he confronted the

complainant Wasudeva over the allegation of assault, and indicated that he

would institute legal action for making false accusations. According to the

Petitioner, it is at that point of time, Wasudeva had denied of making any

S.C.(FR) Application No. 325/2013

12

complaint against him and maintained he was not aware of the former’s

arrest. The Petitioner however did not support this important assertion, either

by way of an affidavit of Wasudeva or by production of a statement made by

the 1st informant of the said assault, in order to counter the fact of Wasudeva,

making a statement implicating him.

The information book extracts contain two specific references to the

Petitioner, in relation to the complaint of the assault on Wasudewa. The

contention of the Petitioner to the first reference to him in the entry (R7) made

by PC 81657 Chamara at 8.30 p.m. on 13.08.2013 contained in the Information

Book, which read “ meàf. uiaiskd jk uq;=l=udr hk wh;a ìu odf.k myr ÿka nj mjid

isáhd” is a sentence that had been inserted into the information book entry at a

subsequent stage, in order to justify the otherwise illegal arrest.

On behalf of the 1st, 3rd, 4th, 6th and 8th Respondents, learned State

Counsel contended that it was consequent upon a complaint made by

Wasudeva implicating the Petitioner, his sister and brother-in-law, only they

were arrested by the Respondents and therefore the arrest of the Petitioner

was made “according to the procedure established by law” in terms of Section

32(1)(a) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.

In view of the pronouncements made by this Court, referred to earlier

on in this judgment, which laid specific emphasis on the existence of a

reasonable and credible complaint against a suspect, that should exist prior to

making an arrest without a warrant, it is important to consider whether there

was any such credible complaint made relating to the incident, during which

Wasudeva had sustained injuries, for the Respondents to form a reasonable

suspicion.

S.C.(FR) Application No. 325/2013

13

Before I proceed to consider the question of reasonableness of the

complaint, it is helpful if a brief reference is made particularly to the sequence

of events that culminated with the arrest of the Petitioner.

The incident of assault, over which the arrest of the Petitioner was

made, had taken place at about 7.30 p.m. on 13.08.2013. Srimath Namasri

Algawatte, a brother of the Petitioner and a three-wheeler driver by profession,

entered the public road driving his three-wheeler from a by-lane that led to

his house. The public road was in a decrepit state. In order to avoid a heavily

washed-out part of the road, Namasri had turned his vehicle to a side of the

road and, in the process, had brushed against a child, who walked along the

road with his father Gabadage Udaya Wasudeva. Wasudeva had taken the act of

Namasri as a deliberate act of swerving the vehicle to his child and was

offended. This incident ensued an exchange of words between the two men

which then escalated into a brawl. Hearing the commotion, Kalapuge

Padmalatha, who lived in a nearby house, had informed Namasri’s sister

Shreemali Algawatte of the brawl. Shreemali and her husband “Pattie”

(Ranasinhage Indika Wasnatha), rushed to the scene and had started attacking

Wasudeva. The Petitioner too had joined his family members after a while and

dealt several blows with his fists and kicked repeatedly on Wasudewa.

At about 8.30 p.m. in the same evening, PC 81657 Chamara of Payagala

Police Station made a note in the information book that one Anoma Janaki had

arrived at the Station with a person bleeding from his nose. She introduced

the injured person as her husband (Gabadage Udaya Wasudeva). It was claimed

that the injured was hit on his head with a stone by one “Pattie” while his

wife, Shreemali Algawatte, hit him with a pole. She further accused that the

Petitioner too had joined in the attack on her husband. The persons referred to

in this incident as “Pattie” and Shreemali Algawatte are the brother-in-law of

S.C.(FR) Application No. 325/2013

14

the Petitioner and his sister, respectively. This is the first reference made to the

Petitioner, according to the information book extracts.

As the injured was bleeding from his nose, he was issued with a MLE

form No. 141/13 by the officer and directed them to proceed to hospital. The

3rd Respondent, who was patrolling in Maggona town area during that time,

was directed by the 1st Respondent to conduct investigations into this

complaint. The 3rd Respondent had therefore proceeded to the hospital and

recorded a statement of the injured Gabadage Udaya Wasudeva at 10.00 p.m.

The injured had already been treated by the medical staff. He had a plaster on

his nose. In his statement, Wasudeva had accused “Pattie” for jabbing him with

a stone on his face. He also accused the Petitioner’s sister for attacking his

head with a pole. The injured further alleged that the Petitioner, who joined

the scuffle after he was hit with a stone, had repeatedly assaulted him with

hands and legs, even after he fell ( ta mdr uq;=l=udr uu ìu jeá, bkak fldg w;ska

mhska Wv mek mek ug .eyqjd" uQK osydg .eyqjd). This is the second reference made to

the Petitioner regarding the said complaint of assault.

It appears from the contention advanced by the Petitioner that he

strongly relied on the fact that the only information available to the

Respondents connecting him to the alleged act of assault on Wasudeva, at the

time of his arrest, was the entry R7. Understandably, the Petitioner therefore

seeks to assail the genuineness of the said entry R7 by making the allegation

that it is due to an act of fabrication by the Respondents, consequent to the

filing of the instant application. The Petitioner invited attention of Court to the

place where the reference to him appeared in R7. He pointed out that it is the

last sentence in the said entry and therefore that very fact strongly supports

his contention that it an insertion made at a subsequent point of time .

S.C.(FR) Application No. 325/2013

15

Perusal of the said entry (R7), revealed that the penultimate sentence of

that entry did indicate that PC 81657 Chamara, having already issued MLEF

No. 141/13 to the injured, had directed them to proceed to hospital. This entry

is followed by a sentence in which the Petitioner’s name too was implicated

for the attack (“ meàf. uiaiskd jk uq;= l=udr hk wh;a ìu odf.k myr ÿka nj mjid

isáhd’”). The entry R7, which described the officer’s own observations and the

actions he had taken upon the verbal complaint, had ended with the said

sentence implicating the Petitioner. As pointed out by the Petitioner, that the

penultimate sentence refers to the issuance of MLEF by the officer with the

direction to the parties to proceed to hospital. The Petitioner contends that

with the act of issuance of MLEF, it is logical to infer the entry regarding the

attack had ended and, in the circumstances, the appearance of the said last

sentence, is obviously due to an act of fabrication. It is already noted that the

said contention was advanced by the Petitioner to substantiate his claim that

there was no reasonable complaint before the Respondent to justify making

his arrest, particularly in view of the denial made by Wasudeva of implicating

him.

When Wasudeva and his wife arrived at the Police Station on their way

to hospital, no statement was recorded from either of the two. The entry R7 is

only an entry made by PC 81657 Chamara in the Information Book. The officer,

in making the entry R7, had merely noted down the gist of the nature of the

complaint, who was implicated for causing the injuries, his observations on

the injured person and what steps he had taken in relation to the complaint.

The appearance of the said last sentence in R7 could be due to an act of

insertion of that statement into the entry at a subsequent stage, as the

Petitioner’s contend. However, it is not the only possible explanation, in view

of the contents of the statement recorded off the injured at the hospital.

S.C.(FR) Application No. 325/2013

16

The Respondents, in seeking to justify the arrest and detention of the

Petitioner, relied on the fact that the injured, Wasudeva, in his detailed

statement made to the 3rd Respondent, made a specific allegation that the

Petitioner had repeatedly struck him in the face, even after he fell down ( ta mdr

uq;=l=udr uu ìu jeá, bkak fldg w;ska mhska Wv mek mek ug .eyqjd" uQK osydg .eyqjd’).

This sentence immediately follows the sentence by which Wasudeva implicates

the Petitioner’s sister and brother-in-law for assault. This statement of

Wasudeva, which contained a direct accusation against the Petitioner of a

physical assault, was recorded by the 3rd Respondent after visiting the

hospital at 10.00 p.m. a few minutes after R7 was made. Thus, it seems that the

last sentence in R7, though entered by the officer after he completed the entry,

is not a fabrication as the Petitioner contends.

The 3rd Respondent, having recorded Wasudeva’s statement at the

hospital thereafter proceeded to record a statement from Ayoma Janaki

(Wasudeva’s wife) at 11.30 p.m. In her statement Janaki stated that, upon

hearing of the attack on Wasudeva through her son, she had rushed to the

place of the incident. She states that on rushing there, she saw her husband

was seated on the ground while the Petitioner and his brother-in-law stood

near him. She also saw Shreemalee had a pole in her hand. After making the

statement at 11.55 p.m., Janaki proceeded to the place of the incident with the

3rd Respondent to point out to the officer of the place of attack, which enabled

him to make observations and to verify whether there were any other

witnesses to the incident. The Petitioner does not challenge the existence of

this statement.

The Petitioner was arrested by the 3rd Respondent at his residence

around 12.10 a.m. on 14.08.2013, after about 15 minutes since his visit to the

place of the incident to conduct investigations. The Information Book extracts

S.C.(FR) Application No. 325/2013

17

indicate that the Petitioner was informed of the reason for his arrest by the 3rd

Respondent in making the arrest and the Petitioner does not deny that fact

either.

Returning to the question, whether there was a reasonable and credible

complaint against the Petitioner at the time of his arrest, I would apply the test

adopted by Amerasinghe J in the determination of the same. Amerasinghe J ( per

Senaratne v Punya de Silva and Others (supra) formulated the test as follows;

“[W]ere there circumstances, objectively regarded the subjective satisfaction of the

officer making the arrest is not enough that should have induced the first respondent

to suspect that the petitioner was concerned in the commission of those offences?” in

the determination of the reasonableness of a complaint on which the

impugned arrest was made.

The 3rd Respondent, who made the arrest of the Petitioner, was directed

by the 1st Respondent to investigate into the complaint of assault of Wasudeva.

When the 3rd Respondent received orders from the 1st Respondent to

investigate, he was patrolling around Maggona area. There was no allegation

that he too had an animosity against the Petitioner. At the time of receiving

orders to investigate, it is very unlikely that the 3rd Respondent knew nothing

of any involvement of the Petitioner. Upon receiving orders from his superior

through radio communications, the 3rd Respondent had thereupon proceeded

to the hospital where the injured was receiving treatment. A statement of the

injured, which contained a direct accusation against the Petitioner implicating

him of assault, was recorded. During the said interview, the officer noted that

the injury of the injured was already treated by the medical staff. He then

proceeded to locate the witness, who accompanied the injured to the Police

and then to Hospital. Her statement was also recorded. Ayoma Janaki

confirmed that the Petitioner was present near the injured, when she rushed

S.C.(FR) Application No. 325/2013

18

to the place of the incident upon being informed of the commotion by her son.

The BHT of Wasudeva ( page 2 of R8) also indicated that the injured was

admitted with a history of being assaulted by “ a known group of people with

hands and a wooden pole” which made him bled from his nose. The X ray of the

injured indicated an “undisplaced (sic) fracture” of his skull.

Clearly the medical records as well as the statement of the injured

provided unambiguous and definitive information to the 3rd Respondent as to

the manner in which Wasudewa had sustained his injuries and the persons

who are responsible for causing them. These factors made the accusation by

Wasudewa a well substantiated one. Nonetheless, the 3rd Respondent had

taken the additional step of recording the statement of Wasudeva’s wife that

very night and also visited the scene before arresting the Petitioner. When

these multiple factors that contributed to the decision to arrest of the

Petitioner are considered objectively, it is my considered view that there was a

reasonable complaint made to the 3rd Respondent by Wasudeva, alleging

physical assault by the Petitioner and others, an allegation which is supported

with sufficient material for the 3rd Respondent to determine that there was a

reasonable complaint made against the Petitioner, that empowered him to

make a lawful arrest.

The factual assertion of the Petitioner that Wasudeva, making an

admission that he did not accuse him of assault, is an important factor in

support of his allegation of illegal arrest. The 1st Respondent tendered a

statement made by Wasudeva containing a direct allegation against the

Petitioner and the Petitioner does not challenge its existence. In these

circumstances, the admission attributed to Wasudeva, should have been

substantiated either by tendering an affidavit or a statement from Wasudeva or

even from a third party, who heard Wasudeva making the said admission. In

S.C.(FR) Application No. 325/2013

19

the absence of such material, the said assertion made by the Petitioner

remains a mere, unsubstantiated and a self-serving assertion. When the 1st

Respondent, tendered the statement of Wasudeva, the Petitioner conveniently

ignored to challenge that fact in his counter affidavit and was content with

repeating his contention that there was no reasonable complaint of assault

made against him.

Even if Wasudeva did formally retract his accusation against the

Petitioner, which said to have happened during an inquiry held on 24.08.2013,

that factor would not have any effect on the legality of the arrest, since what is

material to the determination of the legality of the arrest are the

circumstances that existed prior to the making of arrest and not the

subsequent events that may have occurred.

This reasoning also applies to the contents of the affidavit dated

14.10.2014, made by witness Kalapuge Padmalatha, who, in her statement to the

3rd Respondent on 14.08.2014, as well as in the affidavit tendered along with

the petition of the Petitioner (P4), claims to have seen the incident of assault

on Srimath Namasri Algawatta. Padmalatha now retracts the contents of her

affidavit while asserting that Namasri obtained her signature to an affidavit

after promising her of Rs. 50,000.00 to implicate Wasudeva. She, in her second

affidavit, claims that she now wants to rectify the “injustice” that caused to

Wasudeva by her actions.

The Petitioner, in his petition concedes that he was informed prior to his

arrest by the 3rd Respondent that the injured “Udaya Kumara” ( Wasudeva) had

implicated him, his sister and brother-in-law for the assault and accordingly

all three of them needed to be arrested. Petitioner’s sister and brother-in-law

could not be arrested along with him, as they were not at home. In view of

these factors, the allegation of the Petitioner that the reference to him in the

S.C.(FR) Application No. 325/2013

20

entry R7, is a fabrication made by the Respondents after he complained of his

arrest to this Court, does not support his allegation of illegal arrest. In these

circumstances, I hold that the arrest of the Petitioner was made according to

procedure established by law and there was no infringement of the

fundamental rights guaranteed to him in terms of Article 13(1).

The allegation that the 1st and 3rd Respondents have acted in violation of

Article 13(2) shall be considered next.

The gravamen of the allegation of the Petitioner in this regard seems to

be that after his arrest he was kept in the “cell overnight without any legally valid

reason” and the 1st Respondent had taken no action on his continued

detention, until his mother intervened in the following morning and “…

beseeched him to release the Petitioner, his sister and brother-in-law”. The Petitioner

contends only then the three detainees were released by the 1st Respondent on

surety bail. The Petitioner is of the firm belief that the 1st Respondent had

intentionally kept him in detention “overnight” because of his complaint

made to a Senior DIG.

The relevant notes contained in the Information Book extracts reveal

that the Petitioner was handed over to the reservist by the 3rd Respondent

after his arrest and detained him at the Station awaiting orders from the 1st

Respondent. The 3rd Respondent thereafter returned to his patrolling duties

by leaving the station at 12.50 a.m. on 14.08.2013. At 8.10 a.m. on the same day

the Petitioner’s sister and brother-in-law too were arrested by PC 88152

Kanchana and detained at the Station awaiting orders of the 1st Respondent.

Statements of Ranasinghege Indika Wasantha (brother-in-law of the Petitioner)

and Shreemalee Algawatta (sister of the Petitioner) were recorded at 8.40 a.m.

soon after their arrests. The 1st Respondent had averred that the Petitioner, his

S.C.(FR) Application No. 325/2013

21

sister and brother-in-law too were released on bail, at 9.55 on the same day.

The Petitioner confirms that position.

In view of these considerations, the assertion of the 1st Respondent that

the Petitioner and his relatives were released on bail after their arrest on the

same day (14.08.2013) by 9.55 a.m., remains an uncontradicted and unassailed

fact. In effect, the Petitioner was kept in detention for a total period of less

than ten hours since his arrest at 12.10 a.m.

Sections 36 and 37 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act governs how

a person arrested is to be dealt with and the duration within which such a

person could lawfully be detained by a peace officer. Section 37 imposes a

mandatory duty on peace officers not to detain suspects in custody or confine

them for a period not exceeding twenty-four hours, leaving out only a narrow

margin of time, in view of the practicalities involved with actual production of

suspects before a judicial officer.

Returning to the consideration of the complaint of the Petitioner on

illegal detention, it is observed that the Petitioner was released on surety bail

by the 1st Respondent, without producing him before a Magistrate. Since the

release was made within a period of less than twelve hours since his arrest,

the only factor that should be considered in relation to the allegation of illegal

detention is whether there was sufficient compliance of the statutory

provisions contained in Section 37 of the said Act by the 1st Respondent.

Section 37 imposes a duty on a peace officer not to detain individuals

unreasonably as it states that such an officer “ … shall not detain in custody or

otherwise confine a person arrested without a warrant for longer period than under all

the circumstances of the case is reasonable” and it further insisted that the total

S.C.(FR) Application No. 325/2013

22

period of detention should not exceed the twenty-four-hour period, except for

certain limited situations qualifying under Section 43A.

In applying the test whether the Petitioner was released by the 1st

Respondent without keeping him in detention “for longer period than under all

the circumstances of the case is reasonable” to the totality of the circumstances as

revealed from the pleadings, I find that the Respondents have released him on

a surety bond well within a reasonable time period, after having sufficiently

complied with the applicable legal provisions contained in Sections 36 and 39.

The contention of the Petitioner that the Respondents acted in breach of the

statutory provisions of Section 65 of the Police Ordinance, in their failure to

produce the Petitioner before a Magistrate, despite being enlarged on a surety

bond, was made on a clear mis-interpretation of the proviso to the said

Section and therefore does not require any further consideration here.

Similarly, the Petitioner’s contention that the Respondents were in breach of

Departmental Orders which made it obligatory for the Officer-in-Charge of

the Station to report of the arrest made by the Police, too is based on a similar

misapprehension of the factual and legal position.

It is evident that the Petitioner’s complaint of violation of his

fundamental rights was primarily made against the 1st Respondent, the

Officer-in-Charge of Payagala Police Station, although he cited several other

officers attached to the said Station as Respondents. In the preceding part of

this judgment, the legality of the arrest and detention was considered in the

backdrop of the material presented before this Court, which includes the

pleadings of the parties and the annexures along with the certified extracts of

the notes of multiple investigations carried out by the officers of Payagala

Police.

S.C.(FR) Application No. 325/2013

23

Since the Petitioner made direct references to the violation of the statute

law in claiming of illegal arrest contrary to procedure established by law,

consideration was more focussed into the relevant provisions in the Code of

Criminal Procedure Act. In addition to urging illegality of the arrest in terms

of the applicable law, it was also alleged that the arrest and detention of the

Petitioner was also due to an animosity harboured against him by the 1st

Respondent. The Petitioner therefore challenges the decision to arrest and to

detain are violative of his rights as they were decisions that are “tainted with

malice”. In view of these repeated accusations made against the 1st Respondent

of acting in malice to the detriment of the Petitioner, it is important to consider

whether any of his actions, taken or not taken on a series of complaints, were

motivated by the said animosity, as alleged by the Petitioner.

Why this becomes an important consideration is, as it has been said“

[A]lthough a law is fair on its face and impartial in appearance, yet if it is applied and

administered with an evil eye and an unequal hand, so as to make unjust and illegal

discrimination it would constitute a denial of equal protection of the laws” ( vide

Fundamental Rights in Sri Lanka, S. Sharvananda, 1993, p.124).

Of these multiple references to the actions or inactions that were

attributed to the 1st Respondent, there are four incidents that stand out clearly

from the rest in relation to this very aspect and therefore are considered in this

part of the judgment. It is for the purpose of clarity and easy presentation, a

re-arrangement of these several instances was made by referring to them in a

chronological order.

It is stated in the petition by the Petitioner that, prior to the series of

interactions that were referred to in the instant application, he has had no

interaction with the Police at all, thereby implying this was his first. That

being the case there cannot be any pre-existing animosity between the

S.C.(FR) Application No. 325/2013

24

Petitioner and the 1st Respondent and if at all, such an animosity did actually

exist, it should be a result of one or more incidents referred to in the

pleadings. The Petitioner’s perception of the reason for harbouring an

animosity, as stated in paragraph 13 of his petition, is directly referable to his

complaint to the Senior DIG regarding the failure of the 1st Respondent to take

action on a complaint lodged by his mother over an incident of assault on his

sister. The Petitioner’s position is that due to the said animosity only he was

arrested by the Respondent, without even a complaint being lodged against

him. However, the Petitioner also alleged in his petition of remanding his

father, pending medical examination, too motivated by the same animosity.

In view of the fact that the strong correlation that seem to exist between

the series of complaints and counter complaints made to Payagala Police. All

of them either directly or indirectly had some relevance to the arrest of the

Petitioner. This factor needed to be examined closely and in the proper

context, in order to assess the justifiability of the Petitioner’s complaint of

personal animosity on the part of the 1st Respondent, which allegedly

occasioned a violation of a fundamental right.

There are four such specific instances where the Petitioner attributes

malice on the part of the 1st Respondent, which shall be examined hereinafter

under separate sections.

The origin of the series of incidents that led to the arrest of the

Petitioner could be traceable to a complaint relates to the Petitioner’s father,

Algawattage Maithreepala. Maithreepala, is a retired medical attendant who

lived with his wife, two sons, a daughter and her husband. The starting point

of all the subsequent events began with a complaint made by Karunakalage

Deepa Krishanthi to Payagala Police Station at 3.00 p.m. on 21.04.2013. In that

complaint, Krishanthi accused Maithreepala for regularly harassing her and

S.C.(FR) Application No. 325/2013

25

family by uttering obscenities that are directed to them. She further alleged

Maithreepala, whilst being under the influence of liquor, regularly made

derogatory references to her caste and also to her religious beliefs in those

utterances. She suspects that it could be due to a mental illness and if it is so,

requests the Police to compel him to obtain medical help. She further claims

that informing Maithreepala’s daughter, Shreemalee Algawatte ( a sister of the

Petitioner) of her father’s abusive behaviour did not help and Maithreepala’s

acts of harassment continued unabated. Not only Krishanthi was disturbed by

the conduct of Maithreepala. There were others who had similar complaints

and the officer thereupon proceeded to record statements of Wittahachchige

Don Janaka Prabath, Wittahachchige Don Keerthisiri and Jayanetti Koralalage

Samitha Samanmalie, all of whom are neighbours of Maithreepala. They

confirmed the complaint of Krishanthi on the abusive behaviour of their

elderly neighbour.

On 22.04.2013, PC 31307 Padmasekara of Payagala Police Station visited

the house of Maithreepala to investigate into the complaint and found that he

was still under the influence of liquor and making incoherent utterances. Due

to his state of intoxication, no statement could be recorded off Maithreepala at

that point of time.

The Police directed the family to produce Maithreepala before the 1st

Respondent on 22.04.2013 but did not do so due to his ill-health. Several

opportunities were given to facilitate an inquiry but Maithreepala was

presented to Police by the Petitioner only on 28.04.2013. They were then re-

directed to appear before the Magistrate on 29.04.2013.

Interestingly, the Petitioner, also made a complaint to the Police on

28.04.2013, alleging that Karunakalage Deepa Krishanthi is of unsound mind and

regularly harasses his family by verbally abusing them. It is relevant to note

S.C.(FR) Application No. 325/2013

26

here that the complaint against the Petitioner’s father alleging harassment was

initiated by the same Karunakalage Deepa Krishanthi.

The 3rd Respondent made reports of facts to the Magistrate’s Court of

Kalutara on 29.04.2013, regarding both complaints of abusive behaviour under

case Nos. AR 4724/13 and 4725/13(R6) seeking orders of Court enabling

psychiatric assessment of Algawattage Maithreepala as well as Karunakalage

Deepa Krishanthi. The 3rd Respondent further states in his report to Court that

the complaints made against Algawattage Maithreepala by several individuals

were independently verified by him after obtaining confirmation by the

Grama Niladhari of the area and the Chairman of Civil Defence Committee.

When the case No. AR 4724/13 was taken up before the Magistrate’s

Court on 29.04.2013, the Court itself made order remanding the Petitioner’s

father and referred both Maithreepala and Krishanthi for psychological

assessment. When case No. AR 4724/13 was called on 15.05.2013, the report

issued by the Consultant Psychiatrist was tendered to Court. The report

indicated that Algawattage Maithreepala was suffering from Bipolar Effective

Disorder and also from alcohol dependency. The report further recommended

his treatment to be continued with proper medication coupled with follow up

visits to Mental Health Unit of Kalutara Hospital.

Thereupon, the Court made order handing the custody of Maithreepala

over to the Petitioner and directed him to ensure continued medical

treatment. Apparently, Krishanthi was cleared of any mental impairment.

The 1st Respondent denied making any application to remand

Algawattage Maithreepala and, states that after verifying the complaint of

Karunakalage Deepa Krishanthi, he merely reported facts to Court. This appears

to be so, since the copy of the report filed in Court or the proceeding of Court

S.C.(FR) Application No. 325/2013

27

does not indicate any such application made by the 1st Respondent to commit

Petitioner’s father to judicial custody pending psychological evaluation. It was

the Court, after observing the demeanour of the person, made the order ex

mere motu. In the circumstances, I am more inclined to accept the explanation

of the 1st Respondent on this allegation. This is because, if the 1st Respondent

was determined to act on any animosity, he had ample opportunity to do so

after receiving many complaints by the neighbours of the nuisance created by

Algawattage Maithreepala. The 1st complaint was made to Payagala Police on

21.04.2013 by Krishanthi but the facts were reported to Court only on

29.04.2013. During this time interval, the 1st Respondent repeatedly directed

the Petitioner to produce his father to the Police Station, to inquire into the

said complaints. The Petitioner, claiming his father was unwell, managed to

avoid that inquiry. He eventually produced his father before the Magistrate’s

Court on 29.04.2013, the day on which the remand order was made. The

manner in which the 1st Respondent reacted to the repeated acts of

disobedience to his directions, is an indication that the Petitioner’s claim of

acting with malice on this issue is only a perception created in the latter’s

mind, rather than being an actual fact that exists in reality.

Moreover, when Krishanthi lodged a complaint against Maithrepala,

suggestive of latter’s mental impairment, the 1st Respondent did not take any

action until he verified that claim from many different sources of information.

However, when the Petitioner made a counter allegation that Krishanthi of

having a mental disorder, in the evening of the day prior to the date for

production of his father before Court, the 1st Respondent had promptly acted

on that information and moved Court for Krishanthi’s mental assessment,

without waiting for any verification of that allegation and disregarding the

fact that she is the complainant against the Petitioner’s father and that she

operates a grocery in the area for some time without any problems as it is

S.C.(FR) Application No. 325/2013

28

unlikely that a person with such an impairment, would conduct her affairs in

that manner.

The second incident relates to an allegation of assault on the Petitioner’s

sister. This is the incident that made the Petitioner to make a verbal complaint

to the Senior DIG against the 1st Respondent and therefore the starting point

of the alleged animosity. At about 8.50 a.m., on 26.04.2013, Sandage

Pushpakanthi complained to Payagala Police Station of an incident of physical

assault on her daughter Shreemali Algawatte by one “Manju Prabath”. She was

told by Shreemali that Manju Prabath had hit her after grabbing her by hair. He

also said to have bragged to Shreemali that somehow her father would be sent

to mental asylum soon. The complainant informed the Police that her

daughter was already admitted to Nagoda Hospital due to this assault. She

also added that their neighbours are harassing them by making repeated

complaints to police against her husband, who suffers from a mental illness.

The individual referred to in the said complaint as Manju Prabath is one

and the same person, who supported Krishanthi’s complaint against the

Petitioner’s father, Wittahachchige Don Janaka Prabath. After he complained

about the nuisance created by Shreemalie’s father on 23.04.2013, after three

days and in the morning of 26.04.2013, at 8.49 a.m., Pushpakanthi made a

complaint against him alleging assault. The complainant Sandage Pushpakanthi

is the Petitioner’s mother and Shreemali Algawatte is his own sister.

PS 3844 Tillakaratne recorded a statement of Shreemali Algawatte at about

4.50 p.m. on the same day at Nagoda Hospital where she accused Manju

Prabath for assaulting her. PS 3844 Tillakaratne visited the place, where the

alleged assault had taken place, at 5.30 p.m. and noted his observations. SI

Gamini Silva thereafter arrested Wittahachchige Don Janaka Prabath and

produced him at the police station on that evening at 6.05 p.m. his statement

S.C.(FR) Application No. 325/2013

29

was recorded at 6.30 p.m. on the same day. Page 118 of the same MCIB, in

paragraph 318, SI Gamini left the Police Station at 5.00 p.m. on 26.04.2013, to

make scene observations regarding the said complaint of assault, on the

instructions of Personal Assistant to Senior DIG. This entry confirms that the

Petitioner did make a complaint to the Senior DIG, on the alleged inaction on

the part of the 1st Respondent over his mother’s complaint which he attributes

to personal animosity. But, by then PS 3844 Tillakaratne already recorded a

statement of Shreemali Algawatte on the incident.

According to Shreemali’s statement, she was cleaning her pots and pans

in her backyard in the morning. She was alone. Suddenly, Manju Prabath

came near her, asked where her husband was and then kicked her twice. She

attributes that attack to an incident that had taken place between her husband

and Prabath on the previous day. She admits there were no witnesses to the

assault. Interestingly, the Petitioner, despite the fact that not being a witness

to the said incident, provides his own version to it in his petition to this Court.

In paragraph 4(g) of his petition, the Petitioner states as follows;

“On 26th April 2013, around 7.30 a.m. the Petitioner’s sister had seen

another first cousin of the said W.D. Ratnapala named W.D. Janaka

Prabath (who is also a first cousin of W.D.Keerthi), who lives in a house

adjoining her house, going from house to house asking people to sign a

public petition to be handed over to the Payagala Police, which petition

stated that the Petitioner’s father is insane and a danger and a nuisance

to the public. The Petitioner’s sister had objected vehemently to the

activities of the said W.D. Janaka Prabath in attempting to obtain a

public petition against her father and told the said W.D. Janaka Prabath

not to be a busy body and meddle in other people’s affairs. The Petitioner

states that incensed by his sister’s words, W.D. Janaka Prabath

S.C.(FR) Application No. 325/2013

30

assaulted his sister, necessitating her admission to the Nagoda

Hospital.”

The version presented to Court by the Petitioner not only differs from

what his sister told the Police but also connects to an incident not spoken to by

any of the others. What Shrimalee said in her statement in relation to the

attack was “ [uxcq ug myr oSug fya;=j 2013’04’25 jk osk uf.a mqreIhd bkaosl jika; uxcqg

myr oSu ksidh’ fjk wukdmhla ke;’” The addition of the fact of collection of

signatures to a public petition is obviously a concoction on the part of the

Petitioner in making an attempt to attach more weightage to his sister’s

complaint of assault against Janaka Prabath by coupling it with the complaint

against his father.

The reason that the Police did not immediately proceed to arrest

Wittahachchige Don Janaka Prabath after the complaint of Pushpakanthi could

be inferred upon perusal of the contents of her first complaint. It was stated by

Pushpakanthi that she did not witness the incident and she only learnt of it

from her daughter. Thus, Pushpakanthi not being a witness to the incident,

who merely repeated what she learnt from her daughter to Police was clearly

insufficient for the Police to arrest Janaka Prabath since no reasonable suspicion

could be formed solely on that statement, particularly in the absence of any

such information forthcoming from the alleged victim Shreemalie, who by then

got herself admitted to Hospital bypassing the Police, despite the fact that she

had no injuries. No MLE form was issued as a result. Shreemalie’s statement

was recorded later on at 4.50 p.m. on the same day and, within a period of

little over an hour, the Police arrested Janaka Prabath as a suspect over her

complaint. He too was detained by the Police after arrest. It could well be that

the intervention of the Senior DIG contributed to the arrest of Janaka Prabath. It

must also be observed that only after recording Shreemalie’s statement, which

S.C.(FR) Application No. 325/2013

31

contained a direct accusation of assault for the first time, the Police had a

reasonable complaint to arrest Janaka Prabath.

Similarly, the reasons for the delay in the arrest of Wasudeva, against

whom a complaint was made by Namasri, are evident when the sequence and

the chronology of the relevant events are lined up in proper context. The

incident of assault on Wasudeva, which referred to as the core incident in this

judgment earlier on is a one immediately followed to the incident of assault,

as complained by Namasri. The incident involving the three-wheeler driven

by Namasri and Wasudeva’s son occurred at about 7.30 or 8.00 p.m. and then

only the Petitioner, his sister and brother-in-law joined in the attack.

Wasudevea’s wife had taken her husband to Police by 8.30 p.m. and while they

were on their way to hospital, Namasri came to Police to make a complaint at

9.40 p.m. Unlike Wasudeva, Namasiri had no visible injuries and he only

complained of headache after his head hit the ground as he fell down. He too

was issued MLE Form No. 142/13.

After visiting the scene in the following morning, PS 3844 Tilakaratne

recorded a statement of Kalapuge Pathmalatha, who witnessed the incident, at

9.20 a.m. On 21.08.2013, PS 3844 Tilakaratne proceeded to arrest Wasudeva who,

by then, had been discharged from the hospital after three days of inhouse

treatment. He was not at home. The officer directed Namasri to come to Police

Station for an inquiry into his complaint on 24.08.2013. The officer also

directed Wasudeva’s wife to inform her husband, to be present at the Police

Station for that inquiry. Wasudeva was arrested on 24.08.2013, when he

presented himself to the Police. He was detained after his arrest and had his

statement recorded. On the instructions of the 1st Respondent, Wasudeva was

released on surety bail and the complaint of Namasri against Wasudeva for

assault was referred to the Mediation Board along with that of Wasudeva

S.C.(FR) Application No. 325/2013

32

made against the Petitioner and others. In these circumstances, I am unable to

find any material which indicate the 1st Respondent acted with malice in

dealing with the Petitioner or any other member of his family.

This factor leads to the consideration of the fourth factor cited by the

Petitioner in support of his allegation of animosity entertained by the 1st

Respondent against him. The Petitioner alleges that, for nearly seven months,

the 1st Respondent did not take any action over the complaints of assault

made by his family members.

The document marked R10, indicates that the 1st Respondent filed three

plaints before the Magistrate’s Court of Kalutara on 13.12.2013. Two the plaints

carried the Petitioner’s name, as an accused in relation to offences of causing

hurt and issuing death threats on Wasudeva. It appears that the incidents of

physical assault on Wasudeva and the incident of physical assault on Namasri

were treated by the Police as an instance where both parties made complaints

against each other over the same incident. The information book extract

marked R7, indicate that the 1st Respondent had referred both the incidents

for mediation in terms of Section of 7(1)(c) of the Mediation Boards Act No. 72

of 1988 as amended, a requirement to be fulfilled before the institution of

proceedings before the relevant Magistrate’s Court.

This was the case, in relation to the complaint by the Petitioner’s sister ,

Shrimalee against Janaka Prabath, as well. The Petitioner himself stated in his

petition that the complaint had been referred to for mediation, and Janaka

Prabath was warned by the board to keep good behaviour. However, the

Petitioner, either in his petition nor in the counter affidavit, does not make any

averment to the reference of the incident to the Mediation Board. In view of

the said entry in the information book, the delay in the institution of

proceedings is sufficiently explained. The delay of seven months is

S.C.(FR) Application No. 325/2013

33

accordingly attributable to the time taken to the mediation process, which

obviously failed, as indicative by the fact that plaints were filed in Court.

In relation to the consideration of the allegation of animosity on the part

of the 1st Respondent, the conduct of the Petitioner and members of his family

should also be considered. It was the Petitioner who made an unsubstantiated

complaint of insanity against Krishanthi for complaining against his father. His

sister, Shrimalie, too made an accusation against the other complainant who

joined hands with Krishanthi to complain against their father, for assault. He

also complained against the 1st Respondent over perceived inaction for not

investigating into his mother’s complaint over the allegation of assault on his

sister expeditiously, simply because no one from the Police visited their

house. He complained to the Senior DIG without even enquiring from his

sister whether she, being the alleged victim, made a statement implicating

Prabath. He further alleges that he was illegally arrested without a complaint,

when in fact, as notes of investigation indicate, there was a direct accusation

levelled against him by Wasudeva in his statement. Then he adds a twist to the

complaint by his sister of assault, in his petition to this Court. Contrary to the

claim of the Petitioner that the 1st Respondent had acted with malice in

arresting him, it appears from the conduct of the Petitioner that it was he who

had a distinct trait of vindictiveness and acted with vengeance on whoever

opted to cross his path.

When the totality of the circumstances relating to the interconnected

series of incidents referred to earlier on in judgment are considered, it is

evident that these incidents occurred primarily due to the acrimonious

relationship that exists between the Petitioner and his family members with

many of their neighbours. Although the starting point of the gradual

S.C.(FR) Application No. 325/2013

34

deterioration of their relationship could be traceable to Maithripala’s actions, it

is the continued display of total disregard to the concerns raised by the

neighbours over Maithreepala’s actions by the Petitioner and his family had

singularly contributed to the conversion of their relationship into a toxic one.

Maithreepala is clearly having a psychological issue, which is now confirmed

medically. In addition, he had another problem due to his alcohol

dependency, which undoubtedly exacerbated his mental impairment. Of

course, his family was aware of that even before these incidents. Pushpakanthi

in her statement to Police on 26.04.2013 admits her husband Maithreepala had

a psychological illness, but admittedly did nothing about it.

The Petitioner too concedes in his petition that he had taken steps to

admit his father to Mental Hospital, Angoda only after the Court had ordered

him to do so. The Petitioner is silent about any previous attempts he made to

help his father with his mental condition. Even after several complaints, the

Petitioner or any other member of his family did not think it is necessary for

them to seek medical advice on behalf of their father until they were

compelled to do so by an order of Court. There was no empathy on the part of

the Petitioner or other members of his family towards their neighbours who

had to undergo repeated bouts of nuisance created by Maithripala on a regular

basis. Obviously, the tolerance level of his neighbours, who suffered over the

repeated acts of verbal abuse hurled at them by Maithripala, which had

continued unabated due to the unrelenting stubbornness of the Petitioner and

his family, had apparently reached its limits, as indicative from their act of

making complaints to Payagala Police.

The Statement of Objections of the 1st Respondent indicate the position

that, after the initial report filed before the Magistrate’s Court, the proceedings

relating to Maithripala were transferred to the District Court. The District

S.C.(FR) Application No. 325/2013

35

Court is conferred with powers to deal with such instances, in terms of Section

2 of the Mental Deceases Ordinance No. 1 of 1873 (as amended). When

produced before the District Court, learned District Judge had observed that

Maithreepala harbouring a deep-seated hatred towards his neighbours (as per

proceedings of the District Court in Case No. “Wu;= 4598” on 15.05.2013) and

thereby affording validity to the complaints made by the neighbours.

It must be borne in mind that Maithreepala, may not be responsible for

all or, at least, some of his actions, due to his psychological impairment, but

certainly it was for the Petitioner and his family, to help out their own father

by securing him of proper medical attention he urgently needed. In addition,

the Petitioner and his family are under a duty to prevent Maithreepala from

being a nuisance to their neighbours due to his mental impairment.

Unfortunately, the Petitioner and his family, instead of securing medical

attention and giving compassionate care to Maithreepala, have apparently

diverted their combined energies to take punitive action against their

neighbours for making complaints. The neighbours, who sought freedom

from the continued acts of nuisance of Maithripala, have resorted to a legally

permissible course of action by involving the Police, rather than trying to

address the problem all by themselves.

This Court, being invested with the Constitutional mandate to protect

fundamental rights that are guaranteed by the Constitution in terms of Article

118(b), should consider each complaint of violation of such rights with equal

seriousness, in order to protect the applicants from any transgressions made

by the State functionaries in the exercise of its executive and administrative

functions. In this context, the Petitioner’s act of making complaint of a

violation of his fundamental rights is a right he should legitimately exercise. If

he could establish the alleged infringement, he is entitled to reliefs that are

S.C.(FR) Application No. 325/2013

36

just and equitable. However, in view of the factors referred to in the

preceding paragraph, it is appropriate here to make a brief reference to Article

28, which states thus;

“[T]he exercise and enjoyment of rights and freedoms are inseparable

from the performance of duties and obligations and accordingly it is the

duty of every person in Sri Lanka –

(a) …

(b) …

(c) …

(d) …

(e) to respect the rights and freedoms of others; and

(f) …”

The several neighbours of the Petitioner, some of whom were accused

of having mental issues and of committing acts of violence against his family,

too are entitled to all the rights and freedoms he himself enjoys. The Petitioner

is undoubtedly under a Constitutional duty to respect the rights and freedoms

of others and should have conducted himself reasonably in the discharge of

that civic duty. This he owed to his own father, who urgently needed medical

attention, and then to his neighbours, who too are entitled to have a peaceful

life. The Petitioner had miserably failed in both these aspects.

In view of the multiple considerations referred to in the preceding

paragraphs of this judgment, it is my considered view that the alleged

illegality of the arrest and detention of the Petitioner cannot be taken as a

valid complaint against any of the Respondents. The Petitioner had therefore

failed to establish that any of the Respondents have by their executive actions,

have violated his fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 12(1), 13(1)

and 13(2) of the Constitution.

S.C.(FR) Application No. 325/2013

37

The application is accordingly dismissed without costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

PRIYANTHA JAYAWARDENA, PC., J. I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

YASANTHA KODAGODA, PC., J. I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT