Page 1 of 17

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of Sections 5(1) & 6 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 10 of 1996 read with Chapter LVIII of the Civil Procedure Code and Article 127 & 128(4) of the Constitution against the Judgment dated 12th October 2018 of the High Court of the Western Province holden in Colombo exercising Civil jurisdiction.

Commercial Leasing and Finance PLC, (former known and named as Commercial Leasing and Finance Limited) No. 68, Bauddhaloka Mawatha, Colombo 04. (New number of company - PQ 131/PB/PQ)

Plaintiff SC (CHC) Appeal No: 06/2019

Commercial High Court

Case No: HC/Civil/28/2013/MR

Vs.

1. Herath Mudiyanselage Indika

Sarathchandra Herath, No. 101/B, Palathuru Wella, Serankada, Padiyathalawa.

Page 2 of 17

2. Ismailkhan Seiyadu Muhammathkhan,

No. 433, Randenigala Road, Weheraganthota. 3. Hitisekara Mudiyanselage Wimalasiri,

No. 201, Opposite School, Padiyathalawa.

Defendants

AND NOW BETWEEN

3. Hitisekara Mudiyanselage Wimalasiri,

No. 201, Opposite School, Padiyathalawa.

3rd Defendant-Appellant

AND NOW

Commercial Leasing and Finance PLC, (former known and named as Commercial Leasing and Finance Limited) No. 68, Bauddhaloka Mawatha, Colombo 04. (New number of company - PQ 131/PB/PQ)

And presently,

LOLC Finance PLC, (Commercial Leasing and Finance PLC after having been amalgamated on 31st March 2022 with LOLC Finance PLC) No. 100/1,

Page 3 of 17

Sri Jayawardenapura Mawatha, Rajagiriya. (New number of company - PB244PQ)

Plaintiff-Respondent

1. Herath Mudiyanselage Indika

Sarathchandra Herath, No. 101/B, Palathuru Wella, Serankada, Padiyathalawa. 2. Ismailkhan Seiyadu Muhammathkhan,

No. 433, Randenigala Road, Weheraganthota.

Defendants-Respondents

Before: Justice A.L. Shiran Gooneratne

Justice Janak De Silva

Justice Sampath B. Abayakoon Counsel: Widura Ranawaka with Bhathiya Dassanayake instructed by

R.J. Upali De Almeida for the 3rd Defendant-Appellant.

Shanaka De Livera with Ruwani Chandrasiri instructed by

Sithumini Wijayarathna for the Plaintiff-Respondent.

Argued on: 29/07/2025

Decided on: 26/09/2025

Page 4 of 17

A.L. Shiran Gooneratne J.

Factual Background

[1] By Plaint dated 01/02/2013 the Plaintiff-Respondent filed this action against

the 1st, 2nd and 3rd Defendants, (presently the 3rd Defendant-Appellant), and

sought to recover a sum of Rs. 6,701,254/- together with interest on a Lease

Agreement, granted to the 1st Defendant, secured by a Guarantee and indemnity

of Lease Agreement, by the 2nd Defendant and the 3rd Defendant-Appellant,

claiming jointly and severally the said sum and the accrued interest.

[2] In the Plaint, the Plaintiff stated that the Plaintiff and the 1st Defendant entered

into a Lease Agreement bearing No. C1-09-0011EB dated 22/09/2011, P2. By

the said agreement, the Plaintiff leased “the property” (1 Nissan Navara Double

Cab) more fully described in the schedule to the Agreement.

[3] The 1st Defendant entered into the aforesaid lease agreement, and the 2nd and

3rd Defendants by Guarantee and Indemnity of Lease Agreement No. C1-09-

0011 jointly and severally undertook to indemnify the Plaintiff against any

failure by the 1st Defendant to perform his obligations. When the 1st Defendant

failed and neglected to pay to the Plaintiff the rentals due, the Plaintiff

terminated the agreement and demanded “the property” and the sums due and

owing to the Plaintiff from the 1st, 2nd and 3rd Defendants.

[4] The Plaintiff instituted action against the 1st, 2nd and 3rd Defendants, claiming

relief jointly and severally on the lease agreement marked ‘P2’ and the

guarantee bond marked ‘P8’.

Page 5 of 17

[5] At the conclusion of the trial, the learned Judge of the Commercial High Court

by Judgment dated 12/10/2018, ex parte against the 1st and 2nd Defendants and

inter parte against the 3rd Defendant-Appellant, decided in favor of the Plaintiff.

[6] The 3rd Defendant-Appellant by Petition dated 05/12/2018 is before this Court

to set aside the Judgment dated 12/10/2018, delivered by the Commercial High

Court.

[7] On the date of the hearing, the 3rd Defendant-Appellant limited his submissions

to the following questions of law.

1. Whether the guarantee bond (P8) was a printed form that had several blanks

that were filled later with typewritten details.

2. The lease agreement was neither shown or a Sinhala translation was given

to the Appellant.

3. Whether the lease agreement (P2) was lawfully terminated.

1. Validity of the Guarantee Bond (P8)

1.1 Whether the enforceability of a guarantee is affected by the addition

of typewritten particulars subsequent to the guarantor’s signature.

[8] The Appellant challenges the validity of the Guarantee Bond (P8) based on

several procedural infirmities which should have precluded the trial court from

granting relief against him. His principal argument is that, at the time of

signing, the bond contained only the printed text and the typewritten details

were inserted later.

[9] The Appellant in his evidence has attempted to point out to the portions that

were subsequently inserted. While the precise portions of evidence were not

marked for the benefit of the Court, a careful reading of his evidence directs to

Page 6 of 17

such subsequent insertions to be the date of execution of the guarantee bond,

the reference number of the lease agreement, the personal details of the

guarantors (entered below their respective signatures), and the name and

address of the lessee.

[10] However, it is crucial to note that none of these particulars were pleaded by the

Appellant to be false or to amount to a misrepresentation.

[11] In support of his claim, the Appellant relied on the testimony of the Plaintiff’s

witness, Belan Daminda who conceded that the blank spaces in the guarantee

agreement were completed after the 3rd Defendant had placed his signature.

[12] The 3rd Defendant-Appellant, in his testimony, stated that at the time he signed

the guarantee bond, the document contained only the printed part and alleged

that the typewritten part was inserted later. He takes up the position that, by

leaving blank spaces in the guarantee bond to be filled later, the lender has

made a fundamental mistake which makes the agreement void.

[13] However, it is noted that any subsequent insertion ipso facto would not render

a contract unenforceable, but rather enforceability would be determined by the

nature of the alteration and the knowledge or consent of the executing party. A

contract can be vitiated where the insertion constitutes a material alteration

that fundamentally changes the obligations undertaken, or where the signature

was obtained by fraud or misrepresentation.

[14] In the present case, it is not disputed that the Appellant executed the guarantee

as surety of the 1st Defendant under the lease agreement. The nature of that

obligation remained constant, irrespective of the fact that the particulars were

subsequently filled. The Appellant is a literate businessman, and has not alleged

that his signature was obtained by fraud or duress by the Respondent. His

evidence was that he signed the printed form knowing it to be a guarantee.

Page 7 of 17

Furthermore, the lessee was known to the Appellant, and he has admitted that

he is related to him.

[15] The law has long recognized that a guarantee or a similar instrument is vitiated

by alterations introduced after execution without the consent of the parties. As

held in Pigot’s Case (1614)1 it was established that such post-execution

changes could render an instrument void, the rationale being that no party

should be held to obligations materially different from those they agreed to

when affixing their signature and seal. In its early application, the rule was

interpreted narrowly and applied strictly.

[16] Over time the courts have refined the principle to reflect commercial realities.

Recent authorities such as Raiffeisen Zentralbank Österreich AG vs.

Crossseas Shipping Ltd2, has explained that only alterations which are

“material” in nature will void a guarantee as against a non-assenting party. As

Potter LJ observed, material alterations fall broadly into two categories:

I. those which change the very nature or character of the instrument, and

II. those which are potentially prejudicial to the legal rights or obligations of

the guarantor.

An alteration falling within either of these points will discharge a guarantor who

did not assent to it.

[17] In the above case, the guarantor, argued that a guarantee had been invalidated

because, after he had signed it, the bank inserted into clause 37 the name and

address of a company (Crossseas Shipping Ltd) as his agent for service of

process in England. The Court accepted that the insertion was made without his

1 (1614) 11 Co Rep 26b, 77 ER 1177. 2 [2000] 1 WLR 1135

Page 8 of 17

knowledge or consent but held that the alteration was not material because it

was procedural in nature and did not alter the fundamental obligations under

the guarantee.

[18] As Cresswell J explained:

“The contract of guarantee (and indemnity) with cl. 37 completed would not

have operated differently from the guarantee in its original form (with cl. 37

containing blanks). The legal incidence of the contract of guarantee (and

indemnity) was not altered by the insertions into cl. 37. The business effect of

the contract of guarantee (and indemnity), if used for any ordinary business

purpose for which a contract of guarantee (and indemnity) is used, was not

altered by the insertion into cl. 37. The alteration was not, in the context of this

guarantee (and indemnity), material.”

[19] Similarly, in the present case, the typewritten particulars inserted into the

guarantee bond after signature do not fall within either category of “material

alteration.” They did not change the nature or character of the instrument. The

bond remained what it was at execution, a guarantee by the Appellant to answer

the obligations of the 1st Defendant under the lease. No new debtor was

substituted, no new creditor was introduced, and the scope of the obligation

was not changed, nor were these insertions prejudicial to the guarantor’s legal

rights or obligations. The typewritten parts had only specified procedural or

administrative details necessary for the operation of the bond.

[20] For the forgoing reasons, the alterations complained of do not constitute

“material” alterations. The Appellant’s fundamental obligation remained the

same, and his rights as guarantor were not diminished. The guarantee bond

therefore remains valid and enforceable.

Page 9 of 17

1.2 The lease agreement was neither shown or a Sinhala translation was

given to the Appellant.

[21] The learned Counsel for the Appellant further contended that before the

guarantors undertake to indemnify the lessor, it is required that a copy of the

lease agreement be made available to the guarantors to satisfy themselves

regarding the total sum and the interest to be indemnified, moreso due to the

1st recital to the guarantee bond which obligates the guarantors to ensure

“punctual payment by the Lessee of all rentals, interest, the Stipulated Loss

value referred to in Schedule of Lease Agreement and all other sums whatso

ever due under the Lease Agreement and the performance of all the Lessee’s

obligations thereunder ---"

[22] In support of this claim, the Appellant relied on the testimony of the Plaintiff’s

witness, Belan Daminda, who admitted that the guarantors were not shown the

lease agreement or its schedules at the time of signing. He testified to a general

procedural practice where the guarantors are verbally informed of the sum

indemnified by the guarantors in the lease agreement. The witness stated that

in this instance, the guarantors did not have the opportunity to go through the

lease agreement or the schedules before signing the document, however, the

responsibilities and the conditions of the guarantors were explained.

[23] His testimony included the following:

Cross examination dated: 20/10/2017.

Pg 186 of the appeal brief

ප්‍ර: මහත්මයා මේ 'පැ8' මේඛනමේ යේ ස්ථානයක තිමෙනවාද 1 වන විත්තිකරුට ලො දුන්න

මුළු මුදල සේෙන්ධමයන් කේෙදු ගිවිසුමේ?

උ: මුදලක් සටහන් කරලා නැහැ ස්වාමීනී'

Page 10 of 17

ප්‍ර: මහත්මයා 'පැ8' මේඛනමේ මකාමහ් හරි සඳහන් මවනවද අදාළ කේෙදු ගිවිසුම

සේෙන්ධමයන් 1 වන විත්තිකරු මෙවිය යුතු වාරිකය සේෙන්ධව?

උ: ඒක මං හරියටම දන්මන් නැහැ'

ප්‍ර: එතමකාට මහත්මයා අත්සන් කරන්න පැමිණි අවස්ථාමේදී තමුන් මමානවද කියා සිටිමේ 3

වන විත්තිකරුට?

උ: 3 වන විත්තිකරු ආවට පස්මස් අයිමෙන්ටි කාඩ් එක මෙක් කලා' මෙක් කරලා අයිමෙන්ටි

කාඩ් නේෙර් එක ෙලලා එයාමේ අයිමෙන්ටි කාඩ් නේෙරය තිමයන තැන නම තිමයන තැන

අත්සන් කරන්න කියලා තමයි කිේමේ.

ප්‍ර: මවන යමක් කියා සිටිමේ නැද්ද 3 වන විත්තිකරුට?

උ: කියා සිටියා' දැන් මේමක් ඇග්‍රිමන්් එකක් අත්සන් කරද්ි අපි කියනවා" සාමානයමයන්

මේකම කියන්මන් නැහැ අපි සරලව මේමක් අත්සන් කරන් තිමයන වෙකීම ෙැන මපාඩි

දැනුේදීමක් කරනවා' ඒ කියන්මන් ඇග්‍රිමන්් එකක් අත්සන් කලහම ඒ කියන්මන්

අයදුේකරුට මෙවන්න ෙැරි jqමනාත් එමහම අයදුේකරුත් ඇපකරුවන් මදන්නටම නඩු

දාන්න පුළුවන්. අයදුේකරුට ඊළඟට එයා මපනී මනාසිටිමයාත් අපට පළමවනි අවස්ථාමේම

ඇපකරුවන් මදමදනාට නඩු දාන්න පුළුවන් කියලා පැහැිලි කරලා තිමයනවා.

ප්‍ර: එපමණද 3 වන විත්තිකරුට තමqන් පැහැිලි කමළ් එින?

උ: ඔේ tපමණයි පැහැිලි කමේ.

ප්‍ර: යේ අවස්ථාවකදී කේෙදු ගිවිසුම මපන්නා සිටිමයත් නැහැ?

උ: නැහැ'

Page 187 of the appeal brief:

ප්‍ර: මහත්මයා ඇපකරුවන්ට විරුද්ධව නඩු දාන්න ඇපකරුවන් දැන ගෙන සිටිය යුතුයි මන්ද

අත්සන් කරන අවස්ථාමේදී මේ කේෙදු ගිවිසුමමන් ලො දුන්න මුදල සේෙන්ධව?

Page 11 of 17

උ: ඒක අපි අයදුේ පත්‍රය අත්සන් කරන අවස්ථාමේ ෙන්න මුදලයි එයා මකාච්ෙර කාමලකටද

ෙන්මන කියලා ඒ සියලු මද්වේ පැහැිලි කරලා දීලා තමයි අයදුේ පත්‍රය අත්සන් කරන්ගේ.

ප්‍ර: කාටද ඒවා පැහැිලි කග ්?

උ: ඇපකරුවන්ටයි‚ අයදුේකරුටයි තුන්මදනාටම පැහැිලි කරනවා අයදුේ

පත්‍රය අත්සන් කරන මකාට'

[24] The Appellant further contends that his consent as guarantor was vitiated

because the lease agreement was not shown to him at the time of execution and

because he was not provided with a Sinhala translation of the agreement, which

was in English. He claims that being unable to read English, he could not fully

appreciate the obligations he was undertaking.

[25] Belan, when further questioned about the rubber stamp, seen on top of the

document, confirming that the guarantors had received a Sinhala translation of

the agreement, failed to respond.

ප්‍ර: අයදුේ පත්‍රය ෙැන මං ඇහුfව නැහැ මහත්මයා. zපැ8Z මේඛනමේ තිමයන මුද්‍රාව ෙලන්න

මහත්මයා. ඒ මුද්‍රාව තමුන්ට කියවන්න පුළුවන්ද මහත්මයා ෙරු අධිකරණයට ඇfහkak?

උ: මමම කුලී සින්නක්කර/කේෙදු ඇපකරු ගිවිසුම සිංහල පරිවර්තන පිටපතක් ලැබුණු ෙවට

සහතික කරනවා.

ප්‍ර: එතමකාට මහත්මයා මමාන මේඛනමේද සිංහල පිටපත් පරිවර්තනයක් ලො දුන්මන්?

උ: මේ zපැ8Z කියන එමක් තමයි ඇපකරුවන්ට මදන්මන්. අයදුම්කරුට මදන්මන් එයා අත්සන්

කරන ලීස් අග්‍රීමමන්් එමක් පිටපතක්.

ප්‍ර: මහත්මයා මන්ද මේ ගිවිසුමට අත්සන් ලො ෙත්මත්?

උ: ඔේ.

Page 12 of 17

ප්‍ර: මහත්මයාට හිතුගන නැද්ද මේ අදාල නැති වෙන අවම වශමයන් පෑනකින් කපා හැරිය යුතුයි

කියලා?

උ: (පිළිතුරක් නැත)

[26] However, the position that no copy of the lease agreement was provided to the

guarantors fails to consider the essential fact that the Appellant was at all times

aware that he was signing as a guarantor for the 1st Defendant’s obligations, and

that his liability would arise in the event of default.

[27] It remains incumbent upon the creditor to ensure that the guarantor is made

aware of the essential nature and extent of the obligation undertaken. In the

ordinary course of banking practice, this would include making clear the

amount guaranteed. In the present case, the evidence of Belan Daminda is that

the guarantors were verbally informed of the liability under the lease agreement

before signing. For that reason, the Court is satisfied that the Appellant was

aware of the nature of his obligation, notwithstanding that the lease agreement

itself was not shown to him.

[28] The Appellant further sought to rely on the alleged absence of a Sinhala

translation. The guarantee bond bears a rubber stamp certifying receipt of

“translations of the lease agreement/guarantee bond,” above which the

Appellant has signed. He now contends that no translation of the lease

agreement was in fact provided. The Respondent’s witness clarified that the

practice is to furnish guarantors with a translation of the guarantee bond which

defines their obligations and not of the Lease Agreement. The reference to both

instruments on the rubber stamp appears to be a standard form in which the

inapplicable words were not struck out. Importantly, the Appellant has never

asserted that he did not receive a translation of the guarantee bond itself.

Page 13 of 17

[29] As explained above, the law does not require that the lease agreement be

translated for the guarantor, it is sufficient that he understands his

responsibilities under the bond. On the evidence, that requirement was met.

1.3 Analysis

[30] The 3rd Defendant-Appellant takes up the position that he is not liable to pay

the demanded sum since the guarantee bond was incomplete at the time he

placed his signature. The Appellant also contends that due to his inability to

read and understand the English language, he required a Sinhala translation of

the Agreement, which was not given to him. Under cross-examination, the 3rd

Defendant-Appellant refers to certain numbers in document P8, which he

claims include the typewritten parts.

[31] The Respondent was obligated to explain to the guarantors the nature of the

transaction and the liability imposed on them in the event the principal debtor

defaults. It is evident that the 3rd Defendant-Appellant, as guarantor, was aware

of the amount he was liable to pay to the lessor in the event of any default of

payment of the obligated sum.

[32] The Judge of the Commercial High Court, in the overall analysis of the evidence,

concluded that the 3rd Defendant-Appellant was aware that he signed P8 as a

guarantor to the 1st Defendant, that the 1st Defendant had defaulted on payment,

that failure or neglect to pay the sum guaranteed or the return of “the property”,

the liability was on the guarantor to pay its value on demand. The trial Judge

observed that, although the 3rd Defendant-Appellant claims to have signed a

document which had blank spaces, the Appellant was admittedly a literate

businessman owning a trading business and was not under any incapacity or

disability, such as blindness or deafness, to be misguided.

Page 14 of 17

[33] Although the Appellant did not expressly plead the defence of non est factum,

the learned trial Judge in the above observation appears to have treated the

Appellant’s claim to be similar to the defence “non est factum” meaning a plea

denying execution of the instrument sued on or signing a document by a person

without knowing its contents. I am of the view that this was an appropriate

application of the principle by the learned High Court Judge. This plea is

primarily available to persons who are illiterate, sick, or incapacitated. It can

also extend to an executor of a document presumed to have read and

understood the document before its execution; however, by proving that it was

not the document the executor intended to sign, or that it was obtained by fraud

or force.

[34] Regarding the usage of this principle, Paget on Law of banking states as

follows3:

“The doctrine is now rarely invoked successfully, and negligence in failing to

ascertain the meaning of the document can prevent its application. So in

Saunders v Anglia Building Society, an elderly widow failed to read a

document which she executed in the belief that it was a deed of gift of a

property to her nephew, when in fact it was an assignment to a third party.

The House of Lords rejected a plea of non est factum in a dispute between the

claimant widow and a lender who had innocently lent money on the strength

of the document. The claimant had known that she was signing a legal

document, and although she was mistaken as to its terms, she had not taken

the trouble to read it so as to ascertain even its general effect.”

3 Paget's Law of Banking (15th edn, LexisNexis Butterworths 2018) 376, para 13.27.

Page 15 of 17

[35] Prof. C.G. Weeramantry in ‘Law of Contracts’ states as follows:

“A person signing a document is held strictly to its terms on the basis that he

does so at his peril. This is known as the caveat subscriptor rule, and in the

operation of this rule the principles relating to justus error come into play.

This rule must not however be viewed as a special head of exemption from the

ordinary rules relating to mistake. Where a person deliberately affixes his

signature to a written contract, the court would naturally be more hesitant in

permitting him to plead that he did so in consequence of a mistake as to the

nature or substance of the transaction, and to this extent would be less prone

to view the error as justus.”4

[36] I also wish to echo the opinion of A.H.M.D. Nawaz, J, in the judgement of

Nimalasena vs. L.B. Finance Company Ltd and others5 where he held that;

“I also find that the 2nd defendant appellant was a technician and a

tradesman on his own admission. The witness came through as a man of the

world who could not have been so naive as to be unaware of the implications

of placing one's signature to a guarantee. If he knew that the act of signing a

guarantee would spell for him disastrous consequences of monetary burdens,

he should have exhibited prudence. So his assertion that he only signed as a

witness and not as a guarantor does not inspire confidence in this Court. The

necessity to exercise prudence was emphasized by the House of Lords in the

context of the plea of non est factum.”

[37] The guarantors have not pleaded fraud or force when obtaining signatures, or

that the signatures were placed unintentionally or without a complete

understanding of the implications. The nature and the contents of the

4 Law of Contracts 1999 reprint, vol. 1 at page 300 5 C.A. Case No. 831/2000 (F) decided on 06/02/2017

Page 16 of 17

Agreement were explained before the guarantors placed their signatures. There

is no evidence that the guarantors were induced to sign the document believing

it to be something different. In such circumstances and taking the above-

mentioned authorities into consideration, the guarantors should be held

responsible for their actions.

2. Whether the Lease Agreement (P2) Was Lawfully Terminated

[38] It is also contended that by the notice for acceleration of payment dated

17/03/2012, P5, the Plaintiff has demanded that all monies due to the Plaintiff

be paid within 14 days of the receipt of the said letter. The relevant postal article

receipt and the seal of the postal authorities are dated 22/03/2012 and

23/03/2912 respectively and are marked ‘P5(a)’. However, the Plaintiff sought

to terminate the Lease Agreement by letter dated 31/03/2012 (marked P6). In

the circumstances, it is contended that the Plaintiff has terminated the Lease

Agreement by letter P6, without the lapse of 14 days, and therefore the learned

trial Judge has erred in law in answering Issue No. 05.

[39] Issue No. 05, raised in the Commercial High Court was limited to the question

“whether the lease agreement marked ‘A’ terminated” [Emphasis added],

to which the court answered correctly as ‘yes’. In addition, the purported lapse

on the part of the Respondent was not pleaded before the Commercial High

Court, nor was it put in cross-examination or pleaded in the Petition of Appeal

to this Court; therefore, it attracts no merit.

[40] For all the above reasons, I am of the view that the Plaintiff-Respondent has

asserted its position taken in the Plaint dated 01/02/2013, in the evidence led

before Court, to establish that the Plaintiff should be granted the reliefs as

prayed for in the Plaint, in terms of prayers (a) (b), and (c).

Page 17 of 17

[41] In all the above circumstances, I answer questions of law Nos. 1, 2, and 3 in the

negative and uphold and affirm the Judgement dated 12/10/2018 of the

Commercial High Court. Accordingly, this Appeal is dismissed with costs fixed

at Rs. 50,000/-

Judge of the Supreme Court

Janak De Silva, J.

I agree

Judge of the Supreme Court

Sampath B. Abayakoon, J.

I agree

Judge of the Supreme Court