IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for leave to Appeal

against the Order/Judgment of the Civil Appellate

High Court of the Southern Province holden in

Galle.

Supreme Court Appeal No:Wijesekera Subhasingha Sathyananda,

SC/Appeal/16/2022 Divisional Secretary,

Supreme Court L.A No: Divisional Secretariat,

SC/HCCA LA No. 236/2021 Nagoda.

SP HCCA/GA/LA /04/2020

District Court of Galle

Case No: LA/613

PLAINTIFF

Vs.

1. Land Reform Commission, PO Box 1526, No. C 82, Hector Kobbakaduwa Mawatha, Colombo 07.

2. Elpitiya Plantation Company now

Known as Elpitiya Plantation PLC, No.73/3, Ward Place, Colombo 07.

Presently at Aitken Spence Tower, No. 315, Vauxhall Street, Colombo 02.

3. Sri Lanka State Plantations Corporation,

No. 21, BCC Premises,

1

Miraniya Street, Colombo 01.

DEFENDANTS

AND BETWEEN

3. Sri Lanka State Plantations Corporation, No. 21, BCC Premises, Miraniya Street,

Colombo 01.

3 rd DEFENDANT - PETITIONER

Vs.

Wijesekera Subhasingha Sathyananda,Divisional Secretary,Divisional Secretariat,Nagoda.

PLAINTIFF - RESPONDENT

AND

1. Land Reform Commission,

PO Box 1526, No. C 82, Hector Kobbakaduwa Mawatha, Colombo 07.

2.Elpitiya Plantation Company now Known asElpitiya Plantation PLC,No.73/3, Ward Place, Colombo 07.

Presently at Aitken Spence Tower, No. 315, Vauxhall Street, Colombo 02.

DEFENDANTS – RESPONDENTS

AND NOW BETWEEN

2

2. Elpitiya Plantation Company now

Known as Elpitiya Plantation PLC, No.73/3, Ward Place, Colombo 07. Presently at Aitken Spence Tower, No. 315, Vauxhall Street, Colombo 02.

2 nd DEFENDANT – RESPONDENT – PETITIONER-

APPELLANT

Vs.

Wijesekera Subhasingha Sathyananda,

Divisional Secretary, Divisional Secretariat,

Nagoda.

PLAINTIFF -RESPONDENT – RESPONDENT-

RESPONDENT

AND

1. Land Reform Commission,

PO Box 1526, No. C 82, Hector Kobbakaduwa Mawatha, Colombo 07.

Presently of No. 475, Kaduwela Road, Battaramulla.

1 st DEFENDANT – RESPONDENT – RESPONDENT - RESPONDENT

3. Sri Lanka State Plantations Corporation, No. 21, BCC Premises,

3

Miraniya Street,

Colombo 01.

3 rd DEFENDANT – PETITIONER –

RESPONDENT – RESPONDENT

BEFORE: S. Thurairaja P.C., J.

Menaka Wijesundera, J. &

M. Sampath K. B. Wijeratne J.

COUNSEL: Samantha Vithana with Samudika de Silva for the 2nd Defendant – Respondent – Petitioner.

Sabrina Ahmed, SSC for the Plaintiff– Respondent – Respondent.

A.D.H. Gunawardana with Shanaka Warnakulasooriya for the 1st Defendant-Respondent – Respondent.

ARGUED ON : 07.05.2025

DECIDED ON: 18.09.2025

M. Sampath K. B. Wijeratne J.

Introduction

This is an appeal from the judgment of the Civil Appellate High Court of the

Southern Province holden at Galle. By their judgment delivered on April 27, 2021,

the learned High Court Judges set aside the judgment of the learned District Judge of

Galle delivered on February 24, 2020, on the ground that the learned District Judge

erred in law and in fact by failing to consider the issues before Court from a correct

legal perspective.

4

When the matter was supported for Leave to Appeal on March 4, 2022 against the

judgment delivered by the Civil Appellate High Court, Galle, this Court granted

Leave to Appeal on the questions of law No 1 to 5 stated in Paragraph 25 (at page 11)

of the Petition and the 6th question of law which was formulated by this Court.

The said questions of law are,

i. Have their Lordships of the High Court of Civil Appeal erred in law by

misinterpreting a judgment of Perera v. Dinigri Manike reported in 63 NLR page

169?

ii. Have their Lordships of the High Court of Civil Appeal erred in law as they have

not followed the judgment of Perera v. Dinigri Manike reported in 63 NLR page

169?

iii. Have their Lordships of the High Court of Civil Appeal erred in law to state that

the claim of the 3rd Defendant- Petitioner -Respondent could have been considered

in the District Court as the 3rd Defendant did not make any claim or failed to

participate at the inquiry held before the Acquiring Officer of Nagoda in terms of

the Section 9 (1) of the Land Acquisition Act No 9 of 1950?

iv. Have their Lordships of the High Court of Civil Appeal erred in law that the

District Court of Galle has no jurisdiction to inquire into the claim and/or title of

the 3rd Defendant as the 3rd Defendant did not make a claim at the inquiry held

before the Acquiring Officer of the Nagoda? (sic)

v. Have their Lordships of the High Court of Civil Appeal erred in law as they have

failed to appreciate the fact that the learned District Judge has correctly answered

issues No. 35 (i), (ii) & (iii) raised in this case?

vi. Could the 3rd Defendant -Petitioner-Respondent be added as a party to the

proceedings in the District Court in view of Section 18 of the Civil Procedure

Code?

5

Factual background

The Minister of Land Development and Minor Export Agriculture, by Extraordinary

Gazette Notification No. 1203/11 dated September 24, 2001, published under Section

5(1) of the Land Acquisition Act, declared that Lot No. 1, depicted in the Surveyor

General’s advance tracing No. GA/NGD/00/554 dated January 27, 2001, of the land

called Talgaswelawatte, of an extent of 12.142 Hectares and situated in the village of

Mapalagama (FVP 526) in the Divisional Secretary’s Division of Nagoda, Galle

District, was required for a public purpose and would be acquired under the

provisions of the Land Acquisition Act.

Consequently, a notice under Section 7 of the Land Acquisition Act was published in

Extraordinary Gazette Notification No. 1330/7 dated March 2, 2004, and in

newspapers in all three languages, requiring persons interested in the same land to

present their claims for compensation to the Divisional Secretary, the Acquiring

Officer. The allotment of the said land to be acquired was described as the land

depicted in FVP 526, Sheet No. 77. A copy of the plan is filed of record. The said

notice also included the particulars of the claimant, Elpitiya Plantations Company.

Subsequently, a correction to the said notice was published in Extraordinary Gazette

Notification No. 1641/46 dated February 18, 2010. The only correction made was the

updated address of the claimant, Elpitiya Plantations Company.

Consequent to the publication of the notices, the Divisional Secretary, as the

Acquiring Officer, proceeded to hold an inquiry into the claims for compensation in

terms of Section 9 of the Land Acquisition Act.

The scope of an inquiry under Section 9 is defined within the section itself. For

clarity, I reproduce below the relevant portions of Section 9 applicable to the present

appeal.

“9 (1). (…) hold an inquiry into -

6

(a) the market value of that land or of the servitude which is to be acquired

over that land;

(b) such claims for compensation as may have been notified to him within the

time allowed therefor by that notice or in accordance with the aforesaid

proviso;

(c) the respective interests of the persons claiming compensation; and

(d) any other matter which needs investigation for the purpose of making an

award under section 17.

(…) (2)

(…) (2A)

(3) The Acquiring Officer conducting an inquiry under subsection (1) may by a

summons under his hand require -

(a) any person whose evidence is, in the judgment of such Acquiring Officer,

likely to be material to the subject matter of the inquiry, to attend and give

evidence (…)

(b) any person to produce at the inquiry, on such date and at such time and place

as may be mentioned in the summons, for examination by such Acquiring

Officer or (…), likely to contain such information as may be necessary to

determine the interests of that person or of any other person in the land to

which the inquiry relates or (…) and

(…) (4) – (6)” [Emphasis added]

An inquiry into the claims was conducted by the Divisional Secretary of Nagoda, in

his capacity as the designated Acquiring Officer, in terms of Section 9 of the Land

Acquisition Act.

7

At the inquiry, only the Director (Revenue) of the Land Reform Commission

(hereinafter referred to as the ‘LRC’) and the General Manager of Elpitiya

Plantations PLC had given statements, which are filed of record. In his statement, the

officer of the Land Reform Commission challenged the validity of Extraordinary

Gazette Notification No. 181/12 dated February 27, 1982.

However, the validity of the Gazette notification cannot be challenged in a

proceeding of this nature, namely, an inter-pleader action.

Be that as it may, the Director of the LRC, in his statement, challenged the validity of

the Gazette notification on two grounds. The first ground is that the notice is said to

have been published under Section ‘42එච්’ read together with Section 27ඒ of the

Land Reform Law; however, as there is no Section ‘27ඒ’ in the Act, the notice is

allegedly defective. When comparing the sections of the Act and the statements of the

Director of the 'LRC' carefully, it is readily apparent that the letters ‘42එච්’ and

‘27ඒ’, though written in Sinhala, correspond to the English text ‘42H’ and ‘27A’.

The second ground is that compensation for the land acquired was not paid to the

LRC by the SLSPC. However, Section 27A (1) of the Land Reform Law specifies

that a vesting order of any estate land to a corporation should specify the terms and

conditions “(...)relating to consideration for the vesting of that land in such

Corporation as may be agreed upon between the Commission and such

Corporation.” In my view, these words do not mean that consideration must

necessarily be paid for the land vested to a corporation. Rather, all that is required is

that the order contain “conditions relating to consideration for the vesting of the

land.” Accordingly, Gazette Notification No. 181/12 dated February 27, 1982,

contained conditions stating that no consideration is payable in respect of the land.

“මෙකී ඉඩම වෙනුවෙන් ගෙවිය යුතු මුදල පිළිබද කිසියම් පොරොන්දුවක් හෝ ගිවිසුමක්

ඇතුලත් නොවේ.”

Therefore, in any event, the claim put forward by the LRC challenging the validity of

the Gazette has no merit.

8

Decision Following the Acquiring Officer’s Inquiry

Consequent to the inquiry, the Acquiring Officer referred the dispute to the District

Court of Galle in terms of Section 10 of the Land Acquisition Act, by plaint dated

March 3, 2015. The LRC and Elpitiya Plantations Company, now known as Elpitiya

Plantations PLC, were named as the 1st and 2nd Defendants, respectively. The

Acquiring Officer informed Court that both the LRC and Elpitiya Plantations PLC

had submitted their claims to him in terms of Section 9 of the Land Acquisition Act,

and that, having inquired into those claims, he was unable to determine the title to the

land in order to award compensation. Accordingly, he requested the District Court to

decide the dispute and determine the title1.

Proceedings Before the District Court

The 1st Defendant, LRC, submitted its statement of claim to the District Court,

seeking a declaration that it is the absolute owner of the subject matter and, therefore,

entitled to receive compensation for the acquired land. The 2nd Defendant, Elpitiya

Plantations PLC, filed a statement of claim seeking a declaration that it is entitled to

compensation for the land acquired and that it is the lawful lessee who was in

possession of the land.

Undoubtedly, the 2nd Defendant, Elpitiya Plantations PLC, is the lawful long-term

lessee of the SLSPC. However, under the law of Sri Lanka, no distinction is drawn

between short-term and long-term leases. As pointed out by Hutchinson C.J in the

Abdul Azeez v. Abdul Rahiman2 case, which was also reproduced in the Carron v

Fernando3 case, "A lessee under a valid lease from the owner is dominus or owner

for the term of his lease. He is owner during that term as against all the world,

including his lessor".Nevertheless, as against the lessor, the lessee’s rights are

confined to those arising under the lease.

1Chapter XLIII of the Civil Procedure Code, Inter-pleader actions.2Abdul Azeez v Abdul Rahiman 2(1909) Current Law Reports Vol. I.,275.3 Carron v Fernando et al (1933) 35 NLR 352.

9

Implications of the introduction of Land Reform Law

With the introduction of the Land Reform Law, agricultural lands owned by any

person in excess of the ceiling stipulated in the Land Reform Law were vested in the

LRC by operation of law4. By the subsequent Amendment No. 39 of 1975, Part IIIA

was introduced to the LRC Law, under which estate lands owned by public

companies were also deemed to be vested in and possessed by the LRC. The effect of

such vesting, as provided by Section 42A (2) of the Land Reform Law, is that the

LRC obtained absolute title to such estate land as from the date of vesting. Sections

42H (a) to (e) specify the purposes for which the estate lands so vested in the LRC

may be used. According to Section 42H (c), such land could be ‘alienated to any

corporation established or to be established under the State Agricultural

Corporations Act or to the Sri Lanka State Plantations Corporation established

under the Sri Lanka State Plantations Corporation Act.’[Emphasis added]

The objective of the Sri Lanka State Plantations Corporation (hereinafter referred to

as the ‘SLSPC’), as per the Sri Lanka State Plantations Corporation Act No. 4 of

1958 as amended by amendment Act No 49 of 1979 (Section 5), was:

“inter alia, of ‘to manage agricultural and estate lands vested in, transferred or

alienated to the Corporation by the Government or any other person or acquired by

the Corporation, and to promote optimum productivity on such lands”5

Section 27A (1) of the Land Reform Law reads as follows;

“27A (1) At the request of the Commission, the Minister may, where he considers it

necessary in the interest of the Commission to do so, subject to sections 22, 23 and

42H, by Order published in the Gazette, vest, in any State Corporation specified in

the Order, with effect from a date specified in that Order, any agricultural land or

estate land or any portion of the land vested in the Commission under this Law, and

described in the order, subject to such terms and conditions relating to consideration

for the vesting of that land in such Corporation as may be agreed upon between the

4Vide Section 3(2) of the LRC law No 1 of 1972.5Vide Section 6 of Sri Lanka State Plantations Corporation (amendment) Act No. 49 of 1979.

10

Commission and such Corporation.”

(2) - (4) (…)[Emphasis added]

The consequences of an order made under Section 27A (1) are set out in Sections

27A (2) and (3). The Minister of Agricultural Development and Research made the

order relevant to this application in terms of Section 27A, read together with Section

42H, which was published in Extraordinary Gazette No. 181/12 dated February 27,

1982.

The order reads as follows:

‘ප්‍රතිසංස්කරණ කොමිෂන් සභාවේ අභිවෘද්ධිය සඳහා එසේ කිරීම අවශ්‍යයි සළකා බැලීමෙන්

පසුව එම කොමිෂන් සභාව විසින් කරන ලද ඉල්ලීමක් අනුව, 1975 අංක 39 දරණ පනතින් ද,

1981 අංක 14 දරණ පනතින් ද, 1981 අංක 39 දරණ පනතින් ද සංශෝධනය කරන ලද 1972

අංක 1 දරණ ඉඩම් ප්‍රතිසංස්කරණ නීතියේ අංක 42 එච් වගන්තිය සමග කියැවෙන ඒ

වගන්තිය යටතේ මෙහි පහත උපලේඛනයේ සදහන් වතු 1958 අංක 4 දරණ ලංකා රාජ්‍ය

වැවිලි සංස්ථා පණත යටතේ පිහිටුවා ඇති ශ්‍රී ලංකා රාජ්‍ය වැවිලි සංස්ථාවට මෙයින් පවරා

දෙනු ලැබේ.’

The entire estate of Talgaswelawatte, within the Administrative District of Galle and

measuring 793.16 Hectares, is included in the Schedule to the said Gazette

Notification. Consequently, in terms of Section 27A (1) of the Land Reform Law, the

title to the entire Talgaswelawatte estate was transferred to the SLSPC, effective from

the date of the order, together with all rights and liabilities of the LRC in respect of

said estate 6.

Although the 1st Respondent, LRC, argued that only the control and management of

subject estate were vested in the 3rd Defendant, SLSPC, Sections 27A (2) and (3)

clearly reflect the legislature’s intention that not only the rights but also the liabilities

of the LRC in respect of estate lands, together with ownership of such lands, vest in

the corporation to which an order under subsection (1) is made.

6Vide Section 27A (2) and (3).

11

For clarity, I reproduce below Sections 27A (2) and (3), which read as follows:

“27A (1) (…)

(2)An Order under subsection (1) shall have the effect of vesting in such

State Corporation specified in the Order such right, title and interest to

the agricultural land or estate land or portion thereof described in that

Order, as was held by the Commission on the day immediately preceding

the date on which the Order takes effect.

(3)Where any agricultural land or estate land or any portion thereof is

vested in a State Corporation by an Order made under subsection (1), all

the rights and liabilities of the Commission under any contract or

agreement, express or implied, which relate to such agricultural land or

estate land or portion thereof, and which subsist on the day immediately

prior to the date of such vesting, shall become the rights and liabilities of

such State Corporation.”

(3), (4) (…)” [Emphasis Added]

The Statutory duty upon the Acquiring Officer

As per the 2nd Respondent’s statement of claim and the petition filed by the 3rd

Respondent in the High Court, by virtue of Gazette (Extraordinary) No. 720/2 dated

June 22, 1992, the management and control of Talgaswelawatte were handed over to

the Janatha Estate Development Board (hereinafter referred to as the ‘JEDB’).

Thereafter, both the JEDB and the SLSPC (3rd Defendant) entered into Lease

Agreement No. 346 dated May 4, 1995, attested by Daphne Peiris, Notary Public, by

which the aforesaid land Talgaswelawatte, measuring 1,847 acres, 2 roods, and 10

perches, was leased to 2nd Defendant Elpitiya Plantations PLC for a period of 99

years, with effect from June 22, 1992. Accordingly, possession was handed over to

Elpitiya Plantations PLC, which has been exercising the control and management of

the estate up to date. Subsequently, an amendment was made to the original lease

12

agreement by Deed of Amendment of Lease No. 1566 dated December 11, 1995,

attested by Manik Dias Amarathunge, Notary Public, by which the lease period was

reduced to 53 years, ending on June 21, 2045.

As quoted above, pursuant to Section 9 of the Land Acquisition Act, the Acquiring

Officer must hold an inquiry into the market value of the land or servitude to be

acquired, the claims for compensation, and the respective interests of the persons

making such claims, as well as any other matters that require investigation for the

purpose of making an award under Section 17. In making such an award under

Section 9, the Acquiring Officer must, inter alia, determine the persons entitled to

compensation and the nature of their interests in the land. Consequently, the

Acquiring Officer is duty-bound to ascertain both the entitlement to compensation

and the nature of each claimant’s interest in the land.

In terms of Section 9(3)(a) of the Land Acquisition Act, the Acquiring Officer

conducting an inquiry is empowered to require the attendance of any person whose

evidence, in his judgment, is likely to be material to the subject matter of the inquiry,

by issuing summons for such attendance and to give evidence at the inquiry. He is

also empowered to require any person to produce any document likely to contain

information necessary to determine that person's interest, or the interest of any other

person, in the land, or the amount of compensation payable for such interest.

At the conclusion of an inquiry held under Section 9, the Acquiring Officer shall

prepare a report setting out the names of the persons who, in his opinion, are entitled

to compensation, the nature of their respective interests, and the amount of

compensation he proposes to award in respect of each such interest or refer the

matter for determination by Court.

Section 10 reads thus;

10 (1) At the conclusion of an inquiry held under section 9, the Acquiring Officer

holding the inquiry shall either-

13

a) make a decision on every claim made by any person to any right, title or

interest to, in or over the land which is to be acquired or over which a

servitude is to be acquired and on every such dispute as may have arisen

between any claimants as to any such right, title or interest, and give notice

of his decision to the claimant or to each of the parties to the dispute, or

b) refer the claim or dispute for determination as hereinafter provided.

(2) – (5) (…) [Emphasis added]

When Section 10(1) is read in isolation, one might gain the impression that the

decision of the Acquiring Officer is only confined to the claims made before him.

However, as I have already stated above, the Acquiring Officer conducting an inquiry

is expected to summon any person whose evidence is likely to be material to the

subject matter, and to require the production of any document likely to contain

information necessary to determine the interest of that person or of any other

person in the land.

Consequently, the Acquiring Officer is expected to diligently determine not only the

rights of the claimants who have submitted claims, but also the rights of any other

persons who, despite not having made a claim, hold an interest whatsoever in the

land. As such, not only the claimants but also those with interests in the land should

be considered 'parties' to the dispute, to whom the Acquiring Officer is required to

give notice of his decision after the inquiry, in terms of Section 10(1)(a) of the Land

Acquisition Act. Accordingly, any person having an interest in the land who ought to

have been summoned by the Acquiring Officer, but was not, must be regarded as a

necessary party to the dispute. In this context, it is relevant to dig into the legal

definition of the word 'necessary party'. The Black's Law dictionary 7 provides the

meaning of the word as follows.

“In pleading and practice, those persons who must be joined in an action

because, inter alia, complete relief cannot be given to those already parties

without their joinder. Necessary parties are those who must be included in

7Black's Law Dictionary, Bryan A. Garner, 6th Edition at page 1030.

14

action either as plaintiff or defendants, unless there is a valid excuse for

their non-joinder. City of Hutchinson v. Hutchinson, Kansas Office of

Kansas State Employment Service, 213 Kan. 399,517 P 2d 117, 122. Those

persons who have such an interest in controversy that a final judgment or

decree cannot be made without either affecting their rights or leaving the

controversy in such a condition that its final adjudication may be wholly

inconsistent with equity and good conscience. Royal Petroleum Corp vs

Dennis 160 Tex 392, 332 S.W. 2d 313, 314."

As a result, when a matter is referred to the District Court under Section 10(1)(b) of

the Land Acquisition Act, such parties should be named as parties to the dispute

referred by the Acquiring Officer for determination by Court. In the present case, the

Director of the Land Reform Commission (LRC), in his statement before the

Acquiring Officer, acknowledged the existence of Gazette (Extraordinary)

Notification No. 181/12 dated February 27, 1982, by which Talgaswelawatte was

vested in the Sri Lanka State Plantation Corporation (SLSPC). The General Manager

of Elpitiya Plantations PLC stated that Talgaswelawatte, which was owned by the

SLSPC, had been leased to Elpitiya Plantations PLC and produced the deed of lease

in support. However, the Acquiring Officer failed to summon the SLSPC to the

inquiry under Section 9(3)(a) and (b) of the Land Acquisition Act which was a fatal

error committed by him. In fact, from the very outset of the inquiry, he was unable to

correctly identify the parties having interests to the subject land, which led to all the

subsequent issues.

After referring the dispute to Court, the District Judge of Galle, having accepted the

plaint, issued summons to the 1st and 2nd Defendants. Consequently, the 1st Defendant

filed a statement of claim dated November 30, 2015, filed on March 28, 2016 and the

2nd Defendant filed a statement of claim on March 20, 2017. Thereafter, the matter

was fixed for inquiry. Prior to the commencement of the inquiry, the 3rd Defendant,

SLSPC, filed a motion through an attorney-at-law requesting a date to file a proxy

along with an application to intervene in the case8. However, only a proxy for the 3rd

Defendant was filed9. Nevertheless, the Court allowed the 3rd Defendant to file a

8 Vide page 170 of the Appeal brief.9 Vide Journal entries dated May 16, 2019 and June 25 2019.

15

statement of claim which he did10.Now the question would be whether the 3rd

Defendant is eligible to intervene in the District Court action without claiming his

interests before the Acquiring officer. (note: this is because his intervention is already

done without objection) The relevant statutory provision for the addition of parties is

contained in Section 18(1) of the Civil Procedure Code, the pertinent part of which

reads as follows:

"18(1) (…) the name of any person who ought to have been joined,

whether as plaintiff or defendant, or whose presence before the court may

be necessary in order to enable the court effectually and completely to

adjudicate upon and settle all the questions involved in that action, be

added"

Section 18(2) of the Civil Procedure Code provides that any order for amendment or

alteration of parties shall state the facts and reasons which together form the grounds

on which the order is made. However, in this instance, the learned District Judge has

failed to comply with the requirements of Section 18(2).

Thereafter, the matter proceeded to inquiry before the District Court. At the inquiry,

three admissions were recorded. The 1st Defendant framed issues numbered 1 to 17;

the 2nd Defendant framed issues numbered 18 to 26 and 35; and the 3rd Defendant

framed issues numbered 27 to 34, and 36 and 37.

Subsequently, the parties moved to try issue No. 25 framed by the 2nd Defendant and

issue No. 36 framed by the 3rd Defendant as issues of law at the first instance11.

Consequently, the parties were allowed to file their written submissions, to which the

2nd and 3rd Defendants acceded. Although the proceedings dated December 6, 2019,

state that the application was to decide issues No. 25 and 36 as preliminary issues, the

written submissions of the 2nd Defendant refer to issues No. 35, 36, and 37, while

those of the 3rd Defendant refer only to issues No. 35 and 36.

10 Vide Journal entry dated July 29, 2019.11 Vide proceedings dated December 6, 2019 at page 75 and 76 of the appeal brief.

16

In any event, issue No. 25 is not a question of law and therefore not an issue that

could be decided as a preliminary issue. The learned District Judge, in his order dated

February 24, 2020, proceeded to answer the three issues No. 35, 36, and 37. The

learned District Judge took into account the fact that the 2nd Defendant, Elpitiya

Plantations PLC, is the lessee under the lessor, the SLSPC (3rd Defendant). He also

considered the explanation in the SLSPC’s statement of claim regarding its inability

to make a claim before the Acquiring Officer, stating that, since it did not have prior

notice, it was unable to participate in the inquiry.

Despite this, the learned District Judge gave weight to the 2nd Defendant’s submission

that since the 3rd Defendant failed to prefer a claim before the Acquiring Officer, it is

not entitled to prefer any claim in the District Court or to obtain any relief.

The learned District Judge heavily relied on the decision of Basnayake C.J. in the

case of Perera v. Dingiri Menike12. Relying on that decision, the learned District

Judge answered issues No. 35(i), (ii), and (iii), as well as issues No. 36 and 37,

against the 3rd Defendant and dismissed the claim made by the 3rd Defendant.

Consequently, the conflicting claims made by the 1st and 2nd Defendants, who inter-

pleaded, were fixed for inquiry. At this juncture, it is pertinent to consider and

compare the facts in Perera v. Dingiri Menike13 (Supra) with the facts of the case at

hand.

In the former case, the disputed claim put forward by the 9th Respondent had been a

belated one, made even after the decree had been entered, claiming compensation in

respect of a 2/3 share of an extent of 2 acres of land. The 9th Respondent moved that

she be added as a Defendant, be permitted to file a statement of claim, and that an

inquiry be held. The Court rejected the application of the 9th Respondent on the

ground that her presence was not necessary for the determination of the dispute

referred to the Court by the Government Agent.

In his judgment, Basnayake C.J. reproduced the following observations made by

Withers J. in Templer v. Seneviratne14, which read as follows:

12 63 NLR 169.13 (Supra).14 [1892] 2 C.L Reports 70.

17

"According to clause 19 of Ordinance No. 2 of 1889, which governed the procedure

herein, no person can intervene in any action other than as provided by Clause 18

of Ordinance No 2 of 1889. The intervention of the additional claimants could not

possibly be necessary for the adjudication of the question raised between the

Government Agent and the four claimants who had attended in pursuance of the

notice." [Emphasis added]

Basnayake C.J. also reproduced the following observations made by De Sampayo J.

in Assistant Government Agent, Kalutara v. Wijesekara15, which reads as follows:

"The Court’s jurisdiction is limited by the Ordinance; it is either to make an award

as to the amount of compensation where the claimants and the Government Agent

are disagreed on that point, or to decide the question of title to the land where there

is any dispute among the claimants or where all the parties interested have not

appeared before the Government Agent. The proceedings are purely statutory and

do not, I think, admit of legal exceptions or dilatory pleas, as in an ordinary action,

where the case falls under the first head of inquiry." (Emphasis added)

The above statements relied on by Basnayake C.J. themselves demonstrate that the

Court has jurisdiction to decide the question of title to the land where all the parties

interested have not appeared before the Acquiring Officer.

Furthermore, Basnayake C.J. has not completely ruled out the application of

Section 18 of the Civil Procedure Code to proceedings of this nature, namely inter-

pleader actions. In the course of the judgment, he went on to observe that16:

“… Section 18 of the Civil Procedure Code which can undoubtedly be resorted to in

an appropriate case …"

Moreover, according to Section 12(1) of the Land Acquisition Act, proceedings in

Court on a reference made under Section 10 shall be subject to the procedure

provided by the Civil Procedure Code for civil suits. Therefore, in the absence of a

specific exclusion, no Court can rule out or restrict the application of any of the

provisions contained in the Civil Procedure Code.

15 4 C.W.R. 257.16 At page 171.

18

It is important to note that in Perera v. Dingiri Menike17 itself, Basnayake C.J.

allowed the addition of the heirs of the deceased 5th Defendant, who had died after

the matter was referred to Court even without the filing of an answer. Further, in

Government Agent, Sabaragamuwa v. Asirwatham et al 18, cited by Basnayake C.J.,

where the land that was the subject of proceedings under the Land Acquisition Act

had been transferred by the claimant while the reference to Court was pending, the

vendee was permitted to be added as a party. Hence, it is clear that the addition of

parties is not alien to inter-pleader actions.

In light of the above analysis, I am of the view that the facts of Perera v. Dingiri

Menike19 are distinguishable from the present case and, therefore, do not constitute a

judicial precedent applicable to this matter.

Above all, when the Charter of Justice of 1801 declared the Supreme Court to be a

court of law and equity, it commenced the reception of equitable concepts into the

system of justice. Therefore, this Court is mindful that it ought to consider not only

the black-letter law contained in statutes, but also the equitable principles that miti­

gate the rigidity of the law when determining a case.

In this context also, the 3rd Defendant suffered significant prejudice, as the Acquiring

Officer failed to follow the statutory procedure correctly. Consequently, although be­

ing the owner of the land, the 3rd Defendant was on the verge of being deprived of the

proprietary rights to which he is entitled under the Land Acquisition Act, due to the

absence of prior notice. Had the Acquiring Officer duly notified the 3rd Defendant, he

could have appeared at the inquiry.

The legal maxim ubi jus ibi remedium, meaning “where there is a right, there is a

remedy”, is applicable here. It is therefore the duty of this Court is to protect and re­

store the rights of the 3rd Defendant where they have been infringed. This Court can­

not, even in equity, place the derivative rights of the 2nd Defendant lessee above the

17 (Supra).18 [1928] 29 NLR 367.19 (Supra).

19

rights of the 3rd Defendant, who is the owner as well as the lessor of the subject es­

tate.

Consequently, I hold that the learned District Judge erred in disallowing the claim

made by the 3rd Defendant, SLSPC.

When the 3rd Defendant sought leave to appeal against the order of the learned Dis­

trict Judge dated February 24, 2020, disallowing the claim of the 3rd Defendant,

SLSPC, the Civil Appellate High Court of the Southern Province holden at Galle

granted leave to appeal and thereafter proceeded to hear the appeal.

The learned High Court Judges also distinguished the facts of Perera v. Dingiri

Menike20 on the ground that, in that case, the party sought to be added was a

complete outsider who had not made any claim before the Acquiring Officer. In

contrast, in the instant case, neither the 1st Defendant, LRC, nor the 2nd Defendant,

Elpitiya Plantations PLC, both of whom made claims before the Acquiring Officer

for compensation holds title to the subject land. The learned High Court Judges

observed that the learned District Judge failed to consider the attributes of property

rights, bearing in mind that the 2nd Defendant, Elpitiya Plantations PLC, is merely a

lessee holding leasehold rights under the 3rd Defendant, SLSPC, who is the owner of

the property. Therefore, despite this procedural defect, it is clearly apparent from the

grounds stated above in this judgment that the SLSPC is a necessary party to the

Acquiring Officer’s inquiry.

Accordingly, the learned High Court Judges held that the learned District Judge erred

in law and set aside the order of the learned District Judge and directed the District

Judge to hold an inquiry based on the issues raised by all parties, including the 3rd

Defendant, the SLSPC.

20 (Supra).

20

In light of the analysis set out above, I answer the questions of law framed before this

Court as follows:

i. No.

ii. No.

iii. No.

iv. The learned Judges of the High Court of Civil Appeal rightly held that the

District Court of Galle possesses jurisdiction to inquire into the claim and/or

title of the 3rd Defendant, notwithstanding the fact that the 3rd Defendant had

not made a claim at the inquiry conducted before the Acquiring Officer.

v. No.

vi. Yes.

I affirm the decision of the learned High Court Judges dated April 27, 2021, and

dismiss this appeal.

No costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

S. Thurairaja, P.C., J.I Agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Menaka Wijesundera, J.I Agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

21