==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application made under Article 17 read with Article 126 of the

Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. SC FR Case No:34/2017 SC FR Case No:125/2017 Kanagarathnam Selvaharan No.425/5, Himbutana Lane Angoda.

Petitioner Vs. 01. Idippully Mudiyanselage Ranjith

Kumarasinghe Officer- Unit 03 Frauds Investigation Bureau No.532/7, Elvitigala Mawatha Colombo 08.

Presently BMICH Police Station, Colombo 07. 02. Herath Mudiyanselage Rohana Susil

Kumara PC-5811 Officer- Unit 03 Frauds Investigation Bureau No.532/7, Elvitigala Mawatha Colombo 08. 03. Pilapitiya Karunathilake Wijesundera

Ratnayake Mudiyanselage Bandara Pilapitiya Chief Inspector Officer in Charge

2

Unit 03 Frauds Investigation Bureau No.532/7, Elvitigala Mawatha Colombo 08. 04. Uditha Perera

Superintendent of Police Director Frauds Investigation Bureau No.532/7, Elvitigala Mawatha Colombo 08. 05. Pujith Jayasundera

Inspector General of Police, Police Headquarters, Colombo 01. 06. Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department, Hulftsdorp Colombo 12. Respondents Before : Jayantha Jayasuriya, PC, CJ Kumudini Wickremasinghe, J Achala Wengappuli, J Counsel : Chandana Liyanapatabendy, PC with Vijaya Gamage,

Ershan Ariaratnam & Janaka Arunashantha instructed by H.Chandrakumar de Silva for the Petitioner in both matters.

Sajith Bandara, SC for the Respondents Written submissions : 05.12.2022 by the Respondents Argued on : 16.11.2023 Decided on : 22.05.2024

3

Jayantha Jayasuriya, PC. CJ

The petitioner, Kanagarathnam Selvaharan who is a shareholding Director of a private

limited company invoked the jurisdiction of this Court on the premise that the

Fundamental Rights guaranteed under Articles 11, 12 and 13 of the Constitution were

infringed due to the conduct of first to the fourth respondents, who were attached to

the Colombo Fraud Bureau, of Sri Lanka Police. The petitioner claims that his arrest

by the officers of the Colombo Fraud Bureau was illegal and unlawful. He further

claims that the complaint made against him fails to disclose any criminal conduct and

hence the respondents acted arbitrarily. Furthermore, he claims that the initial arrest

followed with his detention at the police station until he was produced before the

magistrate amounts to a violation of Article 11 of the Constitution.

The petitioner has filed two applications before this Court. The initial petition that

was filed on 20th January 2017 (SC FR 34/17) impugns the arrest and detention until

he was produced before the Magistrate. By the subsequent application that was filed

on 28th March 2017 (SC FR 125/17) the petitioner impugns the filing of further

reports in the Magistrate’s Court and framing charges in the Magistrate’s Court. He

prays inter alia an order or a direction to quash the charges and criminal proceedings

pending in the Magistrates Court. These two applications have been amalgamated and

considered together when leave to proceed was granted and all parties agreed that

both these matters should continue to be amalgamated and all issues be addressed

together in a single judgment.

Respondents deny the petitioner’s claim. They submit that the petitioner was arrested

for alleged commission of offences of cheating and criminal misappropriation. It is

their contention that the arrest of the petitioner was due to a complaint that was duly

received. They contend that the arrest was carried out after recording statements from

relevant witnesses and examination of all material that was gathered in the course of

the investigation.

4

It is common ground that the company of which the petitioner is a shareholding

director engaged in the business of exporting fresh fish and vegetables to countries

such as Switzerland, France, Canada, United Kingdom and United States of America

via air freight. The petitioner has obtained services of a private limited company that

was involved in freight forwarding for the export of the relevant consignments. One

such consignment had not reached the destination on time as there was a flight delay

due to an unexpected intervening factor (riots in one of the transit cities). The

Consignee had refused to accept the consignment as it contained perishable items.

However, the freight forwarding company has invoiced the exporter company and the

petitioner had refused to honour the payment due to the freight forwarding company

on the basis that the delay in reaching the destination caused loss to them. This

questionable consignment was dispatched on 15th July 2016 and was due to reach the

consignee on the following day namely on 16th July 2016.

The affidavit filed in this court by the second respondent who was attached to the

Unit-e of the Fraud Investigation Bureau reveals that the investigation that led to the

arrest of the petitioner was initiated on a complaint made by a Deputy Director of the

relevant freight forwarding company. According to the said complaint the Petitioner’s

company has defaulted several payments due to the complainant company, totaling

approximately to rupees three million. The complaint was therefore lodged on the

basis that the failure to honour due payments amounts to cheating and criminal

misappropriation. On the receipt of this complaint on 24th November 2016, several

statements had been recorded and documentary material had been gathered. On 12th

December 2016 facts had been reported to the relevant magistrate’s court on the basis

that offences under sections 403, 389 and 386 are revealed. Further time was sought

to record additional statements and thereafter to arrest and produce the suspect.

The learned State Counsel who represented the respondents submitted that the

respondent investigators have acted within the parameters of law in carrying out the

5

arrest as per Chapter XI of the Criminal Procedure Code. It was submitted that a

complaint was recorded, facts had been reported to court by way of a B report, the

name of the suspect had been included in the body of the said report and time had

been sought to arrest and produce the suspect as he did not make an attempt to make

the due payment. Thus, there is no violation of Article 13. Facts fail to establish that

the respondents acted either arbitrarily or unlawfully. Furthermore, it was contended

that at no stage did the petitioner take any steps to repay the amounts due for a series

of consignments that were dispatched subsequent to the consignment that failed to

reach the destination on time. The petitioner has continued to obtain services of the

freight forwarding company despite the unforeseen event and failed to honour the

invoices pertaining to these consignments which had no bearing to the questionable

consignment. It is in this context it was submitted that the alleged undisputed conduct

raises a reasonable suspicion on the commission of offences as described in the initial

report filed by the respondents in the Magistrate’s Court.

Section 32 (1)(b) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No 15 of 1979 as amended

(hereinafter referred to as the “code”) reads:

“Any peace officer may without an order from a Magistrate and without a warrant

arrest any person….. who has been concerned in any cognizable offence or against

whom a reasonable complaint has been made or credible information has been

received or a reasonable suspicion exists of having been so concerned…”

Sections 36 and 37 of the code sets out the manner in which a peace officer should

deal with a person who is arrested without a warrant. A person so arrested subject to

provisions relating to bail should be produced before a Magistrate without

unnecessary delay. Such a person should not be held in custody for a longer period

than reasonable and such custody should not exceed twenty-four hours.

6

Articles 13(1) and 13(2) of the Constitution recognizes respectively that “no person

shall be arrested except according to the procedure established by law…..” and

“every person held in custody, detained or otherwise deprived of personal liberty

shall be brought before the judge of the nearest competent court according to

procedure established by law….”

According to the respondents, the petitioner has obtained the services of the

complainant company for freight forwarding for seven consignments even after the

consignment that was not delivered on time. However, thereafter having obtained

such services refused to make payments for more than four months. At no stage

during this period the petitioner had indicated that payments for subsequent

consignments will be made after settling the issue on the delayed consignment. The

complainant company was made to believe that no defaults or a refusal would take

place for such successful consignments. According to the code, offences of criminal

misappropriation, criminal breach of trust and cheating are cognizable offences,

where an arrest could take place without a warrant.

It is trite law that a peace officer should not arrest a person even for an cognizable

offence on suspicion founded on mere conjecture or vague surmise. To effect an arrest

of a person for a cognizable offence without a warrant, there should be tangible

evidence that is sufficient to establish the reasonableness and credibility of the charge,

information or suspicion. The information on which the arrest is based must be

credible by the application of the objective test. There should be reasonable grounds

for suspecting that the person in question is concerned, in or to be committing or to

have committed the offence. The mere fact that a complaint was made is not itself a

ground to arrest a person. [Gamlath v Neville Silva and Others – (1991) 2 SLR 267;

Channa Peiris and others v Attorney-General and others – (1994) 1 SLR 1;

Seneviratne v Rajakaruna and Others - (2003) 1 SLR 410; Dhammarathana

Thero and another v OIC Police Station Mihinthale et al – SC FR 313/09, SC

7

minutes of 03.07.2013; Lakshman de Silva and another v OIC Police Station

Kiribathgoda et al, SC FR 09/2011 - SC minutes of 03.03.2017].

It is also pertinent to observe that this Court held that,

“the provisions relating to arrest are materially different to those applying to the

determination of the guilt or innocence of the arrested person. One is at or near

the starting point of criminal proceedings while the other constitutes the

termination of proceedings and is made by the judge after the hearing of

submissions from all parties. The power of arrest does not depend on the

requirement that there must be clear and sufficient proof of the commission of the

offence alleged. What the officer making the arrest needs to have are reasonable

grounds for suspecting the persons to be concerned in or to be committing or to

have committed the offence” [Channa Peiris (supra at 45)].

One of the main arguments on behalf of the petitioner was the fact that the learned

magistrate granted bail when the petitioner was produced in court while observing

“that the transaction concerned is primarily commercial in nature” and subsequently

on 12th September 2017 discharged the petitioner on a preliminary objection raised

on his behalf should be considered in favour of the petitioner in determining that the

fundamental rights of the petitioners were violated due to the arrest of the petitioner.

However, it is pertinent to observe that the material placed before this court by way of

affidavits and other documents including the reports filed in the Magistrate’s Court in

my view fail to establish that the respondents either acted arbitrarily or outside the

procedure established by law in arresting the petitioner. The guilt or innocence of the

petitioner has to be determined after considering all evidence presented at a trial and

the burden on the prosecution is to prove charges beyond a reasonable doubt.

However, presence or absence of evidence to establish guilt beyond reasonable doubt

8

is not the threshold criteria that should be adopted in determining the lawfulness or

otherwise of an arrest. Mere appearance of a transaction which is commercial in

nature per se is insufficient to establish that there were no reasonable grounds to

suspect the commission of an offence. As discussed hereinbefore there is material to

demonstrate that the company of which the petitioner is a director engaged the

complainant company for freight forwarding even after the incident where the delay

of delivery of the consignment caused a loss to the petitioner. At no stage until

November, the petitioner disputed the payments due to be paid to the complainant

company relating to subsequent consignments. In my view, the second respondent had

acted within the procedure established by law and exercised lawful authority when he

formed the opinion that the petitioner deceived the complainant company when

obtaining services and made them to believe that payments will be made in due course

and defrauded with the subsequent refusal to honour the invoices. Hence forming a

reasonable suspicion that the petitioner has committed the offence of cheating cannot

be faulted. Hence I am of the view that the arrest and subsequent initiation of criminal

proceedings against the petitioner are lawful acts that had been performed in

accordance with law.

Therefore, I am of the view that the petitioner has failed to prove that the rights

guaranteed under Articles 12 and 13 of the Constitution had been violated.

The Petitioners contention that his rights guaranteed under Article 11 has been

violated is based on the premise that he was treated like a “common criminal” along

with the others during the time of arrest and at the time of him being produced before

the Magistrate’s Court. In this regard it is pertinent to observe that a high degree of

certainty is required if the Court is to hold a violation of Article 11. The fact that the

petitioner was treated like a common criminal fails to establish that his rights under

Article 11 were violated. To the contrary, it is pertinent to note that no person who is

suspected of committing a crime could claim preferential treatment based on his status

9

in the society or the nature of the offence he is alleged to have committed. Persons

accused of offences involving physical violence as well as persons accused of

offences that does not involve physical violence are liable to be treated in accordance

with law and such process would not amount to torture, cruel, inhumane or degrading

treatment falling within the ambit of Article 11 of the Constitution. As I have already

concluded that the arrest of the petitioner does not amount to a violation of Article 12

or 13 and the petitioner has also failed to establish that such arrest and subsequent

steps initiated in accordance with the procedure established by law resulted in the

violation of rights guaranteed to him under Article 11, the petitioner has failed to

establish the violation of his rights.

Based on these findings, I am of the view that there is no merit in these applications

and hence both petitions are dismissed. Court makes no order on costs.

Chief Justice Kumudini Wicremasinghe, J. I agree Judge of the Supreme Court Achala Wengappuli, J. I agree Judge of the Supreme Court

10