1 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application under and in terms of Articles 17 and 126 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka SC /FR/ Application No 58/2018

1. J.M.H. Chandani Jayasundara,

No. 19/8, Guilford Crescent, Colombo 07. 2. B.P. Niyadandupola,

No. 19/8, Guilford Crescent, Colombo 07. 3. Nulara Piyaji Niyadandupola,

No. 19/8, Guilford Crescent, Colombo 07.

Petitioners Vs,

1. Ms. S.S.K Aviruppola,

Principal, Vishaka Vidyalaya, Colombo 05. 2. Ms. Kalani Sooriyapperuma,

Deputy Principal (Administration) Vishaka Vidyalaya, Colombo 05. 3. Ms. Sumudu Weerasinghe,

Deputy Principal (Education & Development) Vishaka Vidyalaya, Colombo 05. 4. Ms. Jeevana Ariyaratne,

Deputy Principal (Co-Curricular & Extra- Curricular) Vishaka Vidyalaya, Colombo 05.

2

5. Ms. Pushparani Samarasinghe,

Sectional Head (Primary), Vishaka Vidyalaya, Colombo 05. 6. L.M.D. Dharmasena,

Chairman, Admissions Appeal Board, Vishaka Vidyalaya, Colombo 05. 7. Ms. Rukmali Kariyawasam,

Member, Admissions Appeal Board, Vishaka Vidyalaya, Colombo 05. 8. Sunil Hettiarachchi,

Secretary, Ministry of Education, “Isurupaya”, Battaramulla.

9. G.N. Silva,

Zonal Director of Education, Colombo District, Zonal Education Office, Vidatha Mawatha, Colombo 02. 10. P. Sirilal Nonis,

Provincial Director of Education, Western Province Provincial Ministry of Education, Provincial Department of Education, No.76, Ananda Kumaraswamy Mawatha, Colombo 07. 11. Hon. the Attorney General,

Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12.

Respondents

3 Before: Justice Vijith K. Malalgoda PC Justice P. Padman Surasena Justice E.A.G.R. Amarasekera Counsel: Sanjeewa Jayawardena PC with Nilshantha Sirimanne, Rukshan Senadeera and

Uween Jayasinhe for the Petitioners

Dr. Awanthi Perera SSC for Attorney General

Argued on: 13.02.2019

Judgment on: 25.03.2019

Vijith K. Malalgoda PC J

The three Petitioners before this Court, a father, mother and their young daughter who appeared

through her parents have alleged violation of the Fundamental Rights of them guaranteed under

Article 12 (1) of the Constitution by denying the admission of the 3rd Petitioner to Grade one of

Vishaka Vidyalaya Colombo 05.

As revealed before this court the 1st and the 2nd Petitioners being the parents of the 3rd Petitioner

minor, applied for admission to grade one of Vishaka Vidyalaya, under the category, children of

Residents in close proximity to the school as laid down in clause 7.1 (i) of circular No.22 of 2017

which governed the school admission to the grade one for the year 2018.

Under clauses 7.1 (i) and 7.2 of the said circular, 50% of the total number of vacancies were

allocated to the children comes under the said category and how such parents should establish

their residence and how the marks should be allocated based on the documents produced by the

applicant is identified under the said clause.

4 As observed by this court, maximum of 30 marks are allocated for establishing the Residence by the

Electoral Register during the past five years and a maximum of 15 marks are allocated for the

documents in proof of residency of the parents. Another five marks are allocated for additional

documents to confirm the place of residence making a total of 50 marks for establishing the

residence of the Applicant.

The balance 50 marks are given for proximity to school from the place of the Residence of the

Applicant and under the said circular, 5 marks are deducted to each school comes within the

distance between the Residence of the Applicant and the school applied for, which has a primary

section where the child can gain admission.

As revealed before us the Petitioners attended the formal interview for the selection of students

for grade one at Vishaka Vidyalaya on 16.09.2017 and secured 58.3 marks at the said interview. The

Petitioners were issued with a document indicating the marks allocated to the 3rd Petitioner under

four headings and a copy of the said document is produced before this court mark P-7. According

to P-7, the Petitioners were allocated full marks for establishing the residence by Electoral Register.

For establishing the ownership, the Petitioners were allocated only 4.5 marks out of 15 marks and

additional documents 3.8 out of 5 marks.

For proximity to the school, the Petitioners were allocated only 20 marks after reducing marks for

six schools making the total marks 58.3.

When the Temporary selection list was published on 06. 11. 2017, the name of the 3rd Petitioner

was not found on the selected students list, but was appeared in the 7th position on the ‘waiting

list’. Being aggrieved by the said selection, specially with regard to the reduction of marks under

5 the heading proximity to school, the Petitioners preferred an appeal under clause 10 of the said

circular.

Even at the appeal, marks allocated to 3rd Petitioner were not revised by the appeal board, and in

protest the Petitioners refused to sign the mark sheet during the appeal hearing.

As revealed before this court the cut off mark under, children of Residents in close proximity

category for the year 2018 was 61.5 and the Petitioners main contention was to challenged the

reduction of 10 marks for two schools under proximity to school, comes within the said category.

Both, the Petitioners and the Respondents agree, that 30 marks under close proximity to school

was deducted for the following schools,

1. Yasodhara Vidyalaya, Colombo 07

2. Presbyterian Girls School, E.W. Perera Mawatha, Colombo 07

3. Sirimavo Bandaranayake Vidyalaya, Stanmore Crescent , Colombo 07

4. St. Anthony’s Balika Vidyalaya, St. Anthony’s Road, Colombo 03

5. St. Mary’s Balika Maha Vidyalaya, Alwis Place, Colombo 03

6. Vidyathilaka Vidyalaya, Thimbirigasayaya, Colombo 05

However, the Petitioners challenged the reduction of 10 marks for two schools namely, St.

Anthony’s Balika Vidyalaya and St. Mary’s Balika Maha Vidyalaya based on the provisions of the

same circular. In this regard the Petitioners relied on a document they obtained from the Zonal

Director of Education on 6th December 2017. According to the Petitioners the said letter which is

produced marked P-11 before this court, refers to the Buddhist students percentage as 9% and 4%

with regard to St. Anthony’s Balika Maha Vidyalaya and St. Mary’s Balika Maha Vidyalaya,

Respectively.

6 However the Appeal Board of Vishaka Vidyalaya had very correctly refused to entertain the said

document since clause 11.6 of the circular 22 of 2017 prohibits the Appeal Board to consider fresh

documents in appeal.

However the issuance of P-11 is an eye opener to consider another aspect of the said circular,

which was overlooked by the authorities when admitting children under the said category.

In this regard, our attention was drawn to the following clauses of the Guidelines/ Instructions and

Regulation regarding admission of children to Grade 1 issued with the circular 22 of 2017 which

governed the school admission for the years 2018.

Clause 3.2 In filling vacancies in schools vested to the government under Assisted

Schools and Training Schools (Special Provisions) Act No 05 of 1960 and

Assisted Schools and Training Schools (Supplementary Provisions) Act No. 08

of 1961, the proportion of children belonging to different religions at the

time of vesting the school to the government will be taken into consideration

and the number of vacancies in the said school be accordingly divided among

different religions and categories. When the number of applications is less

than the number of vacancies set apart for a given category of a religion,

remaining vacancies shall be proportionately divided among other categories

of the same religion. When there are no applicants from a religion, or when

the number of applications from a religion is less than the number of

vacancies set apart for that religion, such vacancies shall be proportionately

divided among other religions.

Clause 6 (III) Proximity to school from the place of residence

7

Maximum marks will be given only if the applicant’s place of residency is

proved and if there are no other Government Schools with Primary sections

located closer to the place of residence than the school applied for. In the

event of having other Government schools with Primary sections for the

admission of the child which are closer to the place of residence than the

school applied for marks will be deducted at the rate of 05 marks from the

maximum marks for each such closer school.

(Other government primary schools that the child could be admitted means,

if the government school concerned has the learning medium the child has

applied for / if a girls or boys school or a mixed school appropriate for the

child and If a government school which can admit 10% or more children of

the religion to which the child belongs. (emphasis added)

Since the Petitioners relied heavily on P-11, the Respondent made an attempt to counter the same

by submitting an affidavit from the author of P-11, the Zonal Director of Education, the 9th

Respondent to the present application.

The 9th Respondent whilst admitting the issuance of P-11 made an attempt to clarify P-11 by

submitting that;

5. d) Since the 1st and/or 2nd Petitioners required the information urgently to pursue an

appeal regarding the school admission application of the 3rd Petitioner,

I immediately issued letter dated 06.12.2017 addressed to the 1st Respondent (P11)

setting out the information received from the Principles of St. Anthony’s Balika

Maha Vidyalaya, Colombo 03 and St. Mary’s Balika Maha Vidyalaya, Colombo 03;

8

e) However, upon further clarifications being sought, it has now transpired that the

said information received from the Principles of St. Anthony’s Balika Maha

Vidyalaya, Colombo 03 and St. Mary’s Balika Maha Vidyalaya, Colombo 03 and the

letter issued thereupon by me (P11) do not accurately capture the number of

Buddhist students admitted to the two schools, for the reasons more fully described

below;

f) The Principals of St. Anthony’s Balika Maha Vidyalaya, Colombo 03 and St. Mary’s

Balika Maha Vidyalaya have clarified the basis upon which the percentages of 9%

and 4% referred to in subparagraph (c) were initially informed to me on an

approximate basis and provided the actual numbers of students of different religions

admitted to the two schools during the past 10 years;

A copy of letter the dated 03.04.2018 issued by the Principal of St. Anthony’s Balika

Maha Vidyalaya, Colombo 03 and copy of letter dated 06.04.2018 issued by the

Principal of St. Mary’s Balika Maha Vidyalaya, Colombo 03 are annexed hereto

marked 9R1 and 9R2 respectively and pleaded as part and parcel hereof.

Explaining circumstances under P-11 was issued, the 9th Respondent proceeded to submit some

statistics obtained from the two schools referred to above along with two letters from the

principals of those schools.

The 9th Respondent had further submitted that both St. Anthony’s Balika Maha Vidyalaya and St.

Mary’s Balika Maha Vidyalaya are Roman Catholic Private Schools which were vested in the state in

terms of Assisted Schools and Training Colleges (Supplementary Provisions) Act No 8 of 1961 read

with Assisted Schools and Training Colleges (Special Provisions) Act No 5 of 1960 but there appears

9 to be no documentary proof of quota reserved at either of the schools for students of religions

other than Roman Catholics, at the time of vesting in the Government.

However when considering the specific written guidelines given by the circular, this court cannot

simply ignore the said requirement, when the authorities submit that they don’t have the required

information with them. Out of the two letters submitted by the two Principals, the principal St.

Anthony’s Balika Maha Vidyalaya had stated that according to the information she could collected,

7%, 10% and 10% of Buddhist students were admitted to the said school during the three years

immediately after the said school was vested with the government.

Even though the principal St. Anthony’s Balika Maha Vidyalaya had failed to give the required

information as at the time, the vesting took place, in the following year, there was only 7% of

Buddhist students admitted to the school and it is well below the 10% required under clause 3.2 of

the circular 22 of 2017.

In the said circumstances a question will arise as to the eligibility of St. Anthony’s Balika Maha

Vidyalaya to admit Buddhist students to its grade one, above the 10% requirement under Assisted

Schools and Training Colleges (Special Provisions) Act No 5 of 1960 and Assisted Schools and

Training Colleges (Supplementary Provisions) Act No 8 of 1961 and in the said circumstances clause

3.2 read with Clause 6 (III) of the guidelines will become a barrie to consider St. Anthony’s Balika

Maha Vidyalaya as a “other Government primary school that the child could be admitted” to

Vishaka Vidyalaya, Colombo 05.

In the absence of similar information with regard to the other school referred to above; i.e.

St. Mary’s Balika Maha Vidyalaya, this court will refrain from making any observation, but we

emphasize the requirement of the authorities to abide by the rules laid down in the circular, since it

10 is the paramount duty of the relevant authorities to fulfill the desire of any applicant, if they are

eligible to come within the provisions of the circular.

As observed by this court the 3rd Petitioner was allocated 58.3 marks at the interview as well as at

the appeal hearing. Cut off mark under the category the application was considered was 61.5

marks and obtaining additional 3.2 will make the 3rd Respondent eligible to gain admission to

Vishaka Vidyalaya, Colombo 05.

When considering the conclusion this court had already reached with regard to St. Anthony’s Balika

Maha Vidyalaya that the said school cannot be considered as a “other government primary school

that the child could be admitted,” the 3rd Petitioner is entitled to receive 5 marks reduced by the

authorities for the said school, increasing the total marks obtained at the interview to 63.3 marks,

making the 3rd Petitioner eligible to gain admission to grade one Vishaka Vidyalaya, Colombo 5.

The Petitioners have alleged the violation of their fundamental rights guaranteed under Article

12 (1) of the Constitution which deals with the right to equality and equal protection of law. The

guarantee of equality ensures that among equals the law should be equal and should be applied

equally.

When considering the totality of the evidence placed before this court I hold that the 3rd Petitioner

is entitled to obtain 63.3 marks making her eligible to gain admission to grade one of Vishaka

Vidyalaya, Colombo 05 under the category of “Children of Residents in close proximity to the

school,” thus the Petitioners have established that their fundamental rights guaranteed under

Article 12 (1) of the Constitution had been infringed by the Respondents.

11 Whilst confirming that the Petitioners Fundamental Rights guaranteed under Article 12 (1) of the

Constitution had been infringed by the above conduct of the Respondents, I direct the 1st

Respondent to take steps to admit the 3rd Petitioner to grade one or to the appropriate grade of

Vishaka Vidyalaya, Colombo 05.

Judge of the Supreme Court Justice P. Padman Surasena I agree, Judge of the Supreme Court Justice E.A.G.R. Amarasekera I agree, Judge of the Supreme Court