1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application in terms of Article 17 and Article 126 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

SC. FR Application No. 434/2016

Kamani Madhya Jinadasa

Attorney-at-Law [for and on behalf of Citizen X, person living with the Human Immuno Virus (HIV)]

Petitioner

Vs.

1. SriLankan Airlines Limited

Company Registration No.PB 67 Airline Centre Bandaranayaka International Airport Katunayaka 2. Dr. Anoma Jayasinghe

Group Medical Officer SriLankan Airlines Limited Bandaranayaka International Airport Katunayaka

3. Nihal Somaweera

Secretary Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation 7th Floor, Sethsiripaya stage II Battaramulla.

2

4. Dr. Sisira Liyanage

Director National STD/AIDS control Programme No.29, De Seram Place Colombo 10. 5. Hon. Attorney General

Attorney General’s Department Colombo 12 Respondents

Before : Sisira J De Abrew J Priyantha Jayawardena PC J Nalin Perera J Counsel : Senany Dayaratne with T Weragoda for the Petitioner Sahanky Parathalingam with N Parathalingam for the 1st and 2nd Respondents Sanjaya Rajratnam ASG for the 3rd and 5th Respondents Argued on : 8.9.2017 Decided on : 26.2.2018 Sisira J De Abrew

This court by its order dated 20.1.2017 granted leave to proceed against

the 1st and 2nd Respondents for alleged violation of Articles 12(1) and 14(1)(g)

of the Constitution.

The Petitioner who is an Attorney-at-Law of the Supreme Court of

Sri Lanka has presented this application to this court in terms of Rules 44(2) and

3

44(3) of the Supreme Court Rules 1990 for and on behalf of a HIV positive

person who does not want to disclose his identity. This HIV positive person is

hereinafter referred to as Citizen X.

Citizen X who was attached to Mihin Lanka Ltd made an application

to join Sri Lanka Airlines Ltd (the 1st Respondent) as Mihin Lanka Ltd was

going to close down its operation with effect from 30.12.2016.He was called for

an interview on 27.9.2010. The Petitioner further states the following facts.

1. Citizen X who was selected by the 1st Respondent reported to the Medical

Centre of the 1st Respondent and filled up a medical form.

2. On 7.10.2016 Citizen X was informed by the 1st Respondent that he had

been selected as a cabin crew member of the 1st Respondent. He was also

requested to take his uniform.

3. On 19.10.2016 Citizen X was requested to present himself at Nawaloka

Hospital for certain medical tests including HIV tests.

4. On 26.10.2016 Citizen X was informed by the 1st Respondent that he had

passed the medical test and was requested to be present at the Human

Resources Department of the 1st Respondent on 28.10.2016.

5. On 28.10.2016 Citizen X signed the contract of employment and the 1st

Respondent issued the staff identity card.

6. Although Citizen X signed the contract of employment on 28.10.2016, the

2nd Respondent who is the medical officer of the 1st Respondent, in the

same afternoon, requested Citizen X to meet him at Hilton Hotel

Colombo. The 2nd Respondent at the said meeting inquired Citizen X with

4

regard to his HIV situation. Citizen X then divulged his HIV situation to

the 2nd Respondent.

7. On 8.11.2016 one Samudrika attached to Human Resources Department

of the 1st Respondent informed Citizen X that he had failed the medical

test and therefore he had not been selected for employment with the 1st

Respondent.

Learned Counsel for the Petitioner contended that Citizen X was not given

the employment in the 1st Respondent company as Citizen X is a person who is

positive for HIV and that the said decision was wrong in terms of ‘National

Policy of HIV and AIDS in the World of Work in Sri Lanka’ published in June

2010 by the Ministry of Labour and Labour Relations.

Learned President’s Counsel for the 1st and 2nd Respondents submitted that

the 1st Respondent by letter dated 28.10.2016 marked Z2, offered Citizen X a

contract of employment as Ground/Flight Attendant for a period of two months

commencing from 1.11.2016 to 31.12.2016 subject to terms and conditions

stated in the Secondment Agreement entered into by Sri Lanka Airlines Ltd with

Mihin Lanka Ltd. However it has to be noted here that the Respondents have

failed to produce the Secondment Agreement along with their pleadings.

Learned President’s Counsel for the 1st and 2nd Respondents further submitted

that when Citizen X filled up the medical form (marked Z1) at the Medical

Centre of the 1st Respondent, he declared in the said medical form that he did

not have any sexual transmitted disease. Learned President’s Counsel for the 1st

and 2nd Respondents further submitted that after the medical test of Citizen X,

the 1st Respondent became aware that Citizen X was HIV positive person; that

the information furnished by him in the medical form (Z1) to the effect that he

5

did not have sexual transmitted disease was proved to be false; and that the 1st

Respondent withdrew his letter marked Z2 offering the contract of employment

to Citizen X on the basis that he (Citizen X) had provided false and dishonest

information. The Petitioner in his petition has stated that Citizen X did not

disclose, in the medical form, the fact that he is a HIV positive person as nurses

attached to the Medical Centre would read the medical form and that therefore

HIV story would be published. Learned counsel for the Petitioner too submitted

the above facts and contended that Citizen X was not required to disclose the

said information in the medical form marked Z1.

I now advert to these contentions. The Petitioner in his Petition admits

that Citizen X became aware that he is a HIV positive person in 2013. Therefore

when Citizen X declared on 10.10.2016 in the medical form (Z2) that he did not

have sexual transmitted disease, his declaration was false. Learned counsel for

the Petitioner further contended that in terms of ‘National Policy of HIV and

AIDS in the World of Work in Sri Lanka’[marked as A-1(b)] it was wrong for

the 1st Respondent to request Citizen X to face a medical test including HIV test

since Citizen X was a HIV positive person. I now advert to this contention. How

does the 1st Respondent know that Citizen X was a HIV positive person? The 1st

Respondent became aware that Citizen X was a HIV positive person only in

October 2016. But Citizen X was aware that he was a HIV positive person in

2013. Citizen X on 10.10.2016 declared that he did not have any sexual

transmitted disease. Under these circumstances, how can the 1st Respondent be

found fault with for subjecting Citizen X to a medical test including HIV test. In

my view, the 1st Respondent cannot be found fault with for subjecting Citizen X

to the above medical test. For the Petitioner’s counsel to be successful in the

above contention, the 1st Respondent should have been aware about the HIV

6

status of Citizen X. For the 1st Respondent to become aware of the HIV status of

Citizen X, he (Citizen X) should have informed the 1st Respondent about his

condition which was only known to him. When I consider the above matters, I

am unable to agree with the above contention of learned counsel for the

petitioner. I therefore reject the above contention.

Citizen X in 2013 knew that he was a HIV positive person but did not

disclose in 2016 at least in a confidential manner that he is a HIV positive

person. But when the 1st Respondent after medical test discovered that Citizen X

is a HIV positive person, he wants the protection provided in ‘National Policy of

HIV and AIDS in the World of Work in Sri Lanka’. When I consider the above

matters, I feel that Citizen X is blowing hot and cold. Such a person is not

entitled to get relief from court.

When I consider all the above matters, I hold that the declaration by Citizen

X in the medical form (Z1) that he does not have any sexual transmitted disease

is false. Therefore Citizen X had breached the trust that an employee should

keep with the employer. In my view, it is not safe to permit such a person to

work as a cabin crew member. Citizen X had, in his declaration marked Z1,

admitted that withholding of facts asked for in the medical form could be a

cause for refusal or termination of his employment. When I consider all the

above matters, I hold that the 1st Respondent cannot be found fault with when he

withdrew the letter marked Z2 on the basis that Citizen X had provided false

information. I further hold that the Petitioner has failed to prove the allegation

that the 1st Respondent terminated the services of Citizen X or the 1st

Respondent did not give him employment on the basis that he (Citizen X) was a

HIV positive person.

7

For the aforementioned reasons, I am unable to hold that the 1st Respondent

and/or the 2nd Respondent had violated the fundamental rights of Citizen X. I

therefore dismiss the petition of the petitioner. Considering the facts of this case,

I do not order costs.

Judge of the Supreme Court.

Priyantha Jayawardena PC J

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court.

Nalin Perera J

I agree.

Judge of the Supreme Court.