==== BLOCKS ==== 

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC

OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an Appeal in terms of Article 128(2) of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

Hon. Attorney General Attorney General’s Department, Colombo 12. Complainant Vs. S.C.Appeal No.16/2021 SC/SPL/LA No. 88/20 Court of Appeal Case No.HCC/217/2018 H.C. Embilipitiya Case No. HC 85/2014

Punchihewage Sampath Kumara alias Bindu Presenly in Angunakolapalassa Prison Accused And then Between

Punchihewage Sampath Kumara alias Bindu Presenly in Angunakolapalassa Prison Accused-Appellant Vs. Hon. Attorney General Attorney General’sDepartment, Colombo 12.

Complainant -Respondent

S.C. Appeal No.16/2021

2

And Now Between Punchihewage Sampath Kumara alias Bindu Presenly in Angunakolapalassa Prison

Accused- Appellant -Appellant Vs. Hon. Attorney General Attorney General’sDepartment, Colombo 12. Complainant-Respondent-Respondent-

BEFORE : A.H.M.D. NAWAZ J. ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J. ARJUNA OBEYESEKERE, J. COUNSEL : Kaushalya Happuarachchi with Dharshan Weerasekera for the Accused-Appellant-Appellant. Chethiya Goonesekera P.C. ASG with Yuresha de Silva DSG for the Complainant-Respondent-Respondent

ARGUED ON : 09th June, 2023 DECIDED ON : 05th December, 2025 ********** ACHALA WENGAPPULI, J.

The accused-petitioner-appellant, who initiated the instant appeal process

(hereinafter referred to as “the Appellant”), was indicted by the Hon. Attorney

General (hereinafter referred to as “the Respondent”) for committing the offence

of rape on Kaludurage Champika. The Appellant pleaded not guilty to the

indictment and elected a trial without a jury. After trial, the trial Court found

S.C. Appeal No.16/2021

3

him guilty as charged and was accordingly sentenced by imposing a ten-year

term of imprisonment on him. The appeal preferred by the Appellant,

challenging the validity of the said conviction and sentence, was dismissed by

the Court of Appeal. The Appellant thereupon sought Special Leave to Appeal

against the said judgment of the Court of Appeal.

On 18.01.2021, this Court, having heard the parties, thought it fit to grant

Special Leave to Appeal to the Appellant in respect of following two questions of

law;

i. Whether the prosecution has proven beyond reasonable doubt

that the ingredients of the offence of rape relating to sexual

intercourse without the consent of the prosecutrix?

ii. Whether the learned High Court Judge has evaluated the

evidence led at the trial and arrived at conclusions in terms of

the law?

At the hearing of the instant appeal, the primary contention presented by

the learned Counsel for the Appellant for consideration of this Court was that the

prosecution has failed to prove one of the essential elements of the offence of

rape, being that the Complainant did not consent to the act of sexual penetration

by the Appellant. The Appellant, in his statement from the dock, admitted that

he has had sexual intercourse with the Complainant Champika and claimed that it

was consensual.

The prosecution, in support of its case, presented the evidence of Champika,

one of her immediate neighbours, Sriyalatha, the medical officer, who examined

S.C. Appeal No.16/2021

4

Champika and the police officers, who investigated her complaint of rape. When

the trial Court called for the defence, the Appellant made a statement from the

dock. He did not call any witnesses.

The Appellant’s grievance is that his defence of consensual sex was not

properly considered by the Courts below. He contended that owing to that very

reason; both Courts have erroneously concluded that he had sexual intercourse

with Champika without her consent. In order to impress upon the validity of his

said defence on this Court, apart from his own evidence, the Appellant heavily

relied on the conduct on the part of the Complainant, during the entire period he

was with her that evening.

In order to determine the validity of the Appellant’s said contention, it is

necessary to examine Champika’s evidence, in a more detailed manner.

Champika, a 30-year-old married woman and a mother of four, was living

with her husband at Wasanagama in Sevanagala area of Embilipitiya. Her husband,

Pushpa Kumara, being a freshwater fisherman, supported his family with that

income. They lived in a house with two rooms, a common area and a kitchen.

They had no electricity and were relying on bottle lamps for lighting purposes.

The main entrance was secured with a wooden door, but the back door was only

a corrugated metal sheet put across the doorway, when not in use.

On the day of the incident, at about 9.30 p.m., the Appellant came to

Champika’s house and called out her husband’s name. When Champika responded

saying that her husband is not at home, the Appellant enquired where he was.

The Appellant then said that he came there to ask for a piece of a cigar. Once told

that Pushpa Kumara was away, the Appellant went over to the house in front. The

Complainant heard him talking to her neighbour Sriyalatha.

S.C. Appeal No.16/2021

5

She then went to sleep. Her 12-year-old son, Akila, being the eldest, slept in

the adjoining room. Champika, was woken up suddenly that night, as she felt

someone trying to sit beside her on the bed. She initially thought it was her

husband but soon realised that it was the Appellant. Being perplexed with this

unexpected intrusion into her house by the Appellant, Champika shouted for her

son Akila. He did not wake up to Champika’s calling. After the Complainant had

recognised the Appellant, she wanted to know why he returned. The Appellant

then said that he just wanted to have few words with Champika, over his affair

with one Kanthi, which apparently had suffered a setback due to some utterance

attributed to the Complainant. He was angry over the fact that his affair had to

be terminated. Then, the Appellant himself led Champika out of her house

through its backdoor. They talked for about 20 minutes under an acacia tree,

over the issue with Kanthi. The Appellant, at that point, requested some water.

When Champika returned with a glass of water, the Appellant suddenly hugged

her tightly and had dragged her back into the kitchen.

At the kitchen, the Appellant, after threatening her with a knife, removed

her outer and under garments. He then took his sarong off and laid it on the

kitchen floor, pushed her on to it and penetrated her. After the act the Appellant

had walked away. Pushpa Kumara returned home sometime later in that same

night, but Champika did not mention the act of sexual violence committed by the

Appellant. The Complainant feared that if she disclosed what happened that

evening, her husband would have done something very violent. She thought he

might even kill the Appellant and, as a result of which, she would become

destitute with their children.

The Appellant once again returned to Champika’s house in the same night

and chatted for some time with Pushpa Kumara. The Complainant’s took this act,

S.C. Appeal No.16/2021

6

on the part of the Appellant, as an attempt to gauge the situation and particularly

her husband’s reaction. After the incident, Champika was frightened, felt helpless

and dejected. She contemplated taking her own life. In the following morning,

with that intention in her mind, Champika has taken her children to her mother’s

place. She thought she would leave them with her mother for their safety and

then go to buy some pesticides. The moment Champika’s mother asked where she

is going by leaving behind her children, she could not hold her emotions any

longer and started crying. Only then Champika narrated her dreadful experience

with the Appellant.

The position taken up by the Appellant in his statement from the dock that

he had consensual sex with the Complainant was in fact put to Champika, by his

Counsel, during cross-examination. The Appellant suggested to her that they

met earlier on that day and he visited her that evening on the invitation she had

extended to him. It was also suggested that it was she who disclosed that her

husband would be away that evening. She was also suggested by the Appellant

they had an ongoing “affair” (iïnkaOhla). The Appellant, further suggested that,

one Ananda had seen they were together in that evening. It was also suggested

that Ananda, being her step-father, thereupon found fault with Champika for her

immoral act, which in turn prompted her to make a false complaint to police

against the Appellant. Champika denied all these suggestions.

The Appellant also relied on an admission made by Champika that she

knew him from her childhood and he was helping out her husband regularly in

his vegetable cultivation in order to support his assertion that their extramarital

“affair” commenced only during that time.

The Appellant, describing the incident in his evidence stated that, after the

nightfall, he went over to Champika’s house at about 9.30 p.m. They chatted for a

S.C. Appeal No.16/2021

7

while and then had consensual sex. While returning from Champika’s house, the

Appellant was accosted by Ananda (step-father of Champika) near his house. The

Appellant, however, did not respond to Ananda’s act and simply walked away

from the situation without creating a scene over it.

With the admission of the Appellant that he had sexual intercourse with

Champika, there is no question that the element of penetration, being another

essential element of the offence of rape, was established. They knew each other

well before the incident and therefore there is no contest on the identity of the

Appellant either. What remains is essentially a question of fact; whether

Champika had consensual sex with the Appellant or he had forcibly penetrated

her without consent, which had to be determined by the trial Court.

Perusal of the judgment of the trial Court, particularly the segment that

dealt with this aspect, reveals that it had considered the following factors, before

accepting Champika’s evidence as a credible and reliable account of the incident;

a. the fact that Champika called out her son loudly is a fact

corroborated by Sriyalatha, who also confirmed that the

Appellant came to her house during that evening for no apparent

reason. The trial Court found it is probable that the Complainant,

being alarmed by the unexpected intrusion of the Appellant into

her house, hurriedly called out for her son, and taken it as a

factor that supports Champika’s claim that she had no idea that

the Appellant would come into her house that night. The trial

Court noted that it runs contrary to a claim of the Appellant of

being invited to visit her that night.

S.C. Appeal No.16/2021

8

b. The fact that Sriyalatha’s confirmation of the Appellant’s visit to

her house in that late evening was taken by the trial Court as

another factor that supported her version for that Court said that

there was no other reason for the Appellant to freely roam

around in the neighbourhood, if Champika expected his arrival

during the period in which her husband was away from home

and make his presence in that late night known to others.

c. the fact that the Appellant had entered through the rear entrance

to Chamipka’s house by simply removing the corrugated metal

sheet, which she had kept across it as a door, is supportive of the

fact that the Appellant had entered uninvited and surreptitiously

into her house,

d. the reason given by Champika, as why she did not shout calling

out for help when the Appellant removed her clothes after

threatening with a kitchen knife, was that she feared for the

safety of her young daughter and the other children, which was

accepted by the trial Court as a probable and sufficient

explanation of her conduct.

e. the evidence of the medical expert, who examined Champika in

confirming that she had a “fresh tear in the posterior vaginal wall”,

which in his opinion could have been caused when she was

subjected to forceful penetration during sexual intercourse, was

taken by the trial Court as another factor consistent with her

S.C. Appeal No.16/2021

9

claim of non-consensual intercourse, and thereby corroborating

her version, although it might also result during consensual sex.

The trial Court had thereafter acted on her emphatic assertion that she did

not consent to have sexual relationship with the Appellant in convicting him for

the offence of rape.

In consideration of the appeal of the Appellant, the Court of Appeal

reviewed the evidence relevant to the complaint that the prosecution had failed

to prove the absence of consent to the sexual act to the required degree of proof.

The appellate Court, after considering the reasoning adopted by the trial Court in

coming to the conclusion that there was no consent, decided that the said ground

of appeal is without any merit.

Even before this Court, learned Counsel for the Appellant made

submissions on the same footing and invited attention to the evidence that

referred to the conduct of Champika during her interaction with the Appellant.

He submitted that Champika had willingly followed the Appellant out of her

house and walked up to the acacia tree, in order to facilitate their discussion,

during the initial phase. Learned Counsel also relied on her failure to seize the

opportunity to run away from him or at least to cry out for help, when his

attention shifted to take off his sarong and to lay it on the ground. Learned

Counsel argued that the Appellant had unwittingly provided an opportunity to

the Complainant by letting off his hold on her, but surprisingly, Champika did not

even make an attempt to run away from him, which according to the Counsel, is

a factor that strongly resembles the conduct of a willing party to the sexual act.

S.C. Appeal No.16/2021

10

Learned Counsel for the Appellant, after making reference to the evidence

of the Complainant that the Appellant had forcibly removed her garments, and

in the process tore out a part of her blouse, which she identified during trial, in

order to pose the question as to how all this could have been done by his client,

without the Complainant “struggling, screaming, or running away”, as the answer

is unclear to him.

These aspects of the evidence presented by the prosecution had already

been considered by the trial Court as well as by the appellate Court, in the

respective judgments, quite in detail. The trial Court accepted Champika’s

explanation that she was threatened by the Appellant with a knife and she was

fearful that her young daughter too would be ravished by the Appellant. The

appellate Court concurred with that view.

However, in view of the submissions made before this Court by the

learned Counsel, particularly in placing heavy reliance on the conduct of

Champika, that it is reasonable for his client in these circumstances to assume she

consented to the sexual act, I cannot help but to note that the said submission is

necessarily founded on a preconceived notion, entertained by the Appellant that,

under the given situation, Champika should have acted in the exact manner he

expected her to act, if she did not consent, i.e., by struggling, screaming and

running away. On the other hand, the Appellant’s contention in this regard

could also be construed as the failure on the part of the Complainant to act in any

one of these specific ways would naturally be a justification for him to act on the

assumption that she is a consenting party to the sexual act.

This type of societal notions which the Appellant had relied on in

presenting these submissions are generally referred to as ‘stereotypes in sexual

relations’ and ‘rape myths’. They do form an area of interest that attracted the

S.C. Appeal No.16/2021

11

attention, not only of sociologists, but of those who are associated with the

administration of criminal justice systems of many a jurisdiction. Learned State

Counsel, in reply to the said submission of the Appellant, relied on a judgment of

the Canadian Supreme Court in R v Ewanchuck (1999) 1 SCR 330. This judgment

reproduces a section from a book, authored by D. Archard, titled Sexual Consent

(1998), where it is stated that (at p. 131);

“[M]yths of rape include the view that women fantasise about being rape

victims; that women mean ‘yes’ when they say ‘no’; that any woman could

successfully resist a rapist if she really wished to; that the sexually

experienced do not suffer harms when raped (or at least suffer lessor harms

than sexually ‘innocent’); that women often deserve to be raped on account

of their conduct, dress and demeanour; that rape by a stranger is worse

than one by an acquaintance. Stereotypes of sexual activity include the

view of women as passive, disposed submissively to surrender to the sexual

advances of active men, the view that sexual love consists in the

‘possession’ by a man of a woman, and that heterosexual activity is

paradigmatically penetrative coitus.”

In the United Kingdom, The Crown Court Compendium (updated version of

April 2025), is a compilation of specimen directions, covering over a wide range

of issues that might come up before a trial Court, on which the presiding Judge is

expected to provide guidance to the jury to determine them in line with the

applicable law. The specimen found in the said Compendium, with regard to rape

myths and stereotypes, provide assistance to Judges in the United Kingdom, in

formulating their addresses to the jurors, in relation to issues that arise during

prosecutions conducted on sexual offences which they must determine (vide p.

S.C. Appeal No.16/2021

12

467). In R v Miller [2010] EWCA Crim 1578, following specimen direction to the

jury received approval of the Court of Appeal;

“The experience of judges who try sexual offences is that an image of

stereotypical behaviour and demeanour by a victim or the perpetrator of a

non-consensual offence such as rape held by some members of the public

can be misleading and capable of leading to injustice. That experience has

been gained by judges, expert in the field, presiding over many such trials

during which guilt has been established but in which the behaviour and

demeanour of complainants and defendants, both during the incident

giving rise to the charge and in evidence, has been widely variable. Judges

have, as a result of their experience, in recent years adopted the course of

cautioning juries against applying stereotypical images of how an alleged

victim or an alleged perpetrator of a sexual offence ought to have behaved at

the time, or ought to appear while giving evidence, and to judge the

evidence on its intrinsic merits.”

In my view, although some of these stereotypes and rape myths referred to

in this judgment and also in the specimen direction inserted in the compendium

might differ from its Asian versions, perhaps due certain cultural and socio-

economic differences, yet it is important that the trial Judges as well as Counsel,

who assist Courts, on behalf of the prosecution as well as the defence, should be

alive to such popularly held but unreliable societal notions, and their adverse

effects on the respective cases, not only in assessing credibility of the witnesses

but also in determining imposition of criminal liability on those who are accused

of sexual offences.

Even in South Asian setting such stereotypes might have the potential of

preventing the Courts from understanding the realities of a situation, as they

S.C. Appeal No.16/2021

13

might tend to subconsciously cloud its ability to arrive at a fair judgment on the

narrative of the Complainant. The Supreme Court of India published a

handbook titled “Combating Gender Stereotypes” (updated in 2023), in which

contained 15 such stereotypes identified as are prevalent in Indian society. The

authors have arranged them under the heading (at p. 16) “Stereotypes concerning

sex and sexual violence”. One such stereotype identified by that Court is “[I]f a

woman does not scream for help, attack the rapist or if she does not have any injuries on

her body such as cuts and scrapes, she has not been raped.”

The Explanation (ii) to Section 363 of the Ceylon Penal Code, as amended,

seems to have been enacted to address this very issue as it states “[E]vidence of

resistance such as physical injuries to the body is not essential to prove that sexual

intercourse took place without consent”. In the case of State of Uttar Pradesh v

Chhotey Lal (2011) 2 SCC 550, Supreme Court of India stated “[I]t is wrong to

assume in all cases of intercourse with women against will or without consent, there

would be some injury on the external or internal parts of the victim”.

Since the core issue presented before this Court is whether the Courts

below have considered and determined the disputed fact in issue, namely, did

Champika consent to have sexual intercourse with the Appellant correctly, it is

necessary to understand the nature of the evidence, which the Appellant relied

on as indicative of her ‘consent’, in terms of the definition given to the consent in

sexual matters by the superior Courts, an essential element of the offence of

Rape.

But, before even I venture in that direction, it is important to take note of

an observation made by Professor G.L. Peiris in his book titled Offences under the

Penal Code of Ceylon in this regard (at p.222). Learned author states “[I]t is a

fundamental principle that, where the woman’s consent is an issue, a conviction of rape

S.C. Appeal No.16/2021

14

will be upheld only in circumstances where the prosecution succeeded in establishing

absence of consent beyond a reasonable doubt. If proof of this element is lacking, the cause

of the prosecution is necessarily incomplete. Consequently, no burden devolves on the

defence in these circumstances. Any departure from this position culminates in a

miscarriage of justice.” The trial Courts as well as appellate Courts must

constantly be reminded of this fundamental principle, in determining criminal

liability in cases of Rape.

The question what exactly is denoted by the word “consent” that contained

in Section 363 of the Penal Code had received attention of the superior Courts on

several occasions. Professor Peiris, in that book (at p. 223), quotes from a case

decided in 1919, where a more complete description to the word consent could

be found. In the case of Kalimuttu (6 C.W.R. 142) Schneider J observed “[C]onsent

is not mere submission. There can be no consent where there is no proper knowledge of

the nature of the act. Consent cannot be implied unless the conscious mind had

considered the nature and consequences of the act and had then submitted to it”. This

Court respectfully agree with the description given to the word ‘consent’ by

Schneider J, in relation to the offence of Rape.

Even though the said observation refers to an ‘implied consent’, such

consent, is in turn hinges on the affirmative answer to the question whether a

“conscious mind had considered the nature and consequences of the act and had then

submitted to it.” Thus, in a situation where there are no words either spoken or

written, or any other reliable mode of communication by which consent could

explicitly be indicated by an individual, consent could be implied only when in

fact there are indications that a “conscious mind had considered the nature and

consequences of the act and had then submitted to it.” Whether this qualification was

S.C. Appeal No.16/2021

15

satisfied or not at the given time, could only be answered by the very person,

whose consent is required by law.

Coming back to the set of circumstances revealed in the instant appeal, it is

clear that the trial Court had found the evidence of Champika is well corroborated

by material particulars and therefore could be taken as a truthful and reliable

narrative of what had taken place in that night, and accordingly the Court could

act upon it safely. The Appellant did not take up the position of a mistake, in

inferring her consent. Instead, he relied on her alleged invitation, extended to

him to pay a visit when her husband was away, as an act indicative of consent.

He also claimed that they had sexual relations prior to this instance. Thus, the

Appellant appears to have inferred Champika had impliedly consented to have

sexual intercourse with him purely on the strength of such an invitation. In

addition, he relied on the conduct attributed to the Complainant during his

interaction with her claiming that too suggestive of her consent.

The evidence of the Appellant, presented through his statement from the

dock, was rejected by the trial Court and there is no complaint by the Appellant

on the findings of the trial Court or of the appellate Court in that regard in

relation to either of the two impugned judgments. That conclusion left only the

issue of ‘implied consent’ for the Appellant to harp on, and that too by placing

reliance on the ‘conduct’ of the Complainant, inviting this Court to determine

whether the prosecution was able to establish the element of absence of the

Complainant’s consent, beyond a reasonable doubt.

It appears that the Appellant’s contention, presented before this Court,

particularly in relation to the first question of law that had been formulated on

the issue of consent, is based on the premise that the trial Court, even after

accepting Champika’s evidence as a truthful and reliable account of what had

S.C. Appeal No.16/2021

16

taken place, it must once again scrutinise her evidence, this time, looking for

signs of any “implied consent” that could be inferred from her conduct. Perusal of

the relevant section of the judgment of the trial Court reveals that there is in fact

a finding made by the trial Court to that effect, when it held “ … leue;a; we;sj ,sx.sl

ls%hdjl fhfok ldka;djlf.a yeisrSu me’ id’ 1 f. ls%hdjka wkqj wkdjrKh fkdjk nj ;SrKh

lrñ’”. Elsewhere in that judgment, the trial Court already found Champika’s

evidence as credible and a probable version after making reference to evaluation

of specific items of her evidence. This is indicative of an evaluation of the

Complainant’s evidence on the issue of consent twice over. Once the Court is

satisfied with her testimonial trustworthiness and then, on the issue of implied

consent. This particular approach adopted by the trial Court could not be taken

as an approach that is in conformity with the applicable principles of law.

Only Champika knows, whether she acted in the manner attributed to her,

after her “conscious mind had considered the nature and consequences of the act and had

then submitted to it.” She categorically denied that the Appellant had sexual

intercourse with her consent. In this context, a very relevant observation that has

been made by the Canadian Supreme Court in R v Ewanchuck (supra) which

must be reproduce here. The Court said “[T]he trier of fact may only come to one of

two conclusions: the complainant either consented or did not. There is no third option.

If the trier of fact accepts the complainant’s testimony that she did not consent, no matter

how strongly her conduct may contradict that claim, the absence of consent is established

and the third component of the actus reus of sexual assault is proven”.

The underlying premise on which this pronouncement was made by that

Court is described therein as follows;

S.C. Appeal No.16/2021

17

“The trial Judge’s conclusion that the complainant implicitly consented and

that the Crown failed to prove lack of consent was a fundamental error

given that he [the Judge] found the complainant credible, and accepted her

evidence that she said “no” on three occasions and was afraid. This error

does not derive from the findings of fact but from mythical assumptions. It

denies woman’s sexual autonomy and implies that women are in a state of

constant consent to sexual activity.”

In the instant appeal too, it must be reiterated that Champika, either with

spoken words or in any other manner did not express her consent to have sexual

intercourse with the Appellant. On the other hand, it is her clear evidence that

the Appellant had ravished her like a “madman” after ignoring all her pleas not to

( “msiafila jf.a ug lror l,d” uu tmd lshoaos lror l,d”). Champika also said that she had

prostrated before the Appellant, begging and pleading with him to go away

without harassing her sexually. During cross-examination of the Complainant,

the Appellant did not challenge any of these factual assertions made by her. The

Court of Appeal, in order to reach its conclusion to affirm the conviction of the

Appellant, too had noted these items of evidence and relied on them. The said

assertions of Champika makes it clear, without leaving room for any ambiguity,

that not only she did not consent but explicitly conveyed her mind to the

Appellant that she had no such intentions. However, the Appellant’s contention

appears to be founded upon the fact that he had perceived her invitation as

indicative of implied consent, which the trial Court considered independent of

the issue of credibility, but rightly decided in favour of the prosecution, before

finding the Appellant guilty of the charge.

In view of the description of the ‘consent’, in the observation of Shnider J in

the judgment of Kalimuttu (supra), I am persuaded by the said reasoning

S.C. Appeal No.16/2021

18

adopted by the Canadian Supreme Court to hold that, after the trial Court

already found Champika’s evidence is credible and reliable, the claim of implied

consent, sought to be deducible from the conduct attributed to the Complainant,

during her interaction with the Appellant, should not have been considered by

the trial Court as it had already been established in the negative by her evidence.

Thus, in view of the above reasoning, I proceed to answer the two

questions of law on which the instant appeal was argued before this Court, in the

affirmative. The judgments of the Court of Appeal and the High Court are

hereby affirmed, along with the sentence imposed on the Appellant.

But before I conclude this judgment by proceeding to dismiss the

Appellant’s appeal, it is important to note a very serious and a disturbing lapse

on the part of the prosecution.

On 19.09.2016, learned State Counsel, by way of a Motion, moved Court to

call for the DNA report from GENETECH. On 27.10.2016, the High Court

received the report sent by GENETECH and issued a copy to the prosecution.

During cross-examination of the investigating officer, the Appellant questioned

the official witness whether his blood samples were taken for a DNA analysis.

The witness answered in the affirmative.

However, for the reasons best known to the prosecution, the DNA report

was not tendered as an item of evidence for the prosecution. The said report

indicate the DNA of the Appellant was identified in the underskirt worn by the

Complainant that night. Since the Appellant admitted having sexual intercourse

in his statement from the dock, the said failure had not resulted in a serious

miscarriage of justice. The serious lapse on the part of the relevant prosecutor is

S.C. Appeal No.16/2021

19

obvious. But I think, even the trial Judge too had been at remise in this regard for

it is her primary duty to discover the truth.

Before I part with this judgment, it is noted that the Appellant was

imposed a ten-year term of imprisonment by the trial Court on him for

committing rape on the Complainant. The High Court imposed the said sentence

on 20.09.2018. The Appellant’s appeal preferred against the said conviction and

sentence was dismissed by the Court of Appeal on 10.03.2020.

With the pronouncement of the judgment on the appeal of the Appellant

by this Court, the Appellant in effect had been in remand for a total period of 87

months, pending determination of his two appeals. The consideration of the time

spent in remand by an appellant pending determination of his appeal by the

Court of Appeal is governed by the statutory provisions contained in Section 333

of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 as amended.

Section 333(5) of the said Act states that the time during which an

appellant if in custody “… shall not count as part of any term of imprisonment under

his sentence” and “ … shall subject to the directions or order of the Court of Appeal be

deemed to … begin to run … as from the day on which the appeal is determined …”. The

Court of Appeal in its judgment, did not make any such order, regarding the

time spent in remand. Thus, in terms of Section 333(5) the Appellant’s sentence is

deemed to begin to run only from 10.03.2020.

However, the proviso to Section 333 states thus;

“ … the Court of Appeal may, in appropriate cases, order that the time

spent by an appellant in custody pending the determination of his appeal

and any time spent in custody prior to the conviction, such time not having

been considered as part of his sentence passed at the time of his conviction

S.C. Appeal No.16/2021

20

by the court of first instance, be considered as part of his sentence ordered

at the conclusion of his appeal”.

If the sentence is deemed to run from the date of judgment of this Court, as

the law provides for, the ten-year term of imprisonment imposed on the

Appellant should begin to run from the date on which this judgment is

pronounced. The resultant position would be the Appellant is incarcerated for a

total period of 207 months, inclusive of the term of imprisonment of 120 months.

In the circumstances, I am of the view that this is an appropriate case, where an

order of Court should be made to the effect, that the ten-year term of

imprisonment should deem to have commenced from the date on which his

appeal to the Court of Appeal was dismissed, i.e., 10.03.2020 and not from the

date of the judgment of this Court.

The appeal of the Appellant accordingly stands dismissed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

A.H.M.D. NAWAZ J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

ARJUNA OBEYESEKERE, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT