==== BLOCKS ==== 

1

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST

REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of an application for Leave to

Appeal under and in terms of Section 5(c) of

the High Court of the Provinces (Special

Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990 as amended by

Act No. 54 of 2006.

SC/Appeal No. 38/2025 1. Mahesh Hewagama

SC/HCCA LA /346/2019 2. Manthri Hewage Nayani Fernando

WP/HCCA/KAL/14/2019

D.C. Kalutara Case No. Both of

6533/L

‘Akinda’ Sama Uyana Mawatha

Duwa Temple Road,

Kalutara South.

PLAINTIFFS

vs

1. Senhiru Lands & Credit (Pvt) Ltd,

Malegoda Road, Galawila, Rendapola, Dodangoda. 2. Senhiru Micro Credit (Pvt) Ltd

Malegoda Road, Galawila, Rendapola, Dodangoda. 3. Binal Investment (Pvt) Ltd.

No. 91/A, Pirivena Road, Molligoda, Wadduwa.

2

4. National Trust Bank

No. 242, Union Place Colombo 2 DEFENDANTS AND BETWEEN

1. Mahesh Hewagama 2. Manthri Hewage Nayani Fernando

Both of ‘Akinda’ Sama Uyana Mawatha

Duwa Temple Road,

Kalutara South.

PLAINTIFFS-PETITIONERS

vs

1. Senhiru Lands & Credit (Pvt) Ltd,

Malegoda Road, Galawila, Rendapola, Dodangoda. 2. Senhiru Micro Credit (Pvt) Ltd

Malegoda Road, Galawila, Rendapola, Dodangoda. 3. Binal Investment (Pvt) Ltd.

No. 91/A, Pirivena Road, Molligoda, Wadduwa. 4. National Trust Bank

No. 242, Union Place Colombo 2 DEFENDANTS- RESPONDENTS

3

AND NOW BETWEEN

3. Binal Investment (Pvt) Ltd.

No. 91/A, Pirivena Road, Molligoda, Wadduwa. 3rd DEFENDANT-RESPONDENT-PETITIONER

vs

1. Mahesh Hewagama 2. Manthri Hewage Nayani Fernando

Both of ‘Akinda’ Sama Uyana Mawatha

Duwa Temple Road,

Kalutara South.

PLAINTIFFS-PETITIONERS-

RESPONDENTS

1. Senhiru Lands & Credit (Pvt) Ltd,

Malegoda Road, Galawila, Rendapola, Dodangoda. 2. Senhiru Micro Credit (Pvt) Ltd

Malegoda Road, Galawila, Rendapola, Dodangoda. 4. National Trust Bank

No. 242, Union Place Colombo 2

DEFENDANTS-REPONDENTS-RESPONDENTS

4

BEFORE : Janak De Silva, J. Mahinda Samayawardhena, J. M. Sampath K. B. Wijeratne, J. COUNSEL : Saliya Pieris, P.C. with Varuna de Seram instructed by Manjula Blasooriya for the 3rd Defendant- Respondent-Appellant.

Kuvera de Zoysa, P.C. with Sajana de Zoysa instructed by Poornima Perera for the 4th Defendant-Respondent-Respondent. Dr. Wijayadasa Rajapaksha, P.C. instructed by Punarji Karunasekara for the Plaintiffs-Petitioners-Respondents. ARGUED ON : 21.07.2025 DECIDED ON : 04.03.2026

M. Sampath K. B. Wijeratne J.

The Plaintiff–Petitioner–Respondents (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Plaintiffs’)

have instituted the present action seeking, inter alia,

a) a declaration of title to the land morefully described in the schedules to the

plaint,

b) a declaration that same is held by the 1st and 2nd Defendant-Respondent-

Respondents (hereinafter called and referred to as the ‘1st and 2nd

Defendants’) and the 3rd Defendant Respondent-Appellant (hereinafter

called and referred to as the ‘3rd Defendant’) in trust for the benefit of the

Plaintiffs,

5

c) an order directing the Defendants to retransfer the title held by them in

trust to the said land to the Plaintiffs, subject to the payment of monetary

claim made in paragraph ‘ඈ’ of the prayer of the plaint.

d) Ejectment of the 3rd Defendant from the portion of the premises possessed

by the 3rd Defendant, which is described in the 2nd schedule to the plaint,

e) for damages,

f) for a declaration that the mortgage bond bearing No. 919A executed in

favour of the 4th Defendant-Respondent-Respondent Bank (hereinafter

called and referred to as the 4th Defendant) is invalid in law and,

g) for interim injunctions restraining the 3rd Defendant from transferring,

alienating or causing any encumbrance in any manner on the said property

and restraining the 3rd Defendant from interfering with the possession of

the Plaintiff in respect of the property in suit other than what is possessed

by 3rd Defendant, described in the 2nd schedule to the plaint.

The case presented by the Plaintiffs is as follows:

The 1st Plaintiff was the owner of the land and the three-storied building standing

thereon. He gifted the same to his wife, the 2nd Plaintiff, by Deed No. 252, marked

‘A1’. The Plaintiffs, being in need of a sum of Rupees Twenty Million, sought a

loan from Somachandra Investments (Private) Limited, which agreed to provide

the loan subject to the execution of a deed of transfer of the property in suit as

security. Accordingly, the Deed of transfer bearing No. 5592, marked ‘A2’, was

executed.

Thereafter, the Plaintiffs, being in need of a sum of Rupees Fifty Million, sought a

loan from the 1st Defendant Company. The 1st Defendant, having agreed to grant

the loan, entered into an agreement as pleaded in paragraph 10 of the plaint and

reflected in the document marked ‘A3’, which provides that:

a) the 1st Defendant should pay sum of rupees 27.5 million in settlement of the

loan obtained from Somachandra Investments (Pvt.) Ltd and take a deed of

transfer of the property in suit in its name as security.

6

b) That the 1st Defendant should pay a sum of rupees 16.5 million to the 1st

Plaintiff out of which a sum of rupees 12.5 million should be invested by the

1st Plaintiff in the 1st Defendant company for which the 1st Defendant company

should pay a monthly interest at the rate of 4%. Out of the balance sum of Rs.

4 million remaining from the total sum of Rs. 16.5 million, a sum of Rs. 3.5

million shall be paid in cash to the 1st Plaintiff.

c) In lieu of the balance out of the total sum of Rs. 50 million, the vehicle

bearing registration number WP CAV 0190 should be sold to the 1st Plaintiff.

However, as it has been obtained on a leasing facility from a finance company,

the 1st Defendant should settle all remaining monthly installments payable to

the finance company and thereafter, transfer the vehicle in the name of the 1st

Plaintiff.

The 2nd Defendant is a subsidiary company of the 1st Defendant. The Boards of

Directors of both companies are the same. Therefore, it was further agreed that

the contract between the Plaintiffs and the 1st Defendant would be enforced

through the 2nd Defendant.

Acting on the aforesaid agreement, the Plaintiffs arranged for Somachandra

Investments (Private) Limited to transfer the property in suit in the name of the

2nd Defendant by Deed No. 1816, marked ‘A6’. In lieu of the loan, a further

agreement bearing No. 1916, marked ‘A4’, was executed.

However, after a lapse of time, the Plaintiffs realised that the 2nd Defendant had

defaulted in the payment of lease installments to the finance company in respect

of the leasing facility obtained for the vehicle. It was further alleged that the 1st

Defendant Company failed to pay the agreed interest on the sum of Rupees

Twelve Point Five Million invested. It was also discovered that the Directors of

the 1st and 2nd Defendant companies had defrauded a large number of their

customers and had fled the country. In support of this allegation, two newspaper

articles were produced and marked ‘A7’ and ‘A8’.

7

The Plaintiffs were further made to understand that the 1st and 2nd Defendant

companies had obtained a loan by hypothecating the property in suit.

Accordingly, upon investigation, it was revealed that the 2nd Defendant had

obtained a loan of Rupees Forty Million from the 4th Defendant Bank by

hypothecating the property in suit under Deed No. 9191A, marked ‘A9’. It was

further found that the 2nd Defendant, having obtained the said loan from the 4th

Defendant, had transferred the property in the name of the 3rd Defendant company

by Deed No. 2597, marked ‘A10’.

Accordingly, the Plaintiffs have prayed for the reliefs referred to above:

At the inception, the original court had issued an enjoining order as prayed for in

the plaint, together with a notice for the issuance of an interim injunction.

The 3rd Defendant, having received the enjoining order and the notice of interim

injunction, appeared before the Court and filed its statement of objections, stating

the following facts.

The subject matter of the action, being a three-storied building, had been let to

various tenants by the Plaintiffs under lease bonds. Upon the transfer of the

property to Somachandra Investments (Pvt) Ltd., the said lease bonds were

terminated, and fresh lease agreements were entered into by the new owner.

Similarly, upon obtaining the transfer, the 1st and 2nd Defendants terminated the

lease bonds entered into by Somachandra Investments Ltd. and entered into fresh

lease agreements, thereby implying that the 1st and 2nd Defendants had been

placed in possession. The 2nd Defendant additionally purchased the adjacent

property and amalgamated it with the land in suit. Thereafter, the 2nd Defendant

mortgaged the property to the 4th Defendant. The 3rd Defendant, being in search of

a commercial property to purchase, negotiated with the 2nd Defendant and

acquired the property for a sum of Rupees Fifty-Five Million, of which Rupees

Seventeen Million Five Hundred Thousand was paid to the 2nd Defendant, and the

balance was set off against the repayment of the loan granted by the 4th

Defendant.

8

The 3rd Defendant further averred that the Plaintiffs had suppressed material facts,

such as the lease bonds entered into between the tenants and Somachandra

Investments (Pvt) Ltd., as well as the 2nd Defendant, demonstrating their

possession, which constitute material evidence. It was further averred that

Somachandra Investments (Pvt) Ltd. is a necessary party if the Plaintiffs are to

succeed in a claim for trust, and, therefore, the plaint cannot proceed due to non-

joinder of parties.

However, it is noteworthy that the 3rd Defendant did not claim to be a bona fide

purchaser for value.

The Learned District Judge, relying on Felix Dias Bandaranayake vs State Film

Corporation1, inferred that the case presented by the Plaintiffs lacked a prima

facie case. She further held that the Plaintiffs had suppressed material facts

relating to the cancellation of the lease bonds with the tenants and the subsequent

execution of fresh lease agreements, initially by Somachandra Investments Ltd.,

and thereafter by the 2nd Defendant. She also found that the Plaintiffs had failed to

disclose that the police had warned both parties not to take possession, as such

action could result in a breach of the peace.

Accordingly, the Learned District Judge dismissed the application for an interim

injunction.

Thereupon, the Plaintiffs moved for leave to appeal to the High Court of Civil

Appeal, which initially granted leave to proceed. Thereafter, by the impugned

order, the Learned Judges of the High Court set aside the order of the Learned

District Judge and granted the interim injunction as prayed for in the plaint. The

Learned Judges of the High Court of Civil Appeal held that, in view of documents

‘A1’, ‘A6’, and ‘A10’, together with the evidence relating to all transactions, the

Court is satisfied that there is a serious matter to be examined at trial. They

inferred that the entire transaction gives rise to certain suspicions.

1 1981 2 SLR 287.

9

The Learned Judges expressed concern as to why the property, having been

mortgaged to the 4th Defendant, was thereafter sold to the 3rd Defendant. They

also noted that the 3rd Defendant, having purchased the property, did not opt to

cancel the previous lease bonds between the tenants and the 2nd Defendant. In

addition, the learned High Court Judges have raised concerns as to why fresh

lease bonds were not executed, thereby giving rise to serious suspicion regarding

the bona fides of the entire transaction. The lease bond marked ‘X9vi’, bearing

No. 2205, was entered into by the 2nd Defendant even after the deed of transfer to

the 3rd Defendant was executed.

The Learned Judges of the High Court, having considered all the facts and

circumstances of the case, held that the issue of whether a constructive trust has

been established or otherwise should be determined at the conclusion of the trial,

rather than at an early stage. Accordingly, they set aside the impugned order and

granted the reliefs as aforesaid.

The 3rd Defendant, being dissatisfied with the aforesaid order, has moved for

leave to appeal to this Court. This Court granted leave on the following question

of law:

“Have The learned Judges Provincial High Court of Civil Appeals have erred in

deciding “that the learned District Judge should have issued interim injunction in

terms of prayers (එ) and (ඔ) in the plaint” in the light of the facts and

circumstances of this case keeping in line with the relevant law?”

Before this Court, the learned Counsel for the 3rd Defendant submitted that the

Plaintiffs have failed to tender prima facie evidence supporting the existence of a

constructive trust that would justify the grant of interim reliefs. He further

submitted that the Plaintiffs are guilty of suppressing material facts, which

warrants the dismissal of their claim for interim reliefs.

10

Prima Facie Case

I will first address the issue of whether the Plaintiffs have established a prima

facie case justifying the grant of an interim injunction.

Section 54(1)(a) of the Judicature Act provides:

“Where in any action instituted in a High Court, District Court or a Small Claims

Court, it appears-

(a) from the plaint that the plaintiff demands and is entitled to a judgment

against the defendant, restraining the commission or continuance of an

act or nuisance, the commission or continuance of which would

produce injury to the plaintiff; or […]”

This requirement was elaborated in the celebrated judgment of Soza J., in Felix

Dias Bandaranayake vs State Film Corporation2. His Lordship has observed “In

Sri Lanka we start off with a prima facie case. That is, the applicant for an

interim injunction must show that there is a serious matter in relation to his legal

rights, to be tried at the hearing and that he has a good chance of winning. It is

not necessary that the plaintiff should be certain to win. It is sufficient if the

probabilities are he will win. Where however the plaintiff has established a strong

prima facie case that he has title to the legal right claimed by him but only an

arguable case that the defendant has infringed it or is about to infringe it, the

injunction should not be granted (Hubbard v Vosper). If the probability is that no

right of the plaintiff will be violated or that he will suffer no wrong such as the

law recognizes then the injunction will not issue.”

This requirement further elaborated in Damayanti Abayawardana vs Hemalatha

Abayawardana3 as plaintiff having a “reasonable prospect of success and actual

and legally recognizable right”.

2 1981 (2) SLR 287, at page 302. 3 1993 (1) SLR 272.

11

However, does a prima facie case mean an establishment of the case for the

parties applying for interim injunction? In Gulam Hussain vs Cohen4 a prima

facie case was interpreted as “a serious matter in relation to legal rights to be

tried at the hearing and having a good chance of winning”. S. N. Silva J. (as he

was then), observed in Rajan and two others vs Sellasamy5 “ The provisions of

section 54(1) of the Judicature Act considered in the light of judicial dicta based

upon antecedent legislative provisions postulate that there are two matters on

which the plaintiff has to satisfy court to entitle him to interim relief by way of an

injunction. They are:

(i) that, there is a serious question to be tried as to the impugned act of the

defendant the commission of which is sought to be restrained;

(ii) that on the facts as disclosed in the material before court, it is probable

that the plaintiff is entitled to permanent relief in restraining the defendant

from committing the impugned act.”

S.N. Silva J., at page 386, while quoting with approval the dictum of Lord

Denning M.R. in Hubbard vs Vosper6, rightly held: “These matters that the

plaintiff has to establish to entitle him to an interim injunction are put under the

rubric of a "prima facie case". The test of a "prima facie case" embracing the

elements stated above, is the foremost consideration applied in deciding the

question of granting an interim injunction. The matters looked at thereafter are

the balance of convenience and the conduct of the respective parties.”

Further elaborating on this requirement, Chandra Ekanayake, J., in Kariyawam vs

Sujatha Janaki and Two Others7, observed: “ The line of authorities on interim

injunctions would imply demonstrate that, the first and foremost thing that should

be satisfied by an applicant seeking an interim injunction is: “has the applicant

4 1995(2) SLR 365. 5 1994(2) SLR 377, at page 385. 6 (1972) 2 Q.B. 84 at p. 86. 7 2013 (1) SLR 176, at page 185.

12

made out a prima facie case?” that is it must appear from the plaint that the

probabilities are such that plaintiff is entitled to a judgment in his favour.”

In other words, the plaintiff must show that a legal right is his being infringed and

that he will probably succeed in establishing his rights. A prima face case - does

not mean a case which is proved to the hilt but a case which can be said to be

established if evidence which is led in support of the same were believed and

accepted In case of Murtin Burn Ltd V R.N.Banerjee at page 85’ the Supreme

Court of India (Bhagwathi,J) had opted to outline the ambit and scope of

connotation “Prima Facie “ case as follows;-

A prima facie case does not mean a case proved to the hilt but a case which

can be said to have been established if the evidence which is led in support

of the same were believed. While determining whether a prima facie case

had been made out the relevant consideration is whether the evidence led it

was possible to arrive at the conclusion in question and not whether that

was the only conclusion which could be arrived at on that evidence”

In Jinadasa vs Weeratunga8 Dalton J., has observed: “In such a matter the Court

must be satisfied that there is a serious question to be tried at the hearing and

that on the facts before it there is a probability that plaintiff is entitled to relief.”

According to Black’s Law Dictionary (third edition) term ‘prima facie’ means

“on first appearance but subject to further evidence or information” and the term

prima facie case means,

“1.the establishment of a legally required rebuttable presumption.

2.a party “production of enough evidence to allow the fact-trier to infer the fact

at issue and rule in parties favor”

On this interpretation, a ‘prima facie’ case means a case which, on first

appearance, is made out as set out.

8 31 NLR 33.

13

Hence, in my view, a ‘prima facie’ case does not require a rigid establishment of

the applicant’s claim, but only the establishment of a legally recognizable right

‘on its first appearance,’ which should be examined at trial. Therefore, in dealing

with an application for an interim injunction, a complete picture of the entire case

should not be expected.

A prima facie case is necessarily linked to the act complained of. Therefore, in

deciding whether a prima facie case exists warranting the issuance of an interim

injunction, the Court should be mindful of the act or acts sought to be prevented

by way of interim relief.

Facts of the Case Presented in the Plaint

I will now revert to the facts of the case. The Plaintiffs have, in their plaint,

pleaded a constructive trust as the main relief.

Section 83 of the Trust Ordinance provides:

“Where the owner of property transfers or bequeaths it, and it cannot

reasonably be inferred consistently with the attendant circumstances

that he intended to dispose of the beneficial interest therein, the

transferee or legatee must hold such properly for the benefit of the

owner or his legal representative.”

The document marked ‘A3’ demonstrates the true nature of the transaction

between the Plaintiffs and the 1st and 2nd Defendants, as well as the background in

which Deed of Transfer No. 1816, marked ‘A6’, was executed. ‘A3’ clearly

shows that the 1st Defendant had advanced a sum of Rupees 27.5 million in

settlement of the rights conveyed to Somachandra Investments (Pvt) Ltd. under

Deed No. 5592, marked ‘A2’. This, in my view, leads to the inference that the

transaction recorded in Deed No. 5592, though termed a sale, was in reality a

money-lending transaction.

14

In Dayawathie vs Gunasekara9, the actual transaction between the parties was

held to be a loan, even though a deed of transfer was executed. It was further held

that the intention of the parties to secure a loan constituted an attendant

circumstance as provided under Section 83 of the Trust Ordinance.

A3’ further acknowledges that the 1st Defendant had taken a deposit of Rupees

12.5 million from the 1st Plaintiff, which was also part of the same transaction.

The agreement between the 1st Plaintiff and the 2nd Defendant in respect of the

vehicle, bearing No. 1916 and marked ‘A5’, further supports the proposition that

the true transaction was one intended to secure a loan.

The 3rd Defendant has stated that Somachandra Investments (Pvt) Ltd., having

purchased the property under Deed No. 5592, marked ‘A2’, terminated all lease

agreements entered into between the Plaintiffs and the tenants, implying that the

transaction with Somachandra Investments (Pvt) Ltd. was an outright sale.

However, both Plaintiffs joined in the subsequent Deed of Transfer in favor of the

3rd Defendant as transferors. If Somachandra Investments (Pvt) Ltd. had sold the

property under the said deed, why should the Plaintiffs have joined as vendors? It

is noteworthy that Deed No. 1816 states in its recital: “(...)ප්‍රසිද්ධ න ොතොරිස් තුසර

එන් ජයන ොඩි මහතො විසින් ලියො සහති ල අං 252 සහ 2009.02.13 ව දි ැති

තෑගි ඔප්පුව මත හිමි ම් ලැබ නිරවුල්ව අඛණ්ඩව ස්වොධි ව බුක්තති විදිනු ලබ නමහි

පහත උපනල්ඛ නේ සවිස්තරව දක්තවො ඇති නද්පල සහ ඊට අදොල එහි න ොටසක්ත හැටියට

ඒ සමග බුක්තති විදි නව ත් සියලුම නද්ද ඒ ගැ අපට ඇතිව තිනබ මුළු හිමි ම්

අයිති ම් උරුමක්ත ොර ොර වැදගත් ම් හො බලුළුවන් ොර ම් ද (...)”This statement,

prima facie, is capable of leading to the inference that the Plaintiffs were in

possession, despite any lease bonds that had been entered into between

Somachandra Investments (Pvt) Ltd. and the tenants. In fact, the third paragraph

of ‘A3’ clearly states: “ඉහත සදහන් නද්පළ අප ආයත ය මිලදී ගැනීමට තීරණය ර

ඇති බැවින් ඉහත සදහන් සීමොසහිත නසෝමචන්ර ඉන්නවස්්මන්් ුද්ගලි සමොගනමන්

ැවත පවරො ගැනීමට ලබොදිය යුතු මුදල රුපියල් ලක්තෂ නදසිය හැත්තෑපහක්ත (රු

9 1991(1) SLR 115.

15

27500000.00) ව අතර (…)” This could indicate that the sum of Rupees 27.5

million was paid in settlement of the amount required for the conveyance from

Somachandra Investments (Pvt) Ltd. Therefore, there is sufficient material to

infer, prima facie, that the Deed of Transfer in favor of the 2nd Defendant was, in

reality, a loan transaction.

Thereafter, the 2nd Defendant, although said to have terminated the lease bonds

entered into between Somachandra Investments (Pvt) Ltd. and the tenants, and

executed fresh lease bonds, it could well be that these are nothing more than

fabricated documents intended to camouflage the true nature of the transaction. In

Perera vs Fernando10 Sureshchandra J. has observed “ It is a matter of general

observation that this case is yet another demonstration of a practice prevalent in

many parts of the country where unofficial money lenders lend money to person

who seek assistance when in need of money and the borrowers have very often no

option but to agree to very high rates of interest for which no document is given

and further they are compelled to effect transfers of property in order to obtain

such loans. In addition, they resort to obtaining signed blank cheques form the

borrower, a postdated cheque, promissory notes, powers of attorney, and

sometimes rental agreements or lease agreement to give the impression that the

borrower is permitted to be in possession of such properties”

One strong piece of evidence in support of the Plaintiffs’ case is Lease Bond No.

2205, dated October 17, 2018, marked ‘X9 VI’, whereby the 2nd Defendant leased

a shop in the building to a tenant. The Deed of Transfer in favor of the 3rd

Defendant had been executed on May 10, 2018. How could the 2nd Defendant

lease a part of the premises to any party after having sold the entire property to

the 3rd Defendant? This demonstrates, on the face of it, that the Deed of Transfer

in favor of the 3rd Defendant was nothing but a sham.

The 3rd Defendant has nowhere claimed the benefit of Section 66(1) of the Trust

Ordinance, which provides:

10 2011(2) SLR 192, at page 200.

16

(1) Nothing in section 65 entitles the beneficiary to any right in respect of

property in the hands of—

(a) a transferee in good faith for consideration without having notice of

the Trust, either when the purchase money was paid, or when the

conveyance was executed; or

(b) a transferee for consideration from such a transferee.

In fact, the 3rd Defendant opted to obtain a transfer while a mortgage bond was

still in force. Moreover, the attestation of the notary in Deed No. 2597, marked

‘A10’, executed for the purpose of transferring the property to the 3rd Defendant,

states that the consideration had been acknowledged as paid prior to the

execution. The 3rd Defendant has not provided any valid explanation for this

statement contained in the attestation of the notary.

Therefore, an inference can be drawn from all the documents that the 3rd

Defendant was not a bona fide purchaser for value.

In Piyasena vs Don Vansu11 and G.C. Karunaratne Perera vs Sanath

Fernando12, it was held that a transferor remaining in possession constitutes

evidence of retention of beneficial interest. Fabricated transactions may further

support and strengthen the inference of the transferors’ continued possession.

Therefore, I am of the view that the Learned Judges of the High Court were

justified in their conclusion.

The learned Counsel for the Appellant has cited the judgments in

Senadirannahalage Chandrika Sudarshani vs Muthukuda Herath

Mudiyanselage Gedara Somawathi13 and Watagoda Gedara Mallika

Chandralatha vs Herath Mudiyanselage Punchi Banda14, where the need to

11 1997 (2) SLR 311. 12 S.C App 8A/2009, S.C minutes 9.5.2011. 13 SC APPEAL NO.173/2011 (S.C. Minutes of 6.4.2017). 14 SC APPEAL NO.185/2015 (S.C minutes of 4.12.2017).

17

recognize the strength of a Deed of Transfer was emphasized. However, both of

these judgments dealt with the final determination of the respective cases and did

not concern the grant of interim injunctions at the inception of proceedings.

Irreparable Loss and Balance of Conveniences

The balance of conveniences is closely linked with the establishment of a prima

facie case. The mere fact that an applicant has made out a prima facie case does

not, by itself, entitle him to the grant of an interim injunction. In Kaluthara Bodhi

Trust vs Kaluthara Multi-Purpose Co-operative Society Ltd15., Her Ladyship

Chief Justice Shirani Bandaranayake observed: “However as could be seen on an

examination of these decisions, the establishment of a prima facie case alone

would not be sufficient for the grant of an interim injunction. The Court would

have to pay serious attention to the question of irreparable damage as well as the

balance of conveniences, prior to grant of an interim injunction although a party

would have satisfied the necessary ingredients for such injunction …”

Taking into consideration the nature of the injunctions sought in the plaint, it

appears that the Plaintiffs would suffer if the 3rd Defendant alienates or encumbers

the property before the final determination of the case. Nowhere has the 3rd

Defendant stated that it has any urgent need to alienate or encumber the property.

As noted above, the attestation of the notary in Deed No. 2597, marked ‘A10’,

suggests the possibility that the 3rd Defendant may not have paid any

consideration to the 2nd Defendant. Therefore, the grant of the interim injunction

prayed for in paragraph (ඒ) of the plaint is justified.

The next issue is whether the 3rd Defendant should be restrained from interfering

with the Plaintiffs’ possession of the building, other than the portion described in

the Second Schedule to the plaint, which is admittedly in the possession of the 3rd

Defendant.

15 2012 blr 175, at page 178.

18

In Pounds vs Ganegama16, the Supreme Court held that even a trespasser could

not be deprived of possession by way of an interim injunction. On reading

paragraph 39 of the plaint and prayer (ඕ), it appears that the Plaintiffs have not

sought an interim injunction to dispossess or restrain the 3rd Defendant Company

from possessing the property, but rather seek to restrain the 3rd Defendant from

interrupting or interfering with the Plaintiffs’ possession. It appears that the rest of

the building, other than the portion possessed by the 3rd Defendant, is occupied by

tenants, and no tenant has entered into any lease agreement with the 3rd

Defendant. The purpose of granting an interim injunction is to maintain the status

quo (Fernando vs Wickremasinghe17). Therefore, I am of the view that the grant

of the second injunction sought is also justified and does not cause serious

prejudice to the 3rd Defendant. On the other hand, the Plaintiffs would suffer

irreparable harm unless the 3rd Defendant is restrained from interfering with their

possession.

Suppression of Material Facts

The Learned Counsel for the 3rd Defendant submitted that the Plaintiffs have

suppressed material facts, particularly the lease bonds executed between the

tenants and Somachandra Investments (Pvt) Ltd., and thereafter with the 2nd

Defendant.

In Hotel Galaxy vs Mercantile Hotels Ltd18., the Supreme Court held that an

applicant for an interim injunction is bound to disclose all material facts, and the

suppression of any such fact should itself deprive the applicant of relief. The test

for deciding whether a fact was required to be disclosed was articulated by His

Lordship Justice:

“Thus, a misstatement of the true facts by the plaintiff which put an

entirely different complexion on the case as presented by him when

16 40 NLR 73. 17 [1998] 3 Sri.L.R. 37). 18 1987 (1) S.L.R. 5, at page 36.

19

the injunction was applied exparte would amount to a

misrepresentation or suppression of material facts warranting its

dissolution without going into its merits”.

In my view, disclosure or non-disclosure which are not material to the issue in

dispute have no adverse effect on the Plaintiffs’ case. Lease bond No. 2205, dated

17 October 2018, marked ‘X9 VI’, was executed by the 2nd Defendant even after

the execution of Deed of Transfer No. 2597 in favor of the 3rd Defendant, which

constitutes strong evidence against the proposition that it was an outright sale.

Therefore, the suppression of the deed has no negative impact on the Plaintiffs’

case but serves as strong evidence against the 3rd Defendant.

Accordingly, I see no reason to hold that the Plaintiffs withheld evidence material

to the application for an interim injunction.

Conclusion

Therefore, I am of the view that the Learned Judges of the High Court of Civil

Appeal were correct in their conclusion in light of the facts and circumstances of

the case. I affirm the impugned Judgment. Accordingly, I answer the question of

law raised in the “negative” and dismiss the appeal of the 3rd Defendant-

Respondent-Appellant with costs.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Janak De Silva, J.

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

Mahinda Samayawardhena, J.

I agree. JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT