[SC/SPL/LA/43/2023] - Page 1 of 5

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

In the matter of a Special Leave to Appeal in

terms of Article 128(2) of the Constitution of the

Republic of Sri Lanka.

The Democratic Socialist Republic

of Sri Lanka

COMPLAINANT

Vs.

Albaradura Rumesh De Silva.

87/38 B,

Mahawatta Road,

Colombo.

ACCUSED

AND THEN BETWEEN

Albaradura Rumesh De Silva.

Angunakolapelessa Prison,

Angunakolapelessa.

ACCUSED-APPELLANT

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General,

SC/SPL/LA No. 43/2023

CA/HCC/ No. 122/2019

High Court Colombo Case No. 7580/2014

[SC/SPL/LA/43/2023] - Page 2 of 5

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

COMPLAINANTRESPONDENT

AND NOW BETWEEN

Albaradura Rumesh De Silva.

Angunakolapelessa Prison,

Angunakolapelessa.

ACCUSED-APPELLANT-

PETIITONER

Vs.

Hon. Attorney General,

Attorney Generals Department,

Colombo 12.

COMPLAINANT-

RESPONDENT-REPONDENT

BEFORE : P. PADMAN SURASENA, J.

JANAK DE SILVA, J. &

ARJUNA OBEYESEKERE, J.

COUNSEL : Shanaka Ranasinghe, PC with Niroshan

Mihindukulasuriya and Sandamali Peiris for

Accused-Appellant-Petitioner.

[SC/SPL/LA/43/2023] - Page 3 of 5

Janaka Bandara, DSG for Complainant-

Respondent-Respondent.

ARGUED &

DECIDED ON : 17th July 2024

P. PADMAN SURASENA, J

Court heard the submissions of the learned President's Counsel for the Accused-

Appellant-Petitioner as well as the submissions of the learned Deputy Solicitor General

for the Complainant-Respondent-Respondent.

Having considered the submissions, Court decides to grant Special Leave to Appeal in

respect of the following question:

Whether the learned Judges of the Court of Appeal were able to evaluate

the case for the defence in the correct perspective according to law, when

they had entertained the thought No reasonable person can believe

those Police Officers would assault and arrest an innocent man who says

he is unaware of the drug traffickers in the area.1

At this stage, the learned Counsel for the Petitioner as well as the learned Deputy

Solicitor General for the Respondents agree that this Court can proceed to hear and

determine the question of law in respect of which we have granted Special Leave to

Appeal forthwith dispensing with compliance with the provisions of the Supreme Court

Rules in regard to taking other relevant steps preparatory to the hearing of the case.

Accordingly, having heard the submissions of the Counsel, we proceed to forthwith

determine the above question of law.

The indictment forwarded against the Accused contains two counts. The first count is

for trafficking of 2.77 grams of Heroin and the second count is for possession of the

same quantity. After the Prosecution closed its case, the Accused has made a Dock

1 Vide page 10 of the Judgment, dated 10-01-2023, of the Court of Appeal.

[SC/SPL/LA/43/2023] - Page 4 of 5

Statement denying the charges and taking up the position that he was assaulted by

the Police Officers who had then taken him to the Police Station.

In the course of the Judgment, the Trial Judge had taken the view that the defence

taken up by the Accused in the Dock Statement has not been suggested to the

witnesses in the course of cross examination. However, the Court of Appeal had not

agreed with that position. The learned Deputy Solicitor General also submitted before

us that that the assertion made by the learned Trial Judge that the defence taken up

by the Accused in the Dock Statement has not been suggested to the witnesses in the

course of cross examination is erroneous.

The Court of Appeal, without relying on the reasons given by the Trial Judge for the

rejection of the Dock Statement, had proceeded to give their own reasons and decided

to reject the Dock Statement made by the Accused. It is in that process that the Court

of Appeal had taken the view that no reasonable person can believe the Police Officers

would assault an innocent man who says he is unaware of the drug traffickers in the

area.

We regret our inability to subscribe to such a view. Moreover, we are of the view that

such a view taken by the Court of Appeal at the very beginning of the process of

evaluating the Dock Statement made by the Accused, particularly in the light of the

nature of the defence taken in the Dock Statement by the Accused in the instant case,

would vitiate the conclusion reached by the Court of Appeal that the Dock Statement

of the Accused must be rejected. We are also of the view that such a conclusion would

also vitiate the final conclusion of this case arrived at by the Court of Appeal to dismiss

the Appeal before it.

In our view this is sufficient for us to decide not to allow the Judgment dated 10-01-

2023, pronounced by the Court of Appeal to stand.

As regards the Judgment of the High Court, the reason for the rejection of the Dock

Statement of the Accused has been adverted to earlier in this Judgment. For those

[SC/SPL/LA/43/2023] - Page 5 of 5

reasons we are of the view that the Judgment of the High Court should also not be

permitted to stand.

For those reasons, we decide to set aside both the Judgment of the High Court of

Colombo dated 20-06-2019 and the Judgment of the Court of Appeal dated 10-01-

2023.

The Appellant neither complained about the conduct of the trial before the High Court

nor complained about the manner in which evidence was recorded in the trial. Thus,

the complaints in this proceeding, are against the Judgments of both Courts. In view

of the above, we have no basis to direct a fresh trial to be conducted from the very

beginning. Therefore, we set aside the conviction and the sentence imposed on the

Accused-Appellant-Appellant and send this case back to High Court of Colombo with

a direction that the High Court of Colombo must takes steps to pronounce a fresh

Judgment on the evidence already adduced in the trial.

The High Court Judge of Colombo is directed to allow both parties to make submissions

in order to facilitate the preparation of the Judgment .

Appeal is allowed.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

JANAK DE SILVA, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

ARJUNA OBEYESEKERE, J

I agree.

JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT

NS